
      
         
            
            
            THE Famous Hyſtory of HERODOTVS.
            Conteyning the Diſcourſe of dyuers Countreys, the ſucceſsion of theyr Kyngs: the actes and exploytes atchieued by them: the Lavves and cuſtomes of euery Nation: with the true Deſcription and Antiquitie of the ſame.
            
               IMP. IVSTINVS. IVN. AVGVST
            
            Deuided into nine Bookes, entituled vvith the names of the nine Muſes.
            AT LONDON Printed by Thomas Marshe. 1584.
         
         
            
            
            To the right excellent and vertuous Gentleman Mayster Robert Dormer, ſonne to the noble Knight Sir Wyllyam Dormer, B. R. vvisheth increaſe of vvorship, vvith the fauoure of GOD.
            
               PRetily was it aunſweared of Praxiteles (right worshipfull) who beeyng demaunded whych of both were moſt to be esteemed the Paynter or the writer of Hystories: whether of the two would you chooſe (quoth he) to be dumbe and make a ſigne aptly, or to haue the vſe of your tongue, and tell your tale fitly? So that hymſelfe beyng a Paynter, and the ſcience ſo greatly regarded as then it was, yet beyng made a iudge of two notable ſciences, he thought meeter to derogate ſomething from his owne arte, then to defame a better. Such were the dayes then, and the people ſo farre enamoured wyth the Arte of Paynting, that to haue skyll in the draught of shadowes, and the apt framing of pictures, was deemed the beſt quality that could reſt in a Gentleman: touchyng whiche, wee may well ſay as dyd Parrhaſius, who paynting one that ranne in a race, and not able to make hym ſweate, added this for a note, No farther then coulours. So that Praxiteles with his pencill shall make the ſigne, and being not vnderstoode, Herodotus shall tell his tale, by meanes whereof, that whych wanteth in the one, shall be ſo plentifully ſupplyed in the

other, that dyſpiſing the Paynter for ſetting downe to little, we shall ſuſpect the wryter for alleadging to much, finding faulte with one for obſcuritie, and in the other fearing flatterie. So lyuely in many things, and ſo euident in all things is the pleaſaunt diſcourſe of hystories, that a better coūterfayte may be drawne wyth two penfull of incke in Herodotus tale, then with two potfull of coulours in Apelles table. But to leaue the Paynter to his coulours, it was fitly ſayde of Cicero, that to knowe no more then that which was done in his owne time, were ſtill to be a childe, meaning that the chiefeſt parte of wiſedome by the which we fartheſt ſurmount the boundes of childish ignoraūce, is to be well ſeene in ſtoryes, out of the which, whether more profite or pleaſure redounde to thoſe that reade them, it is hard to ſay. For what greater commodity may there be, then to fit our-ſelues with ſundry ſortes of examples, to direct our wits, to frame our manners, to gouerne the courſe of our whole lyues, an infinite number whereof are offered in ſtories to the ſingulare profite of the posteritie. Vertue blaſed with excellency, vice defaced with infamy, famous cities vtterly destroyed, ſmall townes highly aduanced, auncient frendship turned to enmity, mortall hatred conuerted to amitie, free cities brought vnder tribute, and ſuche as were tributarie, restored to freedome, briefly, all things in ſtoryes, that may eyther for profite auayle the reader, or for pleaſure delight hym. It is lefte to memory of Scipio Africanus a noble Gentleman of Rome, that ſeeking to enſue the example of Cyrus which was fayned by Xenophon, he atchieued that fame of wiſedome and valure as fewe had attayned before hym. The lyke happened to Selimus prince of the Turkes, whoſe auncetours hating ſtories, he

cauſed the actes of Caeſar to be drawne into his mother tongue, and by his example, ſubdued a great parte of Aſia and Africa. And Caeſar himſelfe had neuer aſpired to the type of ſo great renowne, but by following of Alexander, reading whoſe victories, he braſt out into teares, forſomuch as at the ſame age whereat Alexander had ſubdued the whole worlde, hymſelfe had done nothing woorthy memory. The delyghte wee receyue by readyng hystories, is euery way ſingulare, a ſoueraigne medicine for the cares of the minde, a ſpeedy remedy for the griefes of the body. So that Alphonſus Kyng of Spayne, lefte by Phyſicke as incurable, recouered his health by readyng Lyuy. In which kynde of delightſome veyne, ſithence of all other Herodotus moſt excelleth, both for the pleaſaunt courſe of the ſtory, and the plentifull knowledge cōteyned therein, I thought him not vnfit at his firſt entry into Englande, to growe in fauour wyth ſo noble a Gentleman, by whoſe countenaunce gaynyng credite, hee may with leſſe shame and greater acceptaunce aduenture into the hands of ſuch as shall reade hym. I leaue hym therfore in your worships hands to entertayne as a ſtranger, and as he deſerueth to make hym familiar, not forgetting to wish hym good fortune as a forreyner, and to your ſelfe increaſe of fame, and the fauour of God to youre lyues ende.
            
               Your Worſhips moſt duty full to commaunde,
B. R.
            
         
         
            
            To the Gentlemen Readers.
            
               RIght courteous Gentlemen, we haue brought out of Greece into England two of the Muſes, Clio and Euterpe, as deſirous to ſee the lande as to learne the language; whome I truſt you wil vſe well becauſe they be women, and you can not abuſe them becauſe you be Gentlemen. As theſe ſpeede ſo the reſt will followe, neyther altogether vnwilling to forſake theyr owne Countrey, nor yetouerhaſty to arriue into this, repoſing the ende of theyr counſayle in the proofe of youre courteſie. If you lyke them not for the attyre they weare, yet bid them welcome for the newes they bring, which I confeſſe are in many poyntes ſtraunge, but for the moſt parte true. The firſt of theſe hath trauelled through three Countreys of auncient fame, Lydia, Perſia, and Aſſyria, making reporte of all ſuche things as in the ſame are eyther memorable for antiquity, or famous for excellency. The ſecond eyther leſſe able to trauayle farre, or more pleaſuring in that Countrey, kepte reſyaunce in Aegypt, where ſhe found the people ſo witty, the countrey ſo wonderfull, all things ſo ſtraunge, and differing from the common courſe of nature, that abiding there, ſhee thoughte Aegypt to haue greater ſtore of myracles, then all the world beſide. Wherefore trauelling to no place but to Aegypt, ſhe telleth no news but out of Aegypt, howbeit, in ſuch exquiſite manner, that for the countrey, the people, the princes, the lawes, the courſe of all antiquitie, hearing her, ye will deſire no more. Neyther of theſe are braued out in theyr coulours as the vſe is now adayes, and yet ſo ſeemely, as eyther you will loue them becauſe they are modeſt, or not miſlike them becauſe they are not impudent, ſince in refuſing ydle pearles to make them ſeeme gaudy, they reiect not modeſt apparrell to cauſe them go comely. The truth is (Gentlemen) in making them newe attyre, I was fayne to take example by theyr olde array, cutting out my cloth by another mans

meaſure, beeyng great difference whether wee inuent a faſhion of our owne, or imitate a paterne ſet downe by another. Whiche I ſpeake not to this ende, for that my ſelfe coulde haue done more eloquently in engliſhe then our Authour hath in Greeke, but that the courſe of his writing beeyng moſt ſweete in Greeke, conuerted into Engliſhe, looſeth a great parte of his grace. Howſoeuer the caſe ſtandeth Gentlemen, if it be not ſo well as it might be, I would it were better than it is, wiſhing the beſt albeit I can not attayne to the beſt, yet leaſt I condemne my ſelfe before I neede, I wil ſtay vpon the cenſure and opinion of others when the time ſhall come. Till when, and euer, leauing you to God, and the good ſucceſſe of your affayres, I ende.
            
               Your very friende.
B. R.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            HER ODOTVS HIS FIRST BOOKE INTITLED CLIO.
            
            
               
                  HER ODOTVS beyng of the citye of Halicarnaſſus in Greece The contrey of the author. wrote and compiled an hiſtory to the end, that nether tract of time might ouerwhelme & bury in ſilence the actes of humayne kynd: nor the worthye, and renowned aduentures of the Grecians and Barbarians, (as well other as chiefly thoſe that were done in warre) might want the due reward of immortal fame. The Perſian wryters witnes ye firſt cauſe of debate & controuerſie to haue comen by ye people The firſt cauſe of diſcention betvvene the Grecians and Barbarians. called Phaenices who ſayling from the redde ſea into this of Greece, & inhabityng the ſelfe ſame regions which at this tyme alſo they holde and retayne: gaue themſelues to long vagaries and continuall viages by ſea. In which ſeaſon by trade of marchaundiſe brought from Aegipt and Aſſyria, as in many other countries, ſo alſo they arryued at Argos. Argos at the ſame tyme was the moſt noble and famous city in Greece. Whither the Phaenices directyng their courſe, after they were come, and within the ſpace of foure or fyue dayes, had made a good hand and riddaunce of their wares. It fortuned certayne women (in whoſe cō
               pany The rape of Io. and her ariual into Aegipt was the Kings daughter, whoſe name was Io. borne of Inachus) to approach the ſhore, in mynde to ſuruay and contemplate the wealth and ſubſtaunce of theſe outlandiſh Marchauntes. Now in the meane ſeaſon whiles the womē were buſye and attentiue in praiſing ſuch thinges as their fancy lead them, the Phaeniſes ranne violently vppon them

and hauing caught Io with ſome others, they reſt exceedingly affryghted, and flying through feare, incontinently wayghed ancōre and ſayled into Aegipt. By theſe meanes the Perſians record that Io firſt came into Aegipt, not as ye 
               Phaenices reporte, & that this was the firſt cauſe and beginning of iniuryes. It chaunced afterward that certaine Greekes whaſe names they knew not taking ſhore, & lauding at Tyrus, in like manner made a rape of the kinges daughter named Europa. Theſe were the people of Crete, Europa ſtolen by the Greeks in reuenge of Io. otherwyſe called the Cretenſes. By which meanes yt was cardes and cardes betwene them, the one beyng full meete and quit with the other.
            But in proceſſe of tyme, the ſeconde treſpaſſe was alſo made and committed, by the Grecians, who paſſinge in a galley by the riuer Phaſis to Aea, a city of Colchis, and hauing finiſhed the affayres and buſines for which they came, caryed away Medea daughter to the King, whom the noble Medea caried avvay by Iaſō, at vvhat tyme, he vvonne the golden fleecè at Colchis. gentleman her father eftſones reclayminge by an Harold of peace, and demaunding puniſhment and reuenge on the treſpaſſer: the Grecians made anſweare, that as by themſelues no correction was done for the rape of Io. euen ſo would they alſo in this cauſe goe voyde of ſmart and eſcape ſcotfree.
            After this in the ſecōd age enſuing Alexander the ſonne of Priamus hauing notiſe and aduertiſmēt of theſe thinges The rape of Helen vvherof aroſe the Troyan vvarre. was greatly deſyrous to ſteale and puruay himſelfe a wife of the Grecians, notfearyng the rigour of Iuſtice, or anye manner pey, or chaſtiſment, which they before had vtterly refuſed to beare and ſuſtayne.
            Hauing therfore gotten Helena, and conuayed her away it ſeemed good to the Greekes, to clayme by embaſſage, reſtitution of the rape and iuſtice on the rauiſher, vnto whom the ſtealth of Medea was obiected and anſweare made that it was not meete for them to require eyther loſſe or law, which in former tyme would be ruled by neyther.
            
               
Thus the tyme hetherto paſſed on by mutuall pillage betweene them. But of thoſe things which inſue and follow. Vpon theſe ye 
               Perſians affyrme, the Grecians to haue bene the chiefe authors, who firſt inuaded Aſia by the power of warre then euer themſelues attempted the rule and domiminion By ſo much the greater is their folly that fight for vvomen, by hovv much the greater their liberty is to be vvel ridde of them. of Europa. Reputing it the poynt of rude and groſe iniury to ſteale away women, and the ſigne of a greater folly to purſue the loſſe of them: ſince no wyſe man would ſet ought by thoſe that without their owne aſſent and free wil could neuer haue bene ſtolne. For this cauſe the Perſians alleadge how lightly they valued the loſſe of their Ladyes, whereas the Greekes on the other ſyde, for one ſilye danie of Lacedemonia, furniſhed a huge nauy and comming into Aſia, ſubuerted and brought to ruine the kingdome of Priamus. Since which tyme they haue alwayes thought of the Grecians as of their heauy frendes, eſteeming themſelues ſomewhat allyed to Aſia and the nations of Barbaria, but the Grecians to be ſtrangers, and alyens vnto them.
            And as touching the courſe & proceding of theſe things, the Perſians report on this manner, adding hereto that the firſt cauſe of tumult and contention betweene them aroſe by the ouerthrow and deſtruction of Troy.
            
            With whoſe aſſertions the Phaenices agree not aboute the Lady Io. Whom they flatly denye to haue bene caryed by them into Aegipt in manner of a rape, ſhewinge, howe that in theyr abode at Argos, ſhee fortuned to cloſe with the mayſter of a Shippe, and feelynge her ſelfe to bee ſpedde: fearynge and doubtinge greatlye the feueritye, & cruell tyrannye of her Parentes, and the detection of her owne follye, Shee willynglye toke ſhyppe and fledde ſtrayght awaye.
            Such are the recordes of the Perſians, and Phaenicians, of the truth wherof I meane not to diſcuſſe.
            Onely whom I fynde to haue done the firſt harme and

iniurye to people of Greece of hym I determine to ſpeake proceding orderly wt the declaratiō aſwell of ſmall cityes & townes of meaner fortune as of thoſe that are populous & wel frequented, for ſo much as many cityes which former ages haue knowne right ample and wel peopled, are now fallen to a low ebbe: and contrariwyſe, thoſe which in the compaſſe of our memory were greate haue heretofore bene much leſſe: wherefore knowing the tenor of humayne felicity to be eftſones varyable, and neuer at one ſtay, my purpoſe is to vſe the examples of eyther kynd.
            
               Craeſus a Lidian born deſcended of Halyattes, was King of thoſe countryes, that lye within the riuer Halis, which The pleaſaunt hiſtory of Craeſus ſonne of Haliattes the firſt of the Barbariās that cōquered any part of Grece, flowing from the South part of the worlde, betweene the Syrians and the Paphlagonians, right againſt the North wind breaketh into the ſea called Euxinam. Of al the princes Barbarian of whom we haue vnderſtanding this ſame Craeſus was the chiefe that made ſome of the Greekes tributary and other his friendes, he ſubdued the Iones, Aeoles and Dores that dwell in Aſia: concluding with the Lacedemonians a friendly league of amity. Wheras before him Greece conſiſted of foure kind of people the Iones, Aeoles, Dorus Laccdemoniās none of the Graecians were euer thrall, or in bondage to any. For as touching the voyage made by the Cymmerians agaynſt Ionia, it happened long before the tyme of Craeſus: wherein was vſed no ſacking of cities, no diſpoylinge of townes: but ſecret inuaſions and ſeyſing on the pray. And albeit in the countrey of this noble King Craeſus the ſoueraygnty and chiefe rule were peculiare to the ſtock of Hercules 
               The right Aeres apparant to the crovvne of Lidia vvere the Heraclidans Mernade vver the family and ſucceſſion of thoſe kinges vvherof Creſus came. which were called Heraclidae, yet was it in this order tranſlated to the bloud of Craeſus whoſe names were Mernadae Candaules (whom the Greekes call Silos) was king of Sardis comming of the lyne and progenie of Alcaeus the ſonne of Hercules. The firſt kyng of the family of Haeraclidans that raygned in Sardis beynge named Argon ſonne of Niuus nephew of Belus ſonne to the nephew Alcaeus and the laſt Candaules the ſonne of Mirſus. Before Argon his

raygne, they which gouerned the countrey, were the ofſpring of Lydus the ſonne of Atis, of whom the whole people The royall family of the kinges of Lidia before the Heraclidans came of Lydus of whō the countrey was named Lydia. The Parentes of the Heraclidans. Hercules, & Iardana. toke the name of Lydians beyng before tyme called the Meonyts, of theſe were the Heraclidans brought vp, beyng borue of Hercules & Iardana a bondmayd. Vnto theſe (by vertue of the oracle) was the ſeignory, and ſupreme gouernment tranſlated, who held the ſame for terme of fyue hundred and fiue yeares, the ſonne eftſones ſucceded hys father, euen vnto Candaules the ſonne of Myrſus. This Candaules was paſſing well affectioned to his wyfe, in ſo much By what meanes the empire came to the ſtocke of Crae
                     •
                  ns. yt for the ſinguler loue he bare her, he thought her to excell al women in the comly feature of the body. And hereof beyng himſelfe fully perſwaded, hee fortuned to fall in talke with Gyges ſonne of Baſcylus, one of the chiefe and principall of his garde (whom alſo he eſpecially fauoured, & not ſeeldome employed him in matters of greate weight) aduauncing vnto him the ſeemly ſhape of his wife aboue meaſure. In ſhort ſpace after (for the euill hap haunted hym) meetinge with the aforeſayde Gyges, hee beganne thus.
            My faythfull ſeruaunt Gyges, wheras thou ſeemeſt not to credite the large vauntes and often bragges which I make of my Ladyes beauty and comlyneſſe (the eares of men beyng much more incredulous then their eyes) behold I wil ſo bring to paſſe, yt thou ſhalt ſee her naked. Wherat the pore Gentleman greatlye abaſhed, and in no wyſe willyng to aſſent therto, made anſwere as followeth. My Lord The beſt poynt of a Woman to be vnknowne (quoth he) what māner of ſpeech is this which vnaduiſedly you vſe in perſwading me to beholde my ladyes ſecrets. for a womā you know, the more in ſight the leſſe in ſhame. Who togeather with her garmentes layth aſſyde her modeſtye, honeſt preceptes haue bene deuiſed by our elders which wee ought to remember, Whereof this is one, that euery man ought to behold his owne. For myne own part I eaſily beleeue you, that of all women in the world, there is none comparable vnto her in beauty.
            
               
Wherfore I beſeech your grace, to haue me excuſed, if in a caſe ſo heynous and vnlawfull, I ſomewhat refuſe to obay your wil. Gyges hauing in this ſort acquited himſelfe, fearing the daunger yt might enſue. The King began a freſh to replye, ſaying, My good Gyges, take hart at grace, & feare not, leaſt eyther my ſelfe do goe about to examine and feele thy meaning by the coloured gloſe of fayned ſpeach, or that the Queene my Ladye take occaſion to worke thy diſpleaſure hereby. Pull vpp thy ſpirites, and leaue al to mee: it is I that wil worke the meanes, whereby ſhee ſhall neuer know any part of her ſelfe to haue bene ſeene by anye creature liuing. Liſten then awhyle and geue eare to my counſayle.
            When night is come the dore of the chaumber wherein wee lye beyng wyde ſet open, I will couertly place thee behynde the ſame: ſtrayght at my entraunce thereinto, her cuſtome is not to be long after mee, directly at her comming in, there ſtandeth a bench, wherat vnclothing herſelfe, ſhee accuſtometh to lay her garmentes vppon it, propoundinge her deuine and angelicall body, to bee ſeene and viewed for a long ſpace, this done, as ſhe turnes frō the bench to bedwarde, her backe beyng toward thee, haue care to ſlip priuily out of the dores leaſt happily ſhe eſpye thee.
            The gentleman ſeynge hymſelfe taken in a trap, that in no wyſe he could eſcape without perfourmāce of his Lords folly, gaue his aſſent, and at an howre appoynted ſtood in a readines, whom Candaules cloſly brought into his chaumber: and immediatly after came the Queene: whom Gyges hauyng beheld at his pleaſure, when her back was turned crept out of the dore, yet not ſo ſecretly, but yt the Queene had a glymſe of hym, and perceyued, who hee was.
            The Lady ſeyng the fond and vndiſcrete treacherye of her huſband made little adoe, and ſeemed as though ſhee had ſeene nothing. Albeit fully mynding to bee reuenged of the ſhameles fooliſh facte of her eſpouſed Lord.
            
               
For with the Lydians, and welnygh alſo with the reſt of the Barbarians, it is a greate reproach euen for a man to be ſeene vnclothed. How beit for the preſent tyme ſhe kept ſilence, makyng no ſemblaunce of my diſpleaſure.
            The day following, hauing aſſembled certayne of her houſhold ſeruauntes, in whom ſhee hadde eſpeciall affyaunce, Gyges was ſent for, who ſuſpecting nothing leſſe then that hys deceipt was knowen: ſpedely and with all diligence, adreſſed hym to come: beyng wont alſo at other tymes to come to the Queene as oft as yet pleaſed hyr to ſende for him. Beyng entred the chaumber ſhe began to aſſayle him in theſe worde. Now Gyges of two preſent wayes I geue thee free choyce which of them both thou wilt take: eyther to ſlay the King Candaules and enioy mee with the Kingedome of Lydia: or thy ſelfe preſently to leeſe thy lyfe. Leſt in obayng thy Lord in that thou oughteſt not, thou be hēſeforth priuye to that which thou ſhouldeſt not.
            There is no remedy ye one of you both muſt to the pot, ether the mayſter or the man, ether hee which led thee herevnto, or thy ſelfe that ſaweſt mee naked, and diddeſt thoſe thinkes that wer vnlawful to be done. Gyges herewith amazed beganne firſt to beſeech her humbly, entreating her not to bynd him to ſo harde a condition. Neuertheleſſe being not hable to perſwade her, and ſeinge it neceſſarye eyther to murther his Lord, or to be murthered by other, he deemed it the better choyſe to lyue hymſelfe, addreſſing his ſpeech to the Queene in this wyſe. My Soueraygne Lady (quoth he) Synce of neceſſity you compell mee to become guylty of the bloude of my Kinge, let mee heare by what meanes wee ſhall ſet vppon him: of a truth (ſayd ſhee) our treaſon ſhall proceede from the ſame place from whence he bewrayed my ſhame. The aſſault ſhall be geuen when hee is a ſleepe. The wretched Gentleman dryuen to ſo harde a ſtrayght, that eyther hee muſt ſlaye or be ſlayne, made

no delay but followed the Queene into her bed chaumber, whom with a naked dagger in hys hand, ſhe priuely placed behynd the ſame dore, from whence Gyges afterwardes aryſing A due revvard of doting. bereaued Candaules of his life, and obtayned both hys wyfe and his kingdome. Whereof alſo Archilocus Parius who was liuing at the ſame tyme maketh mention in a verſe named lambie. Trimeter. To bee ſhort Gyges proclaymed himſelfe kyng, and was eſtabliſhed in the gouernment The diuil in old tyme a dipoſer of kingdomes & ſince the Pope. by the oracle from Delphos. For when as the Lydidians greatly diſdayning at the heauy lotts of Candaules, aroſe, and were all in armoure, they came to agreement wt them that mayntayned the cauſe of Gyges, that wherehe was pronoūced kyng by ye oracle he ſhould raygne in peace: if otherwyſe the ſupreme authority ſhould bee reſtored to ye bloud of Hercules. Counſayle beynge demaunded of the oracle: Pythia a vvomā that ſerued the deuil in his temple at Delphos & gaue out oracles to ſuch as demaū
                  ded them. the gouernment and principall authoritye was aſſygned to Gyges. Albeyt Pythia mīgling hony wt gall threatned a reuenge to come vpon ye ſon of Gyges nephewes nephew: or fift in line all diſcent from himſelfe: which ſayng neither the Lydians, nor their princes any thing regarded vntil ſuch tyme as the end had confirmed it. Gyges beynge in full poſſeſſion of the kyngdome, ſent many giftes to Delphos to the Temple of Apollo, whereof the greater part were framed of ſiluer, and beſides the ſiluer, a mightye ſumme of Gold. How beit amonges diuerſe his preſentes one is moſt worthy memory: to wit, 6 diſhes of golde offred by hym wayghing thirty talentes, which were ſafely garded in the cloſe treaſurye of the Corynthians. Albeit (to ſpeake truth) the treaſure wee ſpeake of, was not proper to the people of Corinth, but rather to Cypſelus the ſonne of Aetion. 
               Delphos a city in the coūtrey of Phoſis one a moūtayne of Grece, called Pa
                     •
                  naſſꝰ, here
            
            In this manner was Gyges the firſt king of the Barbarians (of whom we haue notice) that preſented any gyftes at the temple of Delphos ſaue only Mydas ſonne to the noble

               Gordius, and king of Phrigia. For Mydas alſo conſecrated a ſumptuous chayre of eſtate, wherin he was accuſtomed to vvas the famous temple of Apollo vvher the deuil gaue craracles. The Actes of Giges vvrought by him in tyme of his raygne. The yeares of his raygne. 38 Ardyis ſonne of Gyges ſecond king of the ſtocke of the Mernadans The tyme of his raygne 49. yeares. Sadiat
                     •
                  es 3. king raygned 12. yeares. Haliattes king 4. The actes and aduentures of Halyattes. ſit and adminiſter iuſtice very princely and beautiful to behold, which was kept and cōſerued in the ſame place where ye golden diſhes of Gyges lay. The gold and ſiluer offred by Gyges was termed by the people of Delphos Gygeum, or Gygades, taking the name of the geuer. Beyng ſetled in hys emperiall dignitye he warred agaynſt Myletus, and Smyrna, and toke the city Colophon by force of armes. neither any other act beſides this was atchieued byhim, albeithe raigned thirty eyght years, we wil therfore paſſe frō him to hys ſome named Ardyis, who as heire apparaunt to the crowne, ſucceeded his father in the ſtate royall. Ardyis conquered the Prienenſis and inuaded Miletus in the tyme of whoſe raygne the people called Cymmerians diſpoſſeſſed of their owne ſeats by the Scithians, ſurnamed Nomades came into Aſia, and aduēturing vpon Sardis the ſeate of prince Ardyis toke the Citye excepting onely the towre and chiefe caſtle of defence.
            
               Ardyis hauyng ruled the kingdome forty nyne yeares, then left yt afterward vnto hys Sonne and Heire, called Sadyattes, who gouerned the ſame the ſpace of twelue yeares.
            After him the Scepter deſcended to Halyattes, who ioyned battayle with Cyaxares ſonne of Beioces and hys people the Medes, baniſhing the Cymmerians out of Aſia. Moreouer by the ſame was the Citye Smyrna ſurpriſed, lying neere vnto Colophon, lykewyſe the famous Citye Clazomenae valyauntlye aſſayled, wherfore (notwithſtandynge) his noble courage was daunted, and he was forſt to depart deſtitute of his hope, other thinges alſo were done by hym in tyme of hys warfare verye worthye of memory: which are theſe following. In his warre with the Mileſians left vnto hym by hys father, he practiſed thys meanes in be
                  •
               ieging the Citye.
            
               
In time of harueſt the grayne beyng ready for the ſickle, he ſent in his army marching with the ſound of fluites and pypes: which beyng comen into the fieldes of the ennemye, their houſes they left vntouched, onely waſted the trees and fruictes of the region, which done, they eftſoones retyred to the place, from whence they came. For the Mileſians hauing intelligence of their ennemyes approach, forſooke theyr city and dwelling houſes, and fled to the Sea, ſo that it behoued not the ennemy to ſtay there: hys dryft and purpoſe in not ſpoyling the manſion places of his aduerſaryes, was onele this, that the Mileſians hauing place wherin to dwell, might returne agayne from the Sea to till and ſow the grounde, which might geue him occaſion to r
                  •
               enter with his power, and bring their labours to none effect.
            In this manner hee inuaded the countrey, for terme of xi. yeares, wherein the Mileſians ſuffred two notable foyles.
            The firſt in Lemeneium, a place ſo called in their owne countrey. The ſecond in a certayne field named Meander. Sixe of theſe eleuen yeares did Sadyattes the ſonne of Ardyis raygne in Lidya, and beginning the Mileſian warre, troubled his enemyes by perpetuall inuaſions, and often conflictes. For other fyue years hys ſonne Halyattes main tayned the quarel receyued of his father. In all the tyme of this warre, none of the people of Ionia gaue ſuccour to the Mileſians, ſaue onely the inhabitauntes of Chios, who hauing before tyme bene ayded by them in the battayle which they fought with the Erythaeans, ſhewing mutuall goodwil, ſent them now a ſupply in their like extremityes. In the xii. yeare Halyattes deſpoyling the fieldes in lyke ſort, as before it chaunced that whyle the corne was on fyre, a great tempeſt aroſe & caried the flames violently to ye temple of Minerua ſurnamed Aſſeſſia, & burnt ye pallaice of ye Goddeſſe welnigh to the ground. Which thing at that preſent was lightly regarded of hym, but being with his army

returned to Sardis, he fell ſicke, and beyng much enfeebled with the vehemency of his maladye, whether of his owne heade, or by the counſayle of others moued thervnto, ſent to Dephos to the God for the recouery of his health & welfare, when the meſſengers were come, Pythia refuſed to geue them anſweare, before they had repaired the temple of Miuerua, which the fyer had conſumed at Aſſeſſum. This I heard with myne owneares at Delphos, whyle I there ſoiorned. Hereunto ye 
               Mileſians adde beſydes, ye 
               Periander the ſonne of Cypſelius, hearing what anſweare Haliattes had geuen hym by the oracle, in all haſt poſſible diſpatched a meſſenger to Thraſibulus thē King of Miletus his faythful & familiar frend to admoniſh him to workeſome deuyſe, how to delyuer himſelfe & hys countrey from the perpetual moleſtation of his enemyes. Halyattes hauing receiued theſe nowes, ſent incontinent to Miletus for compoſition of a truce till ſuch tyme as the temple was renewed and erected agayn. The ambaſſadoures being arriued Thraſibulus which knew the cauſe of their cōming and vnderſtoode the purpoſe of Halyattes framed this deuiſe, what Corne ſoeuer was in the city ether of his owne, or in the poſſeſſion of others, he commaunded it all to bee brought into the Market place and there to be layed in one heape. This done he gaue in eſpecial charge to all the citye at a priuye ſigne to fall to feaſting, tipling and quaffing betweene themſelues aboue meaſure. Which thing he deuyſed, to the intent the Sardian embaſſadours beholding ſo greate plentye, and aboundance of grayne and vewing the people in ſuch wiſe to diſport them ſelues with al kynde of pleaſure and delight, might make report therof to ye kinge his ſoueraigne which fell out accordynglye. For the ambaſſadours taking diligent view of all thinges they ſaw, and diſpatching their ambaſſage to Thraſibulus made ſpeedy recourſe to Sardis. And as I am geuen to vnderſtand, hereof onelye proceeded a concluſion of peace betwene them.

For Halyattes ſuppoſinge the Mileſians to bee oppreſſed with greate want and penury of grayne, at the returne of hys legates hard other newes then hee looked for. After this, a league was eſtabliſhed betweene them of mutuall hoſpitality and fellowſhip, and in ſteed of one temple, Halyattes, cauſed 2 other to be ſumptiuouſly built at Aſſeſſū
                beyng after reſtored to hysful and perfect ſtrength. Such was then the maner of the warre, that Halyattes mayntayned agaynſt the people of Miletus,
            
            
               Periander the ſome of Sypſelus who aduertiſed Thraſibulus of the oracle, was king of Corinth, in whoſe raigne The Story of Arion. there happened by report of hys people, with whom alſo ye cityzens of Leſbos do iuſtly accord a miracle right ſtraunge and wonderful, Arion Methimnaeus ſitting on the backe of a Dolphine by ſafe and eaſy conduite, arryued at Taenaros, hauing the name to bee the moſt excellent and ſkylfull muſition on the harpe of thoſe 
                  •
               yme
                  ••
               , by whom alſo chieflye was inuented, named, and taught the kynde and forme of verſe called Bi
                     •
                  hyrambus. The fame is, how this Aryon hauing a lōg tyme bene reſident in the court of Periander, was greatly deſyrous to paſſe the Seas into Italye, and Cicilie, wher beyng growen in wealth, and flowinge with infinite ſummes of money, was lead by a deſire of retyring backe into hys owne countreye, and determyne to in ſhip himſelfe at Tarentum, for the ſpeciall credite and good lyking he had to the men of his owne nation, hyred a Corinthian barck to returne in: which hauing a gall of pleaſant wynde, and beinge nowe without kenne of Lande, the Maryners were all in mind to haue borded Aryon, to enioy his money: which thing ye pore harper perceyuing freely offred to depart from his wealth, if therewith ſatiſfyed they would ſhew mercy on him ſelfe and ſpare his life. How beit finding thē cruelly bent, & not to bee moued with anye tears, but yt either he muſt kil himſelfe, & be buried on ye lād or fling hīſelfe hedlōg into ye mids of ye ſea: he beſought thē 
               
                  •
               ſibly yt ſince it ſemed them beſt to deale ſo roughly wt him

they would graunt him liberty in his richeſt aray, to ſing a ſong, wherto they gladly yeldīg, as beyng not a little ioyful to lend their eares to the chiefeſt and moſt famous muſitiō then liuing on the earth. He wēt from them apart into the middeſt of the ſhippe, wher hauing decked his body wt moſt pretious and coſtlye furniture he framed his voyce to the ſweete and melodious verſe named Orthium, which no ſoner had he brought to an end, but al his pompe & glorious arayment, he threw himſelfe headlonge into the Sea: the ſhipmen held on their courſe to Corinth. Arion receyued by a Dolphin, was in perfect ſafety landed at Taenaros frō whence ſo arrayed as he was he framed his ſteps towarde Corinth to the ſeate and pallace of the king: wher hauing entred a diſcourſe of his ſtraūge caſe & incredible fortune, ye king ſuppoſing him to ouer reach, cōmitted him immediatly to cloſe ward wher no mā might haue acceſſe vnto hī. After that diligent ſerch was made for the mariners, who beyng apprehended and curiouſlye queſtioned with about Arion, made anſwere that his abode was aboute Italy and how at their comming from thence, they leaft him in floriſhing eſtate at Tarentum, at which words Arion preſētly appearing, draue them into ſuch a quandarye: that hauing no colour of excuſe, they were compelled perforce to confeſſe the truth. Theſe thinges are verifyed by the men of Corinth, and Leſbos. Ther is yet to be ſeene at Taenaros a huge & maſſy monumēt wrought of braſſe, Arion ſitting on ye back of a Dolphin. Howbeit, Haliattes prince of Lydia hauing entred the warre with the Mileſians, & gouerned Haliattes rayned 57 yeares. the kingdome 57 yeares finiſhed his dayes: who ſecond of that linage, after the due recouerye of his ſtrength offred at Delphos a piece of ſiluer plate of value incomparable, and a ſmal diſh of yron curyouſly wrought, a thinge no Glancus Chius the firſt that inuented to vvorke in iron leſſe wonderful to behold then ought that hath bene dedicated in the temple of Apollo being the handy worke of Blaucus Chius, who firſt found out the meane to worke in yron.
            
               
After the death of Haliattes, the ſceptor deſcended vnto Craeſus his ſonne, beyng then at the age of thirtye and three yeares. This Kyng mynding to haue a fling at the Grecians began firſt of all, and encountred with the people of Epheſus, who beyng inuyroned by hym with a ſiege: gaue theyr Citty to the Goddeſſe, tying a rope from the temple of Diana to the walles of the Towne. Betweene the olde citye that was beſieged and the Temple was the ſpace of 7. furlonges. Theſe were the firſt that Craeſus began to quarel with amonges the Grecians. After this he began by piecemeale to be doyng with the ſeuerall cityes of Ionia Aeolia, pretending agaynſt each diuerſe and ſundrye cauſes ſome very weighty and of due regard, other meeretrifles and very friuolous.
            Now when he had ſubdued the Grecians in Aſia, and made them tributory to his ſeat, hee determined to furniſh a nauy agaynſt the inhabitauntes, of the Iſles.
            To the framing wherof when all things were in readyneſſe, ſome ſay that Bias Prienaeus: other that Pittacus Mitylaeneus comming to Sardis, was demaunded of the Kinge what newes in Greece, who ſhaped him ſuch an anſweare, that it gaue him ſmall courage to proceede in his enterpriſe.
            The people of the Iſles, O King (ſayd hee) haue made prouiſion of a thouſande horſes, in full purpoſe to come agaynſt thee and thy citye Sardis. Craeſus thinking he had ſpoken truth: Would God (quoth he) it might once take them in the brayne to war on horſebacke againſt the ſonnes of the Lydians, who taking his talke by the end, proceeded ſaying.
            Moſt noble Prince, it is thy deſire to meete with theſe Sea fiſhes flooting on ſhore: and what doſt thou think they more greedy wiſh and long after, then to take thee and thy Lidyans waueryng and toſſing in the water, to gleike the one the other ſyde, for ſo many Grecians become ſubiect, &

pentionarye to thy kingdome. Wherwith Craeſus verye much delighted, (for that he ſeemed to haue ſpoken wiſely) chaunged his mynd, and made a friendly league with the people of Ionia that held the Iſles: in proceſſe of tyme hee became conquerour of al thoſe which are within the ryuer Halis. For beſydes the Ciliſians, and Liſians, all the reſt were ſubiect to the Empire of Craeſus, which were theſe. The Lidians, Phrigians, Myſians, Mariandyns, likewyſe the Chalibes, Paphlagonians, Thraſians, Oetimans, laſtlye the Bithynians, Carians, Iones, Dores, Aeoles, Pamphylians, which beyng all ſubdued and the Gouernement of the Lydians greatly amplified by Craeſus, there repayred to Sardis, beyng then in ye flower of her fortune, as well other wyſe men out of Greece, termed Sophiſters, as alſo the Solon trauayling frō Grece came into Lidia to the court of Craeſus, of vvhoſe vvealth and felicity hee gaue iudgement as follovveth. moſt famous Solon, one of the citye of Athens, who at the inſtant prayers of his citizens hauinge tempered the common wealth, with good lawes, vnder coloure of viſittinge ſtraunge countreyes, willingly for terme of yeares abandoned his natyue ſoyle, that hee might not be forced to break the Lawes which he before had made, the Athenians them ſelues ſtanding bound with a ſolemne and religious vowe for ten yeares ſpace to obſerue theſe ſtatutes which Solon had inuented, aſwel then for the maintenance of his lawes as to view and ſee forraine nations, he vndertoke a pilgrimage into Aegipt to King Amaſis, and from thence to Sardis to the court of Craeſus, where in gentle and curteous manner beynge entertayned by the Kinge at the thirde or fourth daye, after his arriuall he was lead about the treaſuryes to view the welth and riches of Craeſus, beholdyng all the ineſtimable and bleſſed iewels that were contayned in them. After he had attentiuely beheld and with curious eye ſurueyed them at his pleaſure. Craeſus began to borde hym on this manner. You Gentleman of Athens, for aſmuche as we hearde greate good wordes of your wiſedome, beyng for knowledge and experience ſake a pilgrim

from your countrey, wee haue deemd it conuenient to aſke you a queſtiō, whether at any time you haue ſeene the happieſt man aliue: not miſtruſting, but that the lotte woulde haue fallen to hym ſelfe to haue exceeded all others in bleſſednes. Solō
                not mynding to double, as one altogeather vn acquaynted with pleaſing phraſes, deliuered his mynd in free ſpeechin forme as followeth.
            I haue ſeene O King (quoth he) Tellus, one of my coū
               triemen of Athens, a man ſurpaſſing all others in happye The example of an happy Tellus lyfe, wherat Craeſus wondring, earneſtlye required what cauſe made him thinke ſo highlye of Tellus.
            
            For as muche (ſayde hee) as in a wel ordered common wealth, heehadde children, trayned vp in vnitye, and honeſty, euery of which hadde likewyſe increaſe of his owne bodye, and yet all liuing. And hauing ſpent the courſe of his age, as wel as a man might, Fortune crowned his end with the perpetual renowne of a moſt glorious death. For the Athenians ioyning in battayle with their next neighbours, Tellus comming with a freſh ſupplye, and putting his ennemies to flight: ended his life in the field, whom ye people of Athens in the ſelfe ſame place where he had ſhed his bloud, cauſed to be entombed with immortall honour, Solon going forward in a large diſcourſe as touching Tellus was cut of by Craeſus with a ſecond demaunde, who aſked him the ſecond tyme, whom in conſcience he thoughte next vnto him, in full hope, that at the leaſt his part had bene next: to whom he anſweared in the next degree.
            Moſt mighty Prince, I haue alwayes reputed Cleobis, and Biton two younge menne of the Countrey of Argos, of body ſo ſtrong and actiue, that in all games they wanne the price, of whom theſe thinges are left to memorye.
            The feaſt of Iuno beynge kept at Argos, the mother of theſe two young men was to bee drawne to the temyle by a yoke of bullocks, which whē the houre came beyng ſtrayed and gone out of the way, the two young youthes yoked thē
               ſelues

and halyng the chariot forty fyue furlongs they came to the temple: which after they had done in the ſight & view of the whole multitude in a lucky howre they dyed, wherby ye Goddeſſe gaue vs to vnderſtand how much better it was for man to die then liue. For when as the people flocking about extolled them to the heauens: the men praiſing ye good nature and intent of the ſonnes? the women commendinge the bleſſed chaunce of the mother, whom nature had indued with two ſuch children: the good old mother almoſt outof hyr wyttes for ioy, what for the kynd deede of her ſonnes and the goodly ſpeech of the people, aduauncinge their virtue: as ſhee ſtoode before the ymage of Iuno, beſought the Goddeſſe with earneſt prayers to rewarde the kindnes of hir children with the chiefe and moſt precious bleſſing that might happen vnto man. Her prayer made, and both the ſacrifyce and feaſt ended: they gaue themſelues to reſt in the temple, but neuer after awaking, in the mornīg they were founde dead, whom the people of Argos by two carued monumentes placed at Delphos commended to euerlaſtinge memory: for men of rare and excellēt vertue. To theſe men did Solon attribute the next ſtep to perfect happineſſe.
            
               Craeſus now beyng throughlye warmed and beginninge to ſtorme: why then (quoth he) thou fooliſhe ſtraunger of Athens is my wealth ſo baſe in thyne eyes that thou demeſt me not worthy to bee compared with two priuate men of Argos. Certes 
                  〈◊〉
                king (ſayd he) you demaund of me a queſtion as one not altogeather ignorāt yt the hygheſt clymers haue the heauieſt falles, the terme of mans life be threſcore yeares and ten, which yeares conſiſt of twentye fyue thouſande two hundred dayes, omitting to ſpeak of that moneth which is giuen to ſome yeares in addition for the iuſt compaſſe and reuolution of the tyme. Howbeit if in euery other yeare we increaſe a moneth: for the due concordaunce and euen courſe of times: to threſcore and ten yeres we muſt adde 35 monethes conteining in themſelues 1500 dayes.
            
               
Be it then in all theſe dayes (which in full cōputation are twenty ſixe thouſand two hundred and fifty) what thing do wee ſee lyke unto other? what rather not flatly vnlike, ſtraūge & diſagreyng from the former? ſo ye mā (O Craelus is altogeather wretched and miſerable, not wtſtanding, thy ſelfe art in wealth flouriſhing and a prince of many people: all this I deny not, and yet I cannot call thee hym whom thou wouldeſt be, til ſuch tyme as I heare of thy fortunate death. For wherein is the rych man better then a begger, vnleſſe the courſe of his happines continew to his graue.
            Ther are many rych but few bleſſed, and many of a meane patrimony, yet very fortune. Two thinges there be wherin the infortunate rich excelleth thoſe who in meaner ſubſtaunce haue fortune their frende: by whom contrariwyſe, they are excelled in many. The wealthy hath to glutte his deſires: & to pay for his default when it happeneth. Both which though fortune haue denyed him yt in baſer wealth liueth well, yet in this he goeth beyond the other, ye want of ſubſtaunce kepeth him from ryot, & care of well doyng frō ſecurity in offending: the ſame hauing no ſmall thankes to yeeld to Fortune, yt he hath his health, that hee is gauled & greeued with no calamity, that he is a father of verteous children, that he is garniſhed with the beauty and comelye ſhape of the body. Beſides al which if his end be lucky: this is hee whom we ſeeke for: a man euery way worthy to bee counted happye. Neuertheles till the laſt gaſpe I deeme him not bleſſed, but fortunate. Al which things I think it vnpoſſible to attayne to in this lyfe. For as one coūtrey cā
               not ſupply vnto it ſelfe all things, but flowing in ſome one thing it fayles in an other: or as the body of a man can not in euery point be abſolute, but happily being fayre in ye face is deformed in the foote, ſo ſtandeth it alſo with the lyfe of man. Yet who ſo in euery kynd commeth neereſt the mark & ſealeth vp his fortune wt a ſeaſonable death, ſhal in maner of a king be renowned with the famous tytle of felicity.
            
               
The end of euery thing is to bee regarded what iſſue it is like to haue, becauſe riches are lent by the Gods to many, The Gods offended at the inſolency of Craeſus bereaued him of his deare ſon Atis whom afterward they bring to wrechednes.
            
               Solon hauing thus freely and vnfaynedly layde open his opinion, within ſhort ſpace after departed ye court, & trulye was accomted an vnwiſe mā, in yt he counſayled euerye one not reſpecting his preſent eſtate, to beholde his end: After whoſe departure ye heauy anger of the gods fel vpō 
               Craeſus, for yt he was ſo puffed vp & exalted iu the vain & ineſtimable confidence of his own felicity. Who not long tyme after fel into a dreame, which rightly foretolde & ſhewed vnto him ye 
               The dreame of Craeſus as concerninge his ſonnes de
                     〈…〉
                  
                great miſfortune & miſery was to lighte vpō his ſon. This noble Craeſus had 2. ſonnes, one of the which was dum and impotent, the other ſurpaſſing al of his age in what ſoeuer he betoke himſelfe vnto, whom he called Atis. This Atis (as his dreame gaue him) beyng ſore wounded wt an heade or poynt of yrō, ſhould ſo periſh & come to his end. The king awaking out of his ſound ſleepe, began to grace vppon the meaning herof, & ſorely agaſt at ſo ſtraunge a viſiō, ſought wtout delay to ioyne his ſonne in maryage with ſome beautifull lady of the countrey, and wheras his accuſtomed maner was to employ him in ye field as a rīgleader of his hoſte frō that time forward he neuer vſed him in ye like affaires. And for the more aſſurance he cauſed al dartes, ſpears and ſuch like weapons of warre that honge in his galeryes to be remoued into by romes and cloſe lodgings of the court, that happily if any thing ſhoulde chaunce to fall, his ſonne might be out of the reach and compaſſe of miſhap.
            In the meane while when the king was ſolemnizing ye nup Adraſtus for killing his brother vvas exiled his coūtry. tials and maryage of his ſon, ther came to Sardis a certain young man very pore & miſerable, defyled with bloudſhed, a Phrigian borne, & deſcended of princely race. Enteryng ye Pallace, he beſought the king that it might be lawfull for him to purifye himſelfe after the manner of his courte: which graunted, and in due order accompliſhed, Craeſus
               
aſked him whēce he came and what he was on this maner. My friend, what are you? from what place in Phrigia are you come to my court? what man or womā haue you ſlaine. To whō he anſwered. My Father (mighty prince) is Gordius comen of the line of Midas: my name Adraſtus: And for that vnwittingly I ſlew my Brother, I am caſt out and exiled, from Country, Parents, and goodes. Craeſus replying, ſaid: Of a truth Adraſtus thou art borne of our friēds, and art now comen to thy friends: abide in my houſe and thou ſhalt want nothing. No doubt but the preſent ſmarte of thy calamity will redounde to thy future gayne. Nowe whylſt he made his abode in the kinges palaice. It chaūced that at Olympus in the country of Myſia there haunted a wyld bore of an huge and incredible bigneſſe, which comming A vvylde Bore haunting in Myſia. from the mountaine made waſt, and ſpoyle of the labours of the inhabitaunts. Whom the people ſondry times indenouring to take did no hurt to him at al, but rather receyued harme by him. Tyll at lengthe diſpatching meſſengers to the court of Craeſus they framed vnto him a ſute in theſe wordes. There rangeth in our country (moſt famous and noble Prince) a wyld bore, ſtraungely diſmeaſured & ouergrowne by whome our tyllage and huſbandry is piteouſly waſted and diſpoyled. Neither can we by any meanes poſſible (ſeeking all meanes we can) remoue or rid him frō our borders. We humbly therfore beſeech thy ſoueraygne highneſſe to aforde vs thy ſome with a company of choyſe and valiaunt youthes, with houn des and other neceſſaries to acquyte and deliuer our region of this peſtilent beaſt. To which their ardent ſupplicatians Craeſus callyng to mynde his former viſion ſhaped this replie. Of my ſonne to make any farther mention it were in vaine for I am not determined to ſend him with you, he is newly eſpouſed to a wyfe ſo that in ſo ſhort ſpace he may not without ſome grieſe eſtraunge and alienate himſelf from the amorous embracemēts of his Lady. Otherwiſe for the moſt tryed and picked out

men of yt 
               Lydians, & ſuch as are ſkilful in the chaſe of wyde beaſt accompanied wt houndes for the purpoſe, I wil cauſe to returne wt you with eſpecial charge yt they let paſſe nothing that may make to the ſpeedy conquering of ſo cruel a monſter. This aunſwere geuen they ſemed therwt greatly diſcontented, when as in the meane ſpace ye kings ſon comming in preſence, and hearyng both the requeſt & humble ſuite of the Myſians, and the greeuous repulſe geuen thē by the king his ſire, brake ſilēce & ſaid, deare father. Such things as before tyme wer cōmendable & glorious vnto vs VVhom deſtenies vvil haue die he ſhal be the buſie vvor ker of his ovvue peril. to make profe & tryal of our ſelues, ether in exploits of chiualry, or in excerciſe of chaſe, you haue cleane depriued me of both, nether for any ſhew of ſlouth, nor defect of courage. With what eies wil the people behold me going & cōming through ye ſtreets? your ſubiects & citezens what will they iudge of me? laſtly what a one ſhal I ſeeme to bee vnto my Lady? wil ſhe not thinke herſelfe to be coupled wt a cow: for which cauſes ether permit me to hunt & make one in y• voiage, or alleage ſome more wayghty & ſeryous reaſon why you retayne me. To whō the king his father made anſwere ſaying. Myne owne good ſon, not for want of ſtomacke, nor for any diſpeaſure towardes thee do I thus: but being moued hereto by the ſtraunge terroure of a viſion, which foreſhewed to me yt thy dayes were ſhort & ſodainly to be ended by y• pytiful dint of an yrō head. For this cauſe my ſon haue I haſtned thy maryage, & reſtranyed thee of the ſporte and paſtime which is now in hande: for yt my care is, whyle I am liuing to preſerue thee from peril. Thon art mine only child ſweete Atis, for ſo much as of thy deafe▪ brother I make non acoūt, thy life is my happines, thy death my miſery. To which words the yoūg prince anſwered. Deare father I hold you excuſed, if prouoked by a dreame ſo rare you be much more diligent & watchful ouer mee: yet in my fācy you cōceaued it not aright. It is needful then yt ſithēce your grace hath miſt the blanke, I lay open vnto youthe true meaning and ſence of the dreame.
            
               
This ſleepy fantaſie (ſay you) hath manaſed my death, by y• poynt of yron. But why, in this voyage ther be no hands whom I neede to dread: neither any head of yron which you ought to feare, had I either bene to dye by a touth, or ſuch lyke ſome cauſe ther were of doubting the worſt, how beit, yt is the yron head that denounceth my death. For aſmuch thē as we haue not to deale at this time wt men ther ſemeth vnto me no iuſt cauſe of abſence, but yt togeather with the reſt I may enter yt chaſe. Thou haſt wonne me my child (
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                
               Craeſus) I can no longer reſiſt, wherfore as vanquiſhed by thee I frankly yeeld and leaue it in thy power to proceede wt them on hunting, which whē he had ſpokē, he called for Adraſtus the Phrygian who appearing in preſence was in theſe words aſſailed by hī. Sir Adraſtus at what time you were afflicted wt miſery & defiled wt impurity, I yelded ſupply to your wāts & repurged your wickednes hauing receaued you of a ſtraūger into myne own houſe. which things, I do not obiect you as vnthankfull for my bountye, or vnmyndfull of my curteſye: But in that it behoueth you to deſerue well of mee, yt haue dealt ſo frendly with your ſelfe. I am in mynd to commit vnto thy tender care the ſafeconduit and diligent garde of my ſonne, who is going to hunt, leaſt by fortune you encounter with any theues or robbers that mynd your deſtruction. Beſydes it is thy parte to atchieue renowne by valiant and worthye aduentures, as a thing natural to thy linage, and conueniēt for thy ſtrēgth. To whō 
               Adraſtus anſweared, were it in my choiſe O king (quoth he) I woulde not moue one fote out of thy court: for yt I deeme it not meete for one in my caſe ſo miſerable to kepe company with the happy and fortunat, from doing wherof, I haue hetherto alwayes refrayned my ſelfe. But for as much as it ſemeth good to your gracious highnes, whom I ought to gratify and ſhew my ſelfe thankefull for ſo great and infinite benefytes receaued, I am ready her in to obay your wil.
            
               
And for that you haue put me in truſt with the health and welfare of the noble gentleman your ſonne, I auouch and vndertake his ſafe and proſperous returne. Adraſtus hauing ended his talke all thinges beynge in a readynes, wt approued men and youthes of ſyngular courage: likewyſe, houndes and chaunters of the beſt kynd, they marched on their way.
            Now when they were come to the hyll Olympus, they began to tract and ſent the beaſt, whom hauyng ſpedily diſloged Atis ſ
                     •
                  ayne by Adraſtus. they flocked about him lyke bees, & with their darts on euery ſide threatned his death. In this gredy aſſault, y• ſtraūger lately clenſed from blondſhed, whom they called Adraſtus, diſcharged his dart at the Bore, and deceyued of his ayme, in ſtid of him ſtrake the ſonne of Craeſus, who beyng wounded to death by y• yron point fulfilled his fathers viſion. Immediatly one of the route retyred ſpedily to the court, & in ſhort ſpace arryuing at Sardis, declared vnto y• king the great miſfortune & death of his ſonne: wherwt the woeful father greatly affrighted, yet much more ſorrowed for this that his ſonne was ſlayne by the hands of him who by his meanes had bene lately ſanctifyed and clenſed from ſlaughter. And in the middes of his anguiſh calling vpon the ſanctifyinge God Iupiter, made a piteous complaynt of the wrong done vnto him by a ſtranger. Inuocating like wyſe the Goddes of hoſpitality and friendſhip. The one for becauſe he entertayned a gueſt not knowing that he nouriſhed the manqueller of his ſonne: the other becauſe hee had found him whō he appointed to be yt tutor & defender of his child a moſt pernicious and deadly enemy. Scarſly had he ended his prayers, but the Lydians were at hand with the dead corſe, after whom immediatly folowed Adraſtus who beynge comen in preſence, and ſtandynge before the wan, & gaſtly carcas of Atis ſtretching forth his armes beſought yt king to ſlea him preſēly vpon y• body of his ſonne, alleadgīg yt what for his former diſtres & euil miſfortue in ſlayng

his cleanſer there was no cauſe why any longer he ſhoulde liue. Craeſus albeit in great dolour & vexation of mynd, yet maued with pitty toward Adraſtus, ſayd thus. Thou haſt aboundantly ſatiſfyed mee (O ſtraunger) in that by thyne owne voyce thou haſt craued death. Neyther art thou ye cauſe of this heauy chaunce (ſaue that vnawares thou haſt done it) but ſome one of the Gods which foreſhewed vnto me, what was to come. After this Craeſus cauſed his ſō to be honourably and magnificially buryed. But Adraſtus 
               Adraſtus ſlevv himſelfe vpon the tombe of Atis. ſonne of Gordius nephewe to Mydas the fatall enemye of his brother and his frend, when all was huſh at the ſepulcher, and euery man had yelded him pardon, yet beynge greuouſly afflycted & gauled in cōſcience ſlew hymſelfe miſerably vppon thecoffine.
            For ye cruel miſhap & deſtenie of his beloued Atis, Craeſus bitterly wailed & lamēted ye ſpace of 2 yeares, which griefe he aftewards ended: at what time the gouernement of the Medes whas tranſlated from Aſtyages ſon of Cyaxares, to the valiant king Cyrus ſprong of Cambyſes, & that the ſtate of the Perſians begā to encreaſe. Reuoluing & caſtyng with himſelfe what meanes he might vſe to atchieue ye gouernment of Perſia, before it grew to be bigger. In this quādary it came into his brain to make trial of ye profecies as wel of thoſe in Greece, as ye other in Affrica, diſpatchīg meſſēgers euery way, ſom to Delphos, others to Dodona, thyrdly to Amphiaraꝰ & Trophoniꝰ. Ther were alſo yt put thēſelues in voyage to Brāchidae in ye borders of Miletus. & theſe were the oracles of Greece: wherunto Craeſus ſent for counſayle: others trauayled into Africa to the oracle of Ammon, to the ſame entent & purpoſe. Al had this ende to require ye ſentēce & aduyſe of ye Gods, yt if they were foūd to accord & agree in truth, nextly he might ſollicite then as touching his own affayres: whether they thoughte it expedient for him to goe in expedition agaynſt ye 
               Perſiās. Herevpō beyng fully reſolued, he gaue his ambaſſadours ſtratly in charge yt taking a note of the day of their egreſſe, and

ſetting forth from Sardis, they ſhould kepe iuſt accompt of the tyme following: & euery day queſtion wt the oracle, demaunding of it what Craeſus ſon of Haliattes king of yt 
               Lidyans did yt day, & geuing diligent hede to their aunſwers: to tell him at their returne, what anſweare was made by ye other reſt of the oracles no mā reporteth: but at Delphos the Lydians hauīg entered the temple to aſke of the oracle according as was geuen them in commaundement by the kīg incontinētly Pythia began to ſalute thē in theſe verſes.
            
               The depthe of raginge Seas,
               The number of the ſande,
               The myndes intent (ſet woordes aſſyde)
               I eaſly vnderſtand. Apolloin theſe verſes telles the ambaſſadours vvhat their kinge did that day.
               
               A ſauoure rancke that comes
               from hedgehogges fleſh I ſmell,
               VVhich ioyntly with the fatte of Lambes
               is boylde in braſen kell.
               And as it bubbleth vp,
               and breathes in burning flame.
               There lies theron a lidd of braſſe,
               that ouerwhelmes the ſame.
            
            Which verſes geuen by Pythia, and written of the Lydians, they made ſpeedy retyre to Sardis. When yt reſt alſo were come that Craeſus had ſent about: hee toke view of euery mans notes & liked none of thē: till at lengch hearing the oracle geuen by Pythia he greatlye allowed and worſhipped it: of opinion that the only true prophecy and diuination was at Delphos, which hadde hit him ſo pat in all thinges he did. For after the departure of his meſſengers The meaning of the oracle. one day aboue ye reſt he ſet his head a work about yt finding out of ſom deuiſe yt might be hard to tel, & moſt difficult to diſcry. Wherfore hauing ſhred the fleſhe of an vrchine, or hedgehog together wt the fat of a Lamb, he cauſed thē both

to be boyled in a braſen pot: the couer or lidde whereof was alſo of braſſe. Such was the anſwere which Craeſus receyued from Delphos, what wordes were geuen by the oracle of Amphiaraus, and what ſentence hee returned. I cannot affyrme, for aſmuch as no other ſpeach goeth thereof, ſaue that this Prophecye alſo was deemed by Craeſus to very true.
            In ſhort tyme after he determined to do honour to the God of Delphos by greate and magnificall ſacrifyce: making The ſacrifice of Craeſus to A pollo & his giftes alſo vvhich he dedicated in the 
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  ple. oblatiō of three thouſand choiſe cattel, ſuch as might lawfully be offered. Moreouer, he cauſed a greate ſtacke or pyle of wood to be made, wherein hee burnt bedſtyds of ſiluer and gold, likewyſe golden mayſors with purple rayment and coats of exceeding value, hoping thereby to purchaſe to himſelfe the gracious fauour and goodwill of the God. The lyke charge alſo hee layed vpon ye 
               Lydians, that euery man ſhould conſecrate thoſe iewels which they poſſeſſed moſt coſtly and precious. From which their ſacrifice when as ſtreames of liquid and molten Golde diſtrayned in great aboundaunce, hee cauſed thereof to bee framed halfe ſlates, or ſheardes, the longer ſort as he entytled them, of ſixe handfull, the ſhorter of three a hand breadth in thickneſſe, amoūting to the number of an hūdred and ſeuentene. Wherof foure were of fayned gold wayghing twoo talents and a halfe, the reſt of whighter golde, in wayght two talentes he made alſo the ſimilitude of a Lyon in tryed and purged gold, waying tenne talentes: which Lyon at ſuch tyme as the temple was on fyre fell downe from the halfe ſlates whereon it ſtood, and is now reſerued in the treaſury of Corinth, poyſed at ſix talents and a halfe beyng molten from him. All which thinges when Craeſus had finiſhed & brought to perfection he ſent them in waye of dedication to Delphos togeather with other giftes & preſentes, which were theſe: two bookes very fayre and ſtately to ſee to, the one framed of gold the other wrough of ſyluer. Wherof ye
               
firſt at the ingreſſe or entry into the temple was placed on the right hand. the other on the left, which at ye ſame tyme that the temple was ſurpriſed by fire were taken downe, & the beſt and fayreſt of them beyng of Gold, & wayghing 8. talents and a halfe, wt a ſuperplus & addition of 24 poūdes was curefully garded in the treaſury of the Clazomaeniās. The other of ſyluer beyng kept vnder the eues of the temple at a certayne corner of the church contayning 600. Amphorae, wherin wine was mingled for the feaſt of Theophanius wrought (as the men of Delphos teſtify) by Theodorus of Samos: which opinion I eaſily aſcribe alſo for the ſinguler workmanſhip therof. He preſented beſydes 4. ſiluer tunnes preſerued by the Corinthians, amonges their treaſury. Furthermore two drinking cuppes the one of gold, ye other of ſiluer, of the which two the moſt principal of Gold hath ingrauen in it a tytle whith doth argue yt to be ye gift of the Lacedaemonians, albeit contrary to truth, being geuen & dedicated by Craeſus, howbeyt ſome one of Delphos (whoſe name though I very wel know, yet I will not deſcry it) willing to gratify the Lacedaemonians, cauſed this poſie to be entytled. True it is that the ymage of the boy, through whoſe handes the water powreth down in a tricklyng and gentle ſtreame, was geuen to the temple by the Lacedaemonians, but neyther of the two cuppes are belō
               ging to thē. Other giftes alſo of no ſmall price dyd Craeſus ſend at yt ſame inſtant, to wit, ſiluer rynges, with the ſhape and forme of a woman 3. cubits in height, which ye inhabitants of Delphos witnes to be ye image of her whom Craeſus in his court employed ye office of baking, herewith alſo were offered the chaynes of the Queene his wyfe, not ſparīg ſo much her girdles & waſtbands, al which he cauſed to be dedicated at Dephos. in like maner to ye oracle of Amphiaraus, of whoſe māhod & miſfortune he had iointly bine enformed, he gaue a ſhield & ſpeare of mere & ſolide golde, a quiuer alſo of the ſame metal, wel ſtored and repleniſhed with dearth, both which, euen to our age wer reſerued at ye
               
city Thebes in ye temple of Apollo Iſmenius. They which were ſummoned to this famous ambaſſage & conueyance of ye giftes to Delphos & Africa, had this in Items to inquire of yt Gods: whether hemight direct an army againſt Perſia or not, & in ſo doing to aſſociate & ioyne vnto himſelfe y• aide Craeſus demaū ded of the oracle vvhether he might make vvarre a gaynſt Perſia or not. & felowſhip of forrayn natiōs. The Lydians diſmiſſed, wēt their way, & hauing attayned to their iorneys end, & made oblation of the preſentes ſent by the king, they demaunded ye oracle on this wyſe. Craeſus king of the Lydians, & chiefe lord of many regions, beſide eſteeming theſe to be the onlye true & infallible prophecies amōg men, hath ſent you gifts worthy your diuyne godhead: requiring you counſayle and aduiſe, whether it be ſafe for him to lead a power againſt y• 
               Perſians vſing therin the helpe & company of other people. This queſtiō beyng framed both the oracles agreed in ſentence ſaying: that if ſo be he addreſſed an army agaynſt the Perſians he ſhould ſubuert and ouerthrow a mighty kingdome: counſayling him moreouer to ſeeke and procure the A doubtful anſvveare the meanīg vvherof is expounded in the next page. aide of the moſt puiſſāt & coragious people of the Graeciās. Theſe anſwears geuen & receiued, Craeſus was ſo puffed vp and exalted in courage, yt already he ſwallowed and deuoured in hope the whole gouernment and empyre of Cyrus. Wherfore he returned a meſſēger wt a freſh preſent to Pythia, and for euery one their abyding, (whom he hadde intelligence to be verie many) 2. ounces of Gold.
            For which his magnificent bounty the people of Delphos to ſhew themſelues thankefull agayne, yeelded hym the chiefe preheminece in counſayling the oracle, the principall place in ſitting and a perpetuall priuilege of a voice & ſuffragie, for any man that ſhould be adopted into the ſociety of Delphos on this maner. Craeſus powred out his preſente He is ſomevvhat to haſty that leaps ouer the ſt
                     •
                  le before he comes at it. vppon the temple of Apollo, ſolliciting the God by a third demaund: for that hauing tryed the oracle to be true, hee now tooke his pentworthes in aduyſe and counſayle. His queſtion at this tyme was dyrected only to know how longe hee ſhould enioy the kingdome of Perſia.
            
            
               
whom Pythia anſweared in theſe wordes.
            
               VVhen ſeate and Scepter of the Medes
               vppon a mule ſhall light,
               To ſtony Hermus valiant lyde The meaning of this oracle is expreſſed.
               
               addreſſe thy ſpeedy flight.
               It ſhall be then no ſhame to flye
               And yeld to ſuch an enemy.
            
            With theſe verſes Craeſus was much more delyghted then with the former, aſſuredly hoping that ye tyme ſhould neuer be wherin a Mule ſhould gouerne the Medes in ſtid of a man and for the ſame cauſe neyther hee nor his heyres ſhould at any tyme be driuen to forſake the kingdome. His next care was how make frendes and copartners of thoſe which among thee Grekes were of greatteſt might, & nobleſt mind, whō by curious enquyry he foūd to be the Lacedaemoniās & Athenians? yt one beyng yt moſt excelēt amōg y•. Dores, y• other in the Nation of the Iones, without cōpariſon chefeſt. Of theſe 2 nations ther hath ben an auncient and grounded opinion as concerning their virtue. Wherof the one toke their begynning and original of Pela
                     •
                  gos, the other of Helen, or Grece. The later of theſe two neuer altered The originall of the Lacedae monians, and Athenians. their ſoyle, but alwayes kept the ſame place of abode The other making often charge wandred very much.
            For in the tyme of king Deucalion they helde a coaſt called Phthiotis and vnder Dorus the ſonne of Hellen, a certayne region bounding vppon the mountaynes Oſſa and Pyndus by name Iſtyaeotis, from whence beyng caſt out and chaſed by the Cadmeans, they inhabited a place in Pyndus, which theycal Macedonus. How beit fleeting agayne from thence into Driopis, they came at length to Poloponeſus, & were ſurnamed the nation Doricke. What toung or language the Pelagians vſed, I cannot certaynly affyrme but

by geſſe yt ſeemeth to haue bene the verye ſame that thoſe Pelaſgians vſe, which ſomewhat aboue the Tyrrhenians poſſeſſe yt city Crotona in time neighbours to them whom the now call Dores: at what tyme they peopled a region in Theſſalye, the like may be gathered by thoſe Pelaſgiās, that built the city Plaecia and Sylax, and were in league & felowſhip with the Athenians. By theſe I ſaye wee may rightly coniecture, that ye language which was then in vſe which the Pelaſgians was very groſſe and barbarous. For the Cretoniatae & Platiens differ in ſpeech from thoſe that lye next them: but betweene themſelues they vſe both one toung, and euidently declare, that they kept the ſelfe ſame phraſe and manner of talke, ſince their firſt comming into thoſe countreys. So that if al the people of Pelaſges were ſuch, they alſo that dwelt in Attica, and the reſt of the Pelaſgian cityes whatſoeuer that chaūged their name at their firſt arriual into Hellen, forgat alſo & let ſlip out of memory their mother tounge. But the Greekes themſelues (as I iudge) haue without chaunge from the beginning retained The miracle of the Greeke nation. the ſame kynd of language, and wheras beyng ſeuered & diſtinguiſhed, from the Pelaſgians, they wer very weake and feeble in might, of a ſmal and tender beginning: they grew to great increaſe, by concurſe of many nations, and huge multitudes of the Barbarians repayring thither. In lyke ſort I ſuppoſe that the people of Pelaſgos beyng barbarous remayned at a ſtay without amplifyinge and augmenting their ſtrength and gouermnent.
            
               Craeſus therfore had notice that the countrye of Attica was inhabited by theſe people and at that time iniuriouſly Pi
                     〈…〉
                   a 
                     〈…〉
                   rauntin Athēs by vvhatdeuiſe he attay
                     〈…〉
                  d the gouern
                     •
                  ēt dealt withall, and kept in ſubiection by Piſiſtratus the ſon of Hipocrates who ruled then as a Tyrant at Athens, hys father beyng a priuate man and bearyng no rule in the cō
               mon weale, whilſt he beheld the games at Olympus, yt chaunced hym to ſee a verye ſtraunge and moſt wonderfull miracle.
            
               
For hauing prepared ſacrifyce to the Goddes, the chalderne filled with fleſh and water, without any fyre vnder it. boyled and played in ſuch ſort, that the water ran ouer the brymmes of the veſſayl which thing Chilō
                a Lacedaemonian vewing who then happily was preſent, gaue him counſayle in no wyſe to marye a wyfe that was a breeder or of a fruitful wombe: and if ſo be he were already maryed, hee willed him to forſake and renounce his wyfe: thyrdlye if by her he were indued with a man childe to make ryddaunce therof and conuay it away. But Hipocrates geuing litle care to his tale begat afterward Piſiſtratus, who in the broyle and controuerſie betweene the inhabiters of yt ſhore (chiefe wherof was Megacles ſonne of Alcmaeon) and the people of the playne (who had to their captayne Lycurgus ſprong of Ariſtolades) made a third tumult ſeeking and affecting a tyrannicall and vnlawful gouernment, and gatheryng togeather a company of rebellions and ſeditious perſons vnder pretēce of ayding the people of the mountains, wrought this ſubtiltye hauing wounded him ſelfe and hys mules he came flynging amayne into the market place wt 
               The ſubtilty of of Piſiſtratue to attayne the kingdome. his charyot as on new eſcaped from his enemyes, whom they (as he fained) taking his iorney into y• coūtrey, ſoughte for to haue ſlayne. For this cauſe he made humble ſute and petition to the peoplefor y• gard and defence of his body, hauing tryed himſelfe to be a valeaunt Captayne in the voyage, and ſetting forth agaynſt Megara, at what tyme being generall of the army he toke Nyſaea and atchieued other famous & valiant actes. The people of Athens induced to beleue hī appoynted for his ſauegard & cuſtody certain choiſe & tryed men of the citezens, who being armed not wt ſpears but wt clubs, were always wayting & attendant on him: wt whō 
               Piſiſtratu
                     •
                  
                geuing a violent aſſault to y• town, & chiefe hold of the city, toke it & by yt means vſurped yt empire of y• 
               Athenians. Neuertheles wtout chaūge or alteratiō of magiſtraties or lawes, obſeruing ſtil yt ſame forme of gouernment, he adorned & beautified the City in excellent manner.
            
               
But he had not long enioyed yt when as the ſouldiours of Megacles and Lycurgus came to a truce and conſpiring Piſiſtratus depriued of his kingdome. togeather caſt him out of the city. In this manner did Pyſiſtratus, firſt aſpire to the chiefe rule of Athens, which he was eftſones conſtrayned to leaue, before his tyrannye had taken roote. They tyme was not long after but hys aduerſaryes renewed their quarel, and fell at varyaunce and debate a freſh, wherwith Megacles being tyred, diſpatched an harrold of peace to Piſiſtratus offring him his daugher in meryage with condition of the kingdome. Which hee not refuſing, they deuyſed a meanes to reſtore him againe (in myfancy) very fonde and ridiculous, eſpecially yf theſe men (beyng of the number of the Athenians, who had the name to be the moſt wyſe and prudent people of the Graetians) pleaſed themſelues onely with a deuiſe ſo fooliſh and baſe.
            There lyeued in the Trybe of Paean a woman named A deuiſe made by Piſiſtratus to recouer the kingdome. 
               Phya of ſtature foure cubits high, wanting three fingers. furniſhed with ſeemly beauty, whom hauing arayed in cō
               pleite harneis, they placed in a Charyot gallantly attyred to the ſhew, in which habite as ſhe paſſed through y• ſtreets of the citye, there ranne ſome before hir cryinge: ye people of Athens receyue willingly Piſiſtratus againe, whom Minerua eſteeming worthy the greateſt honor amongeſt men, hath in her owne perſon brought back into the tower. The citezens ſuppoſing it had bene the Goddeſſe indede, bowed themſelues and honouryng her admitting agayne Piſiſtratus for their liefe ſoueraygne. Pyſiſtratus hauinge in ſuch ſort recouered the kingdome vppon a couenant made with Megacles toke his daughter to wife. But hauing 2 yoſig youthes to his ſonnes, and hearyng moreouer the whole lineage of Alcmaeon to be atteinted and guilty of an hainous cryme agaynſt y• Goddeſſe: vnwilling for that cauſe to haue any children by his new wife, accompanied with her vnlawfully and agaynſt nature which beyng a long tyme by her

concealed and kept ſecrete: at laſt, eyther vppon demaund, or of her owne free will, ſhe reuealed it to her mother, who alſo made her huſband acquaynted with the matter. Megacles taking in ill part the ſlaunder & contumelie done hym Piſiſtratus bani ſhed out of Athēs the ſe
                     •
                  d tyme. by Pyſiſtratus, brought him in diſpleaſure & hatred with y• ſouldiours: which thing he perceiuing fled y• coūtrey, and came to Eretria to aſke counſayle of his ſonnes. Amongeſt whom the ſentence of Hyppias ſeeming to be the beſt wher by he was incited once again to lay clayme to the kingdom, they made a gathering throughout all cityes, with whom they had any ſmal acquayntance: many of the which made liberall contribution, & eſpecially the Thebans. In fyne to compriſe the matter in breefe, ye time was come, & al things were in a readines for his returne. For ou
                  •
                of P
                     ••
                  oponneſus there reſorted to him certaine Arguies marching vnder pay: & a captayne of Naxos named Lygdamis, who of his owne accord made offer of his ſeruice being very wel furniſhed wt men and money: which gaue thē great alacrity and encouragmēt to go forward in their attempts. In ſo much as ſetting forth from Eretria the II. yeare after his flighte from Athens, fyrſt of all he toke the citie Marathon in Attica, wher hauing incāped his army, there repayred to him diuers ſeditious felowes out of the city, & out of al y• tribes very many who liked better a tyrannical empyre thē a free ſtate. Whlſt Piſiſtratus leuied many for his affaires, & held himſelfe at Marathon y• 
               Athenians which kept within the city, made light of the matter, vntil ſuch tyme as hearing him to be diſlodged frō thence, & to draw towardes ye citye, they put themſelues in array, and went forth to encounter hym. Wherfore with might and mayne they valiauntye ſet forward to mayntayne and defend their liberty agaynſt the enemy. Likewyſe Piſiſtratus and hys confederates came fiercely agaynſt the city till both the armyes met ioyntlye in one fielde, where approachinge neere vnto the Temple of Mynerua Pallenis, and diſpoſinge all hys Armye in

order there came vnto him Amphilytus Acarnen a prophet, who being inſpired with a deuine motiō, vttered this oracle in verſe.
            
               The bayte is layed, the nets are caſt,
               The fiſh incloſde ſhall play apace A prop
                        ••
                     cy of Piſiſtratus 
                        ••
                     s victory.
               
               VVhen Phoebe from the glistring Skyes
               In view reueales her golden face.
            
            Which Piſiſtratus perceiuing to be a prophecye of hys good ſucceſſe immediately gaue the 
                  ••
               cet and encountered y• 
               Athenians which were come forth of the city, who hauing then newly dyned, and beyng partly ſet to dice, partly taken with ſleepe, welny without reſiſtaunce he put them to flight and wanne the field. Neuertheles in the purſuite he found out a way how nether the Athenians might be ſpoyled in ſuch ſort, neyther yet ioyne themſelues and come togeather agayne to his further trouble. Wherefore hauing cauſed certayne of his ſeruauntes to mount on horſebacke, he ſent them ſpedely after the people to bid thē bee of good courage, and euery one to depart to his own houſe. Whervnto the willingly obaying, Piſiſtratus raygned the thyrd Piſiſtratus the 3 time king. tyme in Athens, eſtablishing & fortifyīg the tyranny as wel by ſupply of forrayne power, as by reuenues of hys money which he leuyed partly from his owne countrey men, and in part alſo from the riuer Strymon. In like manner the children of thoſe men that yeelded not the fyrſt, but bare the brunt of the battell, he toke in hoſtage and ſent them ouer to Napos: which Iſle after he had conquered & brought in ſubiection he committed the gouernment & adminiſtratiō therof to Lygdanus: hauing heretofore alſo halowed & purged the Iſle Delos according to the oracle, which hee clenſed in this ſort. Out of all thoſe places that weare with

in the view and proſpect of the temple he cauſed the corſes and deade Bodyes to be digged vp and buryed in another place of the Iſland.
            In this wiſe ſome if the Athenians beyng ſlayne in battayle, other fled away togeather with the houſhold and family of Megacles. Piſiſtratus obtained yt ſeat roial: whom Craeſus vnderſtode at the ſame tyme to beare rule in Athens. He heard moreouer that the Lacedaemonians, hauing eſcaped a ſcowring, were triumphant conquerous ouer y• 
               Tegeates. For in the raygne of Leon and Hegeſicles princes of Sparta, the Lacedaemonians hauing right good euent in al their enterpriſes and affaires, were commonly repulſed and fayled by the Tegeates. The ſelfe ſame before tyme were the moſt diſordered and lawleſſe people of the Graetians, vſing no cōmunity or felowſhip eyther betwene themſelues or with ſtraungers.
            Notwithſtanding they were reduced to a more orderlye Lycurgus the lavvgeuer of the Lacedaemonians. kynd of gouernment by Lycurgus a mā of approued virtue amongeſt the people of Sparta. Who comming to the oracle at Delphos and being entered into the tēple, Pithya ſaluted him in theſe termes.
            
               VVelcome vnto my pallace noble knight,
               Beloued of Ioue and thoſe that rule aboue:
               For God or man to blaſe thee out aright An oracle in the prayſe of Lycurgus.
               
               In doubtful waues my wandering mynd dothmoue.
               Yet to the first by force I do enclyne,
               And deme thy state not earthly but diuyne.
            
            Some are of opinion yt the lawes and ſtatutes which are now in force with the Lacedaemonians, were vttered & told him by Pythia. Howbeit themſelues affyrme that Lycurgus beyng both tutor and vucle to young Leobotu
                     •
                  
                Kynge

of the Spartans brought theſe ordinances out of Crete. For no ſooner was he inſtituted gouernour to the young prince, but he chaunged all the lawes and eſtabliſhed new, making a diligent prouiſo that no man ſhould break them. He made alſo decrees for warre, ordayning the ſociety of the twenty magiſtrates, likewyſe the colledge or fellow of the thirtye men, ſo called. Laſtly he diſtributed and deuyded the Citizens into trybes and companies, not omitting the appointment of certayne protectours in defence of the commons agaynſt the noble named Tribuns of the people, erectinge moreouer y• ſenate and counſayle of the Ephor, with an order of other ſages and wyſe men. By this meanes the ſtate of the Lacedaemonians was reformed by Lycurgus: whom after his death by the buildīg vp of a famous temple in his name, they honoured & reuerenced as a God. And beynge reſident in a countrey verye populous and plentifull, they made an inrode and inuaſion into other regions with very good fortune and lucky ſucceſſe in battayle. Wherfore as profeſſed enemyes to peace, ſuppoſing themſelues to excell the Arcadians in might and courage they were in mind to denounce warre agaynſt Arcadye aſkinge in that caſe the aduyſe of the oracle.
            To whom Pythia made anſweare.
            
               You ſeeke to conquere Arcadye,
               Your ſuite is great, but all in vayne:
               VVhere many men contented lye,
               By acornes ſwage their hungars payne.
               As hott as fire, as hard as oke
               Vnfit to beare a forreine yoke:
               Yet ſince I cannot ſay thee nay,
               I freely yeeld into thy hand
               
                  
A fertill coaſt and fit for pray A deceyptful oracle that fell out othervviſe thē the vvords import.
               
               The compaſſe of Tegea Land
               VVhere thou ſhalt meaſure by a rope
               The fruites of thy deſyred hope.
            
            This anſweare geuen, the Lacedaemonians leauing the other partes of Arcadie leuied a power againſt the people of Tegêa, carying with them chaynes and fetters, in full hope (albeit deceaued by the double meaning of the oracle) to haue brought them into captiuity. Notwithſtandinge, hauing coped in fight with the enemy they were forced to forſake the fielde and take themſelues to their fete. Such of them as were taken in the chaſe alyue, faſt bound & inchayned in the ſame gyues which they brought with them, were conſtrayned to meaſure out theire dwellinges in the playne of Tegêa with a rope ther to inhabite. The fetters wherwith they were clogged indured welny to our age, beyng hung vp in the temple of Minerua Alea in Tegêa. Thus in the former conflictes and battayles the Lacedaemonians, had alwayes the worſt hand of the people of Tegea ſa
                  •
               e in the tyme of Craeſus, and vnder their rulers Anaxandrydes and Ariſton in whoſe raygne and dominion they ga
                  •
               e the better of their enemyes in this ſort. Aggreeued at their often foyles and continuall repulces receyued by their aduerſaryes, they went in embaſſage to Delphos to witt, of the Oracle, which of all the Gods they might pleaſe, to become conquerours ouer Tegêa. The queſtion propounded Pythia willed them to ſerch out the bones of Oreſtes ſonne of Agamemnon, and tranſlate them into their countrey.
            But being ignorant in what par
                  〈…〉
               he world to make inquirye they e
                  •
               tſones returned 
                  〈…〉
               eſſengers to require

of the God where, or in what place Oreſtes lay.
            Whereto anſwer was made on this maner.
            
               In Arcady there lyes
               an ample coast Tegêa hyght,
               VVhere two wyndes vſe to blowe, An oracle deſcribing the place vvhere Oreſtes vvas buryed.
               
               and breath their blaſtes with raging might.
               VVhere forme to forme is foe,
               and blow to blow an enemy.
               Here doth Orestes lye,
               whom fynd and take the victory.
            
            Which the Lacedaemonians hearyng were neuer y• wyſer: who albeit they had made curious ſearch aboute him neuertheles they found him not. Till at length one Lyches a Spartan of the number of thoſe whiche are called free knightes, by good fortune eſcryed the Tombe. Theſe free Knightes, are fyue ſouldiours of the Spartan horſemen, wel ſtricken in yeares, which annually haue a releaſe from the field: who beyng in this wyſe by the common conſent of the horſemen priuileged and diſmiſſed, may in no wyſe for that yeare remayne idle, but are employed in iourneys and voyages, ſome one way, ſome another.
            One of theſe was the forenamed Lyches, who by the helpe aſwel of a currant and ready wyt as of a gratious and proſperous happe, came to knowledge wher Oreſtes lay. For this beynge the yeare wherein the people of Tegêa and The meanes hovv the tomb vvas diſeried. 
               Sparta, hadde entercourſe of marchaundiſe one with an other, by fortune comming into a ſmiths forge he behelde the ſmith himſelfe working on yron, who on the other ſide perceauing Lyches to be very intentyue and in maruailing wyſe to view his worke: a li
                  ••
               e pauſing, ſayd.
            
               
Thou ſtraunger of Lacedaemon, if this baſe worke in yron ſeeme ſo rare in thy ſight: thou wouldeſt much more haue wondered to haue ſeene that which I did. For going about in this litle court to dig a well or pit for water, yt was my chaunce to light vpon a ſepuicher 7 cubites long. Which when I ſaw, ſuppoſinge that men were neuer of greater ſtature then they are at theſe dayes. I opened the C
                  •
               ffyne and found theriu a dead Carkaſſe of equall length: wherof hauing taken meaſure I couered it agayne. Lyches liftening to the diſcourſe of the Smith, coniectured by the oracle that it ſhould be Oreſtes: conſtruinge the ſmithes Bellowes for the two mynds wherof the oracle ſpake, the hammer and anuyle he thought to be the two formes to each other foes: and one blow en
                  ••
               y to an other he t
                  •
               ke to be the yron wroughte and beaten by the ſtroake of the hammer, conſideryng that yron was found out to yt h
                  ••
               t and damage of men. Pouderyng theſe thinges with himſelfe, he returned to Sparta and opened the matter to the Lacedaemoniās who perceiuing the caſe to be likely, wrought this pretēce, cauſing of ſet purpoſe a queſt to proceede vppon their cicizen Lyches, they condemned him for ſome offence, and baniſhed him the ſoyle, who incontinently retyryng to Tegêa, and lamenting his miſerable caſe to the ſmyth, couenaunted with him for the hyre of his baſe court, for aſmuch as he refuſed altogeather to alienate it from himſelfe, and ſell it outryght. Wher hauing made his abode for certaine daies he diſcouered the ſepulcher, and taking out Oreſtes bones, ſtale priuily away and came to Sparta. From that tyme forward the Lacedaemonians ioyning battaile with Tegêa, remayned victors, and alwayes after obtayned the glory of yt field, hauing beſydes a great part of Peloponneſus in their power and dominion.
            Of al which thinges Creſus not ignoraunt, furniſhed an The ſtory of Craeſus beyng interrupted. Ambaſſage to Sparta with greate giftes, to deſyre theire ayde and felowſhip in war, whither beyng come they vſed

theſe wordes. We are ſent from Craeſus kyng of the Lydians and lord of other nations, who ſayth thus. Ye noble Lacedaemonians, wheras I am prouoked by the Gods to enter league and frendſhip wt the Graetians, amongeſt whom you haue the report to be the moſt warlike and valiaunt. I deemed it conuenient (without fraude or gūile, to deſire your ayde and aſſiſtauuce in the enterpryſe which I haue in hand. The Lacedaemonians right glad & ioyous of theyr arryuall and gentle entreaty, hauing alſo intelligence of the oracle, entered bands with them of perpetual hoſpitality and frendſhip. Beyng alſo not vnmyndful of the bounty of kyng Craeſus ſhewed before tyme towards their nation. For hauing ſent to Sardis for prouiſion of golde, to make the ymage of Apollo, which is ſituated in Thornax a part of the Lacons countrey. Craeſus without counterchaunge freely beſtowed the gold vppon them. For which cauſe, the Lacedaemonians in that alſo principally aboue the reſt of yt 
               Craecians he had made choyſe of their amity, willingly aſſented and declared themſelues to be readye at all aſſayes. Lykewyſe to auoyd ingratitude: in lue of his preſentes they returned vnto hym a braſen Veſſell, wroughte about the brymmes wich the pictures of diuerſe wylde beaſtes, containing the meaſure of 30 Amphorae, which for one of theſe cauſes that we ſhal alleage, was neuer brought to Sardis. The Lacedaemonians teſtify, that the veſſel beyng in voyage to Sardis, was intercepted by yt people of Samos, wher they lay at rode. The Samians aſſayling them by a fleete of gallies. Contrariwiſe they of Samos affyrme, that the Lacedaemonians beynge in the waye to Sardis, and hearyng newes that Craeſus was takē, and the whole city ſacked by the Perſians, ſold the veſſel to certayne priuate: men of Samos, who made dedicatiō therof in the temple of Iuno. But immediatly returning to Sparta, they fayned themſelues to be robbed by the Samyans, and the veſſel to bee taken away by force.
            
               
To make briefe, Craeſus deluded by the oracle, prepared an armye agaynſt Cappadocia, in hope to ſubdue Cyrus, and The vviſe coū
                  ſayle of Sardanis geuen to king Craeſus in his ſettinge forth agaynſt Perſia. the whole power of Perſia.
            
            Whileſt he was buſied in theſe affayres, a certaine Lydian named Sandanis a manne of ſingular regarde for hys wyſedome, and for this ſentence and aduiſe much more eſtemed then before, coūſayled the king on this manner. Thou determineſt a voyage agaynſt thoſe (O king) which are wrapped & clothed in beaſtes ſkynnes: not farynge as they would, but as they can, abyding in a region vnfruitful and barreyne. Their drink is water not wyne, their chiefe foode is figges: beſides the which they haue nothīg good. From whom as thou canſt take nothing if thou conquer, ſo conſider I beſeech thee how much thou ſhalt leeſe if thou be conquered, if once they taſt of our ſweete, then they wil dayly ſwarme about vs, and wil neuer be driuen from vs. Truly I thanke the Gods that they neuer put into the heads of yt 
               Perſians to inuade the Lydians. By which wordes, notwithſtanding he litle preuayled with Craeſus. True it is, yt 
               The riot ofth Perſiās vvhēce it came. the Perſians before they vanquiſhed Lydia, were far from all elegancy and ſumptuous dayntines. Furthermore the Capadocians were called by the Greekes, Syrians. Who before the empyre came to the Perſians, did homage to the Medes, but at that preſent acknowledged Cyrus for theyr Kinge. The dominion of the Medes, and Lydyans is deuyded and ſundered by the ryuer Halis, which taking his The limites of Media and Lydia. beginning from the hill Armenus firſt waſheth the Cilicians, and ſecōdly the Maciens lying on the ryght hand, laſtly the Phrygians declyninge towarde the leaſt, after this, wynding to the North pole, that floweth betweene the Cyrians, Cappadocians, and Paphlagonians, waterynge the coaſt of Cappadocia on the right hande, and the borders of Paphlagonia on the lefte. In this ſort the floud Halis doth part and diſtermine all thē hygh places of Aſia, from the ſea Cyprian, vnto the waters of the Euxine ſea the backe,

and hinder part of this region is in length fyue dayes iourney for a light and ſpedy footeman.
            
               Craeſus therefore ſpeeding himſelfe towarde Cappadocia, was greatlye deſyrous both to ioyne vnto his owne kyngdome a land ſo battle and plentifull, and then alſo to Th. cauſes of Craeſus his voi age agaynſt Perſia. reuenge Cyrus in the behalfe of Aſtyages ſonne of Cyaxares king of the Medes his nere kynſman: whom Cyrus yſſued of Cambyſes had taken captiue in ye field. The meanes wherby kynred and alliance grew betwene the two kinges Craeſus and Aſtyages, were theſe. The graſiers of Scithia and ſuch as were conuerſant in reyſing and breeding cattel A prety diſcourſe ſhevvīg the meanes hovv Craeſus & Aſtyages came to be of a kinne. falling to debate and ſedition betweene themſelues, a certayne company of them fledde into the lande of the Medes, at what tyme the Scepter was held by Cyaxares, ſonne of Phraeortas nephew of Deioſes. To whom the Scythians humbling themſelues were at the begynninge much made of, and grewe in credite and fauoure with the kinge, in ſo much that he committed to their charge certayne younge ympes to inſtruct in the Scithian language, and to trayne vp in the art and facultye of ſhootinge. In tract of tyme the The Scythians excellent in ſhoting. 
               Scythians being accuſtomed daily to hunt, and for the moſt part wont to bryng home ſome thing with them for a pray, notwithſtanding otherwhyles returned empty: which the king perceyuing (who in his rage was very fierce & ceuell, ſharply rebuked them) and in reprochfull and tauntynge wordes toke them vp very ſhort, wherat the Scythians ſtomackes beyng moued ſuppoſing themſelues to be hardlye dealt withall by the kyng, toke cou
                  •
               ſayle togeather, that hauing ſtayne ſome one of the children whom they taught, they might ſerue him vp to the kyng in lieu of 
                  〈◊〉
                or ſome other wylde and ſauage pray: which done, they would put themſelues to flight to Sardis and become ſupplyaunts to Halyattes ſonne of Sadyattes for theyr defence & ſafetye, which fell out accordingly. For aſwel Cyaxares as others

that were preſent at the Table, taſted of the fleſh, and the Scythians hauing committed the villanye, iucontinentlye fledde to Haliattes, whom Cyaxares rechalinging, & Haliattes refuſing to ſurrender and yeelde them vp, ther aroſe warre betweene the Medes and Lydians which indured yt ſpace of v. yeares. In the which their broyle and diſcord the Medes ſometime atchieuynge the conqueſt, it happened them to encounter in a night battell. For in the ſixt yeares the armyes comming to the cloſe and the fight being equal: ſodeinly the day became nighte, which chaunge and alteration The day turned into night of the day. Thales Mileſius foretold to the people of Ionia preſining the ſelfe ſame yeare wherein it ſhould happē. The Medes and Lydians perceauing the day to be ouercaſt with darkeneſſe, abandoned the field: and by meanes of Syenneſis of Cilicia, and Labynetus of Babilō
                were brought Labynetus ſonne of Nitocijs. to accord and compoſition of peace, who haſtening to haue them ſworne, and to eſtabliſh their agreement by the bands of affinitye, they decreed that Aſtyages ſonne of Cyaxares ſhould eſpouſe and take to wyfe Ariena daughter of Halyattes. ſuppoſing the condition would not long remayn ſoūd and inuiolate, were it not confirmed by the ſure and infolluble knot of alyaunce. In ſtricking league and concluding peace aſwell other thinges vſuall to the Greekes, are obſerued The māner of makīga league betvvene the Lydians and Medes The meaning of this place of Aſtyages his captiuity is declared more at large. by theſe nations, as alſo cutting their armes tyll yt bloud iſſue out, which ech of them lycke vp and ſucke together.
            This Aſtyages graūdfather to Cyrus by the Mothers ſide was by him held pryſoner and went vnder cuſtody, for ſuch cauſe as in the ſequele of this hiſtory ſhalbee declared: Craeſus therefore moued with diſpleaſure, requyred of the Oracle whether he might proclaime war agaynſt Perſia, & hauing receiued a double & deceitful anſwere, deeming it to make wt him, went out wt his army to aſſaile & fight againſt a certain part of the Perſiā
                dominiō. And approching neare to the Riuer Halis (as I iudge) hee trailed and convewed

ouer his armye by brigges built vppon the water: but as ſome of the Graecians affyrme, hee paſſed the ryuer The deuyſe of Thales Mileſius to paſſe the riuer. by the means of Thales Mileſiꝰ who deuiſed another way. For Craeſus ſtandīg at a bay, vncertayn what way to paſſe the water (for aſmuch as the brygges which are now made for paſſage as then were none at al) Thales Mileſius being then in the campe, inuented a meanes to chaūge the courſe of the water, and cauſe the ryuer that ranne on the righte ſide of the army to flow on left. Hee made therefore to bee dygged a mighty deepe trench or dytch, begynninge aboue the tentes, and procedinge in compas lyke a Mone on the backſide of the hoſt, whereinto the water hauing iſſue frō the proper chanel, became ſo low and fleet, that the ryuer on both partes was paſſable, & eaſy to be waded.
            Some holde opinion that the olde courſe of the riuer was hereby wholly altered and became drye, from whom I diſſent. For by what meanes the regreſſe of Craeſus into Lydia could the armye haue retyred ouer. Craeſus hauing recouered the other ſyde of Halis came into a part of Cappadocia named Pteria, ſafely ſituated and neere adioyning to the city Synopis that lyeth to the ſea Euxinum, where hauing encamped his whole power, hee ſpoyled, and foraged the mannours and ferme places of the Syrians, ſubduinge alſo and ſacking the city Pteria. More ouer he vanquiſhed many other cityes roūd about, caſting out the Syrians that neuer offended hym: wherof Cyrus hauinge aduertiſement gatheryng an armye of the myddle part of hys countrey, & came out to meete him, notwithſtanding, firſt he ſollicited the Iones to reuolt from Craeſus, which they refuſing, hee Cōpare vvith this place the apologi of Cyrus to the ambaſſadour of Ioma. marched on forward, and encamped agaynſt the Lydians.
            
            Where the Armyes beyng in viewe, the one Armye to the other, and hauinge geuen ſignes of defyaunce, they ioyned in force and cruell battayle, wherein many beynge ſlayne on eyther ſyde, and Nyght drawyng very nere, they

blew the retrayte, the victory remayning on neyther part. But Craeſus laying for his excuſe the ſmall number of his men (as farre exceeded by Cyrus in multitude of Souldiours) the next day following (the Perſians abſtaining from battayle) he moued his campe and repayred backe to Sardis, in mynd to ſummon and call out the Aegiptians according to couenaunt, with whoſe king Amaſis he had concluded a league before euer he attempted the Lacedaemonians, purpoſing beſides to challenge the helpe of the Babilonians promiſed and auowed to him by league and compoſition. Not forgetting alſo to clayme the aſſiſtaunce of the Lacedaemonians, appoynting them a day to bee preſent at Sardis: that hauing made a generall aſſembly of all his power, and taken his eaſe that winter, he might ymmediatlye at the beginninge of the next ſpringe lay charge to the kingdome of Perſia by a new and freſh aſſault. Whilſt hee leueled at this mark, he ſent abroad heroldes to his league fellowes and friendes, with earneſt requeſte that the fifte moneth after they would come togeather, and mete at Sardis. Lyke wyſe the ſouldiers ſtipendary, which hee hyred, and conducted to ayde him agaynſt the Perſians, he diſſeuered and ſent away: nothing doubtinge leaſt Cyrus (with whom ſo ſhort tyme before he had fought euen hand & with out diſuantage) ſhould aduenture to come nere & approche to Sardis. In this ſort reaſoning the caſe and debating with himſelfe yt fortuned that all the ſuburbes & places conterminate A miracle forſhevving the deſtruction of Sardis. to the city were filled with aboundance of Snakes, and Adders: which the horſe leauing their paſture & foode ſwallowed greedily and in mouſtruous ſort eate vp and deuoured. Which Craeſus adiudging (as it was) to be a tokē on premonſtration of ſome 
                  〈…〉
                to come, ſente to the Southſayers & 
                  〈…〉
               . The meſſengers y• went were 
                  〈…〉
                y• ſence, and ſignification of 
                  〈…〉
                they neuer

brought newes therof to Craeſus, who before their returne to Sardis was taken captyne. The wyſe men Telmiſſes declared The meaning of the miracle. vnto them, y• 
               Craeſus ſhould be ſet vppon with a forrayne army, which ſhoulde vanquiſh and ſubdue the towne borne and natural people of the countrey, alleaging that y• ſnake was the child of the earth, properly bred and ingen: dred of the groūd, but the horſe, an enemy, and a forrainer. This meanyng and expoſition the Telmiſſes ſent backe agayne to Craeſus but now captiue, altogeather ignorant of theſe thinges which befell vnto hym, and alſo to hys Citye Sardis.
            
            
               Cyrus a certayned of the determination of Craeſus that preſently after the conflict at Pteria hee was in purpoſe to diſperſe & ſcatter his army, thought it expedient in al haſt poſſible to remoue hys hoſt to Sardis, to intercept and preuent his ennemy, or euer he could aſſemble the Lydians agayne, which aduiſe he altogeather allowed, & put in practiſe and ſpedely arryuing into Lydia with his power was hymſelfe a meſſenger unto Craeſus of his comming. Craeſus caſt into a greate penſiuenes, and anguiſh of mynd, to ſe himſelfe ſo farre deceiued of his accompt: notwithſtanding put the Lydians in array to battayle.
            At that tyme there was no nation in the worlde, neyther The Lydians couragious in battaile and expert in ridīg. in value & might neyther in haughty courage & magnanimity equall and comparable to the Lydians, who commonly warred on horſeback as moſt expert & nymble in ryding: weaponed with ſpeares of a meruailous length.
            The field wherin the fight was committed lyeth before the citye Sardis: through the which, both other ryuers haue a pleaſaunt and delyghtſome courſe, and chieflye the famous ryuer Hellus, flowynge into the mayne ſtreame called Hermus, which taking hys yſſue and firſt head from the ſacred Mountayne of the holye mother Dyndimena, ys caryed wholly into the Sea, not farre from the City Phocyas.
               
In this field Cyrus beholding the Lydians prepared to the battayle, and greatly dreading the proweſſe and puiſſaunce of theyr horſemen, determined by the counſayle of Harpagus the Mede, to put in execution this ſtraunge deuiſe. hauing A ſinguler deuiſe of Harpagus to vanquiſh the Lydian ryders. gathered together all the Camelles that folowed the Army, and diſburdened them of theyr loades of corne and veſſels wherewith they wer charged, he cauſed certain mē to ſit on them apparelled in a robe accuſtomably worne of of the Perſian Horſemen. Whome in this ſorte attyred hee gaue in charge to march in the forefronte of the battayle aagaynſt the horſemen of the Lydians. After theſe incontynently followed the footemen: and in the laſte ranke were placed the horſemen, into whych order and aray hauing directed and contryued his Armie, he ſtraightly commaūded them to ſpare none of the Lydians, but whomeſoeuer they found to make reſiſtaunce, him to diſpatch and ſlay preſently: Craeſus onely excepted, towards whome he warned that no violence ſhould be ſhewed how peruerſlie ſoeuer he behaued himſelfe.
            This charge geuen, he cauſed his Camels to proceede forward agaynſt the Lydian ryders, to this ende: for that a horſe is very much afrayd of a Camell, and can neither away A horſe very fearful of a camel. with the ſight of him, nor abyde his ſmel. Which pollicy he founde out to defeate Craeſus of his greatteſt hope, whoſe chiefeſt confidēce he knew to be placed in the ſtrēgth and virtue of his horſemen. Aſigne of battayle beyng geuē, and the armies comming to the cloſe: the Lydian courſers what with the ſight and ſent of the camels, fledd backe and retyred violently: which clean diſcouraged Craeſus, and put him out of hope. But the Lydians nothing abaſhed therat as hauing learned the cauſe, alyghted ſpedily, and buckled with the Perſians on foote, tyll at length manye fallyng on ether ſide, they were forced to flye and gard them ſelues with the walles of the city, beyng inuyroned by the Perſiās with a ſiege: which ſiege Craeſus ſuppoſing to put of and

delay for a long time, ſent other meſſengers from ye walles to his freyndes and confederates: hauinge by the firſt ſet downe and prefyned the fift moneth enſuinge for the tyme of their aſſembly. Contrariwiſe by theſe he requeſted and deſyred mature and ſpeedy ayde, beyng held at a baye, and incloſed within the walles and gates of hys citye. The meſſengers vndertoke a ſpeedy courſe, as well to other nations as to the Lacedemonians his aſſured frendes.
            It fortuned that at the ſame tyme, there fell a ſtrife A ariefe diſcourſe of a cō
                  bat fought betveene the Argyues and Lacedaemonians for a piece of ground. and contention betwene the men of Sparta and Argos, about a certayne field called Thyrea, which grounde, albeit properly belonging to the Arguies, was vnlawfullye helde backe and retayned by the Spartans. For what land ſoeuer in the mayne bendeth and inclyneth toward the Weſt, as farre as Malea is peculier and appertinent to the Argiues with the tytle alſo and dominion of certayne Iſles, in the number wherof is reckoned Cythera. Therfore the people of Argos gathering an army for the recouerye of theire owne territory and freedome: they fel to condition for the matter to be tryed out by cōbratry of three hundred choiſe men on eyther ſyde conſenting and agreeing that the right of the lande ſhould follow the victorers.
            Prouiding moreouer that both the armyes ſhould forſake the field and retyre home: leaſt beynge preſente they might be moued to ſuccour ye part that was moſt diſtreſſed The couenant ratifyed and confirmed betwene them, they departed each to theyr owne cityes.
            The partyes ſyngled out, and delected from both armyes, remayning behynd, gaue byter aſſault each to other, & continued the combate til ſuch tyme as of ſixe hundred, there were left but three men alyue the battayle beynge interupted and broken of by the nere approach and comming of the euening. The remaynētes were theſe. Two of the Argyues, Aleinor, and Chromius, who in manner of conquerours haſtened their ſteps to Argos one of the Lacedaemonians
               
named Othryades who diſpoyling the deade bodyes of the Argyues, caried their weapons to his tentes keping himſelfe in his due order and array. The next day the cauſe beyng known, the people of both Cityes were preſent in ye field laying equall clayme to the victory. The Argyues, for that the men on their ſyde eſcaped, and remayninge aliue were more in number. The Lacedaemonians, for that the Argyues fled the field, and their men onely abode behynde, taking the ſpoyle of his ſlayne enemyes. Incontinently fallyng from ſowre woordes to ſad blowes, many were loſt on both partes and the conqueſt atchieued by the Lacedaemonians. Since which time the people of Argos ſhauing their heads (wheras of neceſſity before time they nouriſhed their hayre) made a law with a ſolemne and religious vowe, neuer to ſuffer their lockes to grow, or their women to weare gold before they had recouered the field of Thyrea. On the other ſide the Lacedaemonians decreed from that tyme forward to goe long headed contrary to their former vſe & cuſtome. But Othryades the onely ſuruiuour of 300. Spartans, moued with ſhame and greefe, that the reſt of hys cō
               pany were vanquiſhed by the Argyues wt his owne handes ended his owne lyfe in the field of Thyrea.
            
            Whyle theſe thinges were freſh at Sparta, the Lydian herauld arryued to intreat ayde and helpe for Craeſus, whō they hauing heard, thought meete without delay to aſſyſte, and ſuccoure him. Wher
                  ••
               ore puttynge themſelues in a readines and being at the point to take ſhipping to Sardis: there came another meſſenger with newes, that the wall & bulwarke of the Lydians was ſcald, and Craeſus himſelfe takē alyue. Wherat the Lacedaemonians greatly greued eſteeming themſelues to haue ſuffered no ſmall loſſe, altered the intent of their purpoſed voyage.
            Furthermore the conqueſt and winning of Sardis, was in this ſort. Thevvynnīg of thcitye Sardis.
            
            
               Cyrus hauing layne at a ſiege the ſpace of 14. dayes, ſent

courſers about his army, and propounded a great reward to him that firſt ſcaled ye city wall, which beyng oftentimes in vayne enterpryſed by the whole armye: when the reſt were quiet, a certain Mardane by name Hyraeades, ſought ſpeedy meanes to aſcend and clymbe the wall on that part which was naked and vndefended of the Lydians: neuer fearyng or ſuſpecting leaſt the citye ſhould be taken on that ſide, which for the roughneſſe and craggines therof was demed inuincible. On which ſyde onely Meles firſt kynge of The cauſe vvhy the vvals of Sardis vvere inuincible. 
               Sardis had not lead hys baſtard ſonne Leo: The wiſe men of Telmiſſes holding opinion that vppon what part of the walles ſoeuer this Leo paſſed, they ſhoulde become inexpugnable, and not to be vanquiſhed. Meles therfore by all partes of the citye walles wherby any daungerous aſſault mighte laye to the Towne, lead and trayned hys vnlawful ſonne: omitting that ſyde only which lieth toward Tmolus, for that he thought it to be of power and ſtrength ſufficient agaynſt the vyolent charge and counterpeaſe of the enemy. From this part the Mardane Hyraeades hauinge marked a Lydian deſcending the day before to recouer his helmet thither tombled downe, conſidered with hymſelfe, and began to attempt the lyke. After whom followed other of the Perſians, who conſequently wer purſued by the reſt in great routes and multitudes. By which meanes ye citye Sardis was taken and ſacked.
            Amids this diſtreſſe and 
                  〈…〉
               eame miſery ther chaūced to Craeſus a verye rare and ſtraunge miracle: hauinge a dumbe ſonne of whom wee made mention before, hee toke greate care and wroughte all meanes poſſible, whyle hys kingdome flouriſhed to recure his malladye, approuinge and trying aſwell other thinges, as alſo the aduyſe and ſentence of the oracle. To whoſe demaund Pythia made this aunſwere.
            
               
               Thou vnaduyſed Lydian King
               what makes thee take ſuch care
               To yeeld vnto thy ſilent ſonne
               the freedome of his toung?
               The gayne God wot is not ſo greate
               thou mayst it wel forbeare:
               The day drawes on when he ſhall ſpeake,
               for which thou nedes not long,
            
            Now the walles beynge taken a certayne ſouldiour of ye 
               Perſians came vyolently towards Craeſus to haue done him to death, not ſuppoſing him to haue bene the king. Whom he perceyuinge, neuertheleſſe regarded not the daunger Craeſus his dumbe ſonne ſpake to ſaue his father. making no difference whether hee periſhed by ſword or otherwyſe. The dumbe ſonne ſeeyng the imminent perill of the King hys father, and fearynge his death, brake out in theſe wordes ſayinge.
            Hold thy handes (Good fellow) ſlay not king Craeſus. Which beyng the firſt wordes that euer he ſpake, hee had alwaies after the ready vſe and practiſe of his toung. Thus Craeſus and hys city Sardis, after he had raygned 14. years and abiden ſo many dayes ſiege, fell into the hands and power of the Perſians: hauing loſt a great kingdome, accordyng The oracle verifyed. Fol. 15. to the voyce and ſentence of the oracle, beyng in this ſort apprehended, he was brought to king Cyrus, who cauſing his hands & feete to be clogged with great & waighty giues of yron, ſet him in ye midſt of a woodpile, made for the nonce accōpanied wt 14. children of the Lydians: determinīg to offer theſe firſt fruites to ye Gods ether for perfourmāce & accōpliſhment of ſome vow or for profe or tryall whether any of the Gods (vnto whoſe honor & ſeruice he vnderſtode Craeſus to be greatly addicted) woulde ſaue & deliuer hī frō ye fyre. Theſe things are cōmonly ſpred & reported of Cyrus.
            
            In this moſt yrkſome & lamentable caſe whiles ye kynge Craeſus acknovvlegeth novv the ſentence of Solon to true, that no man is perfyte happy that maye bee miſerable. of ye 
               Lydiās ſtode on ye heape or pyle of fagots he bethought

hymſelfe of the words and ſaying of Solon: who lead by the diuine inſtinct of ſome heauenly influence, had told hym before that in the number of the liuinge, there was no man ſo ſingular that might be named happy. Wherof beyng admoniſhed in his mynd, and fetching from the bottom of his hart a deepe and ſtreyning ſigh, by report wept bitterly, & three ſundrye tymes cryed out aloude vppon the name of Solon, which Cyrus hearing willed the interpreters to aſke hym whom he called vppon. To whom Craeſus made no an ſweare at all, vntil ſuch tyme as beynge compelled by conſtraynt, he ſayd. I named him whom I had rather then al the wealth in the worlde, hee had lykewyſe talked with all thoſe who beynge placed in the hygheſt degree of honoure haue the chiefe gouernment of the kingdomes on Earth, which woordes for that hee vttered not halfe playnlye, and to the cleare and perfyt vnderſtanding of thoſe which were attentyue, and liſtened vnto hym, they vrged him a freſh to make a recytall therof agayne. At whoſe inſtant and importunate halinge beynge now conſtrayned to begynne his ſpeech anew, he told them how a long tyme ſynce Solon an Athenian, arriued at his court: who beholding his infinite treaſure & aboundance of wealth made verye light accompt thereof as a thinge of ſmal and baſe value, in ſo much that whatſoeuer he had ſpokē and pronounced of hym, the ſame in due meaſure had fallen out and comen to euent. Which thinges neuertheleſſe, were not peculiarly ſpoken by hym but generally of the whole nation and company of men: and chiefly of thoſe which pleaſe themſelues here on earth in a pleaſaunt dreame and ſingular cōtentment of happy bliſſe. Whyles Craeſus ſpake theſe thinges, and the fagottes had taken fyre on euery ſyde: Cyrus vnderſtandynge by the expoſiters The vviſedom and merciful nature of Cyrus in yeldinge Craeſus pardō. of the Lydian toung what he had ſaid, was moued with compaſſion, knowinge himſelfe alſo to bee but a man who was now in hand to frye another to death by fyre, that of late dayes was nothinge inferiour to himſelfe in power

and proſperitie. And fearing vengeaunce for the ſame and conſydering the inſtable courſe and fickle flower of mans affayres, commaunded with all diligence the fyre to be extinguiſhed and Craeſus with the reſt of his company to bee ſet free. But they ſtroue in vain the fyre hauing taken ſuch Apollo by a ſhovvre of rained deliuered Craeſus from the fire. vehement holde, that it ſeemed vnquencheable and not to bee ouercome. In this place the Lydians recounte that Craeſus knowing kyng Cyrus his minde to be chaunged & ſeeing euery man endeuoure to abate the rage and furie of the flame howbeit nothing at all profiting: he lyfted vp his voyce & cryed to Apollo for ſuccour: that if euer any giftes offered by him had ben pleaſaunt in his ſight, he would acquite and deliuer him from this preſēt daunger As he was pitifully ſhedding his teares in plainte and lamentation to the God, ſodainly the ſkye being faire & the weather ſmoth and calme the daye was ouercaſte and ſhadowed with the darke vale of dimme and duſkie cloudes, which breakynge out into maine ſhowres cleane put out and quenched ye fire: Herby Cyrus perceiuing that Craeſus was a vertuous mā and reuerenced the Gods he ſaued him from the fyre: & demaunded him the queſtion ſaying. Tell me now O Craeſus whoſe counſaile was it to inuade my country, and became of my friend myne enemy: Certes (quoth hee) G Kinge I haue done this to mine owne great loſſe and thy gayne the God of the Graecians incyting and leading me hereto, who was the cauſe that I warred agaynſt thee. For no man is ſo franticke to deſire warre rather then peace: when as in tyme of concorde the ſonnes bury the fathers: but in warre the father carieth the ſonne to hys graue. Howbeit it ſeemed good to the God to bringe theſe things to paſſe, which A reaſon vvhy peace is more to be deſired. then vvarre. hauinge ſaide. Cyrus placed him by, and hadde hym in great honour and reuerence, and ſtedfaſtlye beholding him greatly wondred with the reſt of his company. All which while Craeſus in a deepe muſe and profound ſtudye ſat ſtil without ſpeaking any worde.
            
               
But ſodainly lifting vp his head and vewing the Perſian ſouldiers ſpoyling and ryflyng the citye. Whether ſhall I ſpeake my mynd (noble Cyrus ſayde hee) and vtter that I thinke, or holde my peace at this preſent and ſay nothinge: But beyng lycenced to ſpeake freely and without feare, he aſked him ſaying. Wherin is al this company ſo buſily cō
               uerſaunt: or what ſeeke they to do: of a truth (quoth Cyrus) naught elſe but to pole, and diſpoile the city, and make a hand of thy riches and treaſure. To whom Creſus anſweryng: neyther do they waſt my city mighty prince (ſayd he) nor conſume my goods, (for the righte of theſe thinges is no longer myne) but they are thy goods which they trayle and lugge aboute, and al this wealth pertayueth to thee: vpon which wordes the king aduyſinge hymſelfe drewe Craeſus aſyde from the company, and demaunded of him what he thought meet to be done in this caſe. Who replyed ſaying. For aſmuch as it hath pleaſed the Gods to make mee thy ſer
                  〈…〉
               . I hold it my duty whatſoeuer I ſhal perceiue more then thy ſelfe to make thee priuy and a counſaile therto. The Perſians (quoth he) are a croked generation, and of nature peruerſe and ſtubburne: yet neuertheles, verye bare and beggerly, whom if in this ſort thou ſecurely permit to ryg and ranſacke cityes, and recouer ſtore & plentye of wealth, I feare me that as euery one groweth to greatteſt aboundaunce, hee will ſoneſt ſlipp the coller, and become of a true ſubiect, a trayterous rebell. Wherefore yf thou wilt follow my counſayle do this. Place at euery gate of the city certayn of thy gard with preciſe commaundemēt that no goods be caryed out of the Citye, pretending of the tenth parte therof to make an oblation and ſacrifice to Iupiter: which doing thou ſhalt neyther purchaſe their diſpleaſure by takyng away the wealth: and themſelues acknowleging the intent to bee good, wil eaſily condiſcend, and bee pleaſed therwith.
            
               
This counſayle greatly lyked king Cyrus: wherfore hauinge in lyke ſorte diſpoſed and ſetled, his Garde as Craeſus had warned him, to him ſelfe he ſpeake in termes as followeth.
            My good Craeſus, whereas thou art-a kinge, and by nature Craeſus ſeynge to vvhat paſſe the oracle had brought him deſireth leaue of Cyrus to chide vvith the deuil. framed both to do well and ſpeake wyſely, aſke of me what ſeemeth thee good, and it ſhalbe geuen thee.
            My ſoueraygne Lorde (quoth Craeſus) I ſhall eſteeme my ſelfe hyghlye benefyted by your Grace, yf by your maieſtyes leaue and ſufferaunce I may ſende theſe my letters to the Gods in Greece. Demaundinge whether it were lawful for him in this order to double with his freyndes.
            But Cyrus requeſting to know the cauſe yt ſet him ſo farre out of fauour with Apollo: hee brake out, and rypt vp the matter from the begynning, declaryng vnto him the Oracles which were geuen, and chiefly hys offeryngs wheron he preſumed to denounce warre agaynſt Perſia.
            
            After a large reherſal made as touching all theſe thinges, he returned to his former ſute, requeſtyng the Kinge that it might be lawful for him to challenge the God for theſe matters, and caſt them in his teeth. To whom Cyrus ſmylyng, ſayd. Not this onely (O Craeſus) but what elſe ſoeuer ſhalbe gaunted to thee, and not at this tyme alone, but as oft as it ſhall lyke thee to make petition. Leaue obtayned) he forthwith diſpatched certayne men of the Lydyans to Delphos, with charge, that laying the gyues at the entry of the temple, they ſhoulde queſtion with Apollo yf hee were not aſhamed to delude and couſyne Craeſus, with his fraudulent and deceitful Oracles: making him to aſſaulte the Perſians in hope to vanquiſh the power of Cyrus, of which his hoped victory, theſe were the firſt fruites: commaunding them therwt to ſhew him the manacles, with the which beyng firſt captiue, he had bene chayned. Moreouer to aſke him, whether the Graecian Gods had a priuilege

and peculiar liberty, aboue the reſt to bee ingrate and vnthankful to their friendes. The Lydians arryued at Delphos, and declaryng theyr meſſuage, Pythia made them Apollo his anſvvere to Craeſus his accuſation. aunſweare on this maner. The neceſſary euent of fatall dedeſtiny, it is vnpoſſible for the Gods themſelues to auoyd. Craeſus layeth the diſloyalty of the fift age before him, yt is to ſay, of his great graūdfathers father: who beyng ſquyre of the body to ye 
               Heraclidans was induced by the fraud & Craeſus is puniſhed for the fact of Gyges that ſlue Candaules his mayſter. deceypt of a woman to kill his Lorde, and was after inueſted with his dignity, which nothing appertayne
                  •
                to him.
            Notwithſtandinge Apollo by al meanes endeuouringe to cauſe the fal of Sardis to light on the poſterity of Craeſus, not vpon himſelfe: for all this could not prolōg or alter the inchaungeable race of deſtenye: but diſpenſinge therewith as much as might be, in ſome part he requyted his curteſy by deferryng the battery and conqueſt of Sardis for terme of three yeares. It is meete therefore that Craeſus knowe, how his ſeat imperiall came three years later to ruine then was determined and appoincted by fatall neceſſity. Agayne it was no ſmall benefite that he ſaued him from frying at a ſtake, for as touthing the oracle he hath no cauſe to cōplain being forewarned by Apollo that furniſhinge an armye againſt Perſia he ſhould ouerturne and deſtroy a great Empyre. Of this ſayinge if in caſe he had bene better aduyſed it was his part to haue enquyred of Apollo what empyre he meant, whether his owne gouernment, or the kingdome and principality of Cyrus. But the prophecy beyng neither ſufficiently pondered by himſelfe nor ſought to be diſcuſſed, if any thing happened otherwyſe then he would and wiſhed for: let him thanke hym ſelfe and not blame the God.
            Now for that he aleageth beſydes the ſentence of Apollo as concerning the Mule: it was better ſayd by the God, Applye to this place theoracle geuen fol. 25. then conſidered by him. For by the Mule was kyng Cyrus vnderſtode, whoſe parents were of dyuers nations, and his mother of a more noble progeny and lineage thē his father.

The one beyng a Mede, daughter to Aſtyages, kynge of ye 
               Medes. The other a Perſian, and in homage and ſubiection to the Medes, who beyng a man of baſe account, and verye meane regard, neuertheleſſe crept into fauour, and wedded the daughter of his ſoueraygne liege.
            The Lydians thus aunſweared by Pythia, made their ſpedy regreſſe to Sardis declaring to Craeſus what they had hearde. Wherby he came to confeſſe that the blame reſted in his owne folly, and was vniuſtly and without cauſe imputed to Apollo. It ſuffyceth therfore to haue ſpoken this of the dominion and rule of Craeſus, ann by what meanes hee firſt vanquiſhed & ſubdued Ionia. Furthermore beſides thoſe which before are mentioned: many other notable preſentes were offered by this king which are yet apparant, & to be ſeene in Greece. For at the Citye Thebs in Boaetia there is a table of three feete all of Gold dedicated vnto Apollo Iſmenius. Certayne young heighfers alſo wroughte of Gold, with ſundry pillers of the ſame kynde. Lykewyſe in the entrey and porch of the temple there is to be ſeene an huge ſheyld of ſolide golde. All which were extant, and remayning euen vntil our age. Albeit, by length of tyme many were conſumed and brought to decay. As for the gyftes he beſtowed at Branchidae (as farre as we can learne) they were nothinge inferiour to them in value which were ſent to Delphos. Notwithſtanding as wel thoſe which hee preſented at Delphos, as alſo the other that were geuen to the temple of Amphiaraus were of his owne propre and hereditary ſubſtaunce, the firſt fruites of his fathers poſſeſſions: as for the reſt which in lyke maner he conſecrated were of the wealth and ſubſtaunce of his enemy: who before Craeſus aſpyred to the crowne was of the ſecte and faction of Pantaleō Craelus his brother by the fathers ſyde ſought to defeat him of the kingdome 
               Pantaleon. For this Pantaleon alſo had to father Halyattes and was brother to Craeſus but by ſundrye women, the mother of Craeſus beynge of Caria, the other of Ionia. no ſoner was Craeſus indued with the ſoueraygntye but hee toke his enemy yt conſtantly withſtode him, & drawing hym

aſyde into a fullers ſhoppe, he bereft hym of his life: whoſe goods before hand vowed to the immortal Gods hee made conſecration of in thoſe places wherereof wee ſpake before. And thus much as concerning his liberalitie and magnificency vſed toward the Gods.
            Now as touching the countrey of Lydia, there is nothing therof recounted worthy admiration like as of other Of the coūtrey of Lydia, a briefe narratiō of ſuch things as therin are vvorthy memory Halyattes his tombe in Lydia. regions: ſaue that only out of the hyll Tmolus are digged ſmall peeces of gold in manner of grauel. There is alſo a monumente by them erected the ſtraungeſt that euer was heard or ſeene (onely excepted the maruaylous works done by the Egyptian
                     •
                  , and Babylonians) to witte, the tombe of Halyattes father to Craeſus. The foundation or grounde wherof is of mighty greate ſtone, the reſt of the ſepulcher of earth and mould caſt vp and heaped togeather in forme of a mount, finiſhed and brought to perfection by the toyle and payne of certayn day men, and hyred labourers, beyng holpen therin and aſſiſted by maydes of the countrey.
            In the toppe or higheſt part of the Tombe ther appeared in our dayes fyue limits or ſeuerall precinctes and borders declaryng by letters therin ingrauen how much euery one had wrought and done, wherby it was euident by meaſure takē that the greateſt part therof was built vp and framed by the labour and handyworke of the maides. For ye daughters of ye 
               Lydiās, are al proſtitute and common vntill ſuch tyme as by the vſe of their bodies they haue gayned and collected The maydes in Lydia get their ovvne dov
                     ••
                  ye by continuall vvhoredome. a dowry wherwith they be placed out, & geuen in maryage, which is at theire owne choyſe & arbitrement. The compaſſe of the ſepulcher was ſixe furlonges and two acres about, the bredth 13. acres, nere vnto the which there paſſeth a mayne riuer, which the Lydians hold opinion to be perpetuall, named by them Gygaeus, and thus much of the tombe. The lawes which the Lydians vſe are almoſt The lavves of the people of Lydia. all one with the ſtatutes and ordinaunces of the Grecians ſaue that they ſet theyr virgins to open ſale and cauſe them

to kepe publique ſtewes and brothel houſes. Theſe firſt of all (to our knowledge) broughte in vſe the coine of ſiluer The firſt coyners of ſiluer & gold. and gold, inſtituting ſhops of mercery, and marchaundiſe, and ſetting vp Tauernes and vittailinghouſes. They challenge alſo to themſelues the firſt inuention and deuyſe of playes and games, which are iointly in vſe and obſeruation with the Grecians, alleaging that togeather, & at the ſame tyme they deuyſed theſe thinges: and made a drauft and ſequeſtration of theire countreimen whom the ſente to inhabite and poſſeſſe a part & portion of Hetruria The meanes alſo and occaſion they affyrme to haue bene theſe.
            In the tyme of Atis ſonne of kinge Manes there was a great ſcarſity and dearth of vittayles, throughout ye whole A famine in Lydiacontinuing the ſpace of 18 yeares. land of Lydia. In the beginning wherof the Lydians iuſtained themſelues by day laboure, and continual toyle, but after fyndinge the famyne to encreaſe, they ſought other ſhiftes and deuyſed meanes whereby to allay and diminiſh the greate diſtreſſe & intollerable rage of hungar, whereof aroſe the gallaunt deuiſe of playinge at Cheſſes: alſo dyce Cheſſe play, dice, and te
                     ••
                  ſe deuiſed by the Lydians. playing, teniſe, and ſuch lyke, which the Lydians clayme and vendicate as proper to themſelues, obſeruinge this order to delay and forget their hungar: one whole day they ſpent in play and gamīg, neuer ſeeking after any meate, another (leauing of to diſport and recreate themſelues) they made prouiſiō of foode for the maintenance of their bodies. In which maner they liued the ſpace of eyghtene yeares.
            But hauing no releaſe of their miſerye, and perceiuing the dearth & penury nothing at all to ſurceaſe: the king deuyded A colonye dravvne & ſene into Hetruria his people into two parts: one of the which he allotted to abyde and ſtay in their owne countrey, commaunding the other to abandon the lande. Ouer thoſe that remayned ſtil in Lydia, & departed not the liſtes of their natiue countrey, the king himſelf held the chiefe rule and gouernmēt: placing ouer the reſt his ſonne for their Lord and principal whom he called Terrhenus.
               
Furthermore they vnto whom the lot fell to relinquiſh and leaue the region, held their way to Smyrna: where hauing built ſhippes ſuch as were fytteſt and moſt conueniente for caryage: they toke the ſea to ſeeke both ſeates and ſuſtenaunce. Vntil ſuch tyme as hauing paſſed manye nations, they came to the Vmbrians, wher founding and building vp cityes they made their abode, and dwel their to this day The people Tyrrheni in Vmbria ſprōg of the Lydians. Changinge the name of Lydians, with the name of theyr kinges ſonne whom they had theyr prince and guide, beyng after called Tirrhenians.
            
            But ſufficeth it vs to know that the Lydians were ſubduediand brought in ſubiection by the Perſians. It reſteth The genology of the kinges of Media from Deioces to Cyrus. now that wee declare and expreſſe who that Cyrus was, which vanquiſhed the power and ſubuerted the kyngdome of Craeſus. Conſequently by what meanes the Perſians atchieued the principality and rule of Aſia, wherin I wil alleage that of which the Perſians themſelues are authors: who ſet downe vnto vs a playne and euident truth, not ſeeking by the vayne floryſh and pompe of wordes to augment the noble and valiant actes of theyr famous kynge. Cyrus. Right wel knowing that alother hiſtoryans which make report of the ſame king are found to vary in three ſundrye tales.
            The Aſſyrians hauing held the dominion of Aſia ye higher for terme of 520 yeares, the fyrſt that made inſurrection Media held by the Aſſyrians. and rebelled agaynſt them were the Medes, who behauing themſelues manfullye and couragiouſlye in the behalfe of their liberty ſhoke of the yoke of bandage, & deliuered them ſelues from the ſlauery and ſeruitude of their gouerners, whoſe example alſo other nations immediatly followed & attempted the like, in ſo much yt al the people of the mayne The pollicy of of Deioces to get the kingdome of Media. land became free, were ruled and gouerned by their owne lawes. Til at length they were made thral agayu by theſe meanes. Ther liued in ye countrey of the Medes, a man of rare & ſingular virtue named Deioces ſonne of Phraortes:
               
Who determining to atchieue ye ſupremiſie framed in his head this conceipte.
            The Medes dwelling here and there, ſcattered by villages, Deioces in very good credite beforetyme began more ſtrictly and ſeuerelye to obſerue iuſtice, and follow equitye then earſt he was accuſtomed: for that he ſaw the Medes vniuerſally addicted to liberty and licentiouſnes, and aſſuryng him ſelfe that iniury and wrong were flatly contrary and repugnant to right. The people that dwelt in the ſame village takinge diligent heede to his manners, appoynted hym a iudge to decide their controuerſies. But hee (as hauing an eye to the ſeate royall and kingdome of the Medes kept the ſincere rule of Iuſtice and ſwarued not one ynche from lawe and equity. Which doing, beſydes that he reaped no ſmall prayſe of his neyghbours and acquayntance, he had reſort alſo and repayre to him by thoſe that dwelt in other places, and in tyme welny frō all places of ye realme, who moued with the good report, and fame of hys Iuſtice, came in flockes, adhibiting Deioces for an arbitratour in Nothingvvin
                  
                     •
                  e: heredite ſo ſonne asiuſtice and vpright dealyng. theyr cauſes, hauinge bene foyled and put to the worſt, by the falſe ſentence and iniurious verdite of others, and admitting no man to the lyke office and dutye.
            When the numbers of his Clientes were encreaſed, knowing all cauſes to be iuſtly determined and takē vp by him Deioces perceauinge himſelfe to bee the onely man for the whole countrey, preciſely refuſed ether to abyde any longer there where earſt he was wont to adminiſter iuſtice, or at all to intermedle and deale with anye cauſes, alleagynge ye it was ſmally to hys profite to ſpend whole dayes in determination and arbitrement of other mens cauſes, omitting the care of his owne houſhold, and priuate affayres.
            Wherfore robbery ſpoyle, vyolence, and all kynde of villany beyng now more freely and with greater impunity in eeuery place committed then euer before: the Medes aſſemblyng a general counſayle, begā to deliberate and conſult

as touching the ſtate and condition of theircommon weale. Where (as I am brought to thinke) the friends and familiars of Deioces conſideratlye and ofſet purpoſe, ſpake in this ſence. It cannot be (ſay they) that in this corruption & lewdnes of manners we ſhould long enioy and abide in our countrey. Goe to then let vs appoynt and ordayne ouer vs a kinge, that our laude may bee gouerned by good lawes: wherby it may be free for euery man quietly to diſpoſe of hys owne affayres and haue no cauſe to feare leſt by the a
                  •
               
               homination and outrage of wicked and pernicious maners we be caſt out and diſpoſſeſſed of our owne ſeats. By which woordes the Medes indured to couch & ſubmit themſelues to a kyng: they began to conſider whom they might electe and choſe for the ſoueraygne lord of their libertye. Which there doubt the name & remembrance of Deioces, ſtraight wayes cut of, who by general conſent and one voyce of the whole multitude was named and approued kynge. And beyng aduaunced to the chiefeſt dignity, he cōmaunded forthwith a pallace to be erected and built vp ſeemly for the maieſty and magnificient eſtate of a prince. Moreouer ye choyſe ſhould be made of ſtronge and likelie men for the gard and preſeruation of his body. Which the people of the Medes (willing to gratify him by their proue and ready obediēce) immediatly perfourmed rayſing a mighty and ſumptuous court notably fenced and garniſhed for his ſafe abode: ſituated alſo in ye part of the countrey which he beſt fancyed, leauing it free and his owne liberty to ſelect and picke out of the whole countrey of ye 
               Medes ſuch as he thought meete for the defence and care of hys health. Deioces in full autority and power of a kyng compelled them alſo to founde a city, which beyng by them accordingly furniſhed & fortifyed, they might haue ye leſſe regard of their ſmal & homely cotages, which thinge the people willingly agreeynge to The buildinge of the famous city Ecbatana. he enuyroned and fenſed in a citye with ſtronge and mighty walies, which is now called Ecbatana, where one wall

               
                  •
               oundeth vpon an other in ſuch manner that the onely compaſſe of the one cleane encloſeth and whollye conteyneth the other euery one in lyke maner excedinge each other in height.
            Whereunto the nature of the place gaue no ſmall aduauntage, as hauinge his reiſe and rearynge towardes the pitch of a hyll. How bee it, farre more greate was the helpe of art and induſtry of man, hauing wrought ſeuen ſeueral cloſurs and countermures nere adioyning the one to the other. In the laſt circuit wherof was the pallace of the king togeather with the treaſure of the city. The ſcope & compaſſe of the laſt and greateſt incloſeth welny as much, ſpace or more as the wall of Athens. The batlement of the firſt wall is coloured with whyte: the ſeconde with blacke, the third with redde, the fourth alſo with blew: or ſkye coloured, the fyft with yellow, the two laſt beyng coped with battlementes, the one of ſiluer the other of gylt. The pallace of the king beyng (as we haue heard) ſtrengthned and corroborated with defence and munition, he commaunded the reſt of the people to dwell aſſyde on euerye part rounde aboute prouiding moreouer that no mā at any time ſhould haue acceſſe or entraunce to his perſon but that all thinges ſhould be done by meſſages to and fro: in ſo much, that the king ſeldome or neuer came vnder view or ſight to any. Aboue this, it was held neyther ſeemely nor lawful for any man to laugh or ſpit in preſence of the prince or anye other. Theſe thinges are therefore practiſed and obſerued by the Medes: that thoſe which wer his equalles before of approued courage and valiancy: might not haue any cauſe by ſeyng hym to be greeued at his dignity, and conſequentlye to The reaſon vvhy no man might haue acceſſe to the king of the Medes. brew treaſō againſt hisperſō: but cōtrarily being abridged of his ſight & cōpany yt might come into opinion yt the king was no part of his people, but a mā ſingled & ſequeſtredfrō ye reſt of the multitude. 
                  •
               erewt 
               Deiocos hauinge garniſhed and ſet forth his maieſty, & in perfyte manner autorized, &

ſetled himſelfe in his empyre, he miniſtred iuſtice wt great rygor and ſeuerity. They which were in plea & controuerſye one with an other put their cauſes in wrytinge, and by a meſſenger ſent them in to the king, which whē he had determined he ſubſcribed his iudgement, and ſent them back agayne, executing iuſtice on this manner.
            In other thinges he held another order, yf happily he had intelligēce of any that had done wrōg or iniury toan other, ſending for him he put him to a payne accoring to the meaſure of his offence: to which end he had diſperſed diuers eſpyalles to prye and watch throughout the whole Realme. Thus the whole nation of the Medes fell to the rule & gouernment of Deioces, wherof himſelfe was the only principal. Appertinent to the tytle and ſeate of the Medes are thus many ſeuerall peoples. The Buſans, Paratacenians, Struchates, Arizantyns, Budyans, Magians. All which The ſeuerall countries of Media are theſe 6. Deioces raiged 
                     •
                  3 yeares. Phrao
                     ••
                  es the 2. King. The Perſians made ſubiect to the Medes by Ph
                     •
                  aortes: reſtored to their liberty by Cyrus. were vnder the ſoueraignty of the Medes. After ye deceaſe of Deioces, whoſe raygne continued the terme of 53. yeares his ſonne Phraortes tooke vppon him the gouernmente. Who not content to be kynge of the Medes alone, moued warre vppon the Perſians, and made them ſubiect to the power of Media, and hauing the rule and dominion of both nations the people of the which were mighty and valyaunt he ſubdued alſo Aſia, muadynge dyuers other countryes, now one and then another, tyll at length hee came to geue aſſault to the Aſſyrians, I meane thoſe that whylom were chiefe of al the reſt, but at that inſtant renounced and forſaken of all theire Subiectes by rebellion. Neuertheleſſe of themſelues in very good eſtate. Agaynſt whom Phraortes vnder taking a voiage the 22. yerre of his raygne, was Phraortes ſlayne by the Aſſyrian
                     •
                   the 22 yeare of his raygne. C
                     •
                  axares 3. ſlayne in battel and the moſt parte of his armye put to the ſwoord.
            After whoſe death Cyaxares hys ſonne and Nephew to Deioces came to the crowne, who hadde the name to be of greater proweſſe and might in warre then any of his aunceſtors.

Wherfore he diſtinguiſhed into 
                  •
               andes & trowpes the people of Aſia, and fyrſt of all arranged his army into an order of Spearemen: horſemen and bowmen, whereas The day turned into night before all were confuſed and out of aray. This is hee who warred with the Lydians, at ſuch time as the day was turned into night: and who hauinge purchaſed the fauour of all Aſia that lyeth about the ryuer Halis, muſtered a power of men agaynſt the city Ninus, aſwell to take reuenge of his fathers death as to vanquiſh and deſtroy the citye.
            But in the meane tyme whyle hee foyled the Aſſyrians in the field, and held them at bay within the citye, hee was of a ſodaine incountered with an huge army of the S
                     •
                  ythians lead and guided by Madyis their kinge, ſucceſſor to his father Protothias. Who hauinge driuen the Symmerians out of Europe brake from thence into Aſia, and beynge in queſt and perſute of thoſe whom they had flighted in battel came into Media.
            
            The diſtaūce betweene ye two riuers Maeotis & Phaſis euē vnto the countreye of Colchis is 30. dayes iorney for a light footman: but betwene Colchis, & the land of the Medes the way is ſhort, & the trauell eaſye, one onely region lying betwene them, which is the countrey of the people called Saſpires: which after wee haue paſſed, the next ſtepp is into Media. Notwithſtāding the Scythiās toke not this courſe but fetcht a compaſſe about another waye, towardes the vpper regions leauing the mount Caucaſus on their ryght hand. The Medes entring battell with the Scithians. were by them vanquiſhed, and loſt the tytle and ſuperiority of all Aſia. Wherfore the S
                     •
                  ythiās ſurpriſing ye dominiō of Aſia, went from thence the next way into Aegipt, but arryuinge in Siria Palaeſtina they were met by Pſammiti
                     •
                  hus Prince of the Aegyptians by whoſe gentle intreaty and greate rewardes they were ſtayed from goyng anye further, wherefore retyring backe agayne after they were come to ye citye Aſcalon in Syria, many of them paſſed by quietly, without

offer of damage or iniury, howbeit ſome drouping behynd rifled the chappel of Venus Vrania, beyng of greateſt ſtanding The moſt auncient temple of Venus. and antiquity, amonges all the temples that were euer erected to that Goddeſſe: for the Pallace of Venus in Cyprus toke oryginal of this, as the Cyprians themſelues teſtify. The temple alſo extant at Cythera was built by ye 
               Phaenicians, which were a progeny and ofſpring of the Syrians. But the Goddeſſe moued with wrath agaynſt thoſe that wrought the ſpoile and pillage of her temple, puniſhed both themſelues and all thoſe which came of them with the feminine ſicknes. Which thing the Scythians alſo graunt: who are eaſily brought to confeſſe that the cauſe was ſuch, and none other why they are tainted and infected with this diſeaſe. Neither is it hard for thoſe that trauayle into Scythia, with their owne eyes to behold them, which are thus diſeaſed, whom the Scythians call Enareas, that is, execrable and accurſed. Aſia therfore was held by this people 28. yeares, for which tyme proudly and iniuriouſly exercyſing Aſia held by the Scythians 28. yeares. gouernment they made waſt and hauocke of al. For beſide the ordinary penſion of tribute, they exacted ſo much of euery one ſeuerally as theyr pleaſure was to rate them at.
            Wherwith alſo hardly ſatiſfied they committed ſpoyle and robberye throughout all the countrey. Wherfore Cyaxares and his people the Medes, intertaining the moſt part of them with ſumptuous feaſtes, and all ſortes of delicious and dayntye fare: watching their time when the Scythians were ouerladen with drinke, they ſet vppon them and flue them. By which meanes recoueryng the empyre with all that they had before, they toke alſo the citye Nynus. The which in what ſort it was by them taken, and howe they brought vnder their rule all the Aſſyriās, ſaue only Babylon, it ſhall elſe where be declared.
            Nowe when as Cyaxares had raygned 40. yeares and Cyaxaresraigned 40. yeares. Aſtyages 4. vn. reclaymed the kyngdome from the Scythians, he ended his life, & Aſtyages hys ſōne ruled in his ſtede: of whoſe loynes

iſſued a goodly gentlewoman named Mandâne: whom hyr father on a night dreamed to haue let her vryne in ſo great der vvhoſe raygne is conteyned the famous ſtory of Cyrus. The 2. dreams of Aſtyages conce
                     •
                  ning his daughter. aboundāce, yt to it filled the whole citye, and couered Aſia wt a maine floud. The meaning wherof after he had learned of the Magi (who had ſkil to lay opē & interprete dreames) atteynted with exceeding feare, hee reſolued to marye his daughter (beyng now of ripe yeares) to none of the noble bloud of ye 
               Medes which might ſeeme worthy of her perſō: but to a certayne Perſian named Cambyſes, whō he knew to be of a good houſe and of nature remiſſe and quiet. Albeit with him ſelfe in farre leſſe accompt then a meane mā of the Medes. The ſame yeare he had placed his daughter with Cambyſes, hee ſaw another viſion no leſſe ſtraunge then the former: wherein ther ſeemed vnto hym out of the wombe of his daughter to grow a vyne that ouerſpread & ſhadowed all Aſia, and hauing knowledge what it meant, immediatly ſent for his daughter from Perſia, where ſhee abode: to whom beyng greate with childe, and neere the tyme of her deliuery, hee aſſygned a ſtrayght and diligent watch, in full purpoſe to deſtroy that whatſoeuer ſhee had brought forth into the world: beynge geuen him to vnderſtand by the wyſe Magi, the interpretors of dreames, that the yſſue of his daughter ſhould raygne in hys 
                  •
               leed.
            Which thing Aſtyages carefully noting, preſentlye at the byrth of Cyrus, ſent for Harpagus his moſt familiar and faythfull counſayler, and the onely ſolicitor and dealer in al his affayres. To whom hee ſayde on this manner: My good and truſty ſeruaunt Harpagus, I ſtraightlye warne thee not to neglect ye charge I ſhal lay vpon thee, nor in any wyſe to delay the ſpeedye diſpatch and accompliſhment of the ſame. Beware thou doſt not deceiue me, and take hede, leaſt repoſing thy truſt in other to do it for thee, thou bee a cauſe vnto thy ſelfe of grieuous reuenge.
            Take this litle bratte of my daughter Mandâne, and,

tary it home with thee to thyne houſe, and ſlay it: which done, take order alſo by ſome ſecrete meanes to ſee it buryed: to whom hee anſwered. Moſt noble Prince, your maieſty at no time enioyned ought to Harpagus that he ſcorned to doe, and ſhall hee from henceforth neglect your heſtes?
            Be it your wil and pleaſure, I ſhall do it: it is my dutye & deuoyre to perfourme it.
            Which hauing ſayd, the young infant was deliuered into hys handes in a rych and coaſtlye mantle whom hee receyuing departed home to his own houſe the teares trickling downe his cheekes for ſorrow. Whether beyng comen hee opened to his wyfe all the wordes that had paſſed betwene himſelfe and the king, who began to demaund him in theſe wordes. And what then my lord are you mynded to do?
            Certes (quoth he) albeit I am commaunded by Aſtyages: yet whyle I liue wil I neuer be brought to commit ſo deteſtable a villany: be he neuer ſo madd, and tenne hundred times more enraged then he is at this preſent, both for that this pore ſeely brat is of myne owne kyndred and allyance, and then becauſe Aſtiages himſelfe is now olde and without iſſue of a man child. After whoſe whoſe death if by fortune his daughter ſhould aſpyre to yt crowne (whoſe ſonne I am charged to bereaue of his life) what elſe could I hope for but the moſt cruel and miſerable death that coulde bee deuyſed? Neuertheleſſe, for myne owne ſafetyes ſake, I hold it neceſſarye this childe ſhoulde dye, yet not by anye of myne, but by ſome of the kinges owne ſeruantes. Hys talke ended, forthwith he ſent a meſſenger to yt heardman of Aſtyages whom he knew woſt cōueniently to be reſident in ſuch paſtors and hils as were haunted and frequented wt wyld beaſtes. The heard mannes name was Mitradates: whoſe mate in bedde and fellow in ſeruice was a poore laye woman named in the Greeke toung Cyno, which ſignifyeth a Bytch: in the Median lauguage Spaco, Spaca, in the commō vſe of their ſpeech being the right name for a vitch
            
               
The paſtours where hee graſed his cattell were borderyng to the foote or bottom of a deſert mountayne, lying to the North ſyde of Eobatana, and to the Euxine ſea: al that coaſt of the land of Media which tendeth towardes the people Saſpires, beinge very hygh & full of hils and forreſtes, but the reſt much more low and playne. The heardman receyuing the meſſuage, and repayring to the houſe of Harpagus after he was comen thither, he began to ſalute hym in theſe wordes. Gentle ſyria (quoth he) it is the kinges wil you take this litle infante and laye hym in the moſt wilde Harpagus deliuereth the child to the kinges neatheard to lay out in the deſert. and deſert place of the woods where he may ſooneſt bee deuoured. Which wordes his maieſty cōmaunded me to ſay vnto you, with this greeting moreouer, that if in caſe thou make not ſpeedy diſpatch of it, but by ſome meanes ſaue it and kepe it aliue, thyſelfe in ſted therof ſhalt dye the death. Which thing alſo that it might be done without deceipt, he gaue me in precyſe charge with myne owne eyes to behold the child dead, with which wordes the poore ſoule toke the babe, and returned the ſame way hee came to his baſe and ſimple cottage. Now it fortuned that all that day his wife laye in traueile of childbyrth, and (as the Gods would haue it) in the meane ſpace whyle her huſband went to the city, was deliuered of a ſonne: beyng very ſollicitous and careful one for another: Mitradates for yt ſafe deliuerye of his wifet Cyno for the good ſucceſſe of hyr huſband, who beſides cuſtome was ſent for by Harpagus. Beyng returned home, & with great ioy receaued of his ſorrowful wyfe, ſhe curyouſly demaunded of hym what the cauſe might be, that in ſuch poſt haſt he was ſummoned by Harpagus to come to the city. To whom he ſayde (my deare wyfe) at my comming to the city I both heard and ſaw that which I woulde to God I had neuer ſeene, nor it had bene done by our Lordes and mayſters. All yt houſe of Harpagus reſounding with teares and yellyng with moſt pitifull outcryes and lamentation. Wherinto after I was entered all agaſt & aſtonied for fear

I beheld a comly younge chyld lying in the middes of the houſe quaking and cryng wrapped in a rich mantel of gold and diuerſe colours, whom Harpagus (hauing eſpyed me) commaunded me to take by and by, and caſt it out in the mayne forreſt for a pray and ſpoyle to the ſauage and rauenous beaſtes: addynge moreouer yt 
               Aſtyages charged me ſo to do, with great threats and men
                  •
               cinges if I ſhould do otherwyſe. The child I toke and haue brought with mee ſuppoſing it to belong to ſome one of the court: for that I would neuer haue thoughte it to haue bene of the kinges owne bloud. Notwithſtanding I maruayled much to ſee that ſo rychly arayed with gold and ſumptuous attyre: as alſo what it might meane that Harpagus and all his family ſo bitterly wayled in extreame wae and heauines. Now in the way I was acertay
                  •
               ed of all the matter by a ſeruaūt that brought me out of the city, and deliuered the child into my handes: who told me it was the ſonne of Mandane our kinges daughter, begotten of Cambyſes ſonne of Cyrus,, and that Aſtyages commaunded it ſhould bee ſlayne: and this is he. Wherwithall he vnfolden the mantle & ſhewed the child to his wyfe. The ſelye woman beholding the young babe to be fayre and beautiful and of body large and well proportioned, fell downe on her knees, and bathinge her huſbandes feete wt her lukewarme teares ſhe beſought him in no wyfe to imbrue his handes in the bloud of an infant ſo goodly and well fauoured. Who alleaging that it could not be otherwyſe, becauſe that Harpagus would ſend his ſeruauntes to ſee it dead, and that himſelfe ſhould bee miſerably tormented to death. The woman which by thys tyme had ſet abroach a new deuiſe begā a freſh to counſaile hym ſaying. If there be no remedye but needes thou muſt lay it out: yet heare me once agayne & follow my counſayle how thou mayſt craftely diſpenſe with the kings commaū
               dement and ſaue the childe. This day haue I brought forth a young infant which was ſtil borne and dead in yt wombe.

Take yt therfore and ſaying it out in the deſert: let vs kepe and foſter this in the ſteed, ſo ſhall it neither be knowne yt thou haſt diſobayed the king, and our ſelues ſhall gayne the heauenly ioy of ſo goodly an infant. By this meanes (my good huſband) both our dead chyld caſt out in this kynglye veſture ſhall enioy a royall and princely ſepulcher: and this poore ſeely innocent that is aſſygned to dye ſhall be preſerued Mitradates moued by his vvife laid out a dead child of his ovvne in ſ
                     •
                  eed of Cyrus. and kept aliue. Which deuyſe fytted the neatheardes humoure ſo wel that without any longer deliberation, hee put it in practiſe. Wherfore giuinge to his wyfe the childe which he was mynded to haue ſlayne, his owne bratte that was ſtill borne gallantly decked in the others aray, he toke and layd out in a moſt wilde and waſt mountayne. Which done the 3. day after he had caſt it forth (leauyng another to ouerſee the neat) he poſted him to the city to the houſe and manſiō place of Harpagus, geuing him to vnderſtande that the child, was dead, and that for more aſſurance he myght behold it wher he lay: who ſending with him certaine of his ſeruauntes in whom he repoſinge geateſt affyaunce willed them to take view thereof, who fyndyng it to be ſo (as they thought) in ſteede of Mendanes ſonne toke the heardmās Cyrus brought vp by the graſiers vvife. child, and buryed it. Now the other yoūg brat yt was after called Cyrus was brought vp and cheriſhed by yt graſiers wyfe who notwithſtanding, as yet did not call hym Cyrus, but by ſome other name. The child arryuing to the age of tenne yeares, deſcryed his progeny, and opened hymſelfe by this deed, and ſportyng in a village where the hearde graſed, and beynge at ſporte and playe with his equalles, hee chaunſed by the other children his playfellowes to be choſē kynge.
            The boy incontinentlye limittynge to euerye one hys Cyrus deſcryeth his progeni and cauſeth himſelfe to be knovven. propre charge, toke vppon him lyke a younge Prince in dede, ordaining ſtrayght ſome of them to builde houſen, and others to garde hys Bodye, and to attende vppon

his perſon, one for the ſteward of his court, another for his legate and ambaſſadour to forreine countries: laſtly ſuch a one as might controll and ouerſee the reſt: bynding euery man with a ſeuerall dutye. Among this company of litle wagges ther vſed to play a young boy the ſonne of Artembares, a man of great calling and principal reſpect among the Medes, whō 
               Cyrus for that he refuſed to obay his authority, and do as hee bade hym, cauſed the other boyes to take and lay hold on, which they doing, he beat him ſpightfully & without meaſure. The boy taking it heauily to be thus abuſed, was no ſoner eſcaped from them, but he rāne home crying to the city where his father dwelled and complayned of the wrong & vyolence done to hym by Cyrus: albeit not callīg him Cyrus (for as yet he had not that name) but the ſonne of Aſtyages heardman. Artembar es tranſported with choller, in a rage toke his ſonne by the hande, and lead him to the kynge, where declarynge the intollerable miſuſage of hys child, opened his coate & ſhewed hys ſhoulders, ſayng. Is it meete (O kyng) that we be thus abuſed by the wretched brat of thy heardmā? Aſtyages willing to gratifye Artembares and do him honour by reuenging his ſonnes quarel, cauſed the heardmas boy to be ſent for: who bryng come, Aſtyages caſtyng towardes hym a ſterue and frowning loke, began in this wyſe: why ſyrra (quoth hee) you litle punion, is it for ſo baſe a brat as thy ſelfe, borne of a beggerly vaſſall, to ſcourge and whip in ſuch ſort a childe ſprong of a noble houſe, whoſe father is one of the peeres and chiefe men of my realme? The boy beholdyng the king with a bold and ſtedfaſt countenaunce aunſweared thus. Why my Lord (quoth he) that which I haue done I haue done by iuſtice, for our towne boyes, in whoſe crew this Cyrus his bold anſvveare to Aſtiages. was, appoynting me their king, as the meeteſt of them all to beare rule, this fellow would not obay me, and thought ſcorne to do as I bad him: for which cauſe according to hys

due deſert I ſharply puniſhed him, and if I for ſo doyng be worthy to be beaten, here I am do with me what thou wilt. Whyles the boy ſpake theſe wordes, Aſtyages his hart began to riſe: for he ſeemd to himſelf to acknowledge the coū
               tenaunce of the boy, callynge to mynde the forme and ſignes of his face, beſydes, his ſtately and liberal geſture: the terme alſo of his yeares hit ſo pat with the time of his caſting out, that he verily thought hym to be his yong nephewe. Wherat ſome what aſtonied he remained ſilent for a ſpace, & hardly at the length returning to himſelfe (being deſirus to ſend away Artembares, to the end he might talke alone with the heardman) he ſpake thus. My meanyng is O Artembares (quoth he) in ſuch ſort to deale in this matter that you ſhall thinke your ſelfe ſatiſfyed, and your ſonne haue no cauſe to complayne. With which wordes Artembares taking hys humble leaue of the king, Cyrus was lead into an inner par lour. Aſtyages beyng now alone with the heardman, began to parle with hym where he had the boy, or how he came by hym. Who thinking it beſt to ſtand to hys tacklinge affirmed ſtoutly that he was his own ſonne, and that his mother was liuing with hym at home at his houſe. To whom the king caſtyng an angry ſmyle: Certes (quoth hee) good fellow thou art not thyne owne freynd to runne wilfullye into the briers, and to be cauſe vnto thy ſelfe of a terrible death: and preſently making a ſigne to hys gard to lay hold on him they toke him in purpoſe to haue lead hym awaye. But the miſerable neatheard oppreſſed with extremity and driuē to ſo nere a ſtrayght, reſolued with hymſelfe abandoning all fayned allegations to ſeeke refuge by confeſſynge the truth: wherfore openyng the whole matter from the firſt head and begynning, he fell downe on his knees, and humblye craued pardon of the kyng. Aſtyages hearyng hym without gloſe or colour to ſpeake as it was, made light of his fault and let him goe, ſending certaine of his court for Harpagus againſt whom hys ſtomacke was inflamed with greate wrath and

indignation, to whom appearing in prefence hee ſpake as followeth. Tell me Harpagus in truth (quoth he) by what death didſt thou murder ye childe that I gaue vnto thee begotten & borne of my daughter Mandâne: who ſeeing Mitradates the heardman preſent, thought it not beſt to diſſē
               ble Harpagus examined about Cyrus. and conceale the matter by fayning, leaſt he were taken vp for triping and conuicted of a lye: but framing this aū
               ſwere: he ſayd. My ſoueraigne lord and King, after I had receiued the Infant at your graces hand, I caſt in my head the beſt way & fitteſt meanes to obey and fulfill your wil: and that in ſuch ſorte alſo, that auoydinge your Maieſtyes diſpleaſure, I might neyther be a mineſter of bloudſhed to your princely ſelfe, nor to your noble daughter. For which conſideratian I wrought thus. Sendinge for this heardman graſier of your maieſties Neat, I gaue into his handes the new borne brat, with a weighty and preciſe cō
               maundement from your gratious highneſſe to put him to death: and in ſo ſaying I ſpake no more then truth, for ſo much as your pleaſure was it ſhould be ſo. In this ſort I committed vnto him the babe with an earneſt and carefull charge to lay it out in the deſert chaſes of the wilde and inhabitable rockes & mountaines, adding a hundred thouſād threats of the moſt cruell and peſtilent death in the worlde if in caſe he ſhould let, or in ye leaſt point refuſe to perfourm it with diligence. Which done by him and the infant beyng dead, of my moſt aſſured and truſty ſeruauntes I ſent ſome to behold the child hauing nowe expyred and breathed forth hys laſt blaſt who fynding it cold, and without ſence, layd it in the earth and buryed it. This ſtandes the caſe O king and by this death the child periſhed. Now as touching this diſcourſe of Harpagus his talke was directed and grounded on a flat and ſincere truth.
            But Aſtyages makinge no ſemblaunce of anger of that which had happened, began and told him fyrſt of the heard

mans confeſſion procedinge orderlye with the reſt, till at length he came to ſay thus. For that the childe liueth and by the benefyte offortune and fauour of the Gods hath eſcaped death I greatly reioyce as beyng diſquieted with no ſmal anguiſh and torment of conſcience to conſider the villany and wicked treeſon wrought agaynſtyt, and beyng often challenged by my daughter, for the priuy murder and concealed death of hyr child, I was not a litle gauled and aſtlicted in thought. But in that fortune hath turned all to the beſt: ſend me hether thy ſonne to bee a playfellow and companion to my litle nephew, and ſee thou come thy ſelfe backe agayne and accompany me at ſupper. For the truth is I am in purpoſe to do ſacrifyce to the Gods immortall for the ſafe recouery of the child, to whom the honour and chiefe prayſe of this gracious and fortunate happe doth eſſpecially belong.
            
               Harpagus hearynge this, dyd hys humble reuerence to the kinge, exceedynge ioyous at the fauourable yſſue and good euent of his fault, and not a litle glad beſydes that as a fellow and companion of the kynges mirth and comfort he was inuyted to ſupper. Wherefore departing home he no ſooner entred within the dores but with all ſpeede he cauſed his ſonne to be ſought out, whom beyng of the age of 13. yeares he ſent to the court willyng hym to do whatſoeuer he was commaunded by the kynge. Hymſelfe as one ready to leape out of hysſkynne for ioy, with mery coun teuaunce and ſmyling cheere declared to hys wyfe imediatly the whole courſe and tenour of hys happye ſucceſſe. Hys Harpagus his ſonne ſlayne &
                     •
                   dreſſed in a barket. ſonne arryued at the kyngs pallace: Aſtyages incontinently ſlew, and cutting and diſmembringe him into ſmall peeces: part therof hee commaunded to bee roſted, and other part ſodden: both excellently wel ſeaſoned and reliſhed, to be kept in a readines. At ſupper time ye gueſtes beynge gathered togeather, and amonges them Harpagus the kyng hymſelfe with the reſt were ſerued with meſſes of mutton

wherewith the borde was generally ſpred, ſaue only Harpagus, before whom were ſet the partes of his torne and mangled childe, except the head, the handes, and the feete, which were ſeuerally kept and ſet aſyde in a baſket.
            Of theſe lamentable deintyes, after Aſtyages iudging hys gueſt to haue well fedde, hee demaunded hym the queſtion Harpagus feeding of his ovvne childe. how he lyked hys chere: who hauinge auouched hymſelfe greatly delighted therewith as the ſweeteſt and moſt delicat meate that euer he taſted: certayne appoynted for the nonce drew nere with the baſket conteyning thehead, handes, and feete, who willing hym to open it, and chooſe of thoſe things which were in it what liked him beſt, he diſcouered ye maūd and beheld the reſidue of his murthered childe: wherewith ſomewhat abaſhed, yet patiently kept him ſelfe from open outrage. Now Aſtyages aſkyng hym whether he knew ye head of that beaſt, of whoſe fleſh he had fed ſo freſhlye, hee made him anſwere, yea, & ſtood contented with that, whatſoeuer his maieſty ſhould do at any tyme. Immediatly he aroſe from the table and taking the remnauntes of his vnfortunate and wretched bratt, framed his ſteps towardes hys owne houſe, in mynd (as I iudge) to interre and burye the remnauntes of that accurſed and boucherlye acte. On this manner did king Aſtyages take reuenge of his faythful and beloued ſeruaunt Harpagus. After which entringe into deliberation of Cyrus, hee called for the wyſe men named Magi, by whoſe meanes he came to knowledge of hys dreame, to whom after they were come he moued a queſtiō about the true conſtruing and expoſition of hys viſion, who yeeldyng the ſame anſweare that they dyd before, that it behoued the boy if he were liuing to raigne and be kyng. Aſtyages 
               Cyrus by the counſayle of the vviſemen vvas ſenthome to his parentes tooke immediatlye theyr talke by the end, and goinge forward: Of a truthe (quoth hee) it is moſt certayne that the Chylde is liuinge, and fareth very well. And when as in the Countrye where hee was brought vppe, the children

of his owne village in wayof paſtime had made him a king loke what they do that are kynges indeede, the ſelfee ſame in like maner did hee. For appoynting his wayghters, his porters, his meſſengers to goe to and froe with other ſuch like dutyes and offices, hee bare himſelfe amonges them lyke a young prince.
            Now tel me therfore you that haue ſkill, what thinke you of this? If the chyld liue (ſay they) and haue already borne rule and that not aduyſedly or of premeditate purpoſe but by chaunce & deſtinye. Be of good courage then (O king) wee warrant you hee hath taken his leaue and ſhal rule no more. For ſome of our prophecies, ſothſayinges, and coniectures come to ſmall effect: & as meere phantaſies, and ydle dreames proue very light and fall to nothing. Surely (quoth the king) and I thinke no leſſe beynge of this opinion alſo that for aſmuch as hee hath once bene named & held for a kyng, my dreame hath his end, and that wee haue no more need to feare him anye longer. Neuertheleſſe I leaue it to your wyſedome carefullye to cōſider what may befall, and geue me ſuch counſayl and aduyſe as may be ſafeſt both for the maintenaunce of my ſcepter and for the cō
               tinuaunce of your owne eſtates, to whom they aunſwered. It is greatly to be wiſhed and deſyred of vs (O mightye Prince) that thy kyngdome perpetually indure, for otherwyſe if it ſhould deſcend or be tranſlated to this boy, which is a Perſian what could wee loke for that are Medes and aliens, then to be held and kept vnder in bondage and ſlauery. Whereas on the other ſyde vnder thy gouernment (whoſe natural ſubiectes we holde an accompt ourſelues) wee are in maner princes ouer them, and with thy ſelfe in great credite and honor. By how much ye rather we ought to haue diligent reſpecte of thy proſperous raygne, and at this tyme alſo to aduertiſe and warne thee if wee ſawe, or were priuye to oughte that might bee preiudiciall to thy royall perſon, but for as much as the viſion is comen to ſo

ſlender proofe, that in euent it ſeemeth a tryfle, both our ſelues are in good hope, and wil your grace alſo not to diſpayre, but to ſende home the childe into Perſia, to his parentes: wherat Aſtyages greatly reioyſing, calling for Cyrus ſayd vnto him: My ſonne, albeit heretofore by meanes of a fond & friuolous viſion, I did thee iniury: yet by thyne owne good fortune and happie deſteny, thou art kept aliue. Now thefore ioyfully get thee home to the Perſian▪
                with thoſe whom I haue appoynted to be thy guydes, wher thou ſhalt fynde a father not like to the heardman Mitradates, and a mother much better then thy nourſe Cyno. With which wordes he toke his leaue of hym and ſent hym away.
            When they were come to the houſe of Cambyſes, Cyrus was receiued of his parentes, who hauing knowledge that Cyrus receiued of his parentes. he was their ſonne, kyſſed and embraced hym a myllion of tymes, holding themſelues the moſt happy and fortunate people in the world, for the ſodayne and vnhoped recouery of their ſweete ſonne, whom they neuer thoughte to haue ſeene alyue. And curiouſly demaunding of him how, and by what meanes he eſcaped, he made them anſweare, that til this tyme he neuer knew: beyng altogeather ignoraunt of hys kyndred & lineage, addyng moreouer yt for ought he knew he was the very naturall and lawful child of Aſtyages his heardmā, ſaue that onely in the way he had intelligēce of his whole miſfortune & ſtraūge hap by thoſe which were geuen him of Aſtyages for his ſafe cōduct into Perſia. He declared therfore in what ſort he was nouriſhed, & kept vp by the field mans wyfe, whom in al his talke he greatly prayſed and commended, in ſo much yt alwayes at one ende of hys tale was his ſwete and dearly beloued Cyno: which The cauſe of the fable that Cyrus vvas ſaid to be brought vp of a Bytch. name his parents hearing, to the end yt deliuerance of their ſonne mighte ſeeme more ſtraunge & miraculous, they blazed abroad y• 
               Cyrus was brought vp & cheriſhed of a bitch: wherof conſequently ſprang and aroſe a fayned tale.
            
               Cyrus growing in yeares and approaching nere to mās

eſtate, waxed of all equals the moſt valiant and hardye, & in paſſinge fauour & goodwill with al men, whō 
               Harpagus oft tymes vrged by ſundry gyftes and preſentes to take reuenge of his graundfather Aſtyages. For ſeynge that by himſelfe beynge a priuate man ther was no waye to repay the iniury done him by the king (Cyrus beyng now at ripe and mature age) he thought good to make him, who had all one cauſe to haue all one quarell. Furthermore, hee wrought this, at what tyme Aſtyages through the peuiſhnes of age dealt very cruelly, and lyke a tyraunte with the Medes. Harpagus clawing fauour, and inſinuatynge himſelfe with the Peeres of the realme, perſwaded thē to depryue Aſtyages of the ſupreme dignity, and make choyſe of Cyrus for their high and ſoueraigne Prince. And ſeing his pretended treaſon pretily well to fadge & goe forward, willyng to make Cyrus of counſayle (which thing for that all the wayes into Perſia were intercluded & garded by watch and warde, was hard to be done) he came in mynd of thys conceipt: hauing finely and cunningly drawen out the garbedge of an hare, he conueied into her belly a letter wherin Harpagu
                     •
                  conuayghed a letter to Cyrus in the belly of an hare. was ſet forth and declared hys whole mynd: which togeather with the hare and nets deliuerynge to an huntsman, one of hys owne houſholdſeruauntes, whom he eſpeciallye truſted, he ſent into Perſia, geuīg him in charge to deliuer it into Cyrus hys owne handes, and to requeſt hym to cutt vp the hare ſecretely by hymſelfe and without company. The fellow faythfully executing his mayſters will, toke ye hare to Cyrus, who opening her belly found the letter encloſed, which he vnfolded and read in theſe termes.
            Thou ſonne of Cambyſes (whom no doubte the Gods The letter. tender and regard, for otherwyſe thou haddeſt neuer moū
               ted to ſo great eſtate) take vengeance now of Aſtyages, the ſeeker of thy vtter ſpoyle and deſtruction.
            For by his deſire thou haddeſt dyed the death, but by ye fauour of the Gods & by means of me, thou remayneſt alyue.

All the courſe of which thy bagicall and vnhappye fortune I doubt not but thon knoweſt of olde: as alſo the villanye and execrable wickednes done to mee by Aſtyages, in that my ſelfe refuſinge to kil the gaue the ouerinto the handes of his neathearde.
            Now therfore if thou wilt liſtē to me, the whole kingdome of the Medes ſhall be ſubiect to thy power. Seke firſt of al to allure the myndes of the Perſians to ſlippe choller, and rebell, which done put thy ſelfe in voyage agaynſt the Medes, in full hope and aſſurance to enioy the crowne. For be it my ſelfe or any other of the nobles of Media whom ye king ſhall aſſygne to come forth agaynſt thee and geue the battell, wee haue all geuen handes with one conſent to rebate the power of the Medes, and ioyninge auncientes to march vnder one banner, to the vtter ouerthrowe and depriuation of that cruell and malicious tyraunt. The account is caſt, the reckning made, and nothinge wantinge, but that which we earneſtly with for, and ſhortlye for, thy quicke and ſpeedy arriuall. The letter read and peruſed, Cyrus caſt with him ſelf what ſleight or art he might now vſe to induce and moue the Perſians to ſedition and fynding The deuyce of lying to moue the Perſians to rebellion. one not altogeather vnfyt for his purpoſe, hee determined to make tryall therof, indytinge a letter in ſuch wordes as hee thought beſt, after this he ſummoned a generall concourſe and meeting of the Perſians, wher opening the letter he ſignifyed to them that Aſtyages had apoynted him lieuetenaunt or principall of Perſia. For which cauſe you Perſians (ſayd he) I will and commaunde you, to reſort hether euery man furniſhed and prouided of his hooke or bill, which charge geuen he brakevp the aſſembly.
            Now it is meete wee knowe that many ſorts of people are contayned vnder the generall name of Perſians. Certayne wherof Cyrus callyng togeather intyſed them to rebell, which were ſuch that of them all the reſt depended.
            The names of the people be theſe.
            
               
The Arteatians, Perſians, Paſargadians, Meraphians, Maſians: of which number the Paſargadians are the moſt noble and renowmed: amonges whom is the ſtocke and familye of the Achaemenides, out of the which the kinges of Perſia are alwayes choſen and elected. There be alſo other Perſians beſydes theſe, as the Parthelians, Deruſians, Germanians, addicted to the trade of tillage and manurynge the ground. Other alſo that haue principall regard of graſinge and feedyng cattel, to wit, the Dayans, Mardians, Drophicians, Sagartians. All which ready preſt with their ſicles & hedging billes, Cyrus toke and lead into a field of 18. or 20 furlonges exceedyngly ouergrowen and peſtered with buſhes, which in one dayes ſpace they cleane cut vp and caried away. Wherfore the next day following hee commaunded them to be preſent agayne euery man handſomly and well arayed. Himſelfe in the meane ſeaſon gatheryng togeather whole heards of goats, ſheepe and oxen, all that his father had, hee ſlew them to make prouiſion of a ſumptuous and magnificent banquet wherwith to feaſt and entertayne the whole hoſt and company of the Perſians. The next day inſuing when (as Cyrus had commaunded) the Perſians were aſſembled and comen togeather, he cauſed them to ſit downe in a great and large field, where as mery as crickets, they fell freſhly to thoſe chats which in great plenty and aboundance were ſet before them. At after dynner Cyrus demaū
               ded of them whether of the two they rather wiſhed, the labour paſt, or the pleaſure preſent. To whom they replyed that there was no compariſon or equality betweene them: for as no payne and miſery was abſent from the one: ſo no pleaſure and felicity was wanting to ye other. Which their anſweare Cyrus takyng hold of preſentlye went forwarde ſaying. My frendes and countriemen of Perſia, euen ſo it fareth with you, and at ſuch choyſe and electiō you now ſtand. For geuing your conſent to obay and follow me: both theſe and many other infinite cōmodityes ſhal redound vnto you,

without the toylſome yoke of ſeruitude and ſlauerye, but refuſing my coūſayle, a whole ſea of miſeryes do dayly threaten you, not vnlyke the toyle and wretchedneſſe that yeſter day you abode. Be ruled then by me and attaine your freedome, for both I my ſelfe am prouyded by deuyne lotte and appoyntment of the Gods, by whoſe meanes you ſhould enter into this paradiſe of bleſſedneſſe, and you in nothinge (eſpecially in martial courage) were euer accompted inferiour to the Medes. What reſteth thē but that in defyaūce to Aſtyages and the tytle of the Medes, you caſt of the yoke of ſeruitude, and become free.
            The Perſians long ſince moued with diſdayne to ſee thē
               ſelues ouertopped and kept vnder by the Medes: hauing ye 
               The Perſians rebell. oportunity of a captayne, with handes and feete (as they ſay) vowed themſelues to obay Cyrus, and recouer their liberty. Theſe thinges ſounding in the eares of Aſtyages: Cyrus by a purſeuant was cyted vp to appeare at ye court: whom he returned backe agayne with this anſweare, that his meaninge was to come verye ſpedily and ſomewhat to ſone for his purpoſe. At which newes Aſtyages imediatlye prepared a power of the Medes, ouer whō in an ill hower he placed Harpagus generall, not mynding the iniurye hee had done vnto hym. The army prepared, and the Medes & Harpagus leading the army of the Medes ioyneth his vvhole povver vvith Cyrus agaynſt Aſtyage
                     •
                  . 
               Perſians meeting in the field: they which were not priuye to the purpoſe of Harpagus, began to fight and bicker with the en
                  •
               emy: the reſt without offer of violence ioyning with them. Other there were, that with ſmall reſiſtaunce turned their backes to the Perſians and fled amayne.
            The hoſt of Aſtyages beynge in this wyſe diſperſed and ſhronke in the wetting, newes was broughte thereof to the king, who in a greate heate of choller and outrage, menacing Aſtyages hangeth the vviſe men for counſayling him to let Cyrus goe. 
               Cyrus ſayd. Let the traytour bee aſſured hee ſhall not thus eſcape. How be it, firſt of all apprehending the wyſe men Magi, by whoſe counſayle hee was brought to let Cyrus depart, he hanged them vp euery man, not leauing one

aliue. After this he put in armour the reſt of the Medes, yt were in the city both young and old: with whom beyng preſent in the fielde. After that for a whyle he had abidden the might and power of the Perſians, he was driuen to flie, and Aſtyages takē captiue in the flyght was taken alyue, with the loſſe and perdition of hys whole army. Ouer whom beyng now captiue, Harpagus his counſaylour greatlye inſulted, with open ſcoffes and reproachful tauntes, omittyng nothing yt might gaule and greeue him to the verye hart: laying in his teeth the ſupper wherin he hadde cauſed hym to ſeede of his ſonnes fleſh. For which cauſe hee had now made him of a kynge a vaſſal. Why then (quoth Aſtyages) doſt thou now challēge the dead of Cyrus to thy ſelfe, who alleaginge on the other ſide that it was his deede and done by hym, for that Cyrus was moued ther unto by his letters. Aſtyages aunſweared that of all men he held hym moſt voyd of wit and goodwill to his countrey. The one, for that hauing power to be king hymſelfe, he had yelded it ouer to an other: the other in that for malice of one ſupper he had brought his owne countrey into perpetuall thraldome. For had it bene neceſſarye to haue put ouer the kingdome from hymſelfe to an other, it had bene much better to haue choſen a Mede then a Perſiā
                wheras now the Medes being nothing giltye of that fact, were become of rulers, ſlaues, and ye 
               Perſians that hetherto had liued in bondage were now come to be lordes themſelues.
            On this manner king Aſtyages hauinge the ſpace of 35. Aſtyages raygned 35. yeares. yeares borne rule in Media: was depryued of his ſeate: by whoſe cruelty and ſore dealing the Medes came in ſubiection to the Perſians after they had held the ſupremiſye of all Aſia aboue the floud Halis an hundred twenty eight years, ſauinge the 
                  •
               yme that the Scithians obtayned the empyre. Afterwardes the Medes repenting themſelues of that they had done, reuolted from Darius, but beyng ouercome in battayle, they were agayne perforce driuen to obedience.
            
               
The Perſians by whoſe meanes Cyrus vanquiſhed his graundfather Aſtyages, hauing the chiefe rule and dominion of Aſia. Cyrus doinge no violence to Aſtyages, kepte him in his houſe to the houre of his death. Such therfore was the byrth and education of Cyrus, & the meanes wherby he atchieued the kyngdome: who not longe after tryumphed ouer kyng Craeſus his profeſſed enemy, of whom wee ſpake before: by which his victory he wan the ful title & poſſeſſion of all Aſia.
            
            Furthermore the rytes and cuſtomes which the Perſiās vſe I fynd to be theſe. Firſt for ymages, temples, & aulters, they neuer build any, and accompt it great follye and madnes in thoſe that do builde them. For this cauſe as I iudge they think not the Gods to come of the progeny and lmeage of men, as the Graetians doe. Wherfore making choyſe of the kigheſt and moſt lofty hyls of the coūtrey on the toppes of them they do ſacrifyce vnto Iupiter by which name they vnderſtand the whole cope and vaute of heauen, geuing alſo lyke honor and reuerence to the Sunne, the Moone, the Earth the Fyre, the Water, and the Wyndes: imputing to theſe alone a deuyne nature and deity, which from the beginnīg they haue had in honour. Notwithſtāding in courſe of time they began to buckle and pray to Vrania: which maner they drew from the Aſſyrians and Arabians. Venus of the Aſſyrians is called Militta, in Arabia Alitta, by the Perſians Metra. The ceremonies ordayned by them to bee kept and obſerued in time of ſacrifice are theſe. They neyther ſet vp any aulter, or kyndle anye fyre at all, omittinge alſo to ſay or taſt of the ſacrifyce before the immolation. Pypes, Myters, ſaltcakes, they neuer vſe. But as euerye one is purpoſed to make oblation to the heauenly powers, ſo leadyng his hoſt or ſacrifyce into a fayre and cleanē place, hee humbleth himſelfe in prayer to ſome one of the Gods hauing his head decked with a nightcap vſuallye worne of the women of Perſia, bounde about for the moſt parte, and

enuyroned with mirtle. Beyng alwayes prouided that the party which maketh the offeryng hold it not lawful to pray for hymſelfe only or to make ſupplication for any priuate or peculiar commoditye of his owne, but vniuerſallye for the whole realme and multitude of the Perſians, and chiefly for the king. The ſacrifycer hymſelfe being a part and parcell of the whole number: ſo that in praying for all others hee prayeth for himſelfe. This alſo: cutting and hewing ye halowed beaſt into ſmall and ſlender peeces, they incontinently boyld it: which done makinge diligent inquiſition for the ſofteſt and ſmotheſt graſſe they can find, and eſpecially trifolly or three leaued graſſe, they ſpred thereon the ſodden fleſh, ouer which a Magician yalpeth out a ſonge of the beginning & childhod of ye Gods, whichthey accompt a moſt forceable and valerous incantation. Without this Magitian: They hold no ſacrifice lawful or rightly perfourmed. After this the ſacrifycer taketh the fleſh, and applyeth it to what vſe it ſeemeth him good. Of all the dayes in ye yeare they obſerue with greateſt ioy and ſolemnitye theyr byrth The celebration of their birth day in Perſia. day. Wherin, then at other tymes, they vſe larger dyete with greater plentye and aboundaunce of meate: in ſo much that the richer and wealthier ſorte ſet whole oxen, camels, horſes, and aſſes vppon the borde, prepared and roſted in a fornace. Such as are of meaner ability and ſubſtance celebrate their natiuity wt beaſtes of leſſe quantity. Litle meat ſufficeth them: the greateſt part of theyr prouiſion conſiſtīg in choiſe chats and iunkettinge diſhes. And thoſe not verye tothſome and daynty. Hereof it commeth that the Perſians obiect to the Grecians their ſhort meales & quicke dinners, for that (ſay they) they haue nothing pleaſaunt, dilicate, or worth eatyng, whereby they may be allured to ſitte longe at meate. Which if they hadde (no doubt) they woulde quatt theyr Stomakes to the full and ſeeldome or neuer aryſe hungrye.
            
               
Moreouer the Perſians generally are verye much geuen to wyne. Beyng notwithſtanding forbidden by the law to perbreake or vomite in company, or to make water wher they The regard of good maners may be ſeene, which maner and cuſtome they kepe as yet. Commonly when they haue typled ſo long they ſee a peece of the deuil, they by and by fall into queſtion and conſultation The maner of their conſultation. of graue and ſerious matters: and loke what is agreed vpon among their cuppes the ſame thenext day following is propounded by the hoſt of the houſe where the Senate was held: and if in lyke manner they allow and thinke well of it beyng ſober, they vſe it, if otherwyſe, they refuſe it. On the other ſide what ſoeuer in time of ſobriety hath bene determined by them, the ſelfe ſame they ruminate and run ouer a freſh, beyng wel moſtned with wine.
            If they meete one an other in the way it is no hard matter to know whether they be equalles or ſuperiours ech to other. For beyng of like reputation they kyſſe each other on the mouth. If the one be ſomewhat the others ſuperiour, after a more modeſt and baſhfull faſhion they kiſſe on the cheekes. If much more ſet by and of farre greater regard the baſe and vnnoble falleth flat on the earth in honour and reuerence to the other. Behauinge themſelues with all dutifull demeanour and curteous vſage towardes them, which are nexte dwellers, and neyghbours vnto them.
            In the ſecond degree imbracing and making much of thoſe who dwell nere alſo and border uppon their neighboures, and ſo conſequently the nerer euery one is in place to them ye greater he isin friendſhip and familiarity, eſteeming thē
               ſelues of all men the beſt.
            To thoſe which are furtheſt ſeperate and diſioyned from them in diſtaunce of place they diſdayne to ſhewe the leaſt poynt of ciuility, in ful accompt that of al men liuing there is none lyke vnto them ſelues in any thinge, and as euerye man hath nereſt propinquity to them in place and neighbourhod

ſo they deeme hym to excell others in vertue and good liuing, making leaſt accompt of thoſe that dwell furtheſt of and moſt of themſelues.
            Furthermore in the tyme of the Medes empyre, certayn familyes exerciſed mutuall gouernment, that is, were rulers ouer ſome and ruled by others, for the Medes generally weare rulers and chieflly ouer thoſe that dwelt next them: who in like ſort had the ouerſight of ſuch as bordered vpon them: to whom alſo in order was permitted the rule and moderation of others. Like to this manner of gouernment was the loue and familaritye that was alſo of the Peſians, alwayes louinge thoſe beſt that were their neereſt neighbours. Of all countryes in the world ye 
               Perſians are moſt delighted with forrayne and outlandiſh maners: wherfore leauing their owne countrey veſture, they put themſelues in Mediſh attyre, deeming it better & more ſeemly the
                  •
               their owne, wearyng vpon their hands a kynd of placars or ſtomacher vſed of the Aegyptians. Moreouer they are drawen with all kynd of pleaſure & delight which they can either inuent thēſelues or learne of other: learning of the Grecians to be in loue wt beautiful boyes. They wed many virgines, & woo more cōcubynes. In the next place to ſtrenght & valiaunt courage, they make moſt of him yt hath moſt childrē, whō anually ye kīg indueth wt a great reward as though he had atchined ſome notable act. Their childrē from 5. yere old til they come to 20. they trayne & bringe vp in 3 principal things in ryding, in ſhoting, & ſpeaking truth The child neuer cōmeth into the fathers ſight before he 
                  •
               e 5 yeare old, but is brought vp priuily among the company of women, to the end yt if the child dye before he aſpyre to that age the father may conceaue no griefe or ſorrow for ye ſame. Which cuſtome truly I greatly cōmend: as alſo this yt it be not lawfull for the king for one offence to bereaue a man of hys lyfe: nor for any of yt 
               Perſians to practiſe cruelty vpō his family beīg moued therto by one only tranſgreſſiō
            
            
               
But breathing vppon the cauſe if by good aduyſemente he founde more and greater faultes committed then duties
                  •
                perfourmed: then to geue the brydle to hys anger & worke hys wil. Beſides they are in opinion in yt countrey, yt no mā at anye tyme ſlew his owne father: but that the child ſo doing vppon examination and tryal had of his byrth is awaies found to be a baſtard and changling.
            Thinkinge it a thinge vnpoſſible that the naturall childe ſhould euer aduenture to brew the deſtruction of his owne and lawfull ſyre. Whatſoeuer is diſhoneſt to do that alſo they eſteeme vnſeemly to ſpeake. But of all thinges they accompt it moſt abhominable to lye: and next to that to bee much in debt: both for many other reſpectes, and chiefly becauſe they thinke it ſkarſe poſſible for him that oweth much not to diſſemble and lye much, if any one be infected with leproſie, or otherwyſe di
                  ••
               eined with vncleannes of the body, he may not come within th
                  •
                citye, or vſe the company of any Perſian, alleaging that for offence and tranſgreſſion agaynſt yt ſunne they were puniſhed and attaynted with ſuch diſeaſes. And if happily it befall a ſtraunger or forreyuer to be taken with ſuch like ſickneſſe, they baniſh and expell him the countrey: for the ſame reaſon alſo chaſting and ſkaringe all Pigeons and doues out of the circuite and compaſſe of theyr region. It is open blaſphamy with the ſame people, (not onely repugnant to good maners and ciuility) to piſſe or ſpitte into anye brooke or riuer, likewyſe to waſh his handes therein, or any ſuch lyke, wherof the water may cō
               ceaue any maner fylth or corruption: verye deuoutlye and with great religion, yelding worſhip & honour to yt flouds & riuers. This alſo is peculier to yt 
               Perſiās, which not marked by them, is knowē of vs, yt all the wordes in theyr language which cō
               
                  •
               iſt of 4 or more ſillables do commonly end in one letter: which letter the Dores cal San the Iones Sigma. And if we loke more narrowlye into theire ſpeech, and note that wel we ſhal fynd not onely ſome but all the names

of the Perſians to haue their termination and endinge alyke which for yt I know it aſſuredly I am not afraid to a
                  •
               ouch it conſtantly, being in halfe a doubt in like ſort to awarrant & beare out the truth of thoſe things which the ſame people are ſayd to obſerue about the dead bodyes of their countrimen, whom (as the rumor is) they neuer b
                  •
               ryeor intumulate before ſuch tyme as either by dogges or foules of the aire, they are drawen and haled about. Which thinges that their wiſemen doe, whom they call Magi, I dare vndoubttedly affyrme, becauſe they manifeſtly do them. The Perſians therfore inrowling and wrapping yt dead body in waxe they afterwardes interrupt and lay it in the graue. The Magi do much diſſent and differ from other men: beyng alſo vnlyke and diuerſe in their cuſtomes from the prieſtes of Aegipt. For the Aegyptian Prieſtes refuſe to defyle and pollute themſelues with the ſlaughter of any creature, ſauing of thoſe which they ſacrifyce to the Gods. But yt 
               Perſian Magi are not ſquemiſh or dainty to imbrew their hāds in the b
                  •••
               d of any liuing thing what ſoeuer, onely excepted a man or a dogge eſteeming it in maner of a conqueſt to be noted for a common kyller and deſtroyer of Ants, Serpentes, byrdes, wormes and ſuch lyke, wherin they greatly glory. Sufficeth it now of the Perſian faſhions and order of liuing to haue ſpoken hetherto, eftſones making recourſe to that from the which we haue ſomwhat digreſſed.
            The people of Ionia & Aeolia hearyng y• 
               Lydians with ſo ſmal endeuour and welny without blowes to be conquered The people of Greece offer themſelues to Cyrus todohomage. by the Perſians put in ambaſſage to Cyrus certayne of the chiefe peares of either coūtrey offring to ſtād at y• ſame cō
               ditiōs to hym as they did before tyme to Craeſus. To whoſe ſuite & humble petition Cyrus made anſweare by this ſimilitude or apology. A certayn fiſher (quoth he) beholding in the ſea great plenty of fyſhe began to play very pleaſūtly on his pype ſu
                  •
               yoſing y• at the ſweete ſound of his harmony y• 
               
                  •
               iſh would haue leaped out to the land: but fruſtrate of his hope, in a great heathe caſt his nets into y• ſea & iucluſ
                  •
               g

a geate number drew to ſhore where ſeyng them leape and play vpon the dry ground: Nay now (quoth he) you daūce to late, ſeyng yt when I pyped before, you refuſed to come. Which ſpeech he vſed for that hauing before tyme diſdayned his gentle offer beyng ſollicited by him to reuolt from Craeſus to the Perſians: Now when they ſawe the worlde chaunged, & the euent of thinges not anſwearable to their expectation, they made offer of their ſeruice, and ſignifyed themſelues ready preſt to do hys commaundements: wherfore moued with diſpleaſure agaynſt them with this briefe anſweare he ſent thē away. The people of Ionia hearyng this, repayred euery one to their owne cityes, to fortify and make ſtrong their walles. Hauinge before by a generall counſayle or Synode aſſembled themſelues in Panionium where they all mett ſauing the Mileſians whom Cyrus receyued into fauour, vnder the ſame condition as he had taken the Lydians, to the reſt of the Ionians it ſeemed beſt by common conſent to ſend legates into Sparta, aſwel to certify the Lacedaemonians of their preſent eſtate as to craue & implore their aſſiſtance. The people of Ionia vnto whō the temple of Panionium doth belong, haue their places of reſidence and abode ſo pleaſaunt and delectable, that what for the excellent temperature and myldneſſe of the ayre and deuyne benefyte and commodity of the mountaynes, there is no people in all Greece comparable vnto them. For neither the hygher region nor the lower, nether ye Eaſt cōmeth, nor ye weſt approacheth any thing nere to ye excellency therof, ye one beyng for ye moſt part very coulde or to much ouergone wt water: ye other (that is to ſay ye higher coaſt) burnt vp & peſtered wt heat, and duſt. The lāguage vſed in Ionia is not all one, but reduced and brought to 4 ſundry propertyes & formes of ſpeech Myletus ye chiefe city amongs thē, bounding to the ſouth, & after yt 
               Myrus & Pryene ſituated in Caria vſe all one toſig. But ye cities in Lydia (to witt) Epheſus, Colophō, Lebedus, Teos, Clazomenae, Phocaea: albeit they agree not in ſpeach wt the places forenamed, yet betweene

themſelues they ſpeake alike. The reſidue which are three: two are Iſles, Samus & Chios: one in the mayne called Erythrae, doe differ much in phraſe and manner of wordes. Chios & Erithrae iumping in one, the other which is Samus challenging vnto it ſelfe a diuerſe & ſtraūge form of language from the reſt: wherbyit is euident, that theyr ſpeach is qualifyed by 4 ſundrye differences.
            Of theſe people were the MILESIANS who vnder coloure and pretence of feare came to league and couenant with Cyrus. As for thoſe cityes that were incompaſſed by the ſea, they had leſſe cauſe to feare & more to liue in greater ſecurity then the reſt. Both for yt the Phaenecians were not yet tributory to the ſeat of Perſia, and the Perſians thē
               ſelues were vnaccuſtomed to ſea battels & vſed no ſhippes. The ſame for no other cauſe then that they knew the Graecians to be weake and mightles, and of all the reſt, the Ionians to be of leaſt power and ſmalleſt valure, withdrew & alienated themſelues from the other cityes in Ionia. Foras much as ſetting Athens aſide there was noe citye of principal fame in all that toaſt. So yt both other regions there inhabitaunt, and alſo the Athenians flatly renounced to bee called Ionians many of them beynge aſhamed of the name. wheras cōtrariwyſethe 12 cities are not alitle proud therof greatly vaunting themſelues vnder the tytle of Ionians wherefore hauinge once called them ſelues Paninoi, they built alſo atemple, intytling it after their owne name Panionium, decreeyng and conſenting neuer to admitte any other to the ſociety and felowſhip of the ſame. Neyther was ther any very deſyrous to be made pertakers therof ſauing the Smyrneans. The lyke thing happened to the Dorienſes 
               The difference of ſpeach in Ionia. that inhabite Pentapolis which before was called Heya polis, who by the generall decree and ordinaunce of the reſt, arenot ſuffred to inioy the libertyes of the palaice Triopium.
            
            Excluding therfore certayne of theire owne natyue people

For the violation and breach of a law or priuilege belongīg to the temple. For in the games of Appollo Triopius certayne three footed ſtooles beynge appoynted for hym that wan the price (which neuertheles it was not lawful to cary out of the temple, but in the ſame place to make dedication therof to the god) one Agaſicles of Halicarnaſſus attayning the victorye ſtrayned curſye with the law, and taking away the ſtole with him caryed it home to his owne howſe: For which deed ye 5 other cityes, Lyndus, Ialiſſus, Cameirus, Coſ, and Cindus. ſequeſtred Halicarnaſſus beyng the ſixt from the right and freedome of the temple: leuiyng a mucle or peine vppon the whole citye, for the bold enterpriſe of their valerous champyon Agaſicles howbeit the Ionians ſeeme vppon good ground and iuſt conſideratiō to haue parted their countrey into 12 cityes refuſing to amplify and augment the number beyng iuſt ſo maney partes of Peloponneſus, wherin that tyme they dwelt, euen as now alſo the Acheans, who draue and expelled the Iones out of theyr proper ſeat are iuſtlye deuyded into ſo many partes. The firſt and principall whrerof is named Pallena: after whiche are recounted Aegyrae and Aagae perpetually waſhed and moyſtned with the pleaſaunt ſtreame of the riuer Crathis which is alſo called Italicus. In the next place are reputed the cityes Bura and Helice, whether ye 
               Ionians diſcomfited in battayle by the Achoeans fledde for ſuccoure, next vnto Helice are theſe Aegion with the people called Rhypes, alſo the Patrenſes, Pharenſes, and the city Olenus, by the which ſcowreth the ſwift and maine riuer Pyrus. Laſt of al Dyma and the Trytaeenſes that dwell in the middle tracte of the region. Theſe are the 12 ſeuerall and diſtinct parcels of Achaea: which afore tyme were held and poſſeſſed by the Ionians, who for the ſame cauſe onlye, and none other kept the number of twelue Cityes, without deſyre to multiplye or increaſe the ſame. Whom precipuallye notwithſtandinge and aboue others to call Ionians yt were

great madnes, ſince the people Abantes alſo are of the proper lineage and naturall ſtocke of Ionia, which neuertheles haue eſtranged themſelues from the name of Iones Lykewyſe the Minyans intermedled and mingled with the Orchomenians, the Cadmaeans, Dryopians Phocenſes, Moloſſians, Arcadyans, Pelaſgians, Dores, Epidaurians, & many other nations confuſed and ioyned one with another. Of which number they that went out of the court or caſtell of Athens named Prytanêum and reputed themſelues the nobleſt and moſt principal of the Iones (at what tyme, being ſingled from the whole multitude of the Athenians they went to dwel in an other prouince) had with them no wiues of their owne: in ſteed whereof they vſed certayne women of Caria, whoſe parentes they had before tyme ſlayne. By reaſon of which ſlaughter ye dames of Caria, toke a ſolemne vow (which they likewyſe cauſed their daughters diligētly to obſerue) neuer to ſit at meate with theyr huſbandes, nor cal them by their own names. For that hauing cruelly murthered their fathers, their firſt huſbandes, & their ſonnes: they had alſo haled thē poore widowes much agaynſt their willes, to their vnchaſt and fylthy couches.
            All which thinges were done at the city Miletus in Ionia.
            
            Furthermore the kinges of Ionia and ſuch as weare aduaunced to the ſumpreme regiment of the countreye: were partly of Lyſia comen of the lyne of Glaucus ſonne of Hippolochus, and partly ſelected and choſen out of the Citye Pylus, drawing theyr progeny from Codrus ſonne of Melanthus. Notwithſtanding the name and tytle of the Ionians, they moſt willingly holde and embrace, of whom wee ſpake before: and in very deede are naturally ſo: how beit not they onely, but all the reſt which comming of the Athenians kepe and ſolemnize the feſtiuall dayes called Apaturia, are ſubiect to the ſelfe ſame name. Which cuſtome of celebration, is vniuerſally held and obſerued of all beſydes

the Epheſians and Colophonians, who by means of a murder committed, are prohibited and reſtrayned therefro. Now it is meete we know that Panyonium is a certayne holy and religious place in Mycale inclyninge to y• North dedicated by the whole countrey of Ionia to Neptune, ſyrnamed Heliconius. Mycale is a promontory or high place lyinge in the firme lande towardes the ſea, the wa
                  •
               e ſyde wherof pertayneth to the yſ
                  •
               e Samus. To this mountayne the people called Iones aſſemble and gather togeather, to perfourme the ceremonies of immolation and ſacrifyce, which they call by the name of the place Panionia. It is to be noted alſo, not onely in the ſolemnity of Ionia, but in the feaſtes & religious dayes of al the Graetians, how like vnto the name of the Perſians they end all in a letter.
            We haue heard then of the cityes of Ionia, what & how many in number they are, it followeth, that wee ſpeake of Of the cityes of Aeolia thoſe that are in Aeolia which are theſe Cumae, which is alſo called Phryconis, Lariſſae, Newalle, Teuus, Cylla, Notium Aegyroeſſa, Aegaea, Myrina. Crynia. And theſe eleuē were the auncient cityes of Aeolia. Hereunto was added in in tyme paſt Smyrna, a city belonging to this regiō, which now hangeth as it were betwene the Ionians and Aeolians, and is reckned for part of neit her. Otherwyſe (as we ſee) both the nations had bene equall in the number of cityes. All the townes of Aeolia are ſpred in the mayne in power and dominion going beyond the Iones but in the temperate calmneſſe of the ayre comming farre behynde them. The The loſſe of Smyrna. occaſion & meanes wherby they loſt Smyrna was this. Hauing entertained the Colophonians dryuen from their coū
               trey by ciuil tumult and ſedition: the people of Ionia bearyng grudge and malice towardes them, lay in diligente wayght to ſurpryſe and take their city. Which thinge they did at ſuch tyme as the Smyrneans were buſied in the ſolemniſing of Bacchus feſtiuall, which they vſually kept wt
               out the city. The Iones therfore when euerye one went out

ſtale priuely into the city, and ſhuttinge the gates held poſſeſſion by vyolence. Which thinge beyng knowen and ſpedy helpe yelded from al partes of Aeolia, they fel to condition y• reſtoring to the Smyrneans all their neceſſaryes and mouable goods, yt ſhoulde bee lawful for them to hold the city in peace: wherunto the contrary part hauing geuen theire conſent it was agreed by the eleuen cityes of Aeolia to deuyde the reſt betwene thē, eueryone making choyſe of their owne citizens. Such therfore and ſo many in number are y• cityes of the maine, excepting thoſe that inhabite Ida, which are not referred to the former accompt.
            This alſo: Leſbos is impeopled with fyue ſea Cityes planted in ylandes: hauing once alſo poſſeſſed the ſixte called Ariſba, with the Methymneans, ſeduced and withdrew from the reſt, as alied to themſelues in kyndred and lyneage.
            There was alſo a citye founded in Tenedos, and an other in the place called the hundred Iles. Now the people of Leſbos and Tenedos with the reſt of the Graecians inuyroned by the ſea, had no cauſe to bee diſmayed or troubled. But the other cityes of the land determined to take ſuch part as the Iones did and to follow them. Wherefore the ambaſſadours of both nations in ſhort ſpace landing at Sparta: they choſe one Pythermus a Phocaean to be the mouth of yt reſt, and to reueale their ſuite to the Lacedaemonians, who at yt fame of the ambaſſadours arryuall flockinge together in greate heapes, Pythermus ſtoode forth & in many wordes moued the Lacaedemonians to imploy their ayd & aſſiſtance to ſuccour the reſt: but they geuing litle eare to his talke wt out purpoſe to moue one foote in the behalfe of Ionia ſente them away, Pythermus and his company in this wiſe repulſed, made ſpeedy returne to Ionia. Howbeit the Lacedaemonians deſyrous to vnderſtand the ſucceſſe of Cyrus, and the Graecians ſent forth a bragandyne or ſhippe of eſpyall to prye and liſten how all thinges wente.
            
               
Who beyng ſodaynlye driuen to ſhore at Phocae a ſpyed one Lacrines the ſtouteſt champyon in the rout of Sardis, wher king Cyrus made his abode to geue hym to witt from the Lacaedemonians that he ſhould not endamage or abuſe the Grecians any way vnder payne of theyr, heauye wrath and diſpleaſure.
            
               Cyrus hearyng the bold meſſage of Lacrines, demaunded of certayne Grecians that ſtode about him, what maner of fellowes the Spartans were, and how manye in number, which after he vnderſtode he made hym this anſweare.
            Verily (my friend ſayde he) I neuer ſtode in awe or feare of thoſe which in the middeſt theyr citye haue avoyde place wherby mutuall othes, fayned vowes, and proteſtations, they defraude & coſine each other: whom if the Gods ſpare me life I wil one day cauſe to leaue of the regarde of other mens miſeryes and bewayle theire owne. Which wordes were vttered by Cyrus in mockage and deriſion to all the Grecians, for hauing ſuch wyde and waſt marketplaces, for open ſale and marchaundiſe. For the Perſians neyther haue any ſuch place for exchaūge and chapmandry, neyther are troubled at any tyme with buyinge or ſelling.
            After this leauing the rule and gouernment of Sardis to one Tabalus a Perſian: and hauing in like maner geuē one Pactyas a man of the countrey of Lydia in charge with the goods of Craeſus, and the reſt of the Lydians accompanied with Craeſus, he toke hys voyage toward Ecbatana, the chiefe citye of the Medes and hauing no greate regarde of Ionia, albeit they were fyrſt to bee dealt withall (as ſcanning more ſedious in his heade touching the Babilonians, Bactrians, Sacans, Aegiptians, all which he determined to aſſayle by warre) hee ſent agaynſt the Iones ſome other of of his capteynes. Being newly departed from Sardis Pactias cauſed the Lydians to rebell from Tabalus, and the Perſians, and hauing in hys cuſtodye all the wealth and treſure

of Sardis he toke ſea and leauied a power of hyred ſouldiours, procuring the helpe and ſupply of all the cityes lying on the ſhore. Who beyng moued by his earneſt intreaty ioyned with him: and remouing hys tentes to Sardis, forced Tabalus to take the tower for hys defence and ſauegarde, where he planted his army in a ſiege againſt him. Tydings hereof beynge brought vnto Cyrus, who was yet in his iourney, he turned himſelfe vnto Craeſus, and ſpake on this maner. When wil it be O Craeſus (quoth he) that I ſhall be quiet & haue nothing to do? wil the Lydiaus neuer leaue of to trouble me and themſelues in ſuch wyſe? were I not beſt to make ſlaues of them and kepe them vnder by miſerable thralldome and bondage? For in this that I haue already done I am not vnlike to hym that hauing ſlayne the father, taketh pity on the children. Foraſmuch as I haue led thee awaye captyue beynge more then a father to the Lydians: and reſtored to themſelues theyr city againe. So that I cannot but greatly maruayle what cauſe mighte moue them ſo ſodaynly to caſt of obedience and become diſloyall. Craeſus fearyng leaſt in his fury he would haue beatē down and defaced the city: began thus (and ſayde) moſt worthye Cyrus thou haſt ſpoken very well and wiſely: yet neuer theleſſe it behoueth thee to moderate thyne anger, and not to ſuffer a citye of ſo great fame and antiquity to be wholly ouerthrowen: whiche (the Gods doe knowe) is all togeather innocent both of the former offences that were done agaynſt thee & of the preſente treaſon which is now in hand, the firſt treſpaſſe (o kinge) I did my ſelfe, and I ſmart for it: the ſecond hath Pactyas done, and let him feele the price of it. But to the Lydians (noble pr
                  ••
               ce) ſhew mercy & compaſſyon, and fynd ſome meanes by infeebling their ſtrength to preuent their courage, and to take from them all occaſion of treaſon heareafter.
            Commaund therfore that no man amonges them be founde to keepe any war like weapons in his houſe: ordayninge beſides

that auorde their coats they weare cloakes, drawing on their feete pumpes and buſkins, inioyne them to bringe vp their children in playing on the cithren, in ſinging, in keping of tauernes and vintninge houſes: and vndoubtedlye thou ſhalt ſee that of valiant men and warlike people they will ſhortely become effeminate and like vnto women: yt there ſhal be no cauſe to feare leaſt euer hereafter they riſe agaynſt thee. Theſe things Craeſus put into his head, thirking it better for the Lydians to liue in this ſort then to bee comonly ſolde for ſalues and vaſſals, knowing that if in caſe he had not framed a very reaſonable deuyſe, he could neuer haue remoued Cyrus from his purpoſe. It is alſo to bee thought that he feared leaſt the whole nation of the Lydians ſhould be cleane rooted out and deſtroied by the Perſiās if eſcaping this at any tyme hereafter they ſought to rebel. Cyrus right glad at the counſayle and deuyſe of Craeſus, gaue him promiſe to do thereafter, wherfore callinge vnto him Mazares a captayne of the Medes, hee warned him to charge the Lydians with the accompliſhmēt and perfourmance of all thoſe thinges that Craeſus had told hym: with a ſtraight cōmaundement to let none of thoſe eſcape vnſold for bondmen which had accompanied the Lydians in the aſſault of Sardis. As for Pactyas the principall, he commaū
               ded himto be taken and brought aliue. Which thinges after he had left to the diſcretion of Mazares, hee proceeded immediatly towardes Perſia his natiue countrey. Nowe Pacyas hauing knowledge that the army drew nere, rayſed the ſyege and fled to Cumae, whom Mazares ſpedily arriued at Sardis, and hearing him wt the reſt of his company to be vaniſhed away. Fyrſt of al bound the Lydians diligētly to perfourme all thoſe things that Cyrus had commaū
               ded. In the next place ſending meſſengers to Cumae to wil them to render and yeld vp Pactyas. The Cumaeans toke counſayle togeather & decreed to ſend Branchyde to ye God inguiring of him what was beſt to be done. For as much as

in ye place reſted an oracle very auncient & of long continuance, which ſēblably ye people alſo of ſonia & Aeolia did vſe and frequent. This prophecy was ſituate in a certayne field of the Mileſi
                     •
                  ns about the hauen Panormus whether ye 
               Cumaeans at this time ſent for aduiſe in their affayres, demaū
               ding what they might do in this caſe yt might ſeme moſt acceptable and approued to the gods. Anſwere was made ye 
               Pactyas ſhould be reſtored to ye 
               Perſians: which the people hearyng and thinking it wiſedome to obay the oracle, were fully mynded ſo to do. Howbeit, the more part of thē bendyng & inclyning hereto one Ariſtodi
                     •
                  us borne of Heraclides, a man of no ſmall accompt amongs thē, either for yt hee beleued not ye oracle or miſtruſted ye meſſengers yt were ſent vnto it, earneſtly wt ſtood it tooth & naile, in no wiſe ſuffring ye 
               Cumaeans to obay the voyce & ſuggeſtion of ye God, whervpon it came to paſſe ye other meſſengers were ſent the ſeconde tyme, to wit ye prieſtes & religious mē of the citye, Ariſtodicus himſelfe making one of the company, who beyng come to the place where the god held his ſeate, humbly beſought hym in theſe wordes. Ther came vnto vs (O king) a certayne Lydian named Pyctyas proſtrate in all humility, pitifully crauing & beſeeching vs to ſaue & aſſiſt him frō the vyolent & cruel hands of his ſpyteful & enraged enemies we (albeit dreading the might & power of ye 
               Perſians:) yet haue not deliuered him, vntil we vnderſtoode of thy diuine wiſedome what pertained to vs to doe in ſo doubtful a caſe. Hauing ended his ſpeach, he receaued ye like anſwere as before, ye 
               Pactyas was to be yelded into ye hands of the Perſiās: wher wt all Ariſtodicus being angry of ſet purpoſe wrought this fact. As he walked about ye temple certain yoūg ſparrowes & other birds yt built there he toke out of their neſts & ſodaynly a voice was hard out of the inner part of ye temple ſaying: thou wicked & malicious wretch what makes thee in this ſort, to ſpoile ye neſts of my innocēt ſuppliantes, wherunto Ariſtodicus anſweryng: (o king quoth hee) doſt

thou ſo greatly fauour and regard thoſe that flye vnto thee for ſuccour, and yet biddeſt the Cumaeans to delyuer Pacty▪
                  as into the handes of hys enemyes? To which the God replying. Truly, ſayd he, I bid you all goe to the deuil, and neuer hereafter to ſollicite this oracle about the reſtoring of your ſuppliantes. The Cumaeans certifyed of this laſt anſweare determined nether to giue vp Pactyas to be ſlayn of the Perſians: nor yet by keeping him ſtil to bring Cyrus to the ſuberſion and ruine of their citye. Wherefore they ſent him ſecretly away to Mytelaeane. But Mazares in lyke ſort making challenge of him from thence, the Mitylinaeans couenaunted vppon a certayne pryce to ſurrender hym. Which notwithſtanding I dare not auouch and verifie for that the matter came not to full iſſue and perfection. The people of Cumae vnderſtādyng in what diſtreſſe Pacctyas was at Mytilaene, ſent a barke to Leſbos, where hee went a borde and was ſpedely landed at Chyus, where hauing taken ſanctuary in the gardian temple of Minerua, he was neuertheles haled out violently by the Chians, & geuē to his ennemyes. The Peraeans gaue in reward to the citye Chius a certayne field of Myſia named Aetarnaeus right ouer agaynſt Leſbos.
            
            By this meanes was Pactyas in warre with the Perſians, when oportunity ſerued to be geuen into the handes of Cyrus. Neuertheleſſe of the fruites and increaſe of Atarnaeus, for a longe tyme after the people of Chius, neyther made any barly cakes to offer to the gods, nor wrought any paaſt of ye meale thereof for iunkets & banquetting diſhes. And in briefe what ſoeuer the ground yeelded they flatly aboliſhed from the ſeruice and worſhip of the gods. Pactyas beyng betrayed by the Chians, Mazares without further delay lead his army agaynſt thoſe that had miniſtred ayde to hym in gettyng the city, and conqueringe the Pryenſes, he began to waſt and depopulate the fieldes of Maeander, geuing the whole pray and booty to his ſouldiours.
            Which done, in ſemblable manner he gaue the onſet to

               Magneſia, and laſtly attached with extremitye of ſicknes, finiſhed hys lyfe. In whoſe ſteed Harpagus, who was alſo Mazares dyīg; Harpagusvvas made generall in his ſteed a Mede, guyded the army. This was hee whom king Aſtiages intertayned with a banket of his ſonnes fleſh: and by whoſe meanes Cyrus before tyme aſpyred to the eſtate royall. To hym the chiefe gouernment of the army was nextly committed: who comming into Ionia, intrenched many cityes and tooke them. For hauing firſt of all compelled thē to vſe the refuge and defence of their walles, he rayſed bulwarkes agaynſt their townes, and with ſmall force cauſed them to yeelde. In which manner he wanne Phocaea, the chiefe city of the Iones, the people whereof firſt of all the Greciās wan
                  •
               ered on ye ſea in long and ample voyages, fynding out and diſcrying both the countreyes themſelues, Adria, Tyrrhenia, Iberia, Tarteſſus, and the nereſt cu
                  ••
                alſo and redieſt way of nauigation to the ſame. At which tyme they had in vſe no beaked or ſnow
                  •
               ed ſhippes armed with a pyke or ſtemme of iron, but ſmaller and lighter veſſels driuen with ꝭ oeres ap
                  •
               ece. Theſe at their firſt arryual to Tarteſſus, were very welcome to ye king whoſe name was Arganthonius and by whom the kingdome had bene gouerned 80 yeares, liuing by the ſpace of 120.
            Who made ſo paſſyng much of the Phocaeans; and ſhewed them ſo curteous intertaynment, that he left it in their power to choſe any part of his kingdome to inhabite, wherevnto not able to allure them by any perſwations, and hearyng by them how the power of Harpagus dayly increaſed, hee gaue them an infinite ſumme of moneye to inuyron and compaſſe about their citye with a wall. The circuit of their wall beyng no ſmall number of furlongs in ſcope and compaſſe, framed & compacted of greate and huge ſtones layd togeather wt ſinguler cunning: by this meanes was ye wall of the Phocaeans builded. Agaynſt whō 
               Harpagus incāping his power gaue fierſe & mightye aſſault to the city, giuing

them vnderſtanding withall that it ſhould ſuffyce and content him if they would throw downe but one fortres or gardure of their wall for himſelf to build an houſe on. But the Phocaeans abhorryng nothing more then ſeruitude & loſſe of liberty, required of him one dayes deliberation in the cauſe, and for that whyle to reclayme his armye from the walles Harpagus (albeit as he ſayd) hee verye well knewe what they meant to do neuertheleſſe, graunted them ſpace to breath and bethinke themſelues. The army goyng from the city, forth with the people of Phocaea with their wiues and children and all their ſubſtaunce tooke ſea, in ſhippinge beſides all the ymages of theyr temples and gyftes offered to the gods, ſauing thoſe that were of iron or ſtone or onely paynted and wrought in colours. Which done with al their caryage they ſayled into Chius▪ Phocaea left deſolate without any liuig creature in it was ye next day takē by the Perſians. The people wher of hauing cheapened of ye 
               Chyans ye 
               Iles Oenuſiae (who refuſed to ſel them fearing leaſt ye mart and cuſtome of marchandize ſhoulde bee tranſlated from their owne Ile, thither) departed thence into Cyrnus.
            
            Where twenty yeares before lead by a certayne prophecye they had founded a city named Aetalia. Whyle theſe things were doyng Argathonius the Tarceſian kyng dyed. But ye 
               Phocaeans holdyng their courſe toward Cyrnus turned out of the waye and came to their old citye where they ſ
                  •
               ue the gariſon and power of the Perſians planted there by Harpagus for the poſſeſſion and cuſtody of the Citye. Curſinge & banning thoſe with moſt blaſphemous and execrable ſpeaches which ſhould ſeeke to leaue theyr companye and turne behynd.
            Wherewithall taking a fiery wedge of hoat iron, they caſt it into the ſea, deepely vowing neuer to returne to their city Phocaea, before the iron ryſinge from the bottome of the water ſhould 
                  ••
               ote aloft and ſwimme one the toppe. Howbeit launchinge towardes Corſica: the halfe part of the rowt

were moued with a great longing and deſire of their countrey, and the maners and cuſtomes therof, inſomuch that many of them without regard of their oth, returned backe to Phocaea. Others lead with a greater care of theyr late 
                  •
               ow, leauing the Iles Onuſae, went ſtrayght to Cyrnus.
            
            Where beyng come on ſhore, for terme of 5 years they ioyned felowſhip with other their countreymen which before tyme were ſhed from the city to inhabite that place, making ordinaunce and appoyntment of diume ſeruice and honoure to the Gods. Neuertheleſſe beyng accuſtomed in manner of enimyes by open pillage to ſpoyle and deſtroy the fields of their neighbours round about: the Tyrrheniās and Carthaginians determined by common conſent to encounter them by power of warre hauing furniſhed to the ſame end a fleete or Nauye of threſcore ſhippes. The lyke number on the other ſyde beyng prouyded by the Phocaeans, wel ſtored and repleniſhed with ſouldiours they ſet forth to meete the enemy in the ſea called Sardonium. Where ioyninge in battell the Phocaeans obtayned a victory much lyke vnto that of Cadmus. For of threſcore veſſels fourty beyng ſunk and ouerwhelmed in the ſea, the other twenty were ſo mangled and torne, and the noſes and ſtemmes thereof blunted and beaten backe, that they ſerued afterwards to ſmall vſe. Retiring therfore to Aetalia they toke theyr wiues and children with the reſt of their wealth aſmuch as coulde wel lye aborde and remoued from Cyrnus to Rhegium. The men wherewith the drowned ſhippes were filled, loke how many eſcaped the water and came into the handes of their enemies (which hapned to many) at their cōming to land wer ſtoned to death. Inſuing which murder they cattell & people of the Agilleans, as manye came into that place where the men of Phocaea were ſtonned were ether ſcorched and blaſed all with lightning or attached with extreame furye & madnes. For which cauſe the Agylleans willing to make

ſatiſfaction for the offence, ſent to Delphos, where Pythia commaunded them to do all thoſe thinges which they hold and obſerue to this houre: annuallye perfourminge to the Phocaeans that were ſtayne the ſolemne pompe of funerall exequies with a game of wraſtling and exerciſe of the body. Such was the euent and ſucceſſe of thoſe people after they for ſooke their countrey ſoyle. Of which rout and companye they which eſcaped the dynt of battel and cut the Seas to Rhegium, planted a city in ye Fielde of Oenotria, called Hyêla: beyngtherto moued by the aduyſe of one Poſidoniates, a manne very well eſteemed and thoughte of in all the lande of Phocaea. In this manner did Fortune deale with thoſe that dwelt in Ionia.
            
            The very lyke thing chaunced to them that held the city Teios: whoſe towne by meanes of a vulwarke caſt vp agaynſte the walles veynge at a poynte welnye vanquiſhed and ouercome by Harpagus, they paſſed the ſeas into Thracia, fyniſhinge the citye Abdêra in the ſame place: the foū
               dation and grounde whereof was fyrſt layed by Temeſius Clazom enius. How bee it, not inioyinge the fruite and due guerdon of his labour, hee was driuen thence and expelled by the Thracians. Albeit, the menne of Teios in the ſelfe ſame citye of Abdêra haue hym in honour and reputa
               
                  •
               ion of halfe a God. Theſe people onely of the whole natiō of Ionia moued with hate and diſdayne of bondage, left the places, where they all were naturallye reſyaunte, and ſoughte forrayne and ſtraūge countries. The reſt remayninge (except the Mileſians) tooke heart at graſſe, and foughte both ſtoutlye and valtauntlye in the behalfe of their landes and liberty.
            But the fortune of warre proceedynge agaynſt them, they came into captiuitye. And abydinge ſtill in theire owne ſeates, dyd as they were commaunded. Onely the Mileſias (who were in league with Cyrus and the Perſias)
               
as wee ſayd before, were quiet and voyde of trouble. By this meanes was Ionia the ſecond tyme bereaued & ſpoiled of theire libertye. The people of the Iles perceyuinge the mayne land to bee all vnder the dominion and rule of the Perſians: fearyng the worſt yelded themſelues to Cyrus to be at his pleaſure. Now the Ionians albeit in very miſerable eſtate and condition, yet oſyng their olde haunte and accuſtomed meetinge at Panionium, the fame is that one Bias a Prienian gaue them ſuch counſayle, as had they purſued it with diligence, they had liued in the moſt happy and bliſſeful eſtate of all the Greciās. His aduyſe was this, that the people of Ionia abandoninge their owne howſes & The counſai of Byas to th people of Ionia. places of habitation, ſhould imbarke themſelues to Sardinia, and there for their whole multitude to build and erect a city to be helde and inhabited by them al in general which doyng they might caſt of the yoke of ye 
               Perſians, and hauing in their dominion the griateſt and moſt principall of all the Iles, might alſo hold ye chiefe rule & dominion ouer all the reſt. This was ye coūſayl of Byas, to ye pore afflicted Iones.
            
            Not much inferyour to this was the graue aduiſe and ſentence of Thales whereby he prouoked and ſtyrred vp the people before their captiuity to the inſtitution of one generall parliament to be cōmonly held at Teios both for that ye city was fixed in the midle part of the region, and that the other Cityes rounde aboute, mighte neurrtheleſſe bee reckened as tribes appertinēt therto. This was ye holeſom doctrine & wyſe coūſayl geuen by theſe 2 learned ſages to ye people of Ionia. Harpagus after his tryumph ouer Ionia, 
               A diſcourſe the Carians. directed hys power agaynſt the Caryans, Caunians, and Lyſians, leading with him the Iones and Aeoles. Of which number the Carians forſoke the Iles to come dwell in the mayne. For in auncient tyme they were vnder the authority and gouernement of Minos, bearyng the name of Lelages, at what tyme alſo they were reſident in the Ilandes wt
               out rent or penſion of tribute, as far as I can learne by ye diligent ſcrutiny (& hearſay) of times forepaſt & conſumed.

onely they weare leauied at a certayne number of ſhyppes furniſhed and prepared with men of armes as often as it ſemed good to the Prynce.
            Moreouer King Mynos inioying a very large & ample Oilion, very fortunate in the euent of warre. The nation of Ca
                     •
                  ia was exceedingly aduaūced aboue the reſt in royall fame & dignity: of whom the Gretians borowed three principall thinges, firſt found out and deuiſed by them. It was their inueſtion to weare a Creſt or Cope on their Helmets, to paynt and ſet forth their Targets in gallant ſhewe & brauery of colours: laſt of all the ſteele or handle of the ſhielde came likewiſe frō thē, whereas, before they vſed no ſteeles, but hanging them about their neckes and right ſhoulders, with lyſtes and thonges of leather they moued and guyded them to and fro. Along time after the Caryans, the Dores alſo and Iones chaunged the Iſles with the mayne or continent, and rowſ
                  •
               ed thē there: all which things are affirmed of ye 
               Carians by the people of Creta. From whom the Caryans themſelues doe greatly diſſent and ſwarue in opinion, cōſtantly auouching how from the beginning and beyonde all memory, thoſe ſeates haue bene helde by them without chaunge or mutation eyther of name or place. In teſtimony whereof they ſhewe the temple of Iupiter Carius, founded at Mylaſſus whereunto the Lydians alſo and Myſians haue common reſorte as allyed to the Carians in neere kindred & affinity. For the Carian calleth the Myſian and Lydian brother, whereof it commeth that they vſe all one place of prayer and worſhip to the powers deuyne. All other nations beſide though in tongue they differ not from thy Carians, yet are they not ioyned wyth them in fellowſhip of ſacrifice and ſeruice to the Gods.
            The people Caunij, though they fetch theyr Progeny, from Crete, yet (as mee ſeemeth) they rowſt now in theyr naturall Reſt where in they haue alwayes bene reſiaunt.

Theyr ſpeach or forme of phraſe they haue drawne from the Caryans, or the Caryans deriued theirs from them: whereof I am not able to ſet downe an abſolute and infallible ſentence. The lawes they vſe are very dyuerſe and ſtraunge, both from the maners of Carya, and other Nations. Foraſmuch as with them it is a very laudable cuſtome & hyghly commended accordinge to the reſpect and degree of age, for men, women and children to flocke together in companyes to open feaſtes and bankettinges. The ſtate of theyr religion and maner of ceremonies accuſtomably vſed by them were firſt taken from forrayne Nations: wherewith after being wearyed and diſcontented, they tyed themſelues to ye Saynctes of theyr owne Countrey. The ſelfe ſame takeing Weapons in their handes marched forward like madde men till they came to the Calyndian hilles, beatinge and ſwynging ye antes alleadging that they baniſhed out of their coaſtes, ſtraunge and forreyne Gods. Sutch were the maners and cuſtomes alſo of thoſe people. But the Lycians moſt aſſuredly are an offpring and braunch of the Cretenſes: for in the beginning Creta was inhabited by the Barbarians, but afterwardes the ſonnes of Europa, Sarpêdon, and Minos, fallinge at variaunce for the Empyre, Minos gettinge the better of his brother, chaſed him and all his cō
               ſederates out of the lande: who beinge diſpoſſeſſed of their ſeates ſeyſed vppon a Region in Aſia called Mylias, which name at this day is ſometime attributed to that place where the Lycians dwell. Mylias ſo properly called, hauinge at that time to name Solinij. During the rule and gouernance of Sarpêdon they were called by ye name which they brought with them. Which is to ſay, Termiliae, which as yet is held and reteyned of thoſe that lye next vnto them. Howbeit Lycus the Sonne of Pandion beinge dryuen from Athens by the rigour and violence of his Brother Aegêus, and comming to Sarpêdon Prynce of the Termilians: in continuaunce

of tyme it came to paſſe that they tooke the name of Lycus, and were called Lycians. They accuſtomed them ſelues to the lawes of Creta, and Caria. Albeit they haue one thinge of theyr owne proper and peculiar, wherby as by Badge, or cognizaunce they are ſeperated from other nations, in that they call them ſelues by the names of their Mothers not of their fathers: as if the queſtion be demaū
               ded of any of them what he is, or whoſe ſonne, the manner and vſe is to blaſe hys pedegre from his mother, reherſynge beſydes his mothers mother and ſo vpward.
            Ouer and beſydes, if a Woman free borne couple hirſelfe in matrimony with a ſlaue or bondma:: neuertheleſſe their Children and ſeede generallye ſhall be held and accompted free.
            Contrariwyſe if a man free by byrth and natiuitye ſhall ioyne in wedlocke with a forrayne woman, or one that is reputed for a ſcalant or common ſtrumpit, their diſcent and yſſue ſhalbe alway ſigned with the note of infamye, and neuer be called to any degree of credite or eſtimation.
            Furthermore the people wh
                  •
               ch at thoſe tymes held the dominion of Caria without atchieuaunce of any famous or notable act were conquered and ouercome by Harpagus. Neither were the Carians onely deſtitute of the glorye and renoune The people of G
                     •
                  ydus their originall. of noble dedes: but the reſt alſo of the Gretians there about lurked in ſilence and had their name darkened and ouerwhelmed with obſcurity. There kept reſiaūtes in thoſe places aſwel others, as alſo the Cnydians, which were a remnaunt of the Lacedaemonians thither drawen and deriued, whoſe region wyndeth to the ſea called Tryopium and is almoſt on euery ſyde hemmed in by the ſea. The North part beyng limitted with the ſalte waues of Ceraunium: the ſouthſide by the Rhodian and Simanian ſea. The reſt which is a very narrow ſtrayght, not paſſinge fiue acres in breadth: the people of Cnydus (whyle Harpagus was buſied in ye affaires of Ionia) thought to haue digged a way, & in

ſo doyng to haue brought ther countreye into the forme of 
                  〈◊〉
                Iland geuing free courſe and paſſage to the ſea on euery ſyde. For their whole territory was within the broken circle of the Sea: ioyninge to the mayne or firme lande in that ſtrayght where the waters almoſt mette, which ſpace they were in mynd to haue trenched throughout, wherby the ſea in manner of a circle mighte haue his full ſcope and iſſue a bout the Ile, whereto employing their whole force and indeuour it chaunced them in the middeſt of their toyle to bee taken in manye partes of the bodye, and chiefly with an extreme ſmarting and ſorenes of the eyes. Wherupon reſoluinge to ſend to Delphos to Apollo, they inquired of him what it might be that ſo greatly hyndred them to proceed in their enterpriſe.
            To whom Pythia made anſwere in certayne verſes cō
               ſiſtyng of ſixe feete after this maner.
            
               Seeke not to ſaue your ſeate
               by trenche or heaped pyle.
               If mightye I oue had pleaſde
               Your land had bene an Ile.
            
            This anſwere receiued, the Cnydians made holiday, & attempted no further to delue the ground. Wherefore Harpagus inuading their countrey with his army they ſubmitted themſelues without reſiſtaunce. More then this, ſome what about Halicarnaſſus in the region dwell the Pedaceans: with whom at the ſhew or appearance of any daunger or miſfortune either to themſelues or their neighbours, it falleth out that Mineruas Prieſt hath continuallye a longe bearde: which happened vnto them three ſundry tymes.
            Theſe alone of all the people in Carya kept Harpagus at lenghth of weapon, and defended their city a long tyme, fencing

the mountayne Lyda with principall garde and munition, howbeit in ye end they were driuen to yeeld. From thence Harpagus mouing hys tentes into ye fieldes of Xanthus was encountered by the Lyſians. Who albeit they were fewer in number, neuertheles hardened themſelues to all extremity & with māful courage ſuſteined the might and puiſſaunce of their ennemyes. Who preuayling againſt them at the laſt made thē to recoyle and take their Citye. Whereinto being entred, they toke their wiues Children, and all their ſubſtaunce and ſhut them vppe into the Tower or caſtle of the city, and ſetting fyre to the ſame without pity or regard they burnt them all. And immediately after binding themſelues with a moſt horrible and dreadefull othe, they cloſed the ſeconde tyme with their enemyes: with whō they perſiſted in valiaunt fight: ſo longe as one man of their number remayned alyue.
            All the Lycians which are called by the name of Xanthians, and forreiners and arriued from ſtraunge places, except 40 familyes, which by fortune at ye ſame tyme being oute of the city eſcaped death. By this meanes came Xanthus into the handes of the Perſians. In like manner alſo the city Caunium was taken by them whoſe people for ye moſt part followed the example of the Lycians. Harpagus therefore hauing added to the ſeate of Perſia all the cityes the lower: the ſuperiour and hygher partes thereof Cyrus by his owne proper Mart and valiauncy had ouercome and vanquiſhed leauing no part of the ſame free and vnſubdued. Wherefore in preſence we will leaue of to ſpeake of the reſt of their noble actes & deedes, letting paſſe many things wittingly for deſire to reueale and diſplaye thoſe thynges which to them ſelues were moſt labour ſome and difficulte and deſerue to bee prynted in eternall memory.
            Now when king Cyrus had brought into his power all the nations that lye in the mayne, he leuied his whole ſtrē
               gth againſt the Aſſyrians. There be many and great cities

of Aſſyria, but aboue all one eſpeciall and pryncipall, both in defence and dignitie ſurmounting the reſt, by name Babylon, where after the occaſion and ruine of Nynus was planted the ſeate and palace of the greate kinge. This citye had the foundation and being in a wonderful huge playne: and was builte and contriued into a foure ſquare forme: euery ſide thereof conteining in length an hundred and twenty acres. Whereby it is euidente that the circuit and compaſſe of the whole city amoūted to the ſumme of 480 acres of grounde, ſo greate and of ſo huge bygnes and amplitude was the mighty citye Babylon. Moreouer within the walles faire and beautifull paſſing meaſure, garniſhed & ſet forth with rych and ſumptuous buildings, as no Citye whereof we haue notyce approacheth any thinge to the incomparable dignity of the ſame.
            Firſt of all it is caſt about and incompaſſed with a wyde and deepe Ditch filled and implet with water, in the nexte place is rayſed a wall 50 royall cubits in thyckeneſſe and 200 in heigth: a cubute royall contayninge three fyngers more then the vulgare & common cubyte, which we vſually follow in meaſuring. It ſhall not be impertinent to ye matter to ſhew and declare to what vſe & ſeruice the earth was imployed, which was caſt and voyded out of the trench, as alſo in what maner and forme the wal was builte.
            Of the clay caſt out, and clenſed from the ditche were drawed and framed certayne brickes, which aryſynge at length to a great multitude they were dryed and burnte in a kill or fornace.
            Afterwardes cloſing the ſame togeather with morter betwixt euery thirtith courſe or row of brickes they layd ye 
               
                  •
               oppes of canes or reedes dipped and ſteeped in boylyng lyme, and firſt of in this manner they curbed and garded about the brinckes of the mote wt a liſt or hemme of brickes obſeruing alſo the ſelfe ſame arte in the frame and workemanſhip of the wal.

On the toppe of the wall along the edges and margentes therof were built & cituated certaine ſmal howſes one ſtory hygh facing and ful oppoſite one to an other, betweene euery of the which was ſo much ſpace and diſtance, as a carte might haue gone betweene them.
            Through the walles ther opened an 100 broad gates for paſſage and ingreſſe into the citye all of braſſe, with poſtes and hynges of the ſame. Eyght dayes iourney from Babilō
                is placed a city called Is, faſt by the which floweth a riuer of no great bygnes, named alſo Is, caryinge his ſtreme into ye floude Euphrates: This ſeely brooke ſcowreth through his chanel greate plenty of lyme wherof they had principall vſe in the buildyng of the walles of Babilon. Of the forme and deſcription wherof ſufficeth it thus to haue ſpoken. How be it, it behoueth vs to vnderſtande that the citye Babylon, ys cutt and ſundered in twayne by the mayne ſtreame of the rithe xiuer Euphrates: which is very great deepe and ſwift of courſe and taking hys fyrſt yſſue from the mountaynes of Armaenia, breaketh at the length and emptyeth yt ſelfe into the red ſea.
            The partition of the walles made by the intercourſe of ye riuer ſhootes bppon the bankes on eyther ſyde, which are breaſted out and fortifyed with a countremure of bricke to kepe the waters from flowing into the citye. The Citye it ſelfe is repleniſhed with houſes four ſtoryes in heighte beyng alſo deuyded, & as it were chekered into ſundry ſtreets and lanes ſome leādyng long wayes, other ſome croſſe and ouerthwort, at the end of one ſtreete openeth a braſen dore through the wall and countergard of the ryuer, whereby the people haue acceſſe to the water. And this wall is in defence of the citye agaynſt the vyolence of the floud. Moreouer in either part and region of the citye there is another wall, not much inferyour in ſtrenghe (albeit in thickneſſe ſomewhat leſſe then the former. One of theſe in ye one parte of the citye incloſeth aboute the ſtately court and reſyaunce

of the Prince exceeding ſtrong, and of a mile compaſſe. Likewiſe in the other parte of the Citie is a wall, in the circle and cloſure whereof is conteined the Temple of Iupiter Belus, wherevnto entry is made through the wall by mighty braſen gates, ſtanding yet in this our age, to the open view and beholding of trauaylers. This wall is built in maner of a quadrangle, foure-ſquare, being on euery ſide two acres long. In the middeſt of the Temple ſtandeth a towre of ſound worke, very firme and ſolide, without vaut or holowneſſe, a furlong thicke, and as much high: on the top of the which was planted another towre, which in like manner vphelde and vnderpropped the third: wherevppon likewiſe were fiue other turrets placed, each taking hys ground and foundation from the top of another. On the outſide of euery towre do winde certaine degrees of ſteps or ſtayres leading to the top or higheſt part of the ſame. In the midway vp the ſtayres are framed certayne ſeates or benches for thoſe that go vp to reſt and breathe by the way. In the top or ſupremity of the higheſt turret is another Chappell, within the whiche is placed a bed decked with moſt coſtly and ſumptuous furniture, beſides the which ſtandeth a beautifull table of fine gold. In this ſacred houſe or veſtry no image is erected, neyther doth any creature lye in the ſame, ſaue one woman alone, beeing of the ſame countrey (as the Prieſts of Babylon affirme) and ſuch a one, as it pleaſeth the god to chooſe for his owne dyet. Who do alſo conſtantly reporte (albeit I am hardly brought to beleeue it) that the god himſelfe entring into the Temple, taketh vp his lodging in that chamber. Like as alſo it falleth out at Thebes in Aegypt by the voyce and record of the Aegyptians, where in the oratory or place of ſeruice dedicate to Iupiter Thebanus, a woman vſeth to lye: who (as alſo the other of Babylon) is conſtantly auouched at no time to haue cuſtome or fellowſhip with men. Such is alſo the prioreſſe or woman prieſt at Paterae in Lycia
               
when time or occaſion ferueth, for there the Oracle is not continually held, but at ſuch time as it approcheth, the Abbeſſe ouer night is faſt lo
                  •
               kt and included into the Church. In the temple of Babylon beſides there is another temple ſomewhat lower, wherein is kept the famous monument of the god Iupiter wrought of golde, neere vnto the which adioyneth a table, which together with the frame and ſettle thereto belonging, is alſo of meere and ſolide gold, eſteemed of the Chaldaean prieſts at the ſumme and value of 800. talents. At the comming out of the chappell, there is alſo to be ſeene an aultar of cleane gold: not farre from the which ſtandeth another of ſtrange and wonderfull bignes, whereon are offered all ſuch beaſtes as are of perfect age and ripe growth: contrarywiſe on the aultar of golde it is not lawfull to ſacrifice any but ſucklings, and ſuch as are newly drawne and taken from the teate. On the greater of the two aultars, the Chaldaean Chaplaynes burne incenſe to the god, with expence of a C. M. talents of frankincenſe. In the ſame temple is alſo another image of. 12. cubites in length of maſſy and beaten golde, which albeit I ſawe not with mine owne eies, yet preſuming vpon the credit of the Chaldaeans, I haue aduentured to ſet it downe. This image Darius the ſonne of Hyſtaſpes, and King of Perſia, would faine haue bin fingering, neuertheleſſe, for feare of afterclaps, he was contente to coole his thirſt, and forgoe the ſpoile, howbeit, Xerxes his ſonne & heire in later daies rifeling the temple, made a booty therof, hauing done to death a chaplaine who ſtoutly forbad him to moue the image out of his place. With theſe & ſuch like ornamēts was yt temple of Babylon gorgeouſly adorned, beſides an infinite number of gifts and preſents, franckly geuen and beſtowed to the poliſhing and ſetting foorth of ſo rare & famous a monument.
            Furthermore, the genealogy and ſucceſſion of the Kings of Babylon is very manyfold and diuerſe, of whome ioyntly with yt affaires & eſtate of Aſſyria we meane to intreate:

parſe of theſe laid their wealth & treaſure on the trimming & beautifying of the city walles: other ſpared no coaſt to inrich & adorne the temples & palaces of the gods. In the lineall diſcent of the bloud royall, mention is made of two women: the one of theſe raigned fiue ages before the later, and was called Semiramis. This Queene cauſed to be caſt vp & raiſed great mounts & mighty banckes, very wonderfull to be ſeene, which kept the riuer within the courſe of his naturall chanell, beeing wont before time to ouerflow & couer the whole plame. The ſecond Queene named Nitocris was of wit more ſharp & ſubtile, and of much more fiue inuention then ye former, by whom both other things were brought to paſſe right woorthy memory, whiche wee purpoſe to recount: and chiefly this, that perceiuing the power and gouernement of the Medes to grow and increaſe, and as well other townes, as alſo the city Ninus to be vanquiſhed by thē, ſhe forethought all the meanes that could be deuiſed, to arme & defend hirſelfe againſt the enemy. Firſt of all the riuer Euphrates that whilome by a ſtreight & equall courſe ſtreame throughout the towne, flowing in a right line towards the ſea by meanes of certaine trenches caſt vp and digged for the ſtreame, ſhe drew into a confuſe and intricate race, folding & winding many waies, inſomuch that in three ſundry places it hath eftſoones recourſe vnto one little village in Aſſyria called Arderica ſo that they which come frō the ſea to Babylon by yt riuer Euphrates, are cōſtreined to ariue thrice at Arderica & that alſo in three ſeuerall dayes. This was alſo one worke of hers which ſhe did about yt riuer, the borders wherof beſides ſhe hath hemmed & garded in with a banke ſo ſtrōg & mōſtrous, & what for yt vnmeaſurable hignes & bignes of yt ſame, it would greatly aſtoniſhe thoſe that do view & behold it. Somewhat aboue the city, a little off from the riuers ſide, ſhe cauſed a place to be caſt & trenched for the receipt of a ſtanding water or poble, which they digged ſo deepe, till they came to the water, extending

euery way in breadth the ſpace of. 320. furlongs. The earth that was voyded heerefro was referred and employed to the bancking of the riuer. The edge and brinckes of the poole were layde aboute and paued with ſtone. In both which things, as well in turning the courſe of the water, as in deluing the trench or lake, ſhe had this purpoſe, that the violēce of the floud being hindred by ſo many windings and turnings, might flowe in a more quiet and peaceable ſtreame: then, that the paſſage from the maine ſea to Babylon might be made more troubleſome to the ſaylers, by the often creekes and circuites of the water: finally, that the next way and readieſt path from Media to Babylon being ſhut vp, and intercepted by the mutable courſe of the riuer, the Medes hindered from mutable trade of Merchandize with the Aſſyrians, might be ignorant and vnſkilfull of hir aſſayres and counſayle. Thus did Queene Nitocris on the lower ſide of Babylon prouide for the ſafetie and good eſtate of the Realme, hauing another meaning in the fenne or mariſh which ſhe cauſed the people to digge aboue the towne, for the City being ſeparate and diuided into two partes, by meanes of the riuer which floweth through the middes, vnder the raigne and dominion of other Princes, whoſoeuer of the Citizens was deſirous to go ouer on the other ſide, he was fayne to be feried ouer, and paſſe by a boate, whiche coulde not be voyde of greate toyle and trouble, of which extremity by the good inuention of Queene Nitocris, the City obteyned ſpeedie releaſe by one and the ſelfeſame meanes, leauing behinde two famous monumēts of perpetual memory. Wherfore hauing turned the riuer into the maine gulfe or lake that was caſt vp and digged in the plaine, ſhe incontinently cauſed mighty ſtones to be hewed out, ſquared for ye purpoſe. The floud hauing a breach and iſſue another way, within the compaſſe of his owne chanell became drye and voyde of water, Nitocris therefore fenced the bankes and ſhores of the

riuer within the Citie, with a ſkirt or edge of bricke, to ſaue the water from abating and wearing the earth. In like maner the ſteppes leading downe from the braſen wickets to the water, ſhe framed of bricke layd and mortered together in like ſorte as the walles. About the middeſt of the Citie ſhe made a bridge ouer the water, built of ſtone cut and poliſhed to the ſame ende, which ſhe cauſed to be knit & mortered together with leade and iron. This bridge in the day time ſhe couered with planckes of foureſquare forme, to giue paſſage & recourſe to her ſubiects: which in the euening were continually drawne & remooued from thence, to the end all occaſion of mutual theft and villany in the night might be foreſeene & preuented. The worke being ended, ſhe wrought the meanes for the water to returne to his proper courſe, eftſoones boyding the lake againe, which then by continuall feeding of the ſtreame, drew to be full. Thus the end prooued the deluing of the fenne to be very profitable & cōmodious, by meanes whereof a bridge was made for the vſe & benefit of the city. The ſame Nitocris alſo put in practiſe this ſubtile and deceitfull inuention. Aloſt vppon the moſt ſtately and portlike gate of the City in open ſhew and appearaunce to all mē, ſhe built her a Sepulchre, engrauen with this title or ſuperſcripcion: If any of the Kings of Babylon after me ſhall ſtand in neede or pen
                     •
                  ry of money, let him open the tombe and take as much as he will: but not vnleſſe he be driuen by extremity, for it ſhall not be good for him. This Sepulchre was ſo long vnmoued, till the kingdome fell into the hands of Darius, who very much diſdaining that he neither had vſe of theſe gates (becauſe that ouer them was placed a dead body, ſo that he counted it vnwholeſome to go through them) nor any profit or commodity of the money, eſpecially being allured and prouoked thervnto by the Epitaph and inſcription, he brake open the monument and looked in, not finding one croſſe nor ought elſe ſaue the dead carkeſſe & certaine letters, ſaying thus:

               Vnleſſe thou hadſt bene an vnſatiable wretch, and greedy of filthy gayne, thou wouldſt neuer haue diſcouered the graues of the dead. Theſe things are left to memory of the Queene Nitocris, againſt whoſe ſonne Labynitus hauing the name of his father, and the gouernement and principality of all Aſſyria; Cyrus prepared his whole army, at whoſe approch the great King gathered a power of mē, hauing made aboundant prouiſion both of corne and cattell. Moreouer, great plenty of water was had in readineſſe, brought from the floud Choaſpis, running a little beſydes S
                     •
                  ſa, of which riuer alone the King is accuſtomably wont to drinke. The water of Choa
                     •
                  pis being firſt ſodden and after reſerued in veſſels of ſiluer, is continually borne after the King whether ſoeuer he goeth by Chariots driuen on four wheeles, which follow his trayne in great number.
            
               Cyrus therefore vndertaking a iourney to Babylon, after he came to the riuer Gyndes (whiche proceeding from the Mantien mountaynes necre vnto the people Darnei, meeteth with the riuer Tigris, whoſe ſtreame paſſing by the City Opis, floweth into the red ſea) he attempted to paſſe the water, which by no meanes can be gone ouer without ſhipping, where ſtepping foorth a luſty gallant of the army, and mounting on the backe of a milkewhite ſteede, ſacred and holy to the gods, aduentured in a brauery to take the water, and go ouer, whome the floud winding and wreathing with in his ſtreame, ſwallowed vp ſo that he was neuer after ſeene. But King Cyrus greatly agreeued at the vnkind and iniurious deede of the riuer, threatned the water in furious manner, ſaying, that the time ſhould not be long erre he brought it ſo lowe, and to ſo ſcant an ebbe, that the very women of the countrey ſhould dare to go ouer it, not weeting themſelues to the knees, which thing for the vehemency of his rage he immediately put in practiſe, intermitting and leauing off hys voyage to Babylon: wherefore diuiding his campe into two partes, heleuelled

out and drew by a line. 180. trenches on eyther ſide of the riuer, whereinto he determined to draine the water: which enterpriſe (as in ſo great a multitude) was at lēgth brought to paſſe, albeit he conſumed the whole ſommer in performance thereof. The mighty riuer Gyndes being in this ſort ſhed and deriued into. 360. brookes at the approch of the next ſpring Cyrus renewed his purpoſe, and ſet foorth afreſh towardes Babylon, whome the great Kyng with an hoaſt of men well prepared, exſpected and looked for in the fielt. When he drewe neere to the city, ſigne of battell was giuen, and a fierce encountry made on both ſides, but the Perſians preuailing, compelled the contrary part to flie into the city, where the Babylonians (for that lōg before they perceyued King Cyrus to be of a buſie & an vnquiet nature, giuen to controuerſy & trouble, intermedling & dealing with other nations) had made plentiful prouiſion of vittailes, & all kind of ſuſtenance for many yeares, for which they liued in ſecurity, nothing at all waying to be kept in and encloſed with a ſiege. Cyrus in like caſe hauing a long time layne at the walles without any ſucceſſe or auayle, was altogether ignorant of what wood to frame his arrowes, howbeit at laſt, eyther of his owne trayne, or by the counſayle and aduertiſement of others, he caſt about another way, and wrought thus: placing his army on eache ſide of the city, ſome on that part where the riuer entereth in, others on the backſide where it floweth out, hee gaue commaundement, that at ſuch time as they ſaw the water to fall and berome fleete and eaſy to be waded; they ſhoulde inuade the city by the chanell of the floud: leauing therefore his ariny in this order and aray, with the vnfitteſt and weakeſt part of his power, he withdrewe himſelfe aſyde to the poole, made by the handyworke of Queene Nitocris, whether beeyng come, looke what before time had bene wrought by her whyle the bridge was building, the ſelfe-ſame alſo dyd Cyrus, piercing the bancke of the

riuer; and geuing a vent to the water to paſſe into the fenne: whereby the ſtreams decreaſing, became very ſhalow, and without daunger to thoſe that aduentured to paſſe through which thing being marked by thoſe that ſtayd behinde at the walles, they tooke the riuer, and wading very little aboue the knees with manfull and valiant courage, brake into the City: whome the men of Babylon (if in caſe they had foreknowne the fact of Cyrus) had not onely not permitted to take the Towne, but contrarywiſe had deſtroyed them all by a miſerable death: for hauing faſt barred the little gates that open to the riuer, and placed themſelues p
                  •
               rtly on the top of the wall, partly on the bankes without the City, they had pent and included them as it were in a 
                  •
               aue or denne from whence they could neuer haue eſcaped aliue: wheras now the Perſians ſtealing vpon them of a ſudden, were at their elbowes before they were aware. In which their diſtreſſe (ſo huge was the City in 
                  •
               igneſſe) that (by report of thoſe that dwelt next them) they which inhabited the middle part of the City, were flatly ignorant that the towne was taken. Wherefore being a feſtiuall day, they egerly perſued their delight and paſtime, diſporting thēſelues with dauncing, and all kind of pleaſaunt recreation, vntill the caſe was too plaine that the enemies were within the walles. Such therfore were the meanes whereby the City Babylon was firſt of all taken and ſurpriſed by warre. As touching the power and value whereof, we will ſhewe many teſtimonies, this one eſpeciall and of manyfeſt euidency. The whole coaſt which is vnder the gouernance of the great King, being leuied at a certayne rent to finde the Prince and his armie (I meane beſides thoſe reuenewes and penſions which euery moneth in the yeare are duely payde and yeelded to the Crowne) at the fourth part of thys rent or ſubſidie is the region of Babylon rated alone, the other eyght partes beéing gathered and contributed out of the whole Countrey of Aſia: ſo that the puiſſance

and hability of this region is equiualent and matchable to the third part of Aſia. The ſeigniorie alſo and principality of this part (which the Perſians call a Satrapy, that is, a Dutchy or Countey) doth in great meaſure exceede all other prouinces that are vnder the protection of the great King. For ſo much as Tritechmas ſonne of Artabazus whome the King made his Lieutenant, and principall ouer this Countrey, had duely rendered vnto him for tribute euery day in the weeke more then eyght gallons of ſiluer, according to the Perſian meaſure called Artaba, which exceedeth by three quarts the meaſure that is vſed in Attica, which they call by the name of Medimnus. Moreouer he had a ſtable of couragious and luſty courſers for the ſaddle, beſides thoſe which were purpoſely kept and managed for the vſe of warre: to theſe were added eight hundred ſtalions or ſtone horſes, with ſixteene thouſand maares which were couered by thoſe horſes, one ſtalion being reſerued and admitted to the couering of twenty maares. Beſides all this, ſo great a multitude of dogs or maſtifes comming of the kinde and breede of India were belonging to him, that four great townes ſtanding in the plaine of Babylon, ſtoode at no other reuenue, then to find and maintayne a company of curres. All whiche things were peculiar and appertinent to him that was the viceroy or preſident of Babylon. In the countrey of Aſſyria they haue ſmall ſtore of rayne: ſuche graine as the land yeeldeth beeing euermore watered by the floud, not after the maner of Nilus in Aegypt (which of his owne accord riſeth ouer the bankes, and giueth moiſture to the fields round about) but partly by the labour and hāds of men, partly alſo by brookes and ditches deriuing the water throughout their ground. For through all the region of all Babylon (euen as in Aegypt alſo) are drawne many trenches and ditches, the greateſt whereof is nauigable, and caryeth ſhips, bearing to that coaſt where the ſunne is at a ſtand in winter, and reacheth from Euphra-|

reacheth from Euphrates to the floud Tigris, neere vnto the which was planted and ſituated the city Ninus. This ſoyle for corne and all kinde of grayne, is the moſt battle and plentifull of all others, being very barren and naked of wood: wherein, eſpecially the figge tree, vine, and olyue, could neuer proſper or come to any proofe, but for ſeede and tillage ſo fruitefull and aboundant, that it neuer fayleth to yeeld increaſe two hundred fold: and if the ground be very well taken, and the yeare fauourable, it multiplieth to three hundreth times as much as was caſt into the earth. The eares of their wheate and barly are more then a handfull broade. Likewiſe ye ſmall ſeede of Millet or Hirſe, together with the graiue of India called Seſamum, to what exceeding growth and tallnes they ariſe in this countrey, that almoſt they ſeeme in manner of mighty trees, albeit I aſſuredly know & could iuſtly affirme, yet I will rather keepe ſilence, knowing that thoſe which hath bene already ſpoken of the greate encreaſe of their graine are ſuche, that they far ſurmount aboue the cōmon credit and vſuall courſe of nature. They vſe no kinde of oyle but ſuch as is made of the ſeede Seſamum. Palme trees are cōmon with thē in euery place of the countrey, many of the which beare fruite & are very fertile. Parte of this fruite they turne and employ to foode and ſuſtenaunce, making wine and honny of the reſt. The trees themſelues they prune and manure not vnlike theyr figge trees. Some of theſe palmes (as they vſe alſo to do in other) the Graecians call male trees, the fruite wherof they eate not, but only bind it to the fruite of the female trees, whereof breedeth a ſmall woorme or flye, which with her ſharpe and forcked nebbe biteth through the fruite of the female palme, whereby it commeth to ripeneſſe and maturity, being otherwiſe wont to drop off and decay before it arriue to full growth and perfection. For of the fruite of the male palme is bred and produced this little worme, ſuch as come alſo of a wilde figge tree.
            
               
Let vs now proceede vnto that which next after the city it ſelfe, is (in my fancy) the ſtraungeſt mirrour and wonder of the whole region. The veſſels wherein they are accuſtomed to paſſe downe ye ſtreame to Babylon, are made circlewiſe, and of round compaſſe, drawne ouer on the outſide, and couered with leather: for the people of Armenia, whoſe countrey lyes aboue the Aſſyrians, hauing hewed & ſmoothed out of willow certaine round veſſels very hollow and deepe, they caſt ouer a paaſt or couering of leather, applying them both to the vſe of houſhold affayres to contemne licour in & ſuch like, and alſo to rowe in and paſſe the water. They haue neither head nor tayle that a man may poynt at with his finger, there to be the noſe and forepart of the ſhippe, and heere the hinder part or ſterne, but are contriued into a circulare forme like a buckler or target. The bottome of theſe veſſels they matte and fence with ſtrawe or ruſhes, wherevpon laying their chaffer and merchandiſe, they commit themſelues to the water. Theyr chiefeſt cariage is ſmall roundlets or firkins of wyne, makyng the caſke it ſelfe of the leaues of palme. The veſſels are gouerned by two ſeuerall rothers, at the which, two men continually ſtande and are attendaunt, the one whereof drawes the ſter
                  •
               e towardes hym into the ſhippe, the other thruſteth from hym outwarde. Theſe kynde of ſhippes are maruaylous greate, and very capable, albeit ſome of them be of ſmaler making then other. The greater ſort are of power to carry the waight of fyue thouſand talentes. In euery of which there is one liue Aſſe at the leaſt, and in the bigger three or foure. Beeyng landed at Babylon, and hauyng made theyr marte of ſuche thynges as they broughte, they ſell alſo the woodde of theyr Shyppes, wyth the ſtrawe, ruſhes, and ſuche lyke, loadyng backe theyr Aſſes with the ſkinnes, which they driue home before them into Armenia: forſomuch as to ſaile vpwards againſt the courſe of the riuer, it is not poſſible for them, by reaſon

of the ſwiftneſſe and violence of the ſtrcame, which is the cauſe alſo that they make their veſſels not of wood, but of ſkinnes. After they are returned to Armenia they make prouiſion of other ſhips, all one in ſimilitude and faſhion with the former: ſuch are the veſſels wherein the Aſſyrians ferry downe the water to Babylon.
            
            Now for their habite and attyre it is on this manner. Their vſuall cuſtome is to go clothed in two garments, one of linnen downe to the feete, another of wollen drawne vppon the ſame: aboute their ſhoulders they caſt a cloake of whyte coulour. In their ſhowes following the cuſtome of the whole countrey, they vſe all one faſhion, not much vnlike the Thebane ſlippers. Their hayre very long, tied and bound vp behinde with a coyfe. In all partes of their bodye embaulmed with ſweete oyles and precious oyntmentes. On their fingers they we are a ſignet: bearing in their hāds a ſlender rod in forme of a ſcepter, very ſkilfully and artificially wrought, on ye top whereof is carued either an apple, a roſe, a lilly, an eagle, or ſome ſuch like thing, being accompted wickedneſſe with them, and againſt all lawe, to carry a rod or ſcepter without ſuch an enſigne on the top. And thus much for their attyre.
            The lawes which they vſe are theſe. One moſt commendable, and for the ſingulare wiſedome and commoditie thereof greatly to be regarded. Likewiſe another, which (if I be not deceiued) the people Eneti comming of the Hlyrians do commonly practiſe throughout their whole lande. Once in a yeare they obſerued this cuſtome. The virgins that were arriued to the due time and eſtate of marriage, they aſſembled all into one place, faſt behind theſe ſtoode a great multitude of yong men and batchelers. When all were come and the company was huſh, there aroſe vp a common cryer, proclayming ſeuerally the ſale of euery one to ſuche as were minded to buy them, and in the firſt place ſhee that was the paragon and moſt beautifull damoſell

of all the route, was in like manner firſt publiſhed and ſet forth to be ſold, whom ſome one or other hauing purchaſed with a great ſumme of money, ſhe that was next in beautie to the faireſt, was next priced, with a condition annexed, that they whiche bought ſhoulde alſo marry them. Suche therefore of Babylon that were of good wealth, and wanted wines, bought vp the braueſt wenches, euery one ſpeeding beſt for beautie that badde beſt for the beautifull. The baſeſt ſorte of yonkers that were not ſo deyntely toothed, contenting themſelues with the homelieſt laſſes, choſe rather to take a good nutbrowne wench with a dowrie, with whome to practiſe the daliaunces of Venus. The market being made of the beſt and fayreſt, incontinently the moſt vggly and fouleſt droſſe of the company was by the voyce of the crier cyted to appeare, whome he ſet foorth and propounded to the liking of any, who with the leaſt expence and ſinaleſt charge that might, woulde be contente with a wife. In which ſort ſhe ſtandeth, til there ſtep foorth a mate that will holde himſelfe ſatiſfied with a ſluttiſhe wife and a ſlender dowrie, euermore making a gayne of thoſe vppon whome nature and the heauens had largely beſtowed theyr graces and treaſures, whereas with the reſt, that were eyther impotent, lame, or in part of the body diſfigured, or generally ſluttiſh and ylfauoured, they endowed with a portion of goodes the ſooner to procure and get them huſbands. Neither was it free and indifferent for any man to place and diſpoſe his daughter to whome he would: nor for the byer without ſufficient warrant or ſuretie of his good vſage of hir to take hir away: but hauing brought ſuch as ſhould plight their faith and honeſtie in his behalfe, that he ſhould vndoubtedly vſe hir in place of his wife, he tooke hir with him, whereof if by fortune they coulde not agree, the law commaunded that the money whiche was geuen for price of the virgine ſhould be eftſoones reſtored to the buyer: wherein the cuſtome was not ſo ſtrict and ſeuere, but

that a couple of contrary villages might match together, and enter the eſtate of mariage one with another, the man alwayes rendering a certaine ſumme and price for his wife if ſhe were worth the buying. This law was very well and wiſely ordeyned by them, which within a while after loſt his force, and was vtterly neglected: albeit in later dayes they coyned a new deuiſe that no man ſhould abuſe or any way iniurie a woman, nor carry hir away into a ſtrange citie, for the citie being taken, and themſelues ſhamefully intreated by their enemies, in ſo much that the moſt part of them had waſted their goodes and ſubſtance, the poore lay people that were in great extremity and want of ſuſtenāce, cauſed their ſtocke, ye care of their honeſty & chaſte liuing ſet apart, to purchaſe lucre by the common vſe of their bodies. Another law and ſtatute they had of equal prayſe and commendation with the firſt, whereby it was prouided that all perſons poſſeſſed with any griefe or diſeaſe, ſhould be caryed out and layd in the open market place, to the end that (vſing no Phyſicions) euery one might giue their verdit of their ſickneſſe and maladie. As euery one therefore approcheth neare vnto the diſeaſed, if at any time they haue had triall and experience of the like payne and diſtreſſe eyther in themſelues or in other, they let not to miniſter connſaile to the ſicke, & preſcribe ſuch order & dyet, as hath bin heretofore either profitable to themſelues, or wholeſome to other: vtterly abhorring from all lawe and ciuility, to paſſe ſecurely & careleſly by the feeble, & not to enquire the ſtate and maner of his griefe. They eſteeme it no ſmall bliſſe to them to be buried in ſepulchers, reſembling very narrowly the cuſtome of the Aegyptians in funerall ſorrow and lamentation for the dead. As oft as they haue ſociety and fellowſhip with their wiues, placing themſelues in ſeates one ouer agaynſt another, the men take ſweete perfume, and burneth it, the women likewiſe doing the very ſame. At the drawing neere of the euening they waſh and wrinſe

themſelues very cleane, not attempting to touch any thing with their hands, before they haue thoroughly cleanſed and purged the filth from their bodies, which thing is in vſe likewiſe with the Arabians.
            
            The ſelfeſame Babylonians acquaint themſelues wyth an order full of all abhomination and wickedneſſe. All the women of their nation once in their whole liues, reſort to the Temple of Venus, where abandoning their chaſtity, they giue vp themſelues to be defiled and corrupted by ſtraungers: howbeit, ſuch women as are of great reputation, and haue wealth at will, diſdeining to ſit and accompany with the reſt, are drawne to the temple in charlots or litters caſt ouer and couered with a vale of leather: whether being come, leauing the trayne of their meyny and ſeruants behinde them, they place themſelues in ſeates before the gates of the palace, which is the common vſe of all ſuch as are of high degree. Within the Churche they ſit in greate multitudes, bound about the temples of the head with garlands of ſweete and pleaſaunt flowres, ſome of them are comming, others going, for certayne paſſages and wayes ſeuerally made by cords & lines, leade and direct the ſtrangers to ſuch as they fancy beſt and haue moſte minde to. Moreouer, hauing once taken her ſeate in the Temple, ſhe neuer returneth home vntill ſome one or other of foreigne countreys hath geuen her money, and reapt her chaſtitie, who approching neere to his lady whome he liketh, ſayeth thus: The goddeſſe Militta be fauourable and gracious vnto thee. By this name Militta is Venus called with Aſſyrians, neither is it lawfull to deſpiſe the money which is geuen, how much or how little ſoeuer it be, being applied to a ſacred & holy vſe. Neither may ye womā be her own caruer to reiect any yt commeth to her, but whoſoeuer is her firſt chapman him ſhe immediately followeth wtout reſpect of perſons: with whome, after ſhe hath accompanyed for a while, hauing made her offring to ye goddeſſe, ſhe returneth

home, for the time to come not to be allured by mountaynes of gold to acquaint themſelues with any in the like ſort. Of this noble route ſuch as are moſt prayſeworthy for beautie and comely proportion of the body, haue ſooneſt made theyr market and are gonne, the groſſer and baſer ſort being held by the law to remaine there ſo long, till they haue accompliſhed the rites and cuſtomes of the Countrey, ſo that it chaunceth thē otherwhiles to abide in the Temple a yeare or two, yea ſometimes three, before the poore ſoules can be acquit of their ſeruitude. The like ordinaunce is of force & vertue in ſome part of Cyprus. Theſe are the lawes of the people of Babylon, of whome there be three ſortes, ſome which liue only by fiſh, whiche beeing purged and dried againſt the ſunne, they vſe in this manner, firſt they powne & bray it in a morter, which done, they preſerue and keepe it in linnen ſheetes, whereof they take at their pleaſure, and putting thereto liquour, they kneade and bake it in maner of bread.
            The Perſian prince Cyrus hauing obteyned the victorie ouer all the countrey of Babylon, was pricked with deſire to bring into his power the people of the Maſſagetes; a nation very large, and in armes couragious and valiaunt, hauing their habitation in the Eaſt towardes the morning ſunne beyond the floud Araxes, right ouer againſt the Iſſedonians, and being (as ſome men ſuppoſe) a part of Scythia. The Riuer Araxes is both greater and leſſe then the mighty ſtreame called Iſter, wherein alſo are many Iles not inferiour in compaſſe to the Iland Lesbus. The people of thoſe Iles liue in the ſommer time by all kinde of rootes whiche themſelues plucke vp and gather, reſeruing the fruite of their trees that is ripe and ready to be eaten for their winter foode and ſuſtenance. By theſe people were found out and deſeryed certayne trees, whoſe fruite beeing caſt into the fire (which they vſe to kindle ſwarming together in great flockes) doth no leſſe incharme and make

drunken the ſenſes of thoſe that fit by, with the ſauour and ſmell proceeding therefro, then their wyne doth intoxicate the heads of the Grecians, being ſo much the more idle in their braynes by how much ye more they burne of the aforeſaid fruite: euen ſo farre at length, that they fall to ſinging, dauncing and leaping paſt meaſure. Now the floude Araxes (like as alſo ye ryuer Gyndes which Cyrus broached and deuyded into 360 trenches) beginneth at the Mantien hylles parting it ſelfe into ſixty ſeuerall ſtreames, the reſt (one only excepted) haue their endinges in fennes and mariſhe groundes: where certayne people are ſayde to make their abode, which are nouriſhed by rawe fiſhes, being clothed and apparelled in Seale ſkinnes. The other parte of Araxes continueth his courſe vnto the ſea called Caſpium, which is a ſea of it ſelfe, not permixt and mingled with any other, for aſwell the ſalte water through the which ye 
               Grecians vſe to ſaile, as alſo the other without ye pyllers called Atlanticum, finally, ye red ſea & it do meete each with other and are all one: but the Caſpian waters are hemmed in & incloſed with their owne ſhores, being in length 15. dayes ſayle for a light ſhippe that goeth with oares: in bredth ſuch that the wideſt parte (which is toward the weſt) may be paſſed ouer in eyght dayes. The weſt ſide of this ſea is edged in by the mountayne Caucaſus, being of incomparable height and greatneſſe: vpon this hill one people of all ſortes inhabyting: very many & diuerſe ſuſteyned by wilde foode and fieldiſhe reliefe. The leaues which their trees beare are much like vnto ours in ſhew, though different in nature: theſe they beate to powlder, and rempering them with a quantity of water they make of them a certayne colour of ſuch force and vertue that paynting therewith vppon their garments the ſimilitudes of ſundry wilde beaſts, it neuer chaungeth hue, but euen as if the pictures had bene wouen and wrought in the cloth: ſo together with ye woolle it ſelfe they weare out and decay. Theſe men after the maner

of brute beaſtes meddle and accompany with their women in open ſight. Now the Weſt parte of the ſea Caſpian being inuyroned by the hill Caucaſus, ye ſide which extēdeth toward the Eaſte beateth vpon a large, ſpacious, & ample playne. The moſt parte of this playne is poſſeſſed by the Maſſagets, whom Cyrus for diuerſe & waighty cauſes was ſtyrred vp and prouoked to aſſaile by warre. Firſt by the remembraunce of his birth and infancie, whereby he was moued to thinke and imagyne him ſelfe to bee more then halfe a god, farre aduaunced aboue the mortall eſtate of humane kinde. Againe not a litle puffed vp and emboldned by ye luck and proſperous atchieuaunce of all his aduentures wherein fortune ſhewed him ſo amiable a countenaunce, that againſt what nation ſoeuer hee ſet his force, the ſame hee cauſed eyther to bend or breake, alwayes hauing the better hande of his enemyes.
            The kingdome of the Maſſagets after the deceaſe of the prince hir huſband was held by the moſt noble and vertuous Queene Tomyris, vnto whom Cyrus addreſſinge certayne meſſengers in fained gloſe of deceiptfull words, demaunded hir mariage: but the prudent and couragious lady perceiuing his bent, how not for the loue of hir ſelfe, but for deſire of the kingdome he had couloured a ſute of diſſembled matrimony, flatly forbadde him to come within the lyſtes and boundes of hir countrey. Cyrus ſeeing his pollicie to be in vayne, lead his power to the ryuer Araxes, in open and profeſſed wiſe, threatning vengeance and all kinde of cruelty againſt the realme of the Maſſagets: wherefore hauing couered the ryuer with certayne bridges, whereby to trayne and conu
                  •
               y his army ouer the water hee fortified the ſame with defence & munition of towers builte by ye help & ayde of ſhips which he made for ye purpoſe: to whom being diligently cōuerſant & buſied in theſe affaires, Tomyris diſpatched an Herauld of peace wt a meſſage as followeth. Thou king of the Medes, leaue of to trouble thy ſelfe in thoſe matters

which ye haſt taken in hand, vncertayne what gayne yt ſhalt reape by this thine enterpriſe: be quiet therefore & be king of thine owne, ſuffring vs to inioy theſe borders whereof we haue the right & chiefe dominion. But what? diſdayneſt y• my coūſaile? preferreſt thou al things before peace & quietneſſe? Be it then, if thy hart burne to be dealing with ye 
               Maſ
                  
                     •
                  agets, ceaſe thy buyldings & either follow vs 3. dayes iourney into our countrey, or departe our coaſts & receiue vs into thine. Cyrus hauing heard this greeting, aſſembled together the chiefe of ye 
               Perſians & propounded ye matter to be ſcanned among them: who being all of one mynde & conſenting in one opinion made it no cōtrouerſie, but yt it behoued rather Tomyris with hir army to be receyued into Perſia & them ſelues to retyre into their owne lande: againſt whom Craeſus being of a contrary iudgment began to reaſon & argue in this maner. Truly (O king) as I ſayd before, ſince it hath pleaſed the mighty Iupiter to delyuer mee into thy hands: whatſoeuer I ſhall marke to be amiſſe in thy houſe the ſame to the moſt of my power I will ſtudy to amend: for myne owne fortune albeit an vnthankfull miſtreſſe, yet hath ſhe bene a leſſon and ſchooling vnto me: if thou thinke thy ſelfe a god, and thy army immortall, my counſaile is not for thee, my ſentence cannot auayle thee: but if ye acknowledge thy ſelfe to be mortall, and to rule ouer thoſe that be ſubiect to death, learne this firſt, that ye affayres of men are placed as it were in a circle, which being rowled and turned about ne permitteth the ſame man to bee alwayes fortunate: as touching therefore the queſtion propounded I vary in opyon from all thy counſaile: for geuing liberty to thy enemies to come into thine owne realme, it is to be feared leaſt at the ſame time thou leeſe both the victory and thy kingdome. thinkeſt thou the Maſſagets if they get the better, will ſtraight wayes depart without ſpoyle of thy countrey? contrarywiſe, if thou vanquiſhe them what canſt thou winne? Certes (O Kynge) not comparably to that as if thou

beate theſe Cockes one their owne dunghilles, ſo mayſte thou followe them preſently vpon the ſpurres and ſet them beſides their owne pearches. Conſider this (noble prince) and if thou ſeeme to like it, ſeeke to follow it, and fly not one foote before thou performe it: that hauing done this fonde girle to vnderſtande thy inuincible force and proweſſe, thou mayſte follow thine enimyes at the hard heeles euen into ye gates and walles of their city. For ſhame let it not be ſayd at any time, that Cyrus the ſonne of Cambyſes did abandone the fielde and geue place to a woman. I thinke it good therefore to goe ſo farre forward, vntill they prouyde themſelues, and come forth to meete vs: wherein alſo we haue fit occaſion to vſe a pollicy. It is not vnknowne to you that the Maſſegets are vnacquainted with the ſtately dyet and magnificency of the Perſians: for which cauſe hauing left behind vs in our tentes all ſtore of delighteſome and pleaſaunte meates, with great plenty and aboūdance of ſweete wines, let vs leaue the weakeſt parte of our army there, and withdraw our ſelues aſide to ye ryuer: our enemyes glutted with ryot, and bereaued of their right ſenſes by exceſſe of wine; what may hinder vs to take them vnwares, cauſing them to pay the pryce of their dinner with the loſſe of their lyues. Theſe opinions were vttered as concerning the cauſe. But Cyrus refuſing to be ruled by the Perſians, betoke him ſelfe wholly to follow the aduiſe of Craeſus. Wherefore he gaue ſignifications to Tomyris to retyre back, delaring him ſelf to be ready to follow & geue her battle at home in her owne countrey. The Queene according as ſhee had determyned withdrew her ſelfe backe into the middes of the region.
            Now king Cyrus hauing committed to his ſonne Cambyſes the gouernaunce and adminiſtration of the realme, he delyuered into his hands Craeſus king of ye 
               Lydians, earneſtly charging him vpon the duty & obedience of a ſonne, yt if his luck in battle were worſe then he loked for, he ſhould let paſſe no parte of courteſie, honour, & liberality towards

him: which when he had ſayd he ſent them away into Perſia paſſing ye water him ſelfe with his whole power. The ſame night after hee had trayned his hoſt ouer the ſtreame of Araxes there befell vnto him a ſtraunge viſion, wherein being on ſleepe he ſeemed to beholde the eldeſt ſonne of Hyſtaſpes hauing on his ſhoulders two wynges, with one of the which he ſhadowed all Aſia, with the other all Europa. Hyſtaſpes (comming of the princely houſe of ye 
               Perſian Achemenides and borne of Arſaces) had a ſonne named Darius, ſuperiour in yeares to the reſt of his children, being at that time welnigh twenty yeares olde, whom his father for that hee was too younge for the campe, left at home in his owne conntrey. Cyrus awaked from his dreame, began to waigh and ponder with him ſelfe the drift and intent of his viſion, and ſuppoſinge it to bee of no ſmale moment called for Hyſtaſpes with whom in ſecret wiſe hauing remoued all company he cōmoned thus. Thy ſonne Hyſtaſpes hath wrought treaſon, againſt me and my kingdome, which his diſloyall & malicious trechery. I came to knowe by this meanes. The heauenly powers whoſe prouidence is a buckler to mee againſt all aduerſity hauing chiefe care and regarde of my health, haue ſhewed me all things that are to come. No longer ago then this laſt night I beheld in my ſleepe the eldeſt of thy children, bearing on each ſhoulder a mighty winge, and couering with the one all Aſia, with the other Europa, whereby I aſſuredly coniecture his treaſon which hee couertly tendeth againſt the crowne: hence then, diſpatch and ſpeede thee into Perſia, reſerue him ſafely to my nexte ret
                  •
               urne, that calling him to his tryall. I may ſee by what meanes he can quit himſelfe of trechery. Theſe things ſayd Cyrus for that hee aſſuredly thought that Darius had tended miſchiefe to his perſon and priuily ſought to vndermine him in his kingdome. But hee reckned without his hoſt, & was farre deceyued of his accounte: for the gods did foreſhew, and ſignifie to him how in that place he ſhould finiſhe

his life, and that his kingdome at the length ſhould deſcend to Darius. Hyſtaſpes ſhaping an anſwere to ye kings words began and ſayd. The gods forbid (O mighty prince) that any one of the Perſian bloud ſhould eyther malice thy perſon or impeach thy Maieſty: who if he were knowne a thowſand M. deathes were to eaſy for him. By whom, but onely by thy ayde (moſt gratious king) were we made of ſlaues fremen, of ſubiects and vaſſals lordes and rulers ouer other? If the gods haue accuſed my childe of treaſon, take him, he is thine owne, I yeelde him vp to bee dealt withall as it ſéemeth thee beſt. His talke finiſhed hee immediatly tooke his paſſage ouer the ryuer Araxes, into Perſia, for farther aſſuraunce and charge of his ſonnes appearaunce at ye Kings pleaſure.
            
               Cyrus hauing gayned the other ſide of Araxes, and marched forward one dayes iourney, forthwith he did as Craeſus had counſayled him, leauing in his tents the feebleſt and moſt vnapt ſouldiers of his whole number, and departed thence with the reſt to the ſhores and banckes of Araxes, being lightly harneyſed and addreſſed for the purpoſe. The ſeely remnaunte of the Perſians appointed to ſtay behinde in defence and munition of the tentes, were aſſayled by the third parte of the Maſſagets power: where vſing al meanes to ſaue the tentes and ſuccour them ſelues, they were miſerably foyled and ſlayne. The enemy entering the campe and perceyuing all places to be furniſhed with ſumptuous prouiſion of dainty and delicious meates, toke the benefit of ſo good and fauourable fortune, and fel freſhly to the banquet, in ſo much that hauing there ſtomacks forced with bittayls and their heads inchaūted with wyne, they were taken with a profounde & heauy ſleepe: when of a ſudden the Perſians returning from their ambuſh, came vpon them vnwares & putting the moſt parte to the ſword, the reſt they tooke and apprehended alyue. Among theſe was the ſonne of Queene Tomyris named Spargapiſes, to whom was geuen and cō
               mitted

the guiding of the army. Tomyris aduertiſed of hir ſonnes miſfortune together with the chaunce and loſſe of hir ſubiects, full of ſtomacke and diſpleaſure, ſent hir Legate ye ſecond time, and ſaluted Cyrus on this wiſe.
            Thou inſatiable and bloudy boutcher boaſt not thy ſelfe of this thou haſt done, for if by the fruite and ſappe of the Vyne (wherewith thy ſelfe otherwhyles being filled to the very eyes art free from no madneſſe, vyce, and blaſphemy) if herewith I ſay, thou haſt taken and inchaunted my ſonne: it is thy pollicy, not thy power: thy craft, not thy courage that hath gotten thee the victory. Well then: once agayne heare mee, and bee ruled by my counſayle: get thee hence yet, and bee ſpeedily packinge, releaſe my ſonne whom thou haſt in hold: for if in caſe thou refuſe and ſtay but one moment, I ſweare by the Sunne the god and king of the Maſſagets, I will glut that greedy pawnch of thine with aboū
               daunce of bloude, wherewith thou ſeemeſt to bee inſaturable and neuer to be ſatiſfied. Theſe words with Cyrus came in at one eare and went out at the other, lighter in value then the wynd in waight.
            Notwithſtandinge, ſeely Spargapiſes ſonne to the ſtoute and couragious Queene. Tomyris, being throughly awaked and come to him ſelfe, perceyuing the caſe he was in, hū
               bly beſought Cyrus to looſe him & take of his bondes: which done, and hauing his hands at liberty, hee pawnched him ſelfe into the belly with a Iauelyne, and ſo dyed. Such was the end and heauy deſteny of poore Spargapiſes ye Queenes ſonne. Whom his mother greatly lamenting, and ſeeing hir counſayle to take no place, gathered a mighty power & fought with king Cyrus in ſuch ſorte, that of all battayles & combatryes of the Barbarians there was neuer any ſo bloudy, fell, and cruell on both ſides as this. The fight and battayle it ſelfe was in this maner. Firſt of all being diſtant one from another a certayne ſpace, they aſſaulted each other by ſhotte of Arrowes, which beinge ſpente & conſumed, ſo feirce a cloſe was geuen on both parts wt Swords,

Daggers, and Iauelynes, that the very fire ſparkled out by the force and might of their blowes. Thus the battayle remayned equall a greate ſpace, neither parte yeelding the breadth of a hayre to his enemy, till at the length the Maſſagets preuailing, made a great ſlaughter of the Perſians: wherein Cyrus himſelfe hauing raygned thirty yeares ſaue one, made a finall ende and concluſion of his dayes: whom the wrathfull Queene Tomyris ſeeking oute amonge the ſlayne and mangled bodyes of the Perſians, toke his head & throwing it into a veſſell filled with bloud, in vaunting and glorious wife inſulted ouer it in theſe words. Thou Bout
               
                  •
               herly tyrant, my ſonne thou tokeſt by craft and kylledſt by cruelty, wherefore with thy ſelfe I haue kept touch. Now therefore take thy fill bloudy caitife, ſucke there till thy belly cracke. In this maner dyed the noble King Cyrus: of whoſe death and ende ſince many and ſundry thinges are bruted, it ſtein
                  •
               d vs good to followe that, which among the reſt founded neereſt to truth.
            The Maſſage
                     •
                  s are very like the Scythians both in lyuing and attyre. There maner is to fighte both on foote and horſe backe, in both kindes exceeding valiaunt. There weapons which they vſe are Arrowes, Speares, & ſhort Daggers after the maner, and cuſtome of the countrey: all their Harneſſe and furniture is garniſhed and adorned both with Golde and Braſſe: vſinge to their Speares Duyuers and Daggers, Spangs and bullions of braſſe: their Coſtlets, Belts, and the reſt of their armour beinge gallauntely ſet forth and beautified with Golde. In like maner alſo the curets of their horſe are layde & emboſſed with curious worke of Golde: wherewith alſo are done and beſet their raynes, brydles, and trappinges: being altogether vnacquainted with the vſe of Siluer, or Iron. For the land yeelding vnto them ineſtimable plenty of Gold and Braſſe, yet of Siluer and Iron it is quite voyde and deſtitute.
            Moreouer their maners are theſe. Euery one marieth

a wyfe, which notwithſtanding is common and indifferente to all. For that which the Grecians affirme to bee done by the Scythians, the ſelfe ſame, not they, but the Maſſagets doe cōmonly vſe and practiſe: being of a very certainety, yt as oft as any of the Maſſagets is moued with deſire of Women, he maketh no more adoe but hanging his quyuer vpon the pinne of his wayne, goeth openly to worke without any regard. They haue no certaine ende or terme of their liues: but as euery one is arryued to the pits brinke, & growne to extremity of age, him his kinſfolkes and acquaintance take with certayne cattell and ſacrifice him to the gods, whoſe fleſhe being afterwardes boyled in a Chaldern, they make thereof a ſolemne feaſte or banquet. Which kinde & maner of death is eſteemed with them the moſt bleſſed and glorydus death that can poſſibly happen to man. Such as dye through any diſeaſe or malady, they neuer eate, but ouerwhelm and couer them with mouldes, holding him vnhappy and accurſed that lyued not to the diuine dignity and honour of ſacrifice. They ſowe not one foote of grounde, but mayntaine them ſelues and liue by fiſh, great aboundaunce whereof the riuer Araxes doth yeelde vnto them. Their only drinke is milke, beſides the which they vſe nothinge. Among the gods they geue honour to the Sunne alone, vnto whom they conſecrate and offer vp horſes: which manner of oblation they ordayned for this reaſon: that to the quickeſt, and ſwifteſt of all the gods, they might likewiſe offer the moſt flight and ſwifte creature that lyueth on the earth.
            
               K. v.
            
         
         
            
            Herodotus his ſecond Booke entituled Euterpe.
            
            
               
                  AFter the death of the most noble & vertuous King Cyrus, there ſucceeded him in ye empyre a ſon of his, named Cambyſes, born of Caſſandana daughter to Pharnaſphus, who dying long tyme before ye king hir ſpouſe, was greatly bewayled by him, and his whole empyre. The younge prince Cambyſes makinge none other accounte of ye 
               Iönes, then of his lawfull ſeruaūts left him by the due right and title of inheritaunce, went in expedition againſt the Aegyptians, preparing an army aſwell out of other countreys as alſo out of the regions & borders of Greece, which were vnder his gouernment. The Aegyptians before ſuch time as Pſamme
                     •
                  ichus held the ſupremicy, thought them ſelues to haue bene the firſt and moſte auncient people of ye world. This king in time of his raigne and gouernaunce in Aegypt, for the great deſire hee had to know by what people the earth was firſt inhabited wrought An experience vvrought for the tryall of antiquitie. an experience whereby the Aegyptians were broughte to thinke that the Phrygians were the moſt old & auncient people of the earth, and them ſelues to be nexte in antiquity to them. For Pſammetichus by all meanes indeuouringe to know who they were that firſt and before al others came into the world, finding himſelfe hardly ſatiſfied with ought he could heare: practiſed a deuiſe and feate of his owne braine. Two young infants borne of baſe parentes, hee gaue to his Sheepheard to bring vp & nouriſh in this maner. He gaue cōmaundement yt no man in their preſence or hearing ſhould ſpeake one word: but that being alone in a ſolitary & deſerte cabyne farre from all company, they ſhould haue milke and other foode brought & myniſtred to them in due & conuenient time. Which thinges were done & commaunded by him, to the intent yt when they left of their childiſh cries & began to prattle and ſpeake plainly, he might know what ſpeach &

lāguage they would firſt vſe: which in proceſſe of time fell out and, happened accordingly. For being of ye age of two yeares, it chaunced that the ſheepheard (who was their Nourice & bringer vp) approching neere to the dore of the Cottage & entring in, both the litle brats ſprawling at his feete, & ſtretching forth It vvere a queſtion if a man should bee taught no language, in vvhat tongue hee vvould ſpeake their hands, cryed thus: Beccos, Beccos: which at the firſt hearing, the Paſtour noted only and made no words: but perceyuing him ſelfe alwayes ſaluted after one ſort: and yt euermore at his entraunce the children ſpake ye ſame word, the matter was opened to ye king: at whoſe cōmaundement he brought the children and deliuered them vp into his hands: whom when Pſammetichus alſo himſelfe had heard to chat in the ſame maner, he made curiouſe ſearch what people vſed ye word Beccos in their language, & in what meaning they toke it. Whereby he came to know yt the word was accuſtomably vſed by ye people of Phrygia to ſignifie bread. For which cauſe the Aegyptians came into opinion, yt the Phrygians were of greater time & longer continuance then them ſelues. Of all which matter, & the maner of doing thereof. I was credibly informed by the prieſtes of ye god Vulcane, abiding at Memphis. Howbeit many fond fables are recited by the Grecian writers, that Pſammetichus geuing ye children to certaine women of the country to ſucke & bring vp, cauſed their tongues to bee cut out yt they might not ſpeake to them. Thus much was rehearſed by them of ye trayning vp & education of the infants. Many other things alſo were told me by the holy and religious Chaplaynes of ye god Vulcane, with whom I had often conference at Memphis.
            
            Moreouer, for ye ſame occaſion I toke a iourney to Thebs & Heliopolis, which is to wit, ye city of ye 
               Sunne, to ye end I might Heliopolis the city of the Sunne. ſee whether they would iumpe all in one tale & agree together. For the Heliopolitans are ſayd to bee the moſt prudent & witty people of all ye 
               Aegyptians. Notwithſtanding of diuine & heauenly matters, as touching their gods, loke what they told me The vviſeſt people in AEgypt. I am purpoſed to conceale, ſaue onely their names, which are manifeſtly knowne of all men: of other matters I meane to keepe ſilence, vnleſſe by the courſe of the Hyſtory I ſhall perforce bee broughte into a narration of the ſame. In all their

talke of mortall and humane altayres, they did rightly accord & conſent one with an other: ſaying this: that yt 
               Aegyptians firſt of all others foūd out the circuite & compaſſe of yt yeare, deuiding The 12 monethes of the yeare firſt foūd out by the Aegyptians. the ſame into 12 ſeuerall moneths according to yt courſe and motion of the ſtarres: making (in my fancy) a better computation of the time then the Grecians doe, which are driuen euery thirde yeare to adde certaine dayes to ſome one moneth, whereby the yeares may fall euen & become of a iuſt cōpaſſe. Contrarywiſe, the Aegyptians to three hundred dayes which they parte & diſtribute into twelue moneths, making addition of fyue odde dayes, cauſe the circle and courſe of their yeares to fall out equally & alwayes a like. In like maner the Aegyptians 
               The names of the 12 gods, Aulters, Images, and Temples inuented by the Aegyptians. firſt inuented and vſed the ſurnames of the twelue gods: which yt 
               Grecians borowed & drew from them. The ſelfe ſame were the firſt founders of Aulters, Images, & Temples to the gods: by whom alſo chiefly were carued the pictures of beaſts and other creatures in ſtone, which thing for yt moſt parte they proue & confirme by lawfull teſtimonyes & good authority: to this they ad beſides yt the firſt king yt euer raygned was named Menes the firſt kinge that euer raygned. 
               Menes, vnder whoſe gouernaunce all y• lande of Aegypt except the prouince of Thebes was wholly couered & ouerwhelmed with water, and yt no parte of the ground which lyes aboue the poole called Myris was then to be ſene: into which poole from A Egypte for the moſt parte couered vvith vvater. the ſea is 7. dayes ſayling. And truly as concerning y• country they ſeemed to ſpeake truth. For it is euident to all men (who hauing neuer heard thereof doe but onely beholde it) how that parte of Aegypt whereat the Grecians are wont to arryue is gayned ground, and as it were the gyft of the ryuer. Likwiſe all the land aboue the poole for the ſpace of thr
                  •
               : dayes fayleing: whereof notwithſtanding they ſpake nothing at all. Beſides, there is another thing from whence no ſmale profe may be borowed: to wit, the very nature and quality of the Aegyptian ſoile: which is ſuch that being in voyage towards Aegypt, after you come within one dayes ſayling of the lande, at euery ſounde with the plummet, you ſhall bringe vppe great ſtore of mud and noyſome filth, euen in ſuch place as the water is eleuen ells in depth: whereby it is manyfeſt that ſo farre y• ground

was caſt vppe and left bare by the waters. The length of Aegypt by the ſea coaſte is 423. miles and a halfe: according to our lymitation which is from the coaſte of Plynthines, to the poole named Selbonis, wherevnto reacheth an ende of y• great mountayne Caſſius: on this ſide therefore Aegypte is ſixety ſcheanes, which conteyne the number of myles before mentioned. For with y• 
               Aegyptians ſuch as are ſlenderly landed, meaſure The maner of the Aegyptians meaſures. their groūd by paces, they which haue more, by furlongs, vnto whom very much is allotted, by the Perſian myle named Paraſanga: laſtly ſuch as in large and ample poſſeſſions exceede the reſt, meete their torritory by Schoenes. The meaſure Paraſanga contayneth thirty furlongs, the Schoene three ſcore, AEgypt nexte the ſea coaſte: 3600. furlonges. whereby it cōmeth to paſſe that the lande of Aegypt along the ſea is 3600. furlongs, from this parte towarde the citie Heliopolis and the middle region: Aegypt is very wyde and broade a playne and champion countrey, deſtitute of waters, yet very ſlimie and full of mudde. The iourney from the ſea to Heliopolis by the higher parte of the region, is welnigh of the ſame length with that way, which at Athens leadeth from the aulter The deſcription of the countrey of AEgypt. of the twelue gods to Piſa, and y• palace of Iupiter Olympius, betwene which two wayes by iuſt cōputation can hardly bee founde more then fifteene furlonges difference: for the diſtaunce betwene Athens and Piſa is ſuppoſed to want of 1500 furlongs, fiftene, which number in the other of Aegypt is ful, complet, and perfit: trauayling from Heliopolis by the hills you ſhall finde Aegypt to be ſtraight and narrowe compaſſed, banked on the one ſide by a mighty hill of Arabia, reachinge from the North towardes the South which by degrees waxeth higher and higher, and beareth vpwards toward the redd ſea. In this mountayne are ſundry quaries out of the which yt people of Aegypte hewed their ſtone to builde the Pyramides at Memphis: one this ſide, the hill draweth and wyndeth it ſelfe towarde thoſe places whereof we ſpake before. The ſelfe ſame mountayne hath another courſe from the Eaſte to the Weſte ſtretching ſo farre in length as a man may trauayle in two monethes: the Eaſte ende hereof yeldeth frankincenſe in great aboundaunce: likewiſe one the other ſide of Aegypt which lyeth

towardes Africa, there runneth another ſtony hill, wherein are builte certayne Pyramedes very full of grauell & groſſe A mountaine. Sande, like vnto that parte of the Arabian hill that beareth toward the South: ſo that from Helyopolis the wayes are very narrowe not paſſing foure dayes courſe by Sea.
            The ſpate betwene the mountaynes is champion ground, being in the narroweſt place not aboue two hundred furlongs from the one hill to the other: hauing paſſed this ſtraight, Aegypt openeth into a large and ample wideneſſe extendinge it ſelfe in great breadth: ſuch is the maner and ſituation of the countrey.
            Furthermore, from Heliopolis to Thebs is nyne dayes iourney by water, being ſeuered from each other in diſtance of place foure thowſand eight hundred and ſixty furlongs, which amounteth to y• number of foure ſcore and one ſchoenes: of the furlongs aforeſayd, three thowſand and ſixe hundred lye to the ſea, as wee declared before: Now from the ſea coaſte to the city Thebs are 6120. furlonges of playne ground, & from Thebs to the city Elephantina, 820. Of all the region and coūtrey. Aegypt whereof wee haue ſpoken the moſt parte is borow
                  〈…〉
                ground, wherein the waters heretofore haue had their cour
                  〈…〉
                for all the whole bottome which lyeth betwene the two mountaines aboue the city Memphis ſeemeth to haue bene a narrow ſea, much like vnto thoſe places that lye about Ilium, Teuthrania, Epheſus, and the playne of Meander: if it be not amiſſe to bring ſmale things in compariſon with greater matters: foraſmuch as none of thoſe ryuers which held their paſſage in the places forenamed, are worthy to be mentioned where any one of the ſeuen ſtreames of Nylus are brought into talke: there be alſo other floudes not comparable in bigneſſe to Nylus, which The ſtraunge effects of certayne ryuers. haue wrought ſtraunge effectes and wonderfull thinges in the places where they haue runne: amongſt whom is the famous ryuer Achelous, which flowing through Acarnania into yt ſea of the Iles Echinades, hath ioyned the halfe parte of the Iles to the mayne and continent. In the countrey of Arabia, not far from Aegypt there is a certaine arme or boſome of the ſea, hauing a breach & iſſue out of the red ſea, the length whereof beginning

at the end of yt angle or creeke & continuing to y• wyde mayne, is foure dayes ſayle: the breadth eaſy to be cut ouer in halfe a day: in this narrow ſea the waters ebbe & flow, raging and roaring exceedingly againſt a forde or ſhalow place, wherat the ſtreame beateth with great violence: ſuch a like creeke I ſuppoſe to haue bene in former ages in the lande of Aegypte, which brake out from the North ſea, and continued his courſe towards Aethyopia: like as alſo the Arabian ſea (whereof we haue ſpoken) floweth from the ſouth waters, towards yt coaſts of Syria, both which ſtraights welnigh in their furtheſt corners concur & meete together being ſeparrted by no great diſtaunce of groūd: were it then that yt ryuer Nilus ſhould make a vent, & ſhed it ſelfe into the narrow ſea of Arabia, what might binder, but yt in 200000 yeares, by yt cōtinuall & daily courſe of yt ryuer, the creeke of the ſalt waters ſhould be cleane altered & become dry: for I think it poſſible, if in 10000 yeares before me, ſundry ryuers haue chaūged their courſes & left the groūd dry whereas firſt they ran: an arme of the ſea alſo much greater then yt may bee dryuen beſides his naturall boſome, eſpecially by the force of ſo great a ſtreame as the riuer Nilus, by whom diuerſe things of greater admiration haue bene brought to paſſe. The reporte therefore which they gaue of the ſoyle I was eaſely By vvhat proofe
                     •
                   the coūtrey of Aegypt is argued to haue bene couered by vvaters. brought to beleue, aſwel for that yt country it ſelfe bringeth credite to the beholders, as alſo yt in the very hills & mountaynes of the region are found a multitude of ſhel fiſhes, the earth likewiſe ſweating out a certaine ſalt and bryniſhe humour, which doth corrupt and eate the Pyramides. Agayne, it is in no point like to any of the countryes that lye next vnto it, neither to Arabia, Lybia, nor Syria, (for the Syrians inhabite the ſea coaſte of Arabia) being of a blacke and brittle moulde, which commeth to paſſe by the greate ſtore of mudde and ſlimy matter which the ryuer beinge a flote bringeth out of Aethyopia into the lande of the Aegyptians. The earth of Lybia is much more redde and ſandy vnderneath. The moulde of Arabia and Syria drawe neere to a fatte and batile claye, beynge vnder grounde very rockye and full of ſtone.
            Lykewyſe, for proofe that the Region in tyme paſt was

watery ground the prieſts alleadged how in the time of kinge Myris his raygne the floud aryſing to the heighth of 8. cubits watered the whole countrey of Aegypte lying beneath Memphis, ſcarſe 900 yeares being paſt & expired ſince the death and deceaſe of Myris: whereas at theſe dayes vnleſſe it ſwell and increaſe 15. or 16. cubits high, it cōmeth not at all into yt coaſt, which aforeſaid coaſt, if accordingly to ye fall of ye riuer it grow ſtill in loftyneſſe and become higher, the earth receyuinge no In AEgypt it neuer rayneth, but their lande is vvatered by the ouerflovve of Nilus. moyſture by the ſloude, I feare ye 
               Aegyptians themſelues that dwell beneath ye lake Myris both other, & alſo the inhabitants of the lande of Delta, will euermore be annoyed with the ſame plague and inconuenience, whych the Gretians (by their accounte) are ſometimes like to abyde. For the people of Aegypt hearing that the whole countrey of Greece was moyſtned and watered by the ſeaſonable fall of rayne and ſhowers, & not by floudes and ryuers lyke vnto their owne: they prophecy that ye day would come, when as the Greekes being deceyued of their hope would all peariſhe through famine and hunger: meaning that if ye gods did not vouchſafe to ſend thē raine in due ſeaſon, from whome alone they haue their moyſture, the whole nation ſhoulde goe to wracke for want of ſuſtenaunce. Thus farre is pleaſed them to deſcant of the fortune of Greece. Let vs nowe conſider in what eſtate and condition they ſtand them ſelues if then (as we ſayd before) the lowe countrey of Memphis (for in theſe is the gayne and increaſe of grounde ſeene) waxe & augment accordingely as in former times, our friendes of Aegypt ſhall ſhew vs the way, what it is to be famiſhed and dye by hunger: if neyther theyr land be moyſtened by the ſweete and timely ſhowres of rayne, nor by the ſwelling and ryſing of the riuer. For as now, they haue an eſpeciall aduauntage aſwell of all The maner of huſbandry amongſt the AEgyptians. men els, as of the reſt of their countreymen yt dwell higher, in that they receiue the fruite and increaſe of the ground without eyther tilling or weeding the earth, or doing ought els belonging to huſbandry: wherefore immediately after the ryſeing of ye waters, ye earth being moyſte and ſupple, & the ryuer returned agayne to his olde courſe, they ſowe & ſcatter their ſeede euery one vpon his owne ground & territory: wherinto hauing driuē
               
great heards of Swine that roote and tread the grayne and moulds together, they ſtay till the time of harueſt, attending Hogs be the beſt husbands in Aegypt, and the vvorſt in England. the increaſe and gaine of their ſeede. Being full growne and ripened, they ſend in their hogges afreſh to muzle and ſtampe the corne from out the eares, which done, they ſweepe it together, and gather it. If we follow the opinion of the people of Ionia, as touching the land of Aegypt, who affirme, that the true countrey of Aegypt is in very deede nothing elſe ſaue the A confutation of the opinion of the Iones concerning Aegypt. prouince of Delta (which taketh his name of the watchtowre or Caſtle of eſpiall made by Perſeus) teſtifying beſides, that by the ſea coaſt to the ſalt waters of Peluſium, it ſtretcheth forty ſcheanes in length, and reacheth from the ſea toward the hart of the region, to the city of the Cercaſians (neere vnto which ye riuer Nilus parteth it ſelfe into two ſeueral mouthes, the one whereof is called Peluſium, the other Canobus) and that all the other partes of Aegypt are belonging to Arabia and Africa, we might very well inferre and prooue heereof, that the countrey of Aegypt in former times was none at all. For the land of Delta (as they ſay, and we eaſily beleeue) was grounde lif
                  •
                voyde and naked by the water, and that of late yeares alſo and not long ago: wherefore if they had no countrey at all, what cauſed them ſo curiouſly to labour in the ſearching out and blazing of their auncienty, ſuppoſing themſelues to be the chiefe of all people, the knowledge and intelligence whereof, was not worth the two yeares triall and experiment which they wrought in the children. I my ſelfe am fully perſwaded, that the Aegyptians tooke not their beginning together with the place of Delta. but were alwayes ſince the firſt beginning and originall of mankinde, whoſe countrey gayning ground, and increaſing by the chaunge and alteration of the riuer, many of them went downe from the high countrey, and inhabited the low places, for which cauſe, the City Thebes, and the countrey belonging thereto, was heeretofore called Aegypt, the circuite and compaſſe whereof is 6120. furlongs. Be it ſo then that our opinion accord and conſent wyth truth, the Graecian writers are in a wrong boxe, but if they ſpeake truely, yet in other matters they recken without theyr

hoſte, making but three partes of the whole earth, Europa, Aſia, and Africa: whereas of neceſſity Delta in Aegypt ſhould be accounted for the fourth, ſithens by their owne bookes it is neyther ioyned with Aſia, nor yet with Africa. For by this account, it is not the riuer Nilus that diuides Aſia from Africa, which at the poynt and ſharpe angle of Delta, cutting it ſelfe into two ſundry ſtreames, that which lyes in ye middes ſhould equally pertayne both to Aſia and Africa. But to leaue the iudgement and opinion of the Greekes, we ſay and affyrme, that all that countrey is rightly tearmed Aegypt, whiche is held and poſſeſſed by the Aegyptians, euen as alſo we make no doubt to call thoſe places Cilicia and Aſſyria where the Cilicians and Aſſyrians do dwell. In like manner, according to truth, Aſia and Africa are diſſeuered and parted betweene themſelues by none other borders, then by the limits and boundes of Aegypt. Howbeit, if we followe the Graecians, all Aegypt (beginning at the places called Catadupae and the city Elephantina) is to be diuided into two partes, which draw their names of the regions wherevnto they are adioyned, the one belonging to Africa the other to Aſia. For the riuer Nilus taking his beginning from the Catadupae ſo called, and flowing The courſe of the riuer Nilus. through the middes of Aegypt, breaketh into the ſea, running in one ſtreame til it come to the city of the Cercaſians, and afterwards leuering it ſelfe into three ſundry chanels. The firſt of theſe chanels turneth to the Eaſt, and is called Peluſium, 
               The names of the chanels of Nilus: Peluſium. Canobus. the ſecond Canobus, the third ſtreame flowing directly in a ſtraight line, kepeth this courſe, firſt of all ſcouring through the vpper coaſtes of the countrey, it beateth full vpon the point of Delta, through the middeſt whereof, it hath a ſtraight and direct ſtreame euen vnto the ſea, being the fayreſt and moſt famous of all the reſt of the chanels, and is called Sebennyticum. From this ſtreame are deriued two other armes alſo, Sebennyticum leading to the ſalt waters, the one being called Saiticum, the other Mendeſium. For as touching thoſe braunches and Saïticum. Menedeſium. Bolbitinum. Bu
                     •
                  olicum. ſtreames of Nilus, which they tearme Bolbitinum and Bucolicum, they are not naturally made by courſe of the water, but drawne out and digged by the labour of men. I followe not

the fantaſies of mine owne brayne, nor imagine any thing of my ſelfe, for that the countrey of Aegypt is ſo wyde, and of ſuch amplitude as we haue deſcribed it, I appeale to the oracle of the god Hammon which came into my minde, beeyng in ſtudy and meditation about theſe matters.
            The people of the two cities Maerea and Apia that inhabite the borders of Aegypt next vnto Africa, eſteeming thēſelues A ſtory touching the deſcription of Aegypt. to be of the linage and nation of the Africans, not of the Aegyptians, became weary of their ceremonies and religion, and would no longer abſteyne from the fleſhe of kyne and feamale cattell, as the reſt of the Aegyptians did, they ſent therefore An oracle in Afrike. to the prophecy of Hammon, denying themſelues to be of Aegypt, becauſe they dwelt not within the compaſſe of Delta, neither agreed with them in any thing, wherefore they deſired ye god that it might be lawful for them without reſtraint to taſte of all meates indifferētly: but the oracle forbade thē ſo to do, ſhewing how all that region was iuſtly accounted Aegypt which the waters of Nilus ouerranne and couered, adding heereto all thoſe people that dwelling beneath the city Elephantina, dranke of the water of the ſame floud. This aunſwere Hovv much of the land Nilus ouerflovveth. was giuen them by the oracle. Nowe it is meete wee know, that Nilus at what time it riſeth aboue the banckes, ouerfloweth not Delta alone, but all the countrey next vnto Africa, and likewiſe the other ſide adioyning to Arabia, couering the earth on both partes the ſpace of two dayes iourney or thereabout.
            As touching the nature of the riuer Nilus, I could not bee ſatiſfyed either by the prieſts, or by any other, being alwayes very willing and deſirous to heare ſomething thereof, firſt, The cauſe and time of the riſing of the riuer. what the cauſe might be that growing to ſo great increaſe, it ſhoulde drowne and ouergo the whole countrey, beginning to ſwell the eyght day before the kalends of Iuly, and continuing aflote an hundred daies, after which time, in the like number of dayes it falleth agayne, flowyng within the compaſſe of hys owne banckes tyll the nexte approch of Iuly.
            Of the cauſes of theſe thynges the people of Aegypt were ignoraunte themſelues, not able to tell mee anye thyng

whether Nilus had any proper and peculiar: vertue different from the nature of other flouds. About which matters being very inquiſitiue, mooued with deſire of knowledge, I demaunded Nilus ſendeth foorth no miſte. inoreouer the reaſon and occaſion why this ſtreame of all others neuer ſent foorth any miſte or vapour; ſuch as are commonly ſeene to aſcend and riſe from the waters, but heerein alſo I was faynt to neſtle in mine owne ignorance, deſiring to be lead of thoſe that were as blind as my ſelfe. Howbeit, certayne Graecian wryters thinking to purchaſe the price and prayſe of wit, haue gone about to diſcourſe of Nilus, and ſet A refutation of the Grecians as touching the ſame things. downe their iudgement of the nature thereof, who are found to varry and diſſent in three ſundry opinions, two of the which I ſuppoſe not worthy the naming, but onely to giue the reader intelligence how ridiculous they are. The firſt is, that the ouer flow of Nilus commeth of none other cauſe, then that the windes Eteſiae ſo named, blowing directly vpon the ſtreame thereof, hinder and beate backe the waters from flowing into the ſea, which windes are commonly wont to ariſe, and haue their ſeaſon a long time after the increaſe and riſing of Nilus: but imagine it were otherwiſe, yet this of neceſſitie muſt follow, that all riuers whatſoeuer hauing a full and direct courſe againſt the windes Eteſiae, ſhall in like maner ſwell and grow ouer their bankes, and ſo much the rather, by how much the leſſe and weake the flouds themſelues are, whoſe ſtreames are oppoſed againſt the ſame. But there be many riuers as well in Syria as in Africa, that ſuffer no ſuch motion and change as hath bin ſayd of the floud Nilus. There is another opinion of leſſe credite and learning, albeit of greater woonder and admiration then the firſt, alleadging the cauſe of the riſing to be, for that the riuer (ſay they) proceedeth from the Oeean ſea, which enuironeth the whole globe and circle of the earth. The third opinion being more caulme and modeſt then the reſt, is alſo more falſe and unlikely then them both, affirming, that the increaſe and augmentation of Nilus commes of the ſnowe waters molten and thawed in thoſe regions, carying with it ſo much the leſſe credit and authority, by how much the more it is euident that the riuer comming from Africa through the

middeſt of Aethiopia, runnes continually from the hotter countreys to the colder, beeing in no wiſe probable, or any thing likely that the waxing of the waters ſhould proceede of ſnowe. Many ſound proofes may be brought to the weakening of this cauſe, whereby we may geſſe how groſſely they erre whiche thinke ſo greate a ſtreame to be increaſed by ſnowe. What greater reaſon may be found to the contrary, then that the windes blowing from thoſe countreys are very warme by nature. Moreouer, the lande it ſelfe is continually voyde of rayne and yee, being moſt neceſſary that within fiue dayes after the fall of ſnowe there ſhould 
                  •
               ome rayne, where by it commeth vvithin fiue dayes after ſnovve, falleth rayne. to paſſe that if it ſnowe in Aegypt, it muſt alſo of neceſſity rayne. The ſame is confirmed and eſtabliſhed by the blackneſſe and ſwartneſſe of the people, couloured by the vehement heate and ſcorching of the ſume: likewiſe by the ſwalowes and kytes which continually keepe in thoſe coaſtes: laſtly by the flight of the cranes toward the comming of winter, which are alwayes wont to flye out of Scythia and the cold regions to theſe places, where all the winter ſeaſon they make theyr abode. Were it then that neuer ſo little ſnow could fall in thoſe countreys by the which Nilus hath his courſe, and from which he ſtretcheth his head and beginning, it were not poſſible for any of theſe things to happen which experience prooueth to be true. They which talke of Oceanus, grounding their iudgement vppon a meere fable, want reaſon to prooue it. For I That there is no ſea called Ocean. thinke there is no ſuch ſea as the Ocean, but rather that Homer or ſome one of the auncient Poets deuiſed the name, and made vſe thereof afterwardes in their tales and poetry. Now if it be expedient for me hauing refuted and diſalowed other mens iudgements, to ſet downe mine owne. The reaſon why Nilus is ſo great in ſommer I take to be this. In the wintertime The true opinion of theſe things. the ſunne declining from his former race vnder the colde winter ſtarre, keepeth hys courſe ouer the high countreys of Africa, and in theſe fewe wordes is conteyned the whole cauſe. For the ſunne the neerer he maketh his approch to any region, the more he drinketh vp the moyſture thereof, and cauſeth the riuers and brookes of the ſame countrey to runne

very lowe. But to ſpeake at large, and lay open the cauſe in more ample wyſe, thus the caſe ſtandeth. The bringer to paſſe and worker heereof is the ſunne, beeing caryed ouer the hygh countreys of Africa: For the ſpring time with them beeyng very fayre and cleare, the land hote, and the wyndes colde, the ſunne paſſing ouer them workes the ſame effecte as when it runneth in the middeſt of heauen in ſommer, forſomuch as by vertue of his beames gathering water vnto him, he cauſeth it to aſcend into the ſuperiour regions, where the windes receiuing The cauſe vvhy the South and Southvveaſt vvind bring rayne. it, diſpearſe the vapours and reſolue them againe, which is chiefely done by the South and Southweſt winde that blowe from theſe countreys, beeing ſtormy and full of rayne. Now the water drawne out of Nilus by the ſunne, doth not in this ſort fall downe agayne in ſhowres and drops of rayne, but is quite ſpent and conſumed by the heate. Toward the ende of winter, the ſunne drawing towards the middeſt of the ſkye in like manner as before, ſucketh the water out of other riuers, which is the cauſe that being thus drawne vntill much rayne and ſhowres increaſe them agayne, they become fleete and almoſt drie. Wherefore the riuer Nilus, into whome alone no ſhowres fall at any time, is for iuſt cauſe loweſt in winter, and bigheſt in ſommer, foraſmuch as in ſommer the ſunne draweth moyſture equally out of all riuers, but in winter out of Nilus alone, this I take to be the cauſe of the diuers and changeable courſe of the riuer. Heereof alſo I ſuppoſe to proceede the dryneſſe of the ayre in that region, at ſuch time as the ſunne deuideth his courſe equally, ſo that in the high countreys of Africke it is alwayes ſommer: whereas if it were poſſible for the placing and ſituation of the heauens to be altered, that where North is, there were South, & where South is, North, the ſunne towardes the comming and approach of winter departing from the middeſt of heauen, would haue his paſſage in like ſort ouer Europe, as now it hath ouer Africke, and worke the ſame effects (as I iudge) in the riuer Iſter, as now it doth in Nilus. In like maner, the cauſe why Nilus hath Iſter a great riuer in Europe. no miſt or cloude ariſing from it according as we ſee in other flouds, I deeme to be this, becauſe the countrey is exceeding

hote and parching, being altogether vnfit to ſende vp any vapours, which vſually breathe and ariſe out of cold places. But let theſe things be as they are and haue bene alwayes.
            The head and fountayne of Nilus where it is, or frō whence it cōmeth, none of the Aegyptians, Graecians, or Africans that The ſpring of the riuer Nilus vnſearchable. euer I talked with, could tell me any thing, beſides a certaine ſcribe of Mineruas treaſury in the city Sais, who ſeemed to me to ſpeake merily, ſaying, that vndoubtedly he knewe the place, deſcribing the ſame in this manner. There be two mountaines (quoth he) ariſing into ſharpe and ſpindled tops, ſituate betweene Syêne a city of Thebais, and Elephantina, the one called Crophi, the other Mophi. from the vale betweene the two hilles doth iſſue out the head of the riuer Nilus, being of The tvvo mountaynes Crophi and Mophi. an vnſearchable deapth, and without bottome, halfe of the water running towardes Aegypt and the North, the other halfe towardes Aethiopia and the South. Of the immeaſurable deapth of the fountayne, the ſcribe affirmed, that Pſammetichus King of the Aegyptians had taken triall, who ſounding the waters with a rope of many miles in length, was vnable to feele any ground or bottome: whoſe tale (if any ſuche thyng were done as he ſayde) made me thinke, that in thoſe places whereof he ſpake, were certayne gulfes or whirlepooles very ſwift, violente and raging, whiche by reaſon of the fall of the water from the hilles, would not ſuffer the line with the ſounding leade to ſinke to the bottome, for which cauſe, they were ſuppoſed to be bottomleſſe. Beſides this, I coulde learne nothing of any man. Neuertheleſſe, trauelling to Elephantina to behold the thing with mine owne eyes, and making diligent inquiry to knowe the truth, I vnderſtoode this, that takyng our iourney from thence Southward to ye countreys aboue, at lēgth we ſhall come to a ſteepe & bending ſhelfe, where ye ryuer falleth with great violēce, ſo yt we muſt be forced to faſten two gables to each ſide of ye ſhip, & in that ſort to hale and draw her forward, which if they chaunce either to ſlip or breake, ye veſſell is by and by driuē backwards by ye intollerable rage & violēce of ye waters. To this place frō ye city Elephantina is four daies ſaile, whereaboutes ye riuer is ful of windings & turnings, like

the floud Meander, and in lēgth ſo cōtinuing twelue ſcheanes, all which way the ſhip of neceſſity muſt be drawne. After this, we ſhall arriue at a place very ſmooth and caulme, wherein is ſtanding an Iland incompaſſed rounde by the ryuer, by name Tachampſo. The one halfe heereof is inhabited by the Aegyptians, the other halfe by the Aethiopians, whoſe countrey is adioyning to the Southſide of the Ile. Not farre from the Iland is a poole of woonderfull and incredible bigneſſe, about the which the Shepheards of Aethiopia haue their dwelling: whereinto, after we are declined out of the mayne ſtreame, we ſhall come to a riuer directly running into the poole, where going on ſhore, we muſt take our voyage on foote the ſpace of forty dayes by the waters ſide, the riuer Nilus it ſelfe beeyng very full of ſharpe rockes and craggy ſtones, by the which it is not poſſible for a veſſell to paſſe. Hauing finiſhed forty dayes iourney along the riuer, take ſhipping againe, and paſſe by water twelue dayes voyage, till ſuch time as you arriue at a great city called Meroe, which is reputed for the chiefe and The City Meroe. Metropolitane city of the countrey, the people whereof, only of all the gods worſhip Iupiter and Bacchus, whome they reuerence with exceeding zeale and deuotion. Likewiſe to Iupiter they haue planted an oracle, by whoſe counſayle and voyce they rule their martiall affayres, making warre how oft ſoeuer, or againſt whomeſoeuer they are mooued by the ſame. From this city Meroe by as many dayes trauell as yee take from Elephantina to ye ſame, you ſhall come to a kind of people named Automoly, which is to ſay, traytours or runnagates, the ſame alſo in like manner being called Aſmach, which emporteth in the greeke tongue ſuch as ſtande and attende at the Kings left hand. Theſe men being whilome ſouldyers in Aegypt to the number of eyght thouſand and two hundred, they reuolted from their owne countreymen, and fled ouer to the Aethiopians for this occaſion. Being in ye time of King Pſammetichus 
               The ſouldiers of Aegypt forſooke theyr ovvne countrey. diſperſed and diuided into ſundry garriſons, ſome at the city of Elephantina, and Daplinae Peluſiae, againſt the Aethiopians, other againſt the Arabians and Syrians, and thirdly at Marea againſt the Africans (in which places agreeably

to the order and inſtitution of Pſammetichus, the Perſian garriſons alſo did lie in munition) hauing continued the ſpace of three yeares in perpetuall gard and defence of the lande, without ſhift or releaſe, they fell to agreement amongſt themſelues to leaue their King and countrey, and flye into Aethiopia: which their intente Pſammetichus hearing, made after them incontinently, and hauing ouertaken the army, humbly beſought them with many teares, not to forſake by ſuche vnkind and vnnaturall wiſe their wiues, children, and countrey gods, vnto whoſe plaint and intreaty, a rude royſtrell in the company ſhewing his priuy members, made this aunſwere, whereſoeuer (quoth he) theſe be, there will I finde both wyfe The tricke of a knaue. and children. After they were come into Aethiopia, and had offered themſelues vnto the King of the ſoyle, they were by him rewarded on this manner. Certayne of the Aethiopians that were ſcarſely ſound harted to the King, were depriued by him of all their lands and poſſeſſions, which he franckly gaue and beſtowed on the Aegyptians. By meanes of theſe, the people of Aethiopia were brought from a rude and barbarous kind of demeanour, to farre more ciuill and manlike behauiour, being inſtructed and taught in the maners and cuſtomes of the Aegyptians. Thus the riuer Nilus is founde ſtill to continue the ſpace of foure monethes iourney by lande and water (leſſe then in which time it is not poſſible for a man to come from Elephantina to the Automolians) taking hys courſe and ſtreame from the Weſt part of the world, and falling A ſlory touching the ſpring of Nilus. of the ſunne. Howbeit in this place I purpoſe to recite a ſtory told me by certayne of the Cyraeneans, who fortuning to take a voyage to ye oracle of Ammon, came in talke with Etearchus King of the Ammonians, where by courſe of ſpeache, they fell at length to diſcourſe and common of Nilus, the head whereof was vnſearchable, and not to be knowne. In which place Etearchus made mention of a certaine people called Nama
                     •
                  ones of the countrey of Afrike, inhabiting the quickſands, and all the coaſt that lyeth to the eaſt. Certayne of theſe men comming to the court of Etearchus, and reporting dyuers ſtrange and wonderfull things of the deſerts and wild chaſes

of Africa, they chaunced at length to tell of certayne yong Gentlemen of theyr countrey, iſſued of the chiefe and moſt noble families of all their nation, who beeing at a reaſonable A voyage vndertaken by certayne yong gentlemen. age very youthfull and valtant, determined in a brauery to go ſeeke ſtraunge aduentures, as well other, as alſo this. Fiue of them being aſſigned thereto by lot, put themſelues in voyage to go ſearch and diſcry the wilderneſſe, and deſert places of Africa, to the ende they might ſee more, and make further report thereof then euer any that had attempted the ſame. For the ſea coaſt of Africa poynting to the North pole, many nations do inhabite, beginning from Aegypt, and continuing to the promontory named Soloes, wherein Africa hath his end and bound. All the places aboue the ſea are haunted with wilde and ſauage beaſtes, beeing altogether voyde and deſolate, peſtered with ſand, and exceeding drye. Theſe gentlementrauellers hauing made ſufficient prouiſion of water, and other vyands neceſſary for theyr iourney, firſt of all paſſed the countreys that were inhabited: and next after that, came into the wylde and waſte regions amongſt the caues and dennes of fierce and vntamed beaſtes, through which they helde on theyr way to the weſt parte of the earth. In which manner, after they had continued many dayes iourney, and trauelled ouer a great part of the ſandy countreys, they came at length to eſpy certayne fayre and goodly trees, growing in a freſh and pleaſaunt medowe, wherevnto incontinently making repayre, and taſting the fruite that grewe thereon, they were ſuddenly ſurpriſed and taken ſhort by a company of little dwarfes, farre vnder the common pitch and ſtature of men, whoſe tongue the gentlemen knew not, neither was their ſpeache vnderſtoode of them. Being apprehended, they were lead away ouer ſundry pooles and meares into a city, where all the inhabitauntes were of the ſame ſtature and degree with thoſe that had taken them, and of colour ſwart and blacke. Faſt by the ſide of thys city ranne a ſwift and violent riuer, flowing from the Weaſt to the Eaſt, wherein were to be ſeene very hydeous and terrible ſerpents called Crocodyles. To this ende drew the talke of Etearchus King of the Ammonians, ſaue that he added beſides

how the Namaſonian gentlemen returned home to theyr owne countrey (as the Cyraeneans made recount) and how the people alſo of the city whether they were broughte, were all coniurers, and geuen to the ſtudy of the blacke arte. The floud A City inhabited by Necromancers. that had his paſſage by the city, Etearchus ſuppoſed to be the riuer Nilus, euen as alſo reaſon it ſelfe giueth it to be. For it floweth from Africa, and hath a iuſt and direct cut through the middeſt of the ſame, following (as it ſhould ſeeme) a very like and ſemblable courſe vnto the riuer 
                  
                     •
                  ſter.
            
            
               Iſter beginning at the people of the Celts, and the city Pyrene (the Celts keepe without the pillers of Hercules, being neere neighbours to the Cyneſians, and the laſt and vtmoſt The deſcription of the riuer Iſter. nation of the weſterne people of Europe) deuideth Europe in the middeſt, and ſcouring through the coaſt, it is helde by the Iſtryans (people ſo named and comming of the Mileſians) it laſtly floweth into the ſea. Notwithſtanding Iſter is well knowne of many, for that it hath a perpetuall courſe through countreys that are inhabited, but where or in what parte of the earth Nilus hath his ſpring, no man can tell, forſomuch as Africa from whence it commeth, is voyde, deſert, and vnfurniſhed of people, the ſtreame and courſe whereof, as farre as lyeth in the knowledge of men, we haue ſet downe & declared, yt end of the riuer being in Aegypt where it breaketh into ye ſea.
            
               Aegypt is welny oppoſite & directly ſet againſt ye mountaines of Cilicia, frō whence to Synopis ſtanding in ye 
               Euxine ſea, is fiue daies iourney for a good footemā, by ſtraight & euen way.
            The Ile Synopis lyeth iuſt againſt the riuer Iſter, where it beareth into the ſea, ſo that Nilus running through all the coaſt of Africa, may in ſome manner be cōpared to ye riuer Iſter, howbeit, as touching ye floud Nilus be it hither to ſpokē.
            Let vs yet proceede to ſpeake further of Aegypt, both for that the countrey it ſelfe hath more ſtrange wonders then any nation Aegypt the moſt vvonderfull nation in the vvorld. in the world, and alſo becauſe the people themſelues haue wrought ſundry things more worthy memory, then any other nation vnder the ſunne, for which cauſes, we thought meete to diſcourſe more at large of ye region & people. The Aegyptians therefore as in the temperature of the ayre, and nature of the

riuer, they diſſent from all other: euen ſo in theyr lawes and cuſtomes they are vnlike and diſagreeing from all men.
            In this countrey the women followe the trade of merchandize in buying and ſelling: alſo victualing and all kinde of ſale and chapmandry, whereas contrarywyſe the men remayne at The lavves and cuſtomes of the people of Aegypt. home, and play the good huſwiues in ſpinning and weauing and ſuch like duties. In like manner, the men carry their burthens on their heads, the women on their ſhoulders. Women make water ſtanding, and men crouching downe and cowring to the ground. They diſcharge and vnburthen theyr bellies of that which nature voydeth at home, and eate their meate openly in the ſtreetes and high wayes, yeelding this reaſon why they do it, for that (ſay they) ſuch things as be vnſeemely and yet neceſſary ought to be done in counſayle, but ſuch as are decent and lawful, in the eyes and viewe of all men. No woman is permitted to do ſeruice or miniſter to the gods or goddeſſes, that duty being proper and peculiar to men. The ſonne refuſing to nouriſh and ſuſteyne his parents, hath no lawe to force and conſtrayne him to it, but the daughter be ſhe neuer ſo vnwilling, The daughter bound to nourish her parents in need. is perforce drawne and compelled thereto. The prieſts and miniſters of the gods in other countreys weare long hayre, and in Aegypt are all raſed and ſhauen. Likewyſe with other people it is an vſuall cuſtome in ſorrowing for the dead to powle theyr lockes, and eſpecially ſuch as are neareſt touched with griefe, but contrarywyſe the Aegyptians at the deceaſſe of their friends ſuffer their hayre to growe, beeing at other times accuſtomed to powle & cut it to ye ſtumps. Moreouer, the people of all lands vſe to make difference betweene their owne diet & the foode of beaſtes, ſauing in Aegypt, where The good felovvship in Aegypt vvher the good man and his hogs dine together. The vſe of grayne is very 
                     •
                  lender in Aegypt. in barbarous and ſwiniſh maner men and beaſts feede ioyntly together. Beſides this, ye people elſewhere haue their greateſt ſuſtenā
               
                  •
               e by wheate, rye, & barly, which ye 
               Aegyptians may not taſte of without great reproch & contumely, vſing neuertheſſe a kind of wheate whereof they make very white and fine bread, which of ſome is thought to be darnell or bearebarly. This at the firſt hauing mingled it with licour, they worke & mould wt their feete, kneading the ſame afterwards with their hands.
            
               
In this countrey alſo the manner is to circum
                  •
               iſe and cut round about the ſkinne from their priuy parts, which none other vſe, except thoſe that haue taken letter, and learned the cuſtome from the Aegyptians. The men go in two garments, the women in one, ſtitching to the inſide of the veſture a tape or caddeſe to gird their appare. I cloſe to them, which ye people of other regions are wont to weare outwardly. The Graecians in writing and caſting account, frame their letters, and The manner of caſting of account. lay their counters from the left hand to the right, the Aegyptians contrarywiſe proceede from the right to the left, wherein alſo they frumpe and gird at the Graecians, ſaying, that themſelues do all things to the right hand, which is well and honeſtly, but the Graekes to the left, which is peruerſely and vntowardly. Furthermore, they vſe in writing two kind of charecters or letters, ſome of the which they call holy and diuine, Their letters or charecters. other common and prophane. In the ſeruice and worſhip of the gods, they are more religious and deuout then any nation vnder heauen. They drinke out of braſen pots, which day by day they neuer fayle to cleanſe and waſh very fayre and cleane, which manner and cuſtome is not in a few of them, but in all. They delight principally to go in freſh and cleane linnen, conſuming Cleanneſſe in auyre vvithout pride. no ſmall part of the day in waſhing their garmentes. They circumciſe their ſecret partes for deſire they haue to be voyde of filth and corruption, eſteeming it much better to be accounted cleane, then comely. The prieſts and churchmen: The cuſtome of the prieſts. ſhaue their bodies euery third day, to the end that neyther lyee nor any kind of vncleanneſſe may take hold of thoſe which are dayly conuerſaunt in the honour and ſeruice of the gods. The ſame are arrayed in one veſture of ſingle linnen, and paper ſhoes, without ſufferance to go otherwiſe attired at any time. They purge and waſh themſelues euery day twice in the daye time, and as often in the night, vſing other ceremonies and cuſtomes welny infinite that are not to be rehearſed. The ſelfe-ſame prieſts haue no ſmall aduantage or commodity in this, that they liue not of their owne, neither ſpend or conſume any thing of their priuate goodes and ſubſtaunce, but haue dayly miniſtred and ſupplied vnto them foode in great aboundance,

as well the fleſh of oxen as of geeſe. Their drinke is wine made of grapes, which in like maner is brought them in allowance. Their dyer. To take any kind of fiſhe, they hold it vnlawfull: and if by fortune they haue but ſeene or lightly behelde any beanes, they deeme themſelues the worſſe for it a moneth after, forſomuch as that kind of pulſe is accounted vncleane. The reſt alſo of the Aegyptians and common ſorte vſe very ſeldome or neuer to ſowe beanes: and to eate the ſame either rawe or ſodden, they hold it a greeuous ſinne. The prieſts take their orders in ſuch wiſe, that euery one by turnes and courſes doth ſeruice to all The orders of prieſthood. the gods indifferently, no man being clarked or choſen to be the ſeuerall miniſter of any one god alone. All theſe are gouerned by one generall preſident or Archbiſhop. If any man dye, his ſonne taketh the prieſthoode in his ſtead. All neate and bullockes of the malekinde they hold ſacred to Epaphus, whereof if they be in minde to ſacrifice any, they ſearche and trie hym whether he be cleane or no after this manner. If in all hys ſkinne there appeare any one blacke hayre, they by and by The manner of trying the bullocks that are ſacrificed vvhether they be cleane or othervviſe. iudge him impure and vnfit for ſacrifice, which triall is made by ſome of the prieſts appoynted for the ſame purpoſe, who taketh diligent view of the oxe both ſtanding and lying, and turned euery way, that no part may be vnſeene. After this, ſearch is made alſo of his mouth and tongue, whether all the ſignes and tokens appeare in him that ſhould be in a pure & vnſpotted beaſt, of which ſignes we determine to ſpeake in another booke. To make ſhort, he curiouſly beholdeth the hayres of his tayle whether they growe according to nature, and be all white. If all theſe markes agree, they tye a ribaund to one of his hornes, and ſeare a marke on the other, and ſo let him run, and if any man aduenture to offer vp an oxe, whoſe hornes are not marked with the publike ſeale or brandyron, he is by and by accuſed by the reſt of his company, and condemned to dye. Theſe are the meanes which they vſe in ſearching and ſurueying theyr cattell, ſuch as are to be offered to the gods. Moreouer, The order of ſacrificing. in the time of ſacrifice and oblation, this is their manner. The beaſt that is ſealed on the horne, being brought to the aultare and place of immolation, incontment a fire is kindled,

then ſome one of the Chaplaynes taking a boule of wyne in his hands, drinketh ouer the oblation with his face towarde the temple, and calling with a loude voyce vpon the name of the god, giueth the beaſt a wound and killeth him, the head and hyde whereof, they beare into the market place, with many The head of the beaſt that is ſacrificed is accurſed. deteſtable curſſes, and diueliſh bannings, making ſale thereof to the Merchaunts of Greece. Such of the Aegyptians as haue no place of ſale or vſe of Merchaundiſe with the Graecians, caſt both head and hyde into the riuer Nilus. In curſſing the head of the ſlaine beaſt they vſe this manner of imprecation, that if any euill or miſfortune be to happen either to thoſe which do the ſacrifice, or to the whole realme and dominion of Aegypt, it would pleaſe the gods to turne all vpon that head. The like vſe and cuſtome about the heads of ſuch cattel as are killed in ſacrifice, and in time of offering for the prieſt to drinke wine, is in all places alike throughout all the churches of Aegypt, in ſo much, that it is growne into a faſhion in all the whole land, that no Aegyptian will taſte of the head of beaſtes ſacrificed. Howbeit, there is choyſe and diuerſity of ſacrifice with thē, neyther is the ſame manner and forme of oblation kept and obſerued in euery place. Now we will ſhew and declare which of all the goddeſſes they chiefly honour, and in whoſe name they ſolemnize and celebrate the greateſt feaſt. Hauing therefore moſt deuoutely ſpent the eue or day before the feaſt in ſolemne faſting and prayer, they ſacrifice an Oxe, whoſe hyde incontinently they pull off and take out his entrayles, ſuffering the leafe and fat to remayne within him. After that, they hewe off the ſhanke bones, with the lower part of the loyne and ſhoulders, likewiſe the head and the necke, which done, they farce and ſtuffe the body with halowed bread, hony, rayſons, figges, franckincenſe, myrrhe, and other precious odours. Theſe things accōpliſhed they offer him vp in ſacrifice, pouring into him much wine & oyle, and abiding ſtill faſting, vntill ſuch time as the offering be finiſhed. In the meane ſpace while the ſacrifice is burning, they beate and torment themſelues with many ſtripes, whereby to ſatiſfy and appeaſe the wrath and diſpleaſure of the gods. Hauing left off on

this manner to afflict and crucifie their fleſh, the reſidue of the ſacrifice is ſet before them, where with they feaſt and refreſhe their hunger. It is a cuſtome receyuen throughout all the region, to offer bullocks and calues of the malekinde, if in caſe they be found immaculate and pure, according to the forme of their lawe: howveit, from kine and heiffers, they abſteyne A lavv greatly honoured in Aegypt. moſt religiouſly, accounting them as holy and conſecrate to the goddeſſe Iſis, whoſe image is carued and framed like a woman, with a paire of hornes on hir head, like as the Graecians deſcribe and ſet foorth Iö. Hereof it proceedeth that the people of Aegypt do moſt of all other beaſtes worſhip and reuerence a cowe, for which cauſe, none of that nation neither men nor women will eyther kiſſe a Graecian, or ſo muche as vſe hys knife to cut any thing, his ſpit to roſt, his pot to voyle, or any other thing belonging to them, diſdayning and loathing the very meate that hath bin cut with a Graecians knife, for ſomuch as in Greece they feede of all neate indifferently both male and feamale. If an oxe or cowe chaunce to die, they bury them The maner of burying kyne vvhē they dy. on this wiſe, the kine and females they caſt into the riuer, durying the oxen in ſome of the ſuburbes with one of his hornes ſticking out of the ground for a token; lying on this maner vntill they be rotten. At an ordinary and appoynted time, there ariueth a ſhip frō y• Ile Proſopitis ſituate in yt part of Aegypt which is named Delta, being in compaſſe nine ſcheanes, which is 63. miles. In this Iland are planted many cities, one of the which continually furniſheth and ſends foorth the aforeſaid ſhip, hauing to name Atarbeehis, wherein ſtandeth a faire and goodly temple dedicated to Venus. From this city Atarbechis, many people are woont to ſtray and wander into other townes of Aegypt. The ſhip comming to land at euery city, takes vp the bones of the dead oxen, and caries them all to one place where they are buryed together. The law alſo cōmaundeth the ſelfeſame manner to be kept and obſerued in the ſepulture and burying of other cattell that dye in the land, from the ſlaughter of the which generally the Aegyptians abſteyne. Neuertheleſſe, ſuch as abiding in the prouince of Thebes in the temple of Iupiter Thebanus, are inueſted with the orders

of prieſthoode, vſe the ſame abſtinence from ſheepe, and ſlayne goates vpon the aultars of the gods, for in Aegypt the ſame gods haue not the ſame kinde of diuine honour in euery place and with euery people, ſauing Iſis and Oſyris, the one a goddeſſe, the other a god, which are of all men worſhipped alyke. This Oſyris is of the Aegyptians thought to be Bacchus, albeit for ſome reſpect they name him otherwiſe. Contrary to theſe, ſuch as are belonging to the pallace of Mendes, and are conteyned within the precinct and limits of that ſheere, withholde themſelues from goates, and make ſacrifice of ſheepe. The cauſe vvhy ſome of the Agyptians vvill kill no sheepe. The Thebaries therefore, and ſuch as following their example eſchew and auoyde the ſlaughter and killing of ſheepe, teſtifie themſelues to be mooued heerevnto by a law, becauſe that Iupiter on a time refuſing to be ſeene of Hercules who greately deſired to behold him, at his inſtant prayers cut off the head of aramme, and ſtripping off the fell, caſt it ouer him, and in ſuch manner ſhewed himſelfe to his ſonne, where of the Aegyptians framing the image of Iupiter, made him to haue a rammes head, of whome, the Ammonians tooke that cuſtome, whych are an offpring and braunch growne from two ſundry nations the Aegyptians and Aethiopians, as well may be ſeene by their lāguage which is a medley of both tongues: who ſeeme for this cauſe to haue named themſelues Ammonians, for that they Whence the Ammonians drevv theyr name. hold the oracle of Iupiter whome the Aegyptians call by the name of Ammon. In this reſpecte the Thebanes abſteyne from the bloud of rammes and ſheepe, eſteeming them as holy and diuine creatures. Howbeit, one day in the yeare which they keepe feſtiuall to Iupiter they kill a ramme, and taking off the ſkynne, they couer therewith the image, wherevnto incontinent they bring the picture of Hercules, after which, they beate the naked fleſh of the ramme for a good ſeaſon. The ſacrifice being in this ſort accompliſhed, they bury the body in a religious and halowed veſſell. This Hercules they recken in the number of the twelue gods, as for the other Hercules of whome the Graecians make mention, the Aegyptians are altogether vnacquainted with him, neyther do they ſeeme at any time to haue heard of him. This name I ſuppoſe to haue come

firſt from Aegypt into Graece, and to haue bene borrowed of them, howſoeuer the Graecians diſſemble the matter, to make The name of Hercules taken from the Aegyptians. the inuention ſeeme their owne: wherevpon I grounde wyth greater confidence, for that the yarents of Hercules, Amphytrio and Alomaeea are by countrey and lynage Aegyptians. Likewiſe in Aegypt, the name of Neptune, and the gods called Dioſeuri, was very ſtraunge, and vnheard of, neyther would they be brought by any meanes to repute them in the fellowſhip and company of the gods. And it in caſe they had taken the name of any god from the Graecians, it is very credible that as well as of the reſt, nay aboue the reſt, they would haue made choſe of Neptune and the other, were it that at thoſe dayes trade of merchandiſe, and voyaging by ſea were vſed eyther by them into Graece, or by the Graecians into Aegypt, which I ſuppoſe and thinke to haue bene. It is therefore moſt ſounding and agreeable to truth, that if any thing had bene borrowed by them, the name of Neptune rather then Hercules had crept into their manners and religion. Beſides this, the god head and name alſo of Hercules is of greate coutinuance and antiquity in Aegypt, inſomuch that (by their ſaying) 17000. The Kings of Aegypt could make at their pleaſure gods. yeares are paſſed, ſince the raigne of King Amaſis, in tyme of whoſe gouernaunce, the number of the gods was increaſed from eight to twelue, whereof Hercules was then one. Heere in not contented with a ſlippery knowledge, but mooued with deſire to learne the truth, I came in queſtion with many aboute the ſame cauſe, & tooke ſhipping alſo to Tyrus a city of Phoenicia, where I had heard ſay that the temple of Hercules was founded. Being landed at Tyrus, I beheld the pallace beautified and adorned with gifts of ineſtimable price, and amongſt theſe, two croſſes, one of tried & molten gold, another framed of the precious gemme Smaragdus, whiche in the night ſeaſon ſent foorth very bright & ſhining beames, forthwith falling into parle with the chap
                  ••
               ines & prieſts of ye temple, I demaunded them during what ſpace the chappell had ſtoode, and how long ſince it was built; whoſe talke and diſcourſe in nothing agreed with the Graecians affirming, that the temple tooke his beginning with the city, from the firſt foundation & groundley

whereof, two thouſand and three hundred yeares are exſpired. I ſaw alſo in Tyrus another temple vowed to Hercules ſumamed Theſius. In like ſort; I made a iorney to Thaſus, where I light vpon a chappell erected by the Phaenicians, who enterpriſing a voyage by ſea to the knowledge and diſcouery of Europe, built and founded Thaſus, fiue mens ages before the name of Hercules was knowne in Greece. Theſe teſtimonies doplainely prooue that Hercules is an auncient god and of lōg durance. For whiche cauſe amongſt all the people of Greece they ſeeme to haue taken the beſt courſe, that honour Hercules by two ſundry temples, to one they ſhew reuerence as to an immortall The tvvo temples of Hercules in Greece. god, whome they call Hercules Olympius, to another, as to a chiefe peere, and moſt excellente perſon amongſt men. Many other things are noyſed by the Graecians, albeit very raſhly and of ſlender ground: whoſe fond and vndiſcret tale it is, that Hercules comming into Aegypt, was taken by the Aegyptians, and crowned with a garland, who were in full mind to haue made him a ſacrifice to Iupiter. Vnto whoſe aultare being lead with greate pompe and celerity, he remayned very meeke and tractable, vntill ſuch time as the prieſt made an offerto ſlay him, at what time recalling his ſpirits, and laying about him with manfull courage, he made a great ſlaughter of all ſuch as were preſent & ſtroue againſt him. By which theyr fabulous & incredible narration they flatly argue, how ignoraunt and vnaquaynted they be with the maners of Aegypt, for vnto whome it is not lawfull to make oblation of any brute beaſt, but of ſwine, oxen, calues and geeſe: couldethey ſo farre ſtray from duty and feare of the gods, 
                  〈◊〉
                to ſtayne and blemiſh their aultars with the bloud of men: Agayne, Hercules being alone in the hands of ſo many Aegyptians, can it ſtande wyth any credence or lykelyhoode that of hymſelfe he ſhould be able to ſlay ſo greate a multitude: But let vs leaue theſe fables, and proceede forwarde to the truth, Such therefore of thys The reaſon vvhy in ſome partes of Aegypt they vvil kill no goates. people as flye the bloudſhead and ſlaughter of goates (namely the Mendeſians) lay for theyr ground, that Pan was in the number of the eyght gods which were of greater ſtanding and antiguitie then the twelue.
            
               
The forme and image of the god Pan, both the paynters and ca
                  •
               uers in Aegypt franie to the ſame ſimilitude and reſemblance as the Graecians haue expreſſed and ſet him foorth by, making him to haue the head and ſhankes of a goate, not that they thinke him to be ſo, but rather like the other gods. Notwithſtanding the cauſe whereby they are mooued to portray and ſhadow him in ſuch ſort, is no greate and handſome tale to tell, & therfore we are willing to omit it by ſilence, ſufficeth it that we knowe how as well bucke as dooe goates are no pety ſaincts in this countrey, in ſomuch that with the Mendeſians goateheards are exalted aboue the common ſorte, and much more ſet by then any other degree of men, of which company, ſome one is alwayes of chiefe eſtimatiō, at whoſe death, all the quarter of Mendeſia is in great ſorrow and heauines, whereof it commeth, that as well the god Pan himſelfe, as euery male-goate is called in ye 
               Aegyptian ſpeach Mendes. In theſe parts of Aegypt it hapned that a goate of the malekinde in open ſight cloſed with a woman, whiche became very famous and memorable throughout all the countrey. An hogge A Goate cloſing vvith a vvoman. Hogs of all beaſts vvurſt accounted of. Hogheards of baſeſt account. is accounted with them an vncleane and defiled beaſt, which if any paſſing by fortune to touch, his next worke is to go waſhe and dowſe himſelfe clothes and all in ye riuer, for which cauſe, of all their proper and natiue countreymen, only ſuch as keepe ſwine, are forbidden to do worſhip in the temples. No man will vouchſafe to we
                  •
                his daughter to a ſwineheard, nor take in marriage any of their diſcent and iſſue feamale, but they mutually take and yeeld their daughters in mariage betweene themſelues. Of the number of the gods onely Liber and the Moone are ſacrificed vnto with hogges, whereof making oblation at the full of the moone, for that ſpace alſo they feede of porke and hogsfleſh. The reaſon why the people of Aegypt kill ſwyne at this time, and at all other times boyle in ſo great deſpight and hatred againſt them, bycauſe mine eares glowed to heare it, I thought it maners to conceale it. Swyne are offered vp to the Moone in this manner: the hogge ſtanding Svvine ſacrificed to Liber and Luna. before the aultare, is firſt ſlayne, then taking the tip of hys tayle, the milt, the call, & the ſewet, they lay them all together,

ſpreading ouer them the leafe or fat that lyeth about the belly of the ſwine, which immediately they cauſe to burne in a bright flame. The fleſh remayning they eate at the full of the moone, which is the ſame day whereon the ſacrifice is made, abhorring at all other times the fleſh of ſwine as the body of a ſerpent. Such as be of poore eſtate, and ſlender ſubſtaunce, make the picture & image of a hogge in paaſt or dowe, whiche beeing conſequently boyled in a veſſell, they make dedication thereof to their gods. Another feaſt alſo they keepe ſolemne to Bacchus, in the which towarde ſupper they ſticke a ſwyne before ye threſhold or entry of their dwelling places, after which, they make reſtitution thereof to the ſwinehearde agayne of whom they bought it. In all other pointes pertayning to thys feaſt, ſo like the Graecians as may be, ſauing that they ſquare Superſtition oft times runneth into moſt filthy deuiſes. a little, and vary heerein. For the manner of Greece is in this banquet to weare about their neckes the ſimilitude of a mans yard named Phallum, wrought and carued of figtree, in ſtead whereof, the Aegyptians haue deuiſed ſmall images of two cubites long, whiche by meanes of certayne ſtrings and coardes they cauſe to mooue and ſtirre as if they had ſence and were liuing. The cariage of theſe pictures is committed to certayne women that beare them too and fro through the ſtreetes, making the yard of the image (which is as bigge as all the bodye beſides) to daunce and play in abhominable wiſe. Faſt before theſe marcheth a piper, at whoſe heeles the women followe incontinent with ſundry pſalmes & ſonets to ye god Bacchus. For what cauſe that one member of the picture is made too big for the proportion & frame of ye body, and alſo why, that, only of all the body is made to mooue, as they refuſed to tell for religion, Melampus the firſt founder of this ceremonie in Greece. In the time of Herodotus the name of Philoſophers vvas ſtraunge. ſo we deſired not to heare for modeſty. Howbeit, Melampus ſonne of Amytheon was falſly ſuppoſed to haue bin ignoraunt in the ceremonies of Aegypt, in the whiche he was very ſkilfull & cunning. By whom the Greekes were firſt inſtructed in the due order and celebration of Bacchus feaſt (whome they worſhipped by the name of Dionyſius) & in many other ceremonies and religious obſeruations pertayning to the ſame. Notwithſtāding ſomething wanted in this deſcription, which

was after added, and in more perfect and abſolute manner ſet downe by certayne graue and wiſe men called▪ Philoſophers, which liued in the ſecondage after him. Moſt euident it is that the picture of Phalli
                     〈…〉
                  
                worne of the Graecians in the feaſt of Bacc
                     ••
                  s; was found out and deuiſed by him, whoſe diſcipline in this point the Graecians obſerue at this day. This Melampus was 
                  〈◊〉
                of rare wiſedome, well ſeene in the art of diuination and ſouthſaying, the author and firſt founder to the Graecians as well of other things which he had learned in Aegypt, as alſo of ſuch ſtatutes and obſeruances as belong to the feaſt of D
                     •
                  onyſius, only a few things altered which he thought to amend. For why, to thinke that the Graecians and Aegyptians fell into the ſame forme of diuine worſhip by ha
                  •
                hazard or plaine chaunce, it might ſeeme a very hard and vnreaſonable geſſe, ſi
                  ••
               ence it is manifeſt that the Greekes both vſe the ſelfe
                  •
               ame cuſtome, and more then that, they kept it of olde. Much leſſe can I be brought to ſay, that either his faſhion or any other hath bene tranſlated and deriued from Greece into Aegypt I rather iudge that Melampus comming from Phaenicia into Beo
                     •
                  ia, accompanyed with Cadmus and ſome other of the Tyrians, was by them made acquaynted with all ſuch rites and ceremonies as in the honour of Dionyſius are vſed by the Greekes. True it is, that the names by which the gods are vſually called, are borrowed and drawne from the Aegyptians, for hearing them too be taken from the Barbarians as the chiefe inuenters and deuiſers of the ſame, I haue found not only that to be true, but alſo that for the moſt parte they are brought out of Aegypt. For ſetting aſide Neptune and the gods called 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                (as before is declared) lun
                     •
                  , Venus, Th
                     〈…〉
                  is, the Graces, the Nymphes Nereides, all the names of the gods and goddeſſes haue bene euermore knowne and vſurped in Aegypt. I ſpeake no more then the Aegyptians teſtify, which a
               
                  •
               ouch ſincerely that neyther Neptune nor the gods Dioſcuri were euer heard of in their land. Theſe names I iudge to haue bene deuiſed by the Pelaſgians, except Neptune, whoſe name I ſuppoſe to be taken from the people of Africa, for ſomuch as from the beginning no nation on the earth but only the Africanes
               
vſed that name, amongſt whome, Neptune hath alwayes bene reuerenced with celeſtiall and diuine honours, whome the Aegyptians alſo denie not to be, albeit they ſhewe and exhibite no kinde of diuine honour towardes him. Theſe and ſuche like cuſtomes (which we purpoſe to declare) haue the Greekes borrowed of the Aegyptians: neuertheleſſe, the image of Mercury, who is framed with the ſecret member porrect The beaſtly deuiſes of the paganes. and apparent, I rather deeme to haue proceeded from the maners of the Pelaſgians, then from the vſuall and accuſtomed wont of Aegypt, and principally to haue growne in vſe wyth the Athenians, whoſe fact conſequently became a paterne and example to the reſt of the Graecians. For the ſelfe ſame ſoyle was ioyntly held and inhabited both of the Athenians (which were of the right lignage of Hellen) and likewiſe of the Pelaſgians, who for the ſame cauſe began to be reckoned for Graecians. Which things are nothing maruaylous to thoſe that are Cabiri the three ſonnes of Vulcane. ſilfull and acquaynted with the worſhip and religion whych the Graecians yeeld to the three ſonnes of Vulcane named Cabiri, which diuine ceremonies are now freſh in Samothracia, and were taken and receyued from the Pelaſgians. The cauſe is, that thoſe Pelaſgians whome we ſaid before to haue had all one territorie with the Athenians, dwelt ſometime alſo in Samothracia, by whome the people of that ſoyle were taught and indoctrined in the ceremonies appertinent to Bacchus. Firſt therefore the people of Athens following the ſteps of the Pelaſgians, cauſed the picture of Mercury to be carued in ſuche ſorte as we haue heard. For authority & proofe why the image ſhould be thus framed, the men of Pelaſgos recited a myſterie out of holy bookes, which is yet kept and conſerued in the religious monuments of Samothracia. The ſelfe
                  •
               ame in prayer and inuocation to the heauenlye powers, made abla
                  •
               ion of all creatures indifferentlye, and wythout reſpect (whyche I came to knowe at Dodona) geuing no names at all to the gods, as beeyng flatly ignoraunte howe to call them. Generally they named them 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                gods, in that 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                that is, they diſpoſed and placed in order all the countreyes and regions on earth. In tract of tyme, the

names and appellations of the powers diuine vſed in Aegypt, grew alſo in knowledge with the Greekes: 
               
                  •
               nſuing which, the name alſo of Dionyſius, otherwiſe called Bacchus, came to light, albeit, long after that time and in later dayes. A ſmall time exſpired, the Greekes counſayled with the oracle in Dodona to the ſame ende and purpoſe. This 
                  •
               hayre of prophecy Dodona ſomtime the chiefe oracle in Greece. was in thoſe dayes the only and moſt auncient ſeate in the land of Greece, whether the Pelaſgians repayring, demaunded the oracle if the ſurnames of the gods receiued and taken from the Barbarians, might be lawfully frequented in Greece: whereto aunſwere was geuen, that they ſhoulde be reteined: for whyche cauſe, yeelding ſacrifice to the gods, ſuch names were helde by the men of Pelaſgos, and laſtly obſerued of ye 
               Graecians. Howbeit, The beginning of the pagans gods. what original or beginning the gods had, or whether they were euermore time out of mind: finally, what forme, figure, or likeneſſe they bare, it was neuer fully and perfectly knowne till of late dayes. For Heſiodus and Homer (which were not paſſing. 400. yeares before vs) were the firſt that euer made the gods to be borne and ſproong of certaine progenies like vnto men, aſſigning to euery one a byname, proper and peculiar honours, ſundry crafts and ſciences wherein they excelled, not leauing ſo much as the fauour and portraytour of any of the gods ſecrete and vndeſeried. As for ſuche poets as are ſaide to haue gone before theſe, they ſeeme to me to haue liued after them. The firſt of theſe things (I meane the names of the natures celeſtiall) to haue bene planted in Greece in ſuch ſorte as hath bene declared, the prieſts at Dodona do iuſtly witneſſe.
            Now for this of Heſiode and Homer to be no other wyſe then is ſaid, I pawne mine owne credit. Furthermore, of ye oracles in Africke and Greece the Aegyptians bla
                  •
               e this rumor, and principally ſuch as are employed in the ſeruice and miniſterie of Iupiter Thebanus: by whome it is ſayde, that certaine men of the Phaenicians comming to Thebes; ſtate priuily from The beginning of the oracles in Africke and Greece. thente two women accuſtomed to miniſter in the temple of Iupiter, one of the which they ſold in Lybia, the other in Greece, by whoſe meanes and aduiſe it came to paſſe, that in each countrey the people created an oracle. Heereat ſomewhat abaſhed,

and requeſting earneſtly how and in what manner they came to knowe this, they made we aunſwere, that leauing no corner vnſearched whereby to come to knowledge of their women, and not able to finde how they were beſtowed, newes was brought at length of their plight and condition. Thus farre was I certified by the Thebane prelates, wherevnto I deeme it conuenient to adde ſuch things as were notified vnto mee at Dodona by the prieſts there, who vndoubtedly affyrme how in A tale of tvvo pigeons. times forepaſt and long ago, two blacke pigeons tooke theyr flight from the countrey of Thebes in Aegypt, ſcouring with ſwift courſe through the ſky, one of the which fortuned to light in Africa, the other in that part of Greece where Dodona is now ſituate, where pointing vpon a mighty 
                  •
               all beech, ſhe was heard to ſpeake in a voice humane, like vnto a man, warning the people to erect an oracle or ſeate of diuination in that place, being ſo thought good, and prouided by the deſtinies. Whiche admonition the people taking (as well they might) to come by the inſtince and motion of the gods, did as they were commaū
               ded by the done. In like manner it fell out that in Lybia the people were ſtirred vp and in
                  •
               enſed by the other done to the planting and erection of a ſeate propheticall, named the oracle of Ammon, being alſo cōfecrate to the name of Iupiter. Theſe things we receiued of the credite and authoritie of the Dodoneans, confirmed: and eſtabliſhed by the generall conſentē of thoſe that had the 
                  •
               aſe and charge of the temple. Of theſe women prieſts reſident in the temple of Dodona, the eldeſt & moſt aunciēt had to name Promenca, the ſecond Timareta, the third and yougeſt Nicandra. Neuertheleſſe of theſe matters ſuch is my iudgement. If any ſuch religions and holy women were by ſtealth of the Phenicians tranſported and caryed away into Lybia and Greece. I condecture that the one of theſe was ſold at Theſprotus, in that parte of the region which earſt was in ye poſſeſſion of the Pelaſgians; and is at this preſent reputed for a portion of Hettus: where, hauing ſerued certayne yeares, in proceſſe of time ſhe brought
                  〈…〉
                diuine ceremonies of Iupiter, vnder ſome beach tree growing in ſhoa
                  •
               e coāſtes. For what could be more likely con
                  •
               emente, then for her to eſtabliſh

ſome monument in the ſacred honour of Iupiter, in whoſe ſeruice and religion ſhe had bene long time conuerſaunt at Thebes in Aegypt Which her ordinance at length grewe into the cuſtome of an oracle. The ſame beeing perfect alſo in the Greeke language, diſcouered vnto them in what ſort the Pheni
                     •
                  
                an
                  •
                had likewiſe made ſale of hir ſiſter to the people of Africa. The ſacred and deuoute women of Dodona reſyaunt in the pallace of the great god Iupiter, ſeeme for none other cauſe to haue called theſe Aegyptian pufi
                  •
               s two doues, then for that they were come from harbarous countreys, whoſe tongue and manner of pronouncing ſeemed to the Graecians to ſounde like the voyce of bites. And whereas they ſhewe that in time the do
                  •
               e began to vtter playne language, and ſpeake like men, 
                  •
               aught elſe is meant heareby then that ſhe vſed ſuch ſpeech as they knew and vnderſtood, being ſo long eſteemed to emuſate and follow the noyſe of birds as ſhe remained in her harbarous kind of ſpeach and pronunciation. For how is it credible that a pigeon in deede could haue 
                  ••
               urped the voice and vtteraunce of a man
                  •
                and alleadging yet further that it was a blarke do
                  •
               e, they argued her more playnely to haue bene a woman of Aegypt, the flower of whoſe beauty is a fayre browne blew, 
                  •
               anned and burnt by the fyery beames of the ſunne. Agayne, the oracles themſelues, that of Thebes, and this of Dodona, are wel
                  •
               ye in all poyntes agreeable. Thſpeake nothing of the maner and order of ſouthſaying in the comples of Greece, whych any man with halfe an eye may eaſily diſcerne to haue bene taken from Aegypt. Let it ſtand alſo for an 
                  •••
               ent and vndoubted verity, that aſſemblies at feſtiuals, pompes and pageants in diuine honour, talke and communication with the gods by Inuentions of the Aegyptians. a mediatour or interpretour, were inuented in Aegypt, and conſequently vſed in Greece. Which I thinke the rather, for that the one is old and of long continuance, the other freſhe and lately put in practiſe. It is not once in a yeare that the Aegyptians vſe theſe ſolemne and religious meetings, but at ſundry The feaſtes of Diana, Iſis, and Minerua. times and in ſundry places, howbeit, chiefly and with the greateſt zeale & deuotion at the city Bubaſt, in ye honour of Diana. Next after that at Buſiris, in the celebration of 
                  〈◊〉
                feaſt, where

alſo ſtandeth the moſt excellent and famous temple of Iſis, who in the Greeke tongue is called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , which is to wit, Ceres. Thirdly, an aſſembly is held in the city Sars in the prayſe and reuerence of Miner
                     ••
                  . Fourthly, at H
                     •
                  liopolis in honour The feaſt of the Sunne. of the ſunne. Fiftly at Batis in remembraunce of Larona. In the ſixt and laſt place no
                  •
               h
                  •
                city Papſ
                  ••
               is, to the dignity & renowne of Mars. Moreouer, ſuc
                  •
                of this people as with encyre. The celebration of Latonas feaſt and Mars. and affectionate zeale moſt religiouſly obſerue theſe aſtat. B
                     •
                  
                  baſtis, behaue and beare themſelues on this maner. Certayne ſhippes being addreſſed, wherein infinite numbers of men and women fayle towards the cat
                  •
               , in the meane ſeaſon whiles 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪ be in voiage on ye water, certaine of the womē play vpō drums The maner of ſuch as repaire to the feſtiuall of Diana. & taders, making a great found & noyſe, ye men on pipes. Such as want theſe implemēts, clap their hands & ſtraine their voice in ſinging to ye higheſt degree. At what city ſoeuer they ariue, happely ſome of the women of 
                  ••
               tinue their mirth & diſpor
                  •
               on ye timbrels, ſome other raiſe, reuise & wold at the da
                  ••
               es of the city beyond meaſure: 
                  〈◊〉
                trau
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  •
               aunce motionly: other caſt vp their clothes, & openly diſcouer and being an
                  •
               he in ſhame, doing this in all thoſe cities yt are neere adioyning to the riuers 
                  •
               i
                  •
               i
                  •
               . Being aſſembled & gathered together at B
                     •
                  baſtis, they honou
                  •
                the fe
                  ••
               h day with 
                  〈◊〉
                all ſolemnity, making large 
                  •
               ffring
                  •
                to Diana, wherein is greater or 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  〈…〉
                of gr
                  •
               p
                  •
                wi
                  •
               e
                  •
                th
                  ••
                all the yeare beſides. To this place by the 
                  〈◊〉
                of the countrey are want to repay 
                  ••
               7000
                  〈…〉
               en & wo
                  〈…〉
               , 
                  〈◊〉
                fides thildrē, and thus they paſſe the time at Bubaſtis. Now in what maner they ſolemnize ye ſacred day of Iſis at ye city▪ Buſinis, we declared before, where in the 
                  〈◊〉
               age is after ye deeper furnāce & accompliſhment of ye ſacrifice, to whip & 
                  •
               to 
                  〈…〉
               ge thēſelues 
                  〈…〉
                In mind table wiſe, and yt not one or 
                  〈…〉
                many thouſandes of 
                  •
               ache degree both men & women▪ 
               
                  •
               nouor the leſſe, by what meanes, or where with al they beate & vexe their bodies in this ſort, I may not diſcloſe. Howbeit ſuch of the people of Car
                  •
               a as ſoiourne & make their abode in Aegypt. ſtricken with a deeper remorſe of ſinne, in this point of zeale & 
                  〈◊〉
                go beyond ye Aegypti
                  ••
               s, in that they hackle & ſlice their forehead with kniues & daggers: where
                  〈…〉
                it is plainely 
                  〈◊〉
                to vnderſtande that they come of forreine nations, and not of the homeborne & naturall

people of the land. Inlike manner meeting (as before) at the city Sais, there to accompliſhe the rites and ceremonies due to the day, at the approche and neere poynt of the euening, they furniſh and beſet their houſes with torches and lampes, which being repleniſhed with pure oyle mingled with ſalte, they giue The feaſt of lampes. fire to the weike, and ſuffer them to continue burning till the next morning, naming the day by the feaſt of lampes. Such as reſort not to this feaſt, do neuertheleſſe at their owne homes giue due honour to the night, placing in euery corner of theyr houſe an infinite number of tapers and candles, the cuſtome being not only kept at Sais, but ſpread and ſcattered throughout the whole region. But for what ende this night is helde ſolemne by lighting of lampes, a certayne myſticall and religious reaſon is yeelded which we muſt keepe ſecret. At Heliopolis and Butis onely, ſacrifice, without execution of any other ceremonies, is done to the gods Likewiſe at Papremis they remyne the ſame cuſtome of diuine ſeruice and worſhipping as in other places. At the ſunne going downe, certayne choſen men of the prieſts, being few in number, and ſeriouſly held and A combate of prieſts. buſied about the image, the moſt parte ſtanding before the dore of the temple armed with clubs as much as they can weilde: ouer againſt whome on the contrary ſide, other, more then a thouſand mē (of the number of thoſe that come to worſhip) all ſtrongly furniſhed & prepared with bats in their handes. The day before the feaſt, the picture or image framed of wood, is by meanes of a few (aſſigned to the miniſtery and cure of ye woodden god) conueyed out of a ſmall temple made of light timber gorgeouſly gilded: into another ſacred and religious houſe, being thither drawne by the miniſter & themſelues vppon a wayne of foure wheeles, wheron the temple itſelfe is placed, & the image alſo conteined therein. Drawing neere to ye temple with their cariage, the clubbes ſtanding before the dore wyth threates & cruell manaces forbid thē to enter: incōtinēt ye band: of men oueragainſt them tōming with might & maine to aſſiſt the image, and encoun
                  ••
               ing with thoſe that kept the temple, laye on ſuche eſcapeth without hys crowne crackt in manye places. Wherein alſo

I ſuppoſe that many men miſcarry and came ſhort home, albeit they flatly denie that of a wound ſo taken any man euer periſhed. The homelings and peculiar people of that countrey alleadge this reaſon of the battell. In this temple (ſaye The cauſe of this combate. they) did ſometimes inhabite the mother of the god Mars, who ſeeking at the eſtate of ripe yeares againſt the lawe of nature to haue ſociety with his owne mother, tooke the repulſe, and was reiected by her miniſters that knew him not, whereat the god ſtorming in great rage, purchaſed ayde out of the cities adioynaunt, and made way perforce, to the greate diſcomfiture and dammage of thoſe as ſought to reſiſt him, for which cauſe, they yet ſolemnize to Mars a feaſt of broken pates and The feaſt of broken pates. bruſed coſtards, enacting moreouer by the vertue of their religion, that no man ſhould haue carnall copulation with a woman in the temple, neyther attempt to ſet his foote within the dores of any ſuche houſe of religion, vnleſſe after the fleſhly knowledge of women he firſt waſh and cleanſe his body wyth pure water, whiche cuſtome onely taketh place amongſt the Graecians and Aegyptians, beeing the vſe in other nations to accompany with their women in the churches and palaces of their gods, and alſo preſently after ſuch ſecret actes, without any regard of purifying themſelues, to ruſh into the houſes of diuine honour, making no difference betweene men and other brutiſh and vnreaſonable creatures. For it is ſeene (ſay they) how other things that haue life and ſence, meddle themſelues A reaſon dravvne from the vſe of beaſtes to defend the maners of men. each with other euen in ſuch places as the gods were worſhipped, which if it were a thing ſo odious and diſpleaſaunt in the eyes of the higher powers, no doubt the beaſtes themſelues would eſchue and auoyde it, whoſe doings together with their iudgement I flatly diſalow. Howbeit, vnderſtand we, that as well in theſe things whereof we haue intreated, as in all other the Aegyptians are led with a ſingular ſuperſtition. Aegypt alſo itſelfe albeit it abutte and poynt vpon the countrey of Lybia, yet is it not ouermuch peſtered with beaſtes. Such as the lande bringeth vp and foſtereth, are reputed holy, and by no meanes to be violated or harmed by any, ſome of which haue their nouriture and foode together with the people of ye ſoyle:

otherſome are more wilde, fierce, and intractable, refuſing ſo gently to come to haud. The cauſe of theſe things, why creatures vnreaſonable are ſo highly honoured of this people, I may not without breach of piety reueale: which things of ſet purpoſe I haue endeuoured to conceale and keepe ſecrete, vnleſſe by the neceſſary courſe of the hiſtory I haue bene brought to the contrary.
            Furthermore, about the beaſtes that breede and multiplye in the region, ſuche is their order. Generally they are The manner of the Aegyptians touching the beaſtes of the land. helde with a moſt tender and reuerent care for the mayntenaunce and foſtering of them, in whiche kinde of honour (for it is accounted a greate honour with them, to haue regard of beaſtes) the ſonne euermore ſucceedeth the father. To theſe brute creatures, all ſuch as are reſident in the cities of Aegypt, performe and pay certayne vowes, makyng humble ſupplication to ſome one of the gods, in whoſe patronage and protection that beaſt is, which thing they accompliſh after this manner. Shauing the heads of their ſonnes, eyther wholly, in halfe, or for the moſt parte, they waigh the hayre in balaunce, ſetting agaynſt it the iuſt weight in ſiluer, whiche done, they deliuered it to him that hath the charge and ouerſight of any ſuche cattell, by whom are bought heere with ſmall peeces of fiſhe which they giue the beaſtes to eate, and ſuch is the meanes whereby they nouriſhe and bring them vp. The ſ
                  •
               aying of any of theſe done of malice and ſet purpoſe, is preſent death to the killer, but committed by chaunce a mule
                  •
                or pe
                  •
               ne at the diſcretion and arbitriment of ye prieſts. To kill an hauke The great regard of haukes or the bird which is called Ibis, is loſſe of life, in what ſort ſoeuer it be done. Such beaſts as are tame and come to hand, hauing their food together with mē, albeit they be many in number, yet wold they much more increaſe, were it not for ye ſtrāge nature of cats in yt countrey. The feamale hauing once kitled, alwayes after eſchueth the male, keeping her ſelfe ſecrete and The nature of catsin Aegypt couert from him, which the Aegyptians ſeeing, kill ye kitlings, & vſe thē for foode. The feamale bereaued of her yong ones, and finding her neſt empty, is by that meanes brought to ſubmitte hir ſelfe to the bucke, beeing of all creatures moſt deſirous of

increaſe. In time of fire, or ſuche like miſfortune, the cats are mooued with a certaine diuine kind of fury & inſpiration. For the Aegyptians behauing thēſelues ſecurely in the appeaſing & extinguiſhing the flame, the cats lie couertly in waight, & ſodeinly courſing towards the place, mount and ſkip quite ouer the heads of the people into the fire, at which chaunce whenſoeuer it commeth to paſſe, the Aegyptians are extreamely ſorrowfull. In what houſe ſoeuer there dies a cat, all of the ſame Mourning for the death of cats and dogs. family ſhaue their eyebrowes: but if a dog dye, their head and body. A cat dying, is ſolemnely caryed to the temple, where being well powdered with ſalte, ſhe is after buried in the city of Babaſtis. A bitch is euermore buryed in the ſame city where ſhe dieth, yet not without the honour of a ſacred tombe, burying Houndes greatly regarded. their dogges after the ſame ſort, and chiefly houndes of the malekinde, whiche they moſt of all others eſteeme and ſet by. Likewiſe ſmall ſerpents called in their tongue Mygalae, and haukes of all kinde, if they fortune to dye, they take and bury them at the city Butis. Beares, ſuch as be halowed, & wolues not much bigger then foxes, are couered in ye ſame place where they be found dead. The nature alſo of the Crocodyle is thys. The nature of the Crocodyle. Foure monethes in the yeare, and chiefly in the winter ſeaſon it liues without meate. And albeit it haue feete like a land beaſt, yet hath it a nature middle & indifferent, liuing as well in the water as one drie land. Her egges ſhe layes on the ſhore, where alſo ſhe couereth & hatcheth the ſame, biding the moſt part of the day abroade on the dry land, but all the night tyme in the water, being much more hoate then the cold deawe that falleth in the night. Of all creatures I iudge none of ſo ſmall & ſlender a beginning, to waxe to ſuch huge and infinite greatneſſe, the egge at the firſt not much bigger then a gooſe egge, which meaſure the broode it ſelfe exceedeth not when it fyrſt commes out of the ſhell, howbeit, in durance of time, it growes to bee monſtrous, ſurmounting the length of ſeauenteene cubites. The Crocodyle hath eyes like a ſwine, teeth of paſſing A cubite is a foote and an halfe. bigneſſe, accordyng to the meaſure and proportion of her bodye, extendyng and bearyng outwarde, beeyng alſo very rough and grating lyke a ſawe: and of all other

creatures is only without a tongne: the ſelfeſame, contrary to the nature and property of all other beaſtes, hath the neather moſt The Crocodyle hath no tongue. chap ſtedfaſt and without moouing, and champeth her foode with the vpper iawe. Her clawes are very ſtrong and great, a ſcaly ſkynne, and aboute the backe impenetrable, that no weapon be it neuer ſo ſharpe can pearce it. In the water as blinde as a moale, on lande of an excellente ſharpe and quicke ſight. Liuing in the water, it commeth to paſſe that her mouth is euermore full of horſeleaches. No foule or beaſt can abide to ſee or come nye a Crocodile, ſaue only the bird Trochilus, with whome ſhe is at a continuall truce for the ſingular commodity ſhe receyueth by him. For the Crocodile at what The bird Trochilus. time ſhe forſaketh the water, and commeth out onlande, her quality is with wide and opened mouth to lye gaping toward the Weſt, whome the bird Trochilus eſpying, flyeth into her mouth, and there deuoureth and eateth vp the horſeleaches, which bringeth ſuch pleaſure to the ſerpent, that without any hurt in the world ſhe ſuffereth the bird to do what ſhe will. To ſome of the Aegyptians Crocodiles are in place of holy creatures, to other prophane and noyſome, which chace and purſue them as moſt odious and peſtilent beaſtles. Thoſe that geue honour to them, are ſuch as inhabite about Thebes, and the poole of Maeris, who are wont commonly to traine vp a Crocodyle to hand, and make it tame, being in all poyntes ſo gentle and tractable as a dogge. At whoſe eares they hang gemmes A 
                     •
                  ame Crocodyle. of ſingulare price, likewiſe golden eareings, hampering a chayne to the forefeete. This tame one they cheriſh and bryng vp with great care, ſetting very much by it while it liueth, and being dead, they powder the body with ſault, and lay it vnder the ground in a veſſell accounted holy. Vnlike to theſe are the people dwelling at Elephantina, who be ſo farre from thinking ſo reuerently of ſuche venemous ſerpents, that for hate they ſtay, and in diſdayne eate them. The Aegyptians call thē not Crocodyles, but Champſi, this name being brought vp Crocodyles in Aegypt called Champſi. by the people of Ionia, for that in ſhape they reſemble thoſe Crocodyles which amongſt them ingender and breede in hedges. Diuers are the meanes whereby they are taken, yet amongſt

other deuyſes this one ſeemeth to mee moſt worthy reherſall. Such as laye for them and ſeeke all wayes to take them, bayte their hookes with Swynes fleſh and caſt it into ye 
               The maner of taking Crocodyles. myddeſt of the ryuer: immediately ſtanding on the ſhore they beate a younge porkling and cauſe it to cry exceedingly: which the Crocodile hearing followeth the cry, and drawing neere to the place, findeth the bayte and ſwalloweth it vp at one morſel. Being faſt intangled and drawne to lande, they firſt blinde and ſtop vp hir eyes with clay and rubbiſhe, which cauſeth hir to lye ſtill and ſuffer all thinges quietly, which otherwiſe they coulde neuer obtaine and come by without much a doe. Likewiſe, the Ryuerhorſe (a beaſt ſo called) in all the borders of A beaſte called the Ryuer horſe. 
               Papremis is reputed holy: being of this ſhape and figure. He hath foure feete clouen in ſunder, and houed like and Oxe: a flat noſe: and taile and Mane like an Horſe: teeth apparaunt & ſtanding out: in ſounde and cry neighing ſo like a horſe as may be: in higneſſe reſembling a mighty Bull, of ſo groſſe and thicke an hyde that being well dryed, they make thereof Darts of exceeding ſtrength and ſtiffneſſe. There be alſo founde to breede in the ryuer certaine beaſtes much like a Beuer and liue like an Otter, which in Aegypt are of great accounte and thought holy. In the ſame degre of ſacred honour are all kinde of ſcale fiſhe and Eeles. Such is alſo their opinion and reuerence towards birds and fowles of the ayre, as wilde Geeſe & ſuch like. There is alſo an other bird of whom aboue all other they think The byrde Phoenix. moſt diuinely, called a Phoenix: which I neuer ſaw, but protrayed and ſhadowed in coloures. For the cōmeth very ſeldome into that countrey (as farre as I could heare ſay by the Heliopolitans) to wit, once in 500. yeares, and that alſo when hir parent The shape of a Phoenix. or breeder dyeth. If ſhe be truely drawne by the Aegyptians this is hir forme and bigneſſe: hir feathers partly red and partly yealow, glittering like Golde: in forme and quantity of the body not much differing from an Eagle. Of this Phoenix, Aegyptians haue bruted a ſtraunge tale, which I can hardly The nature of the Phoenix. credit: ſaying that the Phoenix flying from Arabia, to the temple of the Sunne in Aegypt, carieth in hir tallaunts the corps of hir dead ſire, embaulmed & roled in Myrrhe, which ſhe accuſtometh

to bury in that place. Adding alſo the maner whereby ſhe inureth hir ſelfe to cary ſo great a burthen. Firſt ſhe gathers a great quantity of Myrrhe and works it into a lumpe, as much as ſhee canne well beare, whereby to make cryall of hir owne ſtrength. After this perceyuing hirſelfe able to weylde it. ſhee maketh an hole with hir Beake in the ſide of the balle, framing it very hollow and empty within, wherein ſhe incloſeth the body of hir breeder. This done, and the hole cunningly filled vp againe, ſhe poyſeth the whole maſſe in hir tallaunts: and finally, ſhe tranſporteth it to Heliopolis to the temple Pallace of ye 
               Sunne: ſo ſkilfully handling hir cariage, that the Myrrhe body and all waygheth no more then the whole balle did before.
            This they mention as concerning the Phoenix. Knowe wee Serpents haū
                  ting in AEgypt. beſides, that in the region of Thebs in Aegypt, there vſe to haunte a kinde of Serpents, had in dyuine worſhippe: of body ſinale, & nothing norſome or hurtfull to men. Theſe haue two hornes growing out of their heads, & euermore dying are laide in Iupiters temple, vnto whom they are holy and conſecrate.
            In Arabia there lyeth a place of no great diſtaunce from the city Batis, whether I went of purpoſe, hauing heard of certayne wynged Serpents there to bee ſeene. And being come: I behelde the ribbes and bones of Serpents in number welnigh infinite and not to bee reckoned whereofſome were greater, and ſome leſſe. The place where the bones are layde, is a ſinale and narrowe bottome betweene two Mountaynes, opening into a wyde and waſte champion.
            The ſpeech goeth, that out of Arabia at the poynte of the Sprynge, many hydious and terrible Serpentes take their The bird Ibis. flght into Aegypt: which ye fowles called Ibides meeting with, ſtraight wayes kill and deuour them: by which meanes ye ſoile is rid & deliuered of a great plague. For this cauſe ye bird Ibis (whereto the Arabians likewyſe accorde) is had in great price and eſtimation of the Aegyptians. The faſhion & protrayture of this bird is ſuch: hir feathers as black as I eat: long ſhanks The shape of Ibis. like a Crane: an hooked beake: much about ye bignes of a Daker hen. And in this ſorte is the fowle bis rightly figured, that killeth ye Serpents as they come into ye land. There is alſo another

of theſe which are brought vp, & liue amongſt men, hauing a ſinale head, a ſlender necke, white plumed in all partes of the body, ſauing in the head & necke, the hinder parte of ye wyngs and the taile, which are of a dark & black hue: the legges & 
                  •
               yll in all poynts like ye other. The Serpents themſelues in forme and making and much like to ye peſtilent & infectious beaſt Hydra, 
               Hydra a vvater Serpent. that liueth in ye water. They haue wyngs not of feathers, but of ſmothe and naked ſkin like vnto the wings of a Bat or Reremouſe. But let it ſuffice vs hyther to to haue continued ye diſcourſe and hyſtory of ſuch beaſtes as with this people are had in chiefe and principall honour, exhibiting towards them a certayne religious, holy, and diuine worſhip.
            Now it vehoueth vs to know that ſuch of the Aegyptians as dwell in the corne Countrey, & are moſt of all conuerſant in deſcrying to the poſterity the acts & affayres of auncient momory, The chiefe par
                     •
                  e 
                     •
                  f AEgypt, nd their maners. and of all the nation the moſt famous & principall. Whoſe kinde of lyuing is after this maner. Thriſe euery moneth they cleanſe and purifie them ſelues, both vpwards by vomitting & downewards by purginge: hauinge eſpeciall regarde of their health and welfare: euermore ſuppoſing all maladies & diſeaſes to grow and ariſe of the meate which they eate. For otherwiſe the Aegyptians are of all men liuing the moſt ſounde and healthfull except ye 
               Libians: the cauſe whereof I iudge to proceede of the immutable & conſtant courſe of ye yeare, which with them neuer varieth but falleth out alwayes alike: the greateſt Sickneſſe proceedeth of the vnſeaſonable times of the yeare. cauſe of defect & ſickneſſe in men, aryſing of the chaung & mutability of ye ſame. Their bread is cōtinually made of fine wheat: their wyne for ye moſt part cōpound of barley: the conntry bearing no vynes at all. They liue by fiſh partly raw and dryed agaynſt the ſunne: ſometimes powdred with ſalt. Likewiſe by raw byrds well ſalted, as Duayles, Duckes, and other ſmale fowle. In like maner, of other Creatures that haue neere affinity either with fiſh or fowle they make their prouiſion and furniture, roſting ſome and boyleing other. The rych and wealthy men of the lande in greate aſſemblies haue an vſuall cuſtome, that by ſome in the company there ſhoulde bee caryed

about in a ſmale coffine the liuely & expreſſe image of a deade man one or two cubits in length, which hauing ſhewne and reuealed An excellent cuſtome practyſed by Nobles of Aegypt. to all that are preſente, hee ſayth thus: Beholde here, and amiddeſt thy pleaſure and delighte remember this, for ſuch a one after thy death ſhalt thou bee thy ſelfe. Such is their order in feaſtes and banquets, contenting them ſelues alwayes with the cuſtomes of their owne countrey and refuſing to be ruled by ſtraunge and forraine maners. Amongſt whom are diuerſe faſhions, very conuenient and well appoynted: in New faſhions abhorred. the number of theſe an excellente Poeme or Ditty, which the Grekes call Lynus. And in truth meruayling at other thinges in Aegypt, I am not a litle amazed at this, whence the name of Lynus ſhould come. The Songe they ſeeme to haue kept & retained from all antiquity. Lynus in the Aegyptian gibberiſhe is called Maneros, who (as they ſay) being the onely ſonne of their firſte Kinge, was ſurpriſed and taken away by vntimely death, whom the Aegyptians bewayle and lament in this pitious and dolefull verſe. Herein they iumpe and agree with the Lacedaemonians, in that the inferiour meeting with his elder, Ciuility. yeeldeth the way, and ſheweth him a dutifull obeiſaunce in riſeing from his ſeate, if happily hee bee ſitting as he paſſeth by: in which poynte they are vnlike all y• reſt of the Grecians beſides. Meetinge in the way in place of mutuall ſalutation, they vſe humble and curteous reuerence each towarde other, bendinge their hands to each others knees. Cōmonly they goe clothed in linnen garments made faſt with a lace about the thigh, which kinde of attyre they call Calaſyris: ouer this they caſt alſo another beſture of linnen very cleane & white. Garments of woollen are neuer caried into the houſes of religion, neither will any man ſhrowd him ſelfe in a woollen veſture, which is accounted prophane. This hath ſome agreement with y• ceremonies vſually kept in y• ſacred feaſts of Bacchus & Orpheus, which partly Pythagoreans vvere ſuch as follovved the doctrine of Pythagoras the Philoſopher. were taken from y• 
               Aegyptians, & partly deuiſed by y• 
               Pythagoreans. For ſuch as haue bene partakers of thoſe ryts, haue euermore abhorred to be buried in woollen garments. Whereof alſo an holy reaſon is geuen which we dare not diſcloſe. Many other thinges haue bene invented by y• 
               Aegyptians, as what

day and moneth is proper and appertinent to euery god. Likewiſe The Aegyptians firſt in
                     •
                  enred the arte to read a mans deſtiny. in Aſtrology what fortune is incident to him that is borne one ſuch a day, how hee ſhall proue in lyfe, by what meanes hee ſhall miſcary by death: which thinges haue bene vſed, of many that haue laboured in the Arte, and Science of Poetry. Alſo, more wonders, and ſtrange ſightes and euentes haue bene diſcuſſed and interpreted by them, then by any other. Nation liuinge. For as any ſuch thing hath happened at any tyme they commit it to memory, awaighting dilligently what iſſue it hath: and if the like fall out at any time after, they coniecture of the ende and effect thereof by the example of the firſt. The knowledge of diuination is ſo practiſed by them, that they impute not the inuention thereof to the will of men, but to certayne of the gods. In their lande there bee theſe Oracles. The prophecy of Hercules, Apollo, Minerua, Diana, Mars, and Iupiter, moſt of all retterencing the diuine ſeate of Latona, 
               The ſeates of prophecy in AEgypt. helde at the city Batis. Theſe propheſies are not all inſtituted after the ſame faſhion, but haue a difference and diuerſity betweene them. Phiſieke is ſo ſtudyed and practyſed with them that euery diſeaſe hath his ſeuerall phiſition, who ſtryueth to excell in healing that one diſeaſe, and not to be expert in curinge many: whereof it commeth that euery corner In AEgypt euery diſeaſe hath his phyſition. is full of Phyſitions. Some for the eyes, other for the head, many for the teeth, not a fewe for the ſtomacke and belly. Finally, ſuch as are of knowledge to deale with ſecret and priuy infirmities.
            In like ſorte, the maner of mourninge, and funerall ſorrow at the death of friendes: alſo the maner of ſepulture and vuryall which they vſe, is moſt worthy memory. When as any of Of mourning and burying the dead. their familiars or domeſticall friendes fortune to deceaſe, (bee hee of regarde amongſt them) all the women of that family beſmere and gryme their heads and faces with myre & droſſe: and leauing the forlorne and languiſhed corps amongeſt their friends & acquaintaunce, they them ſelues being ſtraight gyrded, with their breaſts all bare and naked, accompanied with al the women of their kindred, wander about y• ſireets with moſt piteous lamentation and howling: on the other ſide, y• men faſt

gyrte about the loynes, thump & beate themſelues, as the moſt miſerable, infortunate, & wretched perſons in the world. After this they cary out the body to embalme and preſerue. Certaine there be definitly appointed for the ſame purpoſe, that make an occupation and trade hereof. Theſe when the corſe is brought vnto them, propounde & ſhew to the bringers, ſundry formes & pictures of the dead, paynted or carued in wood, one of which The maner of embalming the dead. is wrought with moſt curiouſe arte and workmanſhip (which we thinke impiety to name): the ſecond of leſſe pryce: the third meaneſt of all: demaundinge of the bringers, to which of theſe paterns & examples their friend ſhalbe dreſſed. Being agreed of the price they depart, leauing the body with y• ſalyners: who incontinent ſeaſon & preſerue the corps with al induſtry, drawing the braynes out by the noſthrills with a croked inſtrument of Iron, in place whereof they fill the Brayne pan with moſt ſweete and pleaſaunt oyntments. This done and finiſhed, they cut and rip vp the Bowells with a ſharp ſtone of Aethyopia, taking thereout the paunche & entrals, and clenſinge the belly with wyne of Palme tree: ſecondly, with freſh water mingled with moſt fragrant & delightfull ſpyces: in place hereof they force and ſtuffe the belly it ſelfe with myrrhe, of the fineſt force brayed and pounded in a morter. Likewiſe, with Caſſia & all kinde of pleaſaunt odours, except frankincenſe. Hauing thus done, they ſowe it vp agayne, & embalming the body, preſerue it for the terme of 
                  •
               0. dayes: longer then which they may not keepe it. The dayes exſpired & drawne to an ende, they take the corſe and waſh it ouer a freſh, annoynting the body with gum (which is to the Aegyptians in ſteede of Glue) and attyring it in a fine lynen drawne together with a lace, they ſend him back againe to his friends. His friends in y• tyme, while the ſaliners haue him in hand, procure an Image to be made to the likenes and reſemblaunce of him that is dead, wherein being holow & vauted within, they cauſe him to be incloſed, layinge both the Image and the body therein contayned in a toumbe together. Howbeit they which in meaner eſtate and fortune cannot reach ſo high, order the bodyes of their frindes in forme as followeth. Firſt of all they fill a clyſter with the oyntment of neder

which without any maner cuttinge or opening the belly, they ſtrayne it into the body by the inferiour partes & Fundament, preſeruinge the corſe: as before, 70. dayes. The laſt day of all they dreyne out the oyle from the bowels of the dead: which is of ſuch vertue, that it bringeth out with it all the inner parts of the belly corrupted and feſtered. Herewith alſo they inſtil & power into the body Saltpeter, which is of force to depratie, taynt, and conſume the fleſh, leauing nothing but ſkin & bones: which done, they eftſones deliuer the body to y• owners. There is alſo a third kinde of vſage accuſtomably practiſed about the bodyes of the dead: that if any one be deceaſed whoſe friendes are very poore and of ſmaleſt ſubſtance, they only purge the belly, and preſeruing the corps with ſalt for terme of like time as before, in fine, redeliuer him to the bringers.
            The wyues of noble men, and ſuch as are very fayre and of Fayre gentlevvomē dying are kept three dayes before they be preſerued. great reſpect for their hearty, are not preſently vpon pointe of their death, geuen to be embalmed, but three or foure dayes after, fearing leaſt they ſhould be abuſed by the inordinate luſt of ſuch as dreſſe them: alleadging moreouer, that a Saliner ſometimes working ſuch abuſe vpon y• dead body of a woman, was taken in the maner, and his villany diſcryed by one of his owne company. If it fortune any one either of the Aegyptians, or of forraine countries to be drowned and caſt on ſhore, the City in whoſe borders he is founde muſt ſuſtaine the charge of the funeralles, which in honorable maner muſt be executed, and the body buried in the ſacred and holy Monumentes. Being not lawfull for his friends and allies any whit to intermeddle or touch the dead, but the Preiſts aſſigned to the worſhip of the ryuer Nylus intoumbe and bury him ſo nicely and ſolemnly as if it were the body of a god. The cuſtomes of Greece they will in no wiſe follow: vtterly eſtraunging themſelues from all orders borowed and deryued from other Nations.
            Albeit Chemmis a great City in the Prouince of Thebs not farre from the City Nëa, wherein ſtandeth the Temple The City Chemmis. of Perſeus, ſenne of Danäe, builte foureſquare and incompaſſed rounde aboute wyth a Springe or Groue

of Date trees: hauing alſo a large entry of ſtone, on each ſide whereof are placed two Images of paſſing greatneſſe: within the pallace is contayned ye carued monument of Perſeus, whom the Chemmyts auouch often times to appeare vnto them out of the earth, and not ſeldome in the church: at which time they ſtude his ſupper which he was wo
                  ••
               s to weare, two cubytes in length & affyrminge that at ſuch times as that is ſeene, the yeare proueth very fertile and proſperous throughe out all Aegypt. This towne (I ſay) hath ordayned certayne games of exer
                  •
               iſe in the honour of Perſeus, after the maner of Greece. Theſe being dmaunded of mee why Perſeus ſhould appeare to them alone, and for what cauſe in the celebration of their games, they diſſented from the reſt of ye 
               Aegyptians: they made anſwere, that Perſeus was iſſued of theyr city, adding moreouer, that Danaeus and Lynaeus were alſo Chēmmyts and ſayled into Greece: in blaſing whoſe Pedagree they came at lēgth to Perſeus, who comming into Aegypt for the ſelfe ſame cauſe as the Grecians teſtify, namely, to fetch the heade of Gorgon out of Africk, came alſo to them and called to remembraunce his kinred and linage, of whom hauing taken acquayntaunce, and hearing his mother to ſpeake of the name of Chem, he inſtituted a game of all exerciſes, which according to his appointment and firſt ordinaunce they obſerue till this day. Theſe are the maners of thoſe that lye aboue the Fennes, ſuch as dwell in the Maryſes differ not from the reſt, neither in other things, nor in eſtate of mariage, euery one inioying the priuate fellowſhip of his owne wyfe, in ſemblable maner to the Grecians. Notwithſtanding for the eaſie prouiſion of their foode and ſuſtenaunce other thinges haue bene ſoughte out and deinied by them. For in time of the floude when the ryuer ouergoeth the Their floud in AEgypt. countrey, there ariſe in the water great plenty of ſyllyes, which the people of Aegypt call Lotos. Theſe they reape and dry them in the Sunne. The ſeede whereof (growing in the middeſt of the flower, ſomewhat like vnto Popy ſeede) they boyle, after which they kneade it into cakes, & bake it for breade. The roote of this is very rothſome, pleaſant & good to eate: being of forme very rounde, & in bigneſſe like an aple. There is alſo another

kinde of lyllyes much like to roſes, which in like maner haue their growth in the water, from whoſe roote ſprings a bud vnlike to the former, bearing fruite in maner & likeneſſe of an hony Combe: herein are contayned certayne ſmale kernells reſembling the ſtone of an Olyue, not vnfit for ſuſtenance, and cō
               monly eaten of the Aegyptians, aſwell freſh as wythered. The ſelfe ſame people when the ſeaſon of the yeare ſerueth, are buſily conuerſant in gathering a kinde of Ruſh called Bybl
                     •
                  s, the top whereof they crop & turne it into vſe of foode: the reſidue being much about one cubyte in length, they partly eate & partly ſell. Such as be deſirous to make fine and delicate meate of this Ruſh, vſe to caſt it into an Ouen & broyle it: ſome there be that lyue only by fiſh, which hauing taken, they incontinently draw them & parch them in the Sunne like ſtockfiſh, and being well dryed they eate them. The cōmon ſorte of fiſh vſed among them, breede not in ye ryuer, but in pooles, being of this nature. The nature of their fish. Toward the time of ſpawning they leaue the fennes & make repayre generally to ye ſea, the male fiſhes in maner of captaines leading the ranke. Theſe male fiſhe as they paſſe ſtill onwarde ſhed theyr ſeede by the way, which their femals following after immediatly deuour, and thereof ſhortly after breede theyr ſpawnes. Now at the pointe of breede, the femals forſaking ye ſalt waters, ſtower backe agayne to the maryſes to their accuſtomed haunte, leadinge the males that follow after them: and in ſwiming backe agayne, they voide ſpawne, being very ſmale cornes, like the graynes of muſtard ſeede which lightinge vpon the male fiſhe in the tayle of the rancke, are ſwallowed vp and deuoured by them. Not one of theſe litle graynes but will grow to a fiſhe, as well may bee ſeene by thoſe that eſcape the males, and are vndeuoured: which being nouriſhed by the waters growe to ſmale Frye. Such of theſe fiſhes as are taken ſwimminge to the ſea, are founde to haue the left ſide of theyr heads very much worne and gauled: and in comming from the ſea, the right ſide: the cauſe being this, that both in going and comming they continually grate agaynſt the ſhore and bancks of the ryuer, as a direction to them in paſſinge to and fro, leaſt that 
                  •
               loting in the middeſt of the ſtreame, they chaunce to ſtray

and wander out of the right courſe. At ſuch time as the ryuer Nilus beginneth to ſwell, all the lowe places in the coū
               trey and Ponds neere adioyning to the ryuer doe likewiſe increaſe: being then to bee ſeene great ſtore of younge Fry in euery litle puddle: whereof theſe ſhould breede, this ſeemeth to be a probable cauſe. That the yeare before, at the fall and decreaſe of the water, the fiſh which together with the ryuer departe them ſelues, leaue behinde them their ſpawne in the mudde, which at the ryſing of the nexte floude, being eftſones moyſtned, by the waters, recouer vertue, and growe to bee fiſh. As touchinge which thinges let it ſeeme ſufficient thus much to haue ſpoken.
            The Aegyptians that keepe in the fenne countrey, vſe a certaine The gatherīg of fruite for oyles. oyle made of a tree, which the Apothecaryes call Palmachri. Theſe trees (that ſpringe naturally in Greece) the Aegyptians accuſtome to plant and ſet by the banckes of Pooles and ryuers, which is the cauſe that they beare fruite, but very ſtrong and rancke of ſauoure. The fruite being gathered, ſome of them bruiſe it againſt the fyre, other ſome frie it in a pan, reſeruing that which commeth of it, which ſerueth them partly for Oyle, partly for the vſe of their Lamps and candles, yeelding (as they ſayd before) a deyne very loathſome and vnſauory. Likewiſe, agaynſt gnats and flyes, wherewith their lande aboundeth aboue meaſure, certaine remedies are founde out by them. Such as dwell aboue the Fennes are holpen herein by towers and high garrets, wherein they take their ſleepe, foraſmuch as the winde will not ſuffer the Gnats to fly high. The people of the Fennes in ſteede of Turrets are fayne to worke this deuiſe. Each man hath his Nets, wherewith in the day time they goe on fiſhing, and in the night pytche them aboute their chambers wherein they reſt, by whych meanes they come to take a nappe of nyne houres longe: whereas otherwiſe (were they neuer ſo well wrapped in clothes) the Gnats with their ſharp nebbes woulde pier
                  •
                and ſtinge quite through all, being not able in like maner to paſſe through The maner of their Shyps. the Nets. Their Shippes vſed for burthen or caryage are

made of a kinde of Thorne, not farre vnlike the tree Lotos growing in Cyrene, from the which there iſſueth a certayne kinde of gumme. Of the body of this thorne they ſawe and ſquare out certaine boardes two cubits longe, and faſhioned like a tileſheard, which they frame and compact together after this maner. Firſt they vnite and ioyne the plancks together with an infinit number of nayles and pynnes, binding the ſame to many tranſomes that goe both croſſe and longe wayes for the ſtrength of the veſſell. Their wood they frame not in compaſſe, after the maner of other Nations, but faſten and knit the ioyntes together with Bullruſhes and ſuch like. They haue only one Helme or Sterne, which is made to goe throughe the hinder parte of the Shippe. The Maſt is likewiſe of thorne, the Sayle of the Ruſhe Byblus. Theſe kinde of veſſells are not able to cut againſt the ſtreame, but are haled and drawne forward by land. Downe the ſtreame they paſſe in this wyſe. They frame an hurdle of the buſhe Tamarisk, faſt bounde and tyed together with the peelings of greene Cane or Reedes: prouydinge moreouer a mighty ſtone wyth an hole through the middeſt, two talents in weight: which done, they caſt the hurdle into the ſtreame beinge made faſt with a Rope to the noſe of the Veſſell: contrariwiſe, the ſtonne they tye behynde wyth an other Gable, geuinge it ſo much ſcope that it may ſinke to the bottome. By which meanes it commeth to paſſe that the ſtreame caryinge on the hurdle, cauſeth the Shippe to follow, with exceedinge ſwiftneſſe: and the ſtone on the other ſide drayling behinde, directeth the ſame in euen and ſtedfaſt courſe. At ſuch time as the ryuer ouerrunneth the ſoyle, the Cityes are only apparent and vncouered, reſembling in ſhew the Iles of the ſea Aegêum, all the land beſides being in maner of a ſea. The Cities which in time of the floud are extante, be in place of Portes for the ſhips to lye at rode in. During which time they ſayle not in ye mayne ryuer, but through ye 
               The Pyramides vvere certayne long rev
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  s of 
                     •
                  oe
                     •
                  
                midſt of the fieldes. They that take ſhipping from the Citye Naucrates to Memphis, haue their courſe by the Pyramides:
               
albeit there be another way alſo 
                  ••
               ndinge to the ſame place, ſtrykinge ouer by the Neb of Delta, and the City of the Cercaſians. Likewiſe as we take our voyage from the Sea coaſte, and the city Canobus to Naucrates through the wyde and open fieldes, we ſhall paſſe by Anthylla a towne ſo named: in like manner arryuinge, at the city Arcandry. Anthylla a city of chiefe renowne, is euermore geuen and allotted by the Kinge of Aegypt to his Queene, that then is, to The reuenues of a city aſſigned to the Queene of AEgypt to find hir shoes. finde her ſhoes, which are purchaſed by the reuenewes of the ſame. Which cuſtome hath remayned ſince the tyme that the Perſians gonerned in Aegypt. Archandry ſeenieth to haue taken the name of Archander, ſonne in lawe to Danaeus, and the lawfull ofſpringe of Phthius Achaeus: not denying but that there might bee another beſides him: but howſoeuer it is, the city Archandry can in no wyſe be made an Aegyptian name. Hytherto haue I ſet dawne ſuch thinges as eyther by my ſelfe I haue ſeene and knowne: or bene conſtantly aduertyſed thereof by the people of the region, determining henceforth to proſecute ſuch matters, as I haue onely by hereſay, interlaceing the ſame otherwhiles, with ſuch thinges as of myne owne knowledge I am able to iuſtifie.
            
               Menes the firſte Kinge of Aegypt (as the pryeſts make Menes the king of AEgypt. reporte) by altering the courſe of the ryuer, gayned all that grounde whereon the City Memphis is ſituated: the floud being wonte before time to haue his courſe faſt by the ſandy mountayne which lyeth towarde Lybia.
            
            This Menes therefore damminge vppe the boſome of the ryuer towardes the ſouth Region hauinge caſt vppe a The actes of Menes. pyle, or bulwarke of Earth much after an hundred Furlonges aboue the City, by that meanes dryed the old Chanell, cauſinge the ryuer to forſake and abandone his naturall courſe and runne at randame amiddeſt the hills. To which damme alſo the Perſians that rule in Aegypte euen at this day haue a dilligent eye: yearely fortifyinge and repayringe the ſame wyth newe and freſh Earth. Through the which if by fortune the ryuer ſtryuinge to recouer his

olde courſe, ſhould happily make a breach, the city Memphis were in daunger to bee ouerwhelmed with water. By the ſelfe ſame Menes firſte bearinge rule and authority in Aegypt (after y• by turning y• ſtreame of Nilus he had made dry ground of that where erſt the ryuer had his paſſage) in the ſame plot of land was the city it ſelfe founded & erected, which (as well may bee ſeene) ſtands in the ſtraight and narrow places of the countrey. More then this, to the North & Weſt (for Eaſtward Memphis is bounded by the courſe of the riuer) hee cauſed to be drawne out of the ryuer a large and wyde poole: beinge alſo the founder of Vulcans temple in Memphis, one of the fayreſt buildinges and of chiefeſt fame in all the countrey of Aegypte. Three hundred & thirty Prynces that by mutuall ſucceſſion followed Three hūdred and 30 princes after Menes. 
               Menes, the prieſts alſo readily mentioned out of y• books of their Monuments: of which number 18 were by Countrey Aethyopians, and one a forraine & outlandiſh women, whoſe nation they knew not, al the reſt being ſprong of their owne land. This woman y• aſpired to y• crowne, bare the name of y• famous Nitocris a Queene of Aegypt. Queene of Babylon, & was called Nitocris: whoſe brother in y• time of his empire being ſlaine by y• 
               Aegyptians, Nitocris wearing y• crowne after him ſought meanes ſecretly how to reuēge his death, whith ſhe brought to paſſe by a ſtraunge deuice and pollicy. Hauing therefore builte for hir owne vſe a fayre & gorgeous courte, ſhe cauſed an hollow Vaut or caue to be caſt vnder the earth, pretending for the time a reaſon of hir deuice, albeit farre different from hir ſecret minde & purpoſe. The work ended, ſhe inuited thither the moſt part of hir nobles to a banquet, ſuch as ſhee knew to haue bene y• authors and workers of hir brothers death, who being all aſſembled and ſet together in an inner Parlour, expectinge their cheere, the water was let in at a priuy grate and ouerwhelmed them all.
            Theſe thinges they ſpake of Nitocris, adding beſids, that hauing wrought this feate, ſhee caſt hir ſelfe into an houſe full of Aſhes to eſcape vnpuniſhed.
            By the reſt of the kinges of Aegypt the prieſtes coulde recyte Moeris the laſt of the 330 prynces. no glorious acte that ſhoulde bee accompliſhed, ſauing by the noble king Moeris the laſt and lateſt of all this crewe.

To whom they attribute y• building of y• great porches belonging to Vulcans temple, ſtanding on the North parte of y• Pallace. By the ſame alſo was a certaine fenne delued and caſt vp, wherein were builded certaine mighty Towers called Pyramides, of whoſe bygneſſe, as alſo of y• large cōpaſſe and amplitude of the Poole, wee will ioyntely intreate in another place.
            Theſe thinges were done by Moeris the laſt king. The reſt conſuminge the time of their raygne in ſilence and obſcurity, whom for the ſame cauſe I will paſſe ouer, and addreſſe my ſpeache to him who came after them in time and went before them in Dignity: namely, the worthy Prynce Seſoſtris. Him the Pryeſtes recounte firſte of all the kings Seſoſtris king in AEgypt, and his exployts. of Aegypt to haue paſſed the narrow Seas of Arabia in longe Ships or Gallyes, and brought in ſubiection to the Crowne all thoſe People that marche a longe the redde Sea. From whence retyringe backe againe the ſame way, hee came and gathered a greate power of men, and tooke his paſſage otter the waters into the mayne lande, conquering and ſubduing all Countreyes whether ſo euer hee went. Such as hee founde valiaunte and hardye not refuſinge to icoparde their ſafety in the defence and maynetenaun
                  •
               e of their liberty, after the victory obtayned, hee fired in theyr countrey certayne ſmale pyllers or Croſſes of ſtone, wherein were ingrauen the names of the kinge and the countrey, and how by his owne proper force and puiſſaunce he had made them yelde. Contrarywyſe, ſuch as without controuerſie gaue themſelues into his handes, or with litle ſtryfe and leſſe bloudſhed were A monument an the reproch of Covvardiſe. brought to relent: with them alſo, and in their region he planted Pillers and builte vp litle croſſes, as before, wherein were carued and importrayed the ſecret partes of women, to ſignifie to the poſterity the baſe and effeminate courage of the people there abyding. In this ſorte hee trauayled with his at my vp and downe the mayne, paſſing out of Aſia into Europe, where he made conqueſt of the Scythians and Thracians: which ſeemeth to haue bene the fartheſt poynt of his voyage: for ſo much as in their land alſo his titles & marks are apparantly ſeene, and not beyonde. Herefro hee began to meaſure his ſteps back

agayne incamping his powre at the ryuer Phaſis: where, I am not able to diſcuſſe, whether king Seſoſtris him ſelfe planted any parte of his army in that place euer after to poſſeſſe y• countrey: or whether ſome of his ſouldiers wearyed with continuall perigrination and trauayle, toke vp their māſion place & reſted there. For the people named Colchi, ſeeme to be Aegyptians: 
               The people Colchi ſprōg of the AEgyptians. which I ſpeake rather of myne owne gathering, then of any other mans information. Howveit, for tryall ſake cōmoninge wt the inhabitants of either nation, the Colchans ſeemed rather to acknowledge & remember y• 
               Aegyptians, then y• 
               Aegyptians thē: affyrming, that the Colchans were a remnante of Seſoſtris army. My ſelfe haue drawne a cōiecture hereof: y• both people are in coūtenance a like black, in hayre a like fryzled, albeit it may ſeeme a very feeble geſſe, the ſame being alſo in other nations. A better ſurmiſe may be gathered of this, that y• people of Aethyopia, Aegypt, and Colchis only of all men, circumcyſe & cut of the foreſkin from their hidden partes; reteyning the cuſtome time out of minde. For the Phoenicians and Syrians y• dwell in Palaeſtina, confeſſe themſelues to haue borrowed the maner of circumſicion from the Aegypt
                     〈…〉
                  . And as for thoſe Syrians y• dwell neere vnto the ryuers Thermodon and Parthemus, and the people called Macrones their next neighbours; they tooke the ſelfe ſame vſe and cuſtome of y• 
               Colchans. Howbeit, the Aegyptians and Aethyopians, which of them learned it of others, it is hard to diſcerne, foraſmuch as the cuſtome in both Countryes is of great antiquity. Neuertheleſſe, very good occaſion of coniecture is offred vnto vs, that it came fyrſt from y• 
               Aegyptians, at ſuch time as the Aethyopians had exchaunge of marchaundiſe with them. For the Phoenicians, that in like maner haue mutuall trafique which the Grecians, leaue of to circumcyſſe them ſelues, and refuſe in that poynte to be conformable to the lawes and ſtatutes of their countrey. One thinge more may be alleaged wherein the people of Colchis doe very narrowly reſemble y• cuſtomes of Aegypt, in ſo much as, theſe two nations alone, work their lynnen & dreſſe theyr flax after ye ſame ſorte, in all poyntes reſpecting each other both in order of lyfe &

maner of lāguage. The flaxe which is brought from Colchis ye 
               Grecians call Sardonick: the other cōming out of Aegypt they terme after the name of the countrey, Aegyptian flaxe. But to returne to the tytles and emblems that king Seſoſtris lefte behind him in all regions through yt which he paſſed, many thereof are fallen to decay. Notwithſtāding, certaine of them in Syria and Paloeſtina I beheld with myne own eyes, intayled with ſuch poſyes as we ſpake of before, and the pictures of womens ſecretes ingrauen in them. Likewiſe in Iönia are to bee ſeene two ſundry Images of Seſoſtris himſelfe carued in pillers: one as we paſſe from Epheſus to Phocoea: another in the way from Sardis to Smyrna. Eyther of theſe haue the forme and figure of a man, fiue hands breadth in bigneſſe, bearing in his righte hand a Darte, in his left a vowe, his harneſſe and furniture after the manner of the Aegyptians and Aethyopians. Croſſe his backe from the one ſhoulder to the other went a ſentence ingrauen in the holy letter of Aegypt: hauing this meaning. By my owne force did I vanquiſhe this region. Notwithſtandinge it is not there ſpecified what he ſhould be, albeit els where it is to be ſeene. Some haue deemed this monument to haue bene Memnon the ſonne of Aurora ſlayne
                     •
                   in the vvarre at Troy. the image of Memnon, not a litle deceyued in opinion. This noble and victorious prince Seſoſtris making his returne to Aegypt, came (by report of ye prieſts) to a place named Daphnoe peluſiae, with an infinite trayne of forraine people out of al Nations by him ſubdued: where being very curteouſly met & welcomed by his brother, whom in his abſence he had lefte for Viceroy and protectour of the countrey, he was alſo by ye ſame inuited to a princely banquet, him ſelfe, his wife, and his children. The death of Seſoſtris intē
                  ded by his ovvne brother. The houſe where into they were entered, being compaſſed about with dry matter, was ſuddaynely by the treachery of his brother ſet on fire, which he perceiuing toke counſayle with his wife then preſent, how to eſcape and auoyde the daunger. The woman either of a readier wit or riper cruelty, aduiſed him to caſt two of his ſixe children into the fire, to make way for him ſelfe and the reſt to paſſe: time not ſuffering him to make any long ſtay, he put his wyues counſayle in ſpeedy practiſe, & made a bridge through the fire of two of his children, to preſerue the

reſt aliue. Seſoſtris in this ſorte deliuered frō the cruell treaſon and malicious deuiſe of his brother, firſt of all tooke reuenge of his trecherous villany and diueliſh intent: in the next place bethinking himſelfe in what affayres to beſtowe the multitude which he had brought with him, whome afterwards he diuerſly employed: for by theſe captiues were certayne huge and monſtrous ſtones rolled and drawne to the temple of Vulcane. Likewiſe, many trenches cut out and deriued from the riuer into moſt places of the countrey, whereby The countrey of Aegypt cut out into trenches for the better conueyance of vvater. the land being aforetime paſſable by cart & horſe, was thencefoorth bereaued of that commodity: for in all the time enſuing, the countrey of Aegypt being for the moſt parte playne and equall, is through the creekes and windings of the ditches brought to that paſſe, that neyther horſſe nor wayne can haue any courſe or paſſage from one place to another. Howbeit, Seſoſtris inuented this for the greater benefite and commodity of the lande, to the ende that ſuch townes and cities as were farre remooued from the riuer, might not at the fall of the floud be pinched with the penury and want of water, which at all times they haue deriued and brought to them in trenches. The ſame King made an equall diſtribution of the whole countrey to all his ſubiects, allotting to euery man the lyke A diuiſion of land. portion and quantitie of ground, drawne out and limited by a foureſquare fourme. Heereof the King himſelfe helde yeerely reuenewes, euery one being rated at a certayne rent and penſion, which annually he payd to the crowne, and if at the riſing of the floud it fortuned any mans portion to be ouergone by the waters, the King was thereof aduertiſed, who forthwyth ſent certayne to ſuruey ye ground, and to meaſure the harmes which the floud had done him, and to leauy out the crowne rent according to the reſidue of the land that remayned. Heereof ſprang the noble ſcience of Geometry, and from thence was tranſlated into Greece. For as touching the Pole and Gnomon 
               The beginning of Geometry. (which is to ſay) the rule, and the twelue partes of the day, the Graecians tooke them of the Babylonians.
            
            This King Seſoſtris held the Empyre alone, leauing in Aethiopia before the temple of Vulcane certayne monuments to

the poſteritie, to wit, certayne images of ſtone, one for hymſelfe, another for his wife, beeyng eache of them thirtie cubites: The images of King Seſoſtris. the foure images alſo of hys foure ſonnes, beeyng each of them twentie cubites apeece. In proceſſe of time when the image of King Darius that gouerned Perſia ſhould haue bene placed before the picture of Seſoſtris, the prieſt of Vulcane which ſerued in the temple woulde in no wiſe permit it to bee done, denying that Darius had euer atchieued the like exploites that Seſoſtris had done. Who, beſides the conquering of ſundrie other nations (not inferiour in number to thoſe whiche had beene ouercome by Darius) had alſo brought in ſubiection the moſt couragious and valiaunt people of Scythia: for whyche cauſe, it were agaynſt reaſon to preferre hymſelfe in place before him vnto whome he was inferiour in chiualry, whiche bolde aunſwere of the prieſt, King Darius tooke in good parte and brooked welynough.
            
               Seſoſtris dying, the ſeate imperiall came to hys ſonne Pheco, who beeyng bereaued of hys ſight, vndertooke no voyage The death of Seſoſtris, vvhome Pheco ſucceeded. of warre, but remayned quiet in his kingdome. The cauſe he was ſtricken blynde, is ſayde to be this. At what tyme the waters of the floud increaſing, by reaſon of a mightie raging winde, had drowned the lowe countreys eyghteene cubites deepe. The Kyng inraged at the vnaccuſtomed ſwelling of the ryuer, tooke hys darte and diſcharged it into the middeſt of the waters, for whyche hys, vnrcuerent facte, the fame is, that hys ſighte incontinente was taken from hym, and hee became blynde the ſpace of tenne yeares. In the eleuenth yeare, there aroſe a prophecie in the city Butis, that the tyme of hys miſerie was nowe exſpyred, and that hys ſyght ſhoulde eftſoones bee reſtored agayne, if in caſe hee waſhed hys eyes in the water of a woman, whych neuer knewe man but her owne huſbande. For further proofe of thys phetis medicine, An exquiſite medicine for the eyes. the Kyng beganne firſt wyth hys owne wyfe, whych working not the effecte he looked for, he tryed many others, but all in vayne, laſtly, lighting vppon a poore ſeely woman that had neuer woorſhipped more Sainctes then one, hee ſpeedely recouered hys ſighte agayne, and cauſing all thoſe whome

earſt he had prooued to be gathered into one citie (the name whereof was called Reddclodd) he ſet fire to the towne, and An army of honeſt vvomē burnt at a clap. conſumed them all.
            The King thus healed, and freely acquited of hys former miſerie, began to be deuoute, increaſing the temples of the gods with giftes of exceeding value. All which deſerue for theyr excellencie to be had in memorie, and chiefly thoſe that he offered in the temple of the Sunne, which were theſe, two mighty great ſtones which the Aegyptians in theyr tongue called Obeli, in faſhion like a ſpit or breach. 100. cubites long, and in breadth. 80.
            Next after hym the kingdome deſcended to a certayne man of the citie Memphis, whoſe name in the greeke language Protheus King of Aegypt. was Protheus, to whome the Aegyptians erected a temple, which is yet to be ſeeue in Memphis, very fayre and beautifull, garniſhed wyth rich and ſingulare giftes. On euery ſide whereof dwell the Phenices, a people deſcended of the Tyrians; whereof the place taketh the name, and is tearmed the tentes of the Tyrians. Within the temple there is ſtandyng the houſe of Proteus, called the court of ſtraunge Venus, vnder which name is meant (as I deeme) Helena, the daughter of Tyndarus, who as a gueſt agaynſt her wyll, kepte reſyaunce for a tyme in the court of Protheus, and was tearmed the ſtraunge Venus, in as much as the other Venus (who Helena. hath many temples in Aegypt) is neuer called by the name of ſtraunge. Heereof entring talke with the ſacred order of the prieſtes, they diſcourſed vnto me, that Alexander hauing ſtolne Helena from the Spartanes, and ſpeedyng hymſelfe Of the ariuall of Paris in Aegypt. homewarde by the ſea called Aegeum, by conſtraynte of weather was driuen into the Aegyptian ſeas, and perforce againſte his will, was caſt aſhore in Aegypt. His ariual was at ye mouth of the floud Nilus called Canobicum, at ye porte whiche the inhabitants tearme by ye name of Trachex. In this place is ſituated a temple to Hercules, where vnto if any mans ſeruaunt or A Sanctuary for ſeruauntes. vaſſall flye, and get vppon hym the holy markes (as they call them) in token that hee yeeldeth hys whole alleageaunce to the god of that place, it is not lawfull for any man

to touch him, which order was kept inuiolate vnto our agea The ſeruauntes of Alexander hearing of the lawes of this temple, forſooke their Lorde, and fled vnto it, and in humble manner ſubmitting themſelues before the god, they accuſed their mayſter (whoſe death they all deſired) ſhewing in what manner he came by Helena & the great iniury he had wrought to her huſband Menelaus. The ſame playnt alſo they framed before the prieſts of Hercules, and the chiefe gouernour of the port named Thonis. Thonis hauing hard the accuſatiō of theſe poore ſuppliants, ſent in all haſte to the King in theſe wordes: Knowe you (noble Prince) that a fewe dayes ſince, a certayne ſtraunger of the Troiane lignage (hauing committed a moſt villanous acte in Greece, by entiſing away the wife of him that had geuen him entertaynement) is by force of tempeſt dryuen vpon our coaſtes, we deſire therefore to knowe your higneſſe pleaſure, whether we ſhall geue him free paſſage into his countrey, or bereaue him of that he hath, and ſende him awaye. To which newes the King returned an aunſwere ſaying. The perſon you ſpeake of, of what nation ſoeuer hee bee whiche hathe wrought this deſpitefull treacherie to his hoſte, ſee you apprehend and bring to my court, to the ende I may heare what he can ſay for himſelfe. Whereat Thonis without any farther deliberation, tooke this yong gallaunt of Troy, ſtrayned hys ſhips, and brought him with the Lady Helena and the reſt of his retinue to the city Memphis, where the King at that tyme made his place of abiding. Beeing arriued at the Court, the King aſked Alexander in theſe wordes: Yong gentleman, what are you, and from what countrey are you landed heere in Aegypt? Alexander, who was not to ſeeke of an aunſwere, with a comely grace made aunſwere to the King, deſcrying both his countrey and lynage, the place alſo from whence hee was arriued, and to what coaſtes he directed his courſe. And where then (quoth the King) had you this goodly geutlewoman, for ſhe ſeemeth to be a woman of no common bloud: whereat my youth ſomewhat mammering before he coulde caſt the plot of his excuſe, was betrayed by his ſeruaunts, who in humble inanner on their knees, diſciphered to the King the

whole diſcourſe of his treaſon. The vaſſals hauing ended their ſpeeche, Protheus turned hymſelfe to Alexander, and tucked hym vp with thys rounde tale: my friende (ſayde hee) were it not for the reuerence I owe to ſtraungers, with whome my cuſtome is not to deale by rigour, I woulde ſurely pipe yee ſuch a daunce for the wicked villanie wherewith thou haſt abuſed thyne hoaſt in Greece, that all vnthankefull wretches ſhoulde take example by thee how to vſe thoſe that ſhewe them courteſie in a forraigne lande. Ah vnkynde wretche as thou arte, is thys the beſt requitall thou makeſt the Grecian for hys noble vſage towarde thee? to bereaue hym of his mate, the moſt comfortable companyon of all hys daies, and not contente therewyth, lyke an arraunt theefe thou haſt deſpoyled hys goodes, the beſt and principall treaſures of hys houſe. Thou mayeſt bleſſe the tyme tenne thouſande tymes, that the Aegyptians yeelde ſuche honoure to ſtraungers: and packe thee hence from my preſence wyth the reſt of thy mates, ſwearyng by my crowne, that if hencefoorth thou bee ſeene within the borders of Aegypt, I wyll account thee as myne enemye. As for thy minion and the goodes thou haſt broughte, I ſhall reſerue, tyll ſuche tyme as the Grecian ſhall come to reclayme them. By theſe meanes (ſayd the prieſtes) came Helena into Aegypt, whereof alſo Homer hymſelfe ſeemed not to bee ignoraunt, but of purpoſe rather (for that it fell not out ſo fittingly for hys verſe) hee choſe the other, declaring notwythſtandyng that ſome ſuch fame as thys was bruted abroade, whyche appeareth manifeſtly in hys Illiads, where making mention of the voyage of Alexander, he affyrmeth, that by meanes of a contrarye wynde, hee was toſſed by ſea, and recouered the lande at the city Sydon in Phaenicia: reade the verſes that are framed by hym in the prayſe of Diomedes, in whych place theſe lynes are founde.
            
               
               There were the cloakes of gorgeous hue
               ſo braue and princely dight,
               Made by the dames of Sydony,
               ſold to the ſeemely wight
               Kyng Pryams ſonne, that ſtale hymſelfe
               a wyfe of royall race,
               Queene Helene hyghte, retyryng home,
               vnto his natyue place.
            
            
               Touching the ſame in his Odyſſea in theſe verſes.
               This poyſon quycke and valerous
               whych Polydamna gaue
               The wyfe of Thonis, Helen brought,
               and carefully dyd ſaue.
               Great ſtore whereof in droughty ſoyle
               of ſcorched Aegypt groe
               Some ſoueraigne good, and otherſome
               the cauſe of preſent woe.
            
            
               In like maner to Telemachus, Menelaus ſpeaketh in this vviſe.
               And when I ſought to leaue the land
               of Aegypt, and retyre,
               God hyndred, whome I left vnſerued
               by vowes and ſacred fyre.
            
            In theſe verſes Homer confeſſeth that he knewe of the wandering of Alexander into Aegypt, forſomuch as the countrey of Syria is bounding vpon Aegypt, and the people Phaenices vnto whome the city Sydon is belonging are reſyaunt in Syria. As well theſe therefore as alſo the place it ſelfe, are no ſmall proofe, nay rather a moſt valerous argumente, that the verſes wherein it is ſayde, that Alexander conueying Helen from Greece in three dayes ſpace, wyth a proſperous gale,

and quyet ſea, arryued at Troy, were rather intruded by ſome other poet then inuented by Homer, who contrarywyſe in hys Illiads maketh mention of his errour by ſea.
            To leaue Homer, and come to the affayres of the Troianes, being deſirous to vnderſtand of what truth theſe things were Of the Troiane vvarre. which are bruted to haue beene done by the Greekes at Troy, I ſollicited the matter with the prieſtes of Aegypt, who tolde me in ſuch manner as themſelues beforetime had beene aduertiſed by Menelaus. After the flight of the Lady Helen, there aſſembled, in the cauſe of ye kings brother Menelaus, a puiſſant armie of the Graecians, who embarking themſelues into Teucria, and incamping in theyr coaſtes, ſent in ambaſſage to the city Troy certayne of theyr chiefe peeres and nobles, amongſt whome, was Menelaus brother to the Kyng. Beeyng entered the city, they made clayme of the Lady Helena, with the goodes and treaſures ſhee tooke wyth her, requyring alſo a ſufficient ſatiſfaction to be made for the iniurie. Wherevnto the Troianes aunſwered, that they ſpente their ſpeech in vaine, to rechallenge eyther women or goodes of them which they neuer ſawe, alledging, that the thyngs they challenged were ſurpriſed by the Aegyptians: neyther was it reaſon why they ſhoulde beare the faulte of others, and make reſtitution of that which they neuer had. Howbeit, the Greekes imagining they had ſpoken it in deriſion, to ſhift off the ſiege for the tyme, bent theyr whole force agaynſt the towne, continuing the ſiege and batterie ſo long, tyll they had brought it to vtter ruyne and ſubuerſion.
            The citie taken, when Helena could not be founde, and the ſame aunſwere was rendered the Graecians as before, they gaue credite at length to theyr wordes, and ſente Menelaus into Aegypt to the courte of Protheus, whether beeyng come, and declaryng the cauſe of hys arriuall to the Kyng, he gaue him greate entertaynemente, reſtoring vnto him hys Lady with all his treaſure, without any manner of loſſe or imbeſelment. Neuertheleſſe, Menelaus for all this courteſie Courteſie revvarded vvith crueltie. and royall vſage which he had receyued at the handes of the King, gaue him but a poupe for his labour, dooyng to the

countrey this iniurie for a farewell. For indeuouring to depart thence, and wayting a fauourable wynde to fit hys purpoſe, by meanes whereof, he ſtayde a long tyme in Aegypt: to knowe the ſtate of hys voyage, what fortune ſhould thereafter betide vnto hym, he tooke two children of the Aegyptians, ſlewe them, and paunched out theyr bowels, whereby to take view of his future ſucceſſe. Which beyng knowne, and perceyuing hymſelfe to be mortally hated and purſued of the inhabitauntes, he ſped hym thence into the Iſles of Africa lying ouer againſt them, from whence alſo makyng as good haſte as he coulde, the Aegyptians heard no more tydyngs of hym. Of all theſe things they were partly informed by the knowledge of hyſtories, beeyng much more certayne of ſuch thyngs as were done in theyr countrey. Thus farre the prieſtes of Aegypt proceeding in diſcourſing of Helena, whereto I adde thys ſurmize of myne owne, that if Helena had beene in Troy, no doubt for ought that Alexander could haue ſayde or done, That Queene Helena vvas neuer at Troy. ſhe had beene deliuered to the Graecians. For who woulde thynke that Kyng Pryamus wyth the reſidue of that lignage were ſo madde, that to the ende Alexander might enioy the delighte of hys Lady, would imperill theyr owne lyues and theyr childrens, with the flouriſhing eſtate of ſo famous a citie. In whych fond opinion, if in caſe they had bene at the beginning, yet vndoubtedly they woulde haue recanted at length when as many valiaunt ſouldyers of the Troianes, and two or three of the Kings owne ſonnes, (if any credit may be geuen to the poets) were moſt lamentably ſlaine by the Graecians in fight. By theſe things I am driuen to coniecture, that if Helena had beene in their keeping, Pryamus to rayſe the ſiege from the walles of hys city, woulde willingly haue wrought meanes to reſtore her agayne. Neyther was Alexander heyre apparaunt to the crowne, ſo that his father beeyng crooked wyth age, the adminiſtration of the kyngdome ſhoulde reſt in hys gouernemente, one there was betweene hym and home, namely hys brother Hector, as well in number of yeares hys elder, as in nobleneſſe of mynde hys better, whome it behoued not to ſmooth vp his brother in hys filthy leachery, ſeeing

ſuch imminent perill to threaten not onely himſelfe, but alſo the whole kyndred and nation of the Troianes. But it was the iuſt plague of God inflicted vppon them for their wickedneſſe, that they ſhoulde neyther delyuer Helena whome they had not, nor be credyted of the Graecians, to whome they fayned not, to the ende all men myght learne, that they whyche ſtryke wyth the ſwoorde, ſhall be beaten with the ſcabberde, being euermore ſeene, that vpon greeuous iniuries the gods alwayes powre downe greeuous reuengements. Thus much I thought conuenient to ſpeake of mine owne fancye.
            After the deceaſſe of Protheus, Kampſinitus tooke vppon hym the rule of the countrey, who in memorie of himſelfe, Kampſinitus. lefte behynde hym certayne porches of ſtone, planted weſtward agaynſt the temple of Vulcane, right ouer agaynſt the whych, ſtoode two images of fyue and twentye cubites in length. One of the which ſtandyng northerly, they call ſommer, and the other lying to the weſt, they tearme winter, contrary to all reaſon and order. This King in aboundance of wealth, and plenty of coyne, ſo farre excelled all thoſe that came after hym, that none coulde go beyonde him, no not approch neere vnto hym in that kynde: wherefore deſirous to poſſeſſe hys goodes in ſafetie, hee builte hym a treaſurie or iewellhouſe of ſtone, one of the walles whereof bounded vpon the outſyde of hys courte. In framing whereof, the workeman A tale of a cunning theefe. had wrought thys ſubtile conueyance, one ſtone in the wall hee layde in that ſorce, that a man might eaſily at pleaſure plucke it in or out, which notwithſtanding ſerued ſo fittingly to the place, that nothing coulde be diſcerned. When the building was finiſhed, the King cauſed his treaſure to be brought into it, minding henceforth to be ſecure and to lay aſide all feare of miſfortune. In proceſſe of time, this cunning artificer lying at the poynt to dye, called vnto him his two ſonnes, and diſcloſed vnto them in what manner he had prouided for theyr good eſtate, in leauing a ſecret and moſt priuy paſſage into the Kings treaſurie, whereby theyr whole lyfe myght be lead in moſt happy and bleſſed condition. In briefe, hee ſhewed them all that was done by hym, delyuering them the iuſt meaſures

of the ſtone, that they mighte not bee deceyued in laying it agayne, whych the two yong youthes well marking, thought from that tyme forwarde to be of the Kings counſayle, if not of hys court, and to become the priuy ſurueyers of hys iewellhouſe.
            Theyr father beeing dead, they made no long delay to put in execution theyr determinate purpoſe, but repayring to the court by night, they found the ſtone, which with ſmall force remoouing it from the place, they ſped themſelues wyth plentie of coyne, and ſo departed. In ſhorte ſpace after the Kyng entering hys treaſurie, and fyndyng the veſſels wherein hys money lay to be ſomewhat decreaſed, was exceedingly amazed, not knowing whome to accuſe, ſeeyng both hys ſeales, whyche he had ſet on the dore, vntouched, and the dore faſt locked at hys commyng thyther. Howbeit, repayring ſundrie tymes to beholde hys wealth, and euermore perceyuing that it grewe leſſe and leſſe, deuiſed with hymſelfe to beſet the place where hys money lay with certayne greens or ſnares to entrappe the theefe in. Theſe ſubtile merchaunts accordyng to theyr former wont approching the ſpring head where they had dronke ſo oft before, one of them wente in, and groaping for the money, was ſo faſt intangled in a ſnare, that for hys lyfe hee wiſt not how to ſhifte, but ſeeyng hymſelfe in theſe braakes, hee called hys brother, to whome he diſcloſed hys euill happe, willing hym in any wiſe to cut off hys head, leaſt beeyng knowne who hee was, they both myght bee ſerued wyth the ſame ſauce. His brother hearing hys counſayle to be good, did as he bade hym, and fitly placing the ſtone as hee founde it, departed home, bearyng wyth hym the head of hys ſlayne brother.
            The nexte day the Kyng opening hys iewell houſe, and eſpying and headleſſe theefe ſurpriſed in a ginne, was woonderfully aſtonied, ſeeing euery place ſafe, and no way in the world to come in or out at.
            In this quandary, vncertaine what to thynke of ſo ſtraunge an euent, be deuiſed yet to go another way to the wood, cauſing the body of the theefe to be hanged out vppon the walles in

open view to all that paſſed by, appoynting certayne to attend in that place, with ſtraight charge, that if they hearde any making moane or lamentation at the ſighte thereof, they ſhoulde foorthwyth attache them, and bryng them to the Kyng.
            The Mother of theſe two Breethron not able wyth patiente eyes to beholde the wretched carkaſſe of her pitifull ſonne, called the other brother vnto her, aduiſing him The affection of a mother. by ſome meanes or other, to take awaye hys brothers bodye and burie it, threatening moreouer, that in caſe he neglected to accompliſhe it wyth ſpeede, ſhee woulde open all hys thefte and treacherie to the Kyng. Whome her ſonne endeuouring wyth many woordes to perſuade, and nought auayling (ſo tender was her affection towardes her childe) hee ſet hys wittes abroache to the framing of ſome ſubtyle conceyte, to beguyle and inueigle the Kyngs watchemen. Pannelling certayne Aſſes whyche hee loaded wyth bottels of ſweete wyne, hee proceeded forwarde wyth hys carryage, tyll ſuche tyme as hee came agaynſte the place where the watche laye, where priuily vnſtopping one or two of hys bottles, the wyne flowed out in greate aboundance, whereat, fayning as though hee had beene beſydes hymſelfe, hee piteouſly cryed out, tearing hys hayre add ſtampyng as one vtterlye; ignoraunte whyche to reuiedye fyrſte. The keepers ſeeyng the wyne guſhe but ſo faſt, ra
                  ••
               e haſtely wyth pottes and cannes to receyue to leaſt all ſhould bee loſt, but the dryuer (who had alreadye caſt hys plotte) ſeemed heereat muche more inraged then before, tauntyng and raylyng at them wyth moſt bitter and reuiling woordes. Contraryly, the watchmen geuing hym very fayre and gentle language, hee ſeemed better contented, leadyng aſyde hys Aſſes out of the way to newe girde them, and place his carriage in better order. Manye woordes grewe betweene them whyles he was addreſſing hys Aſſes to proceede on theyr waye, till that one of them bolting foorth a merry ieſt, cauſed hym to laugh hartily, ſo that lyke

a good fellowe, he beſtowed amongſt them a bottle of wyne. Which courteſie they all tooke in very good parte, requeſting hym to ſitte wyth them for companye, and drinke parte of hys owne coſt. Whereto hee willingly conſenting, they dranke a carouſe, euery man hys cannikin, tyll the wyne began to runne of the lyes, whyche thys coapeſmate perceyuing, ſet abroach another bottle, and began to quaffe afreſhe, whyche ſet my keepers on ſuch a tantarra, that beeyng well wetted, they ſet more by three drammes of ſleepe, then ſyxe ounees of witte. When all was huſhe, and the watchmen faſt aſleepe, hee tooke the bodye of hys brother, and in mockage, ſhauing off the hayre of theyr right cheekes, he returned home, beyng right gladly enterteyned of hys mother.
            The Kyng ſeeyng hys deuiſes no better to proceede, but for ought he coulde imagine the theefe ſtill beguyled hym, waxed woonderous wrath: howbeit, determining to leaue nothing vnattempted, rather then to let ſuch a villayne eſcape ſcotfree, he built yet another trappe to catch the foxe in. He had at that time abiding in hys courte a goodly gentlewoman his onely daughter, whome he tenderly loued from her childhood. This Lady he made of his counſayle, willing her by the duety of a chylde, to a bandon chaſtity for the time, making hirſelfe a common ſtalant for all that would come, on condition they ſhoulde ſweare to tell her the ſubtileſt and the ſinfulleſt prancke that euer they had played in all theyr lyfe tyme, and who ſo confeſſed the facts lately atchieued in imbeſileing the Kings treaſure, and ſtealing away the theefe, him to lay hold on, and not ſuffer to depart.
            The gentlewoman obeying her fathers will, kepte open houſe, hauing greate repayre vnto her out of all partes of the countrey. Now the theefe whyche knewe full well to what intente the Kyng had done thys, deſirous to bee at oaſt wyth hys daughter for a nighte, and fearing the daunger that myghte enſue, beeyng of a verie pregnaunt and readie witte, deuiſed yet another ſhifte wherewythall to delude the Kyng: he ſtrake off the hande of hys brother that was

dead, and cloſely carying it vnder his cloake, he repayred to the place where the Kings daughter lay, who demaunding hym the queſtion as ſhe had done the reſt, receyued of him this aunſwere, that the ſinfulleſt acte that euer he committed, was to cut off his brothers head, beeing inueigled in a ſnare in the Kings treaſurie, but the ſubtileſt in that he had deceyued a ſort of drouken aſſes, whome the King had appoynted to watch the body. The Lady that had liſtned to his tale, hearing the newes ſhe longed for, ſtretched out her hand to lay hold on him, who ſubtilly preſenting her with the hande of his brother, (which beeing darke, ſhe faſt griped in ſtead of his owne) hee conueyed himſelfe from her and was no more ſeene. The King heereof aduertiſed, was ſtricken with ſo great admiration as well of his wit in deuiſing, as his boldneſſe in aduenturing, that forthwith he cauſed notice to be geuen throughout all partes of his gouernment, that in caſe the party whiche had done theſe thinges. woulde diſcloſe himſelfe, and ſtande to his mercy, he woulde not only yeeld him free pardon, but alſo indue and honour him with ſo princely rewards as were fit for a perſon of ſuch excellent wiſedome. My yonker yeelding credite to the Kings promiſe, came foorth in preſence, and deſcried himſelfe, with whome Kampſinitus ioyning his daughter in mariage, did him the greateſt honour he could deuiſe, eſteeming him for the wiſeſt man that liued vpon the earth, holding it for certayne, that the Aegyptians excelled all others in wiſedome, amongſt whome he iudged none comparable to hym. The ſame King (ſay they) whiles he was yet liuing, trauelled ſo farre vnder the ground, till he came to the place which the Kampſinitus iourney to hel. 
               Graecians call the ſeates infernall, where he played at dyce with the goddeſſe Ceres, and ſometimes winning ſometimes loſing, he returned againe at length, beeing rewarded by her with a mantle of gold. In the meane ſpace while Kampſinitus vndertooke this voyage to hell, the Aegyptians kept holyday, prolonging the celebration till ſuch time as he retyred backe againe, which ſolemne obſeruance, ſince our memory hath bene duely celebrated. But whether this be the cauſe of that ſacred feſtiuall, I dare not auowe, howbeit, the prieſts ſhewed me a

certayne cloake, wouen in the ſpace of one daye, wherewith once ayeare they attyre ſome one of theyr petie vicares, blinding moreouer hys eyes wyth a myter. Beeing in thys ſorte attyred, they conduct hym to the hygh way that leadeth to the temple of the goddeſſe Ceres, where after they haue placed hym, they leaue hym grabling in that place, and departe their waye. To whome incontinently reſorte two wolues, conducting the prieſt to the temple aforeſayde, whyche is diſtaunte from the city twentie furlongs, where hauing accompliſhed certayne rytes, the wolues leade hym backe agayne to the ſame place. All theſe thyngs they doubt not to reporte for certayne true, which we leaue to euery mans lyking to iudge of them as they deſerue. For myne owne parte I haue thought it meete to make relation of ſuch things as I heard amongſt them, going no farther in many thyngs then he areſay.
            Amiddeſt the infernall powers, the Aegyptians affyrme that Ceres and Liber haue the chiefe authoritie.
            The ſame people were they that firſt helde opinion that the ſoule of man was immortall, paſſing from one body into another The opinion of the Aegyptians touching the immortality of the ſoule. by a continuall courſe, as euery one tooke hys beginning and generation of another, and when it had paſſed through all bodyes that haue theyr beeyng eyther in the lande, ſea, or aire, then conſequentlie to returne into the bodye of man agayne, whyche courſe it finiſhed within the tearme of three thouſand yeares: whych opinion had many patrones of the Graecians, ſome auncient and of great authoritie, others of later dayes, vſurping and chalenging it for theyr owne, of whoſe names I am not ignoraunt, albeit I minde not to recite them. The Aegyptians likewiſe mention that to the tyme of Kampſinitus, religion, iuſtice, and true order of gouernement greatly flouriſhed among them.
            After whome, the royall dignitie came into the handes of Cheops, a man fraught with all kynde of vicious demeanour, Cheops. and wicked conuerſation. For cauſing the temples of the gods to be faſt locked vp, he gaue out through all quarters of hys Empyre, that it myght not be lawfull for any Aegyptian to offer ſacrifice, to the ende, that beeing ſeduced front

the ſeruice and reuerence of the gods, he might ſecurely employ them in hys owne affayres. Some were appoynted to digge ſtones in the mountayne Arabicus, and from thence, to conuey them to the riuer Nilus, where they were receyued of others which pheryed them ouer the riuer to the roote of a greate hill named Africus. The whole number of thoſe that were conuerſaunt in the Kings affayres, was tenne thouſande men, ſeruing by turnes, euery three monethes a thouſand. In which manner, he helde the people the ſpace of tenne yeares, in all whiche tyme, they did nothyng but hewe and cary ſtones, a labour of no leſſe importaunce (in my iudgemente) then to haue built the pyre it ſelfe, or towre of ſtone, which is in length fiue furlongs, in breadth tenne paces, and in height where it is greateſt, to the number of eyght paces, beeyng framed of ſtone, euriouſly carued and ingrauen with the pictures of beaſtes. Heerein alſo were conſumed other tenne yeares, The building of the Aegyptian Pyramides. cauſing certayne chambers to be cut out vnder the grounde, vndermining the ſtoneworke vpon the which the towres were founded, whyche hee prouided for hys ſepulcher. The ſituation heere of was in a ſmall Ilande, through the whyche by a trench or ſmall draught, he cauſed the riuer to haue paſſage. The pyre was made ſtearewiſe, aſcending by ſteppes or degrees orderly placed one aboue another.
            Hauyng in ſuche ſorte finiſhed the lower worke, they deuiſed certayne engines or wreſtes to heaue vp ſtones from the grounde to the fyrſt ſtayre, and from thence to the ſeconde, and ſo conſequently tyll they came to the place where the ſtone ſhoulde lye, hauyng vppon each ſtayre a wreaſt: or (that whyche is more likely) vſing one for all, beeyng framed of lyght wood, to the intente it might the more eaſily be remooued.
            The groſſe worke finiſhed, they began to poliſhe and beautifie the towre from the toppe downewardes, comming laſt of all to the neathermoſt ſtayre, wherein they made a finall ende and concluſion of the beautie and grace of all theyr woorkemanſhippe. In thys pyre, were intayled

certayne letters in the Aegyptian language, declaring the expence the King was at in the time of his building, for 
                  •
               uſtardſeed, oynyons, and garlike, which (as I remember) the interpreter told me, did amount to the ſumme of a thouſande ſixe hundred talents. If this were ſo, how much ſhal we deeme to haue bene ſpent vpon other things, as vpon tooles, engins, victuals, labouring garments for the workemen, being tenne yeares buſied in theſe affayres? I recken not the time wherein they were held in framing and hewing of ſtones to ſet them in a readineſſe for the mayne worke: neyther all the ſpace that paſſed ouer in the conueyance and cariage of the ſtone to the place of building, which was no ſmall numbers of dayes, as alſo the time which was conſumed in vndermining the earth, and cutting out of chambers vnder the grounde, all whyche things draue the King to ſuch a narrow ſtraight, that he was fayne to cloute out his deuiſes with a moſt wicked inuention, which was this: Perceiuing his golden mine to draw low that the diuell might daunce in the bottome of his bagge and finde neuer a croſſe, he made ſale of his daughters honeſtie, willing hir to entertayne tagge and ragge all that would come, in caſe they refuſed not to pay for their pleaſure, ſithence Venus accepteth not the deuotion of ſuch as pray with empty hands and threadbare purſſes. The Lady willing to obey the heſtes of the King her father, deuiſed alſo the meane to prolong the memorie of herſelfe, and to aduaunce her fame to the notice of all ages that ſhould enſue, wherefore ſhe made requeſt to ſuche as had acceſſe vnto her, to giue her a ſtone to the building and erection of a worke which ſhe had determined, wherewith (as the brute goeth) ſhe gaue ſo many ſtones as ſerued to the framing of a whole pyre, ſituate in the middeſt of the three former, in full view and proſpect to the greateſt pyrame, which is euery way an acre and an halfe ſquare.
            Enſuing the raigne of Cheops, whoſe kingdome continued the ſpace of fifty yeares, the chiefe gouernement was committed Chephrenes King of Aegypt. to Chephrenes his brother, which followed the ſteps of his predeceſſour as well in other things, as alſo in building of a pyre, howbeit, not ſo huge and great as that which his brother

had finiſhed before him, for we tooke the meaſure of them all. Moreouer, ſuch vnderworke wrought out in caues and chambers vnder the ground as is to be ſeene in the pyre of Cheops, are wanting in this, beſides the laborious & toileſome worke which they had to deriue and drawe the riuer to that place, which hath his courſe through the middeſt of the former pyre, 
                  •
               emming in the whole Iland wherein it is ſituate: within the compaſſe whereof, they affirme that Cheops himſelfe was buried. By whome in his lifetime, an houſe was framed of one ſtone alone, diuerſly coloured, which he had out of the countrey of Aethiopia, forty foote lower then the pire it ſelfe, yet planted and built vpon the ſelfeſame foundation. Chephrenes alſo (by the computation of the Aegyptians) ruled the countrey fiftie yeares, by which meanes they make account that their miſerie cōtinued an hundred and ſixe yeares, al which time, the temples of their gods were vnfrequented, abiding ſtill from time to time ſealed vp and vnopened, wherefore theſe princes the Aegyptians will not name for the hatred they beare them, calling their pyres the towres of the ſhepeheard Philitio, who at that time kept ſheepe in thoſe places.
            
               Chephrenes dying, yeelded the Kingdome to Mycerinus, 
               Mycerinus King of Aegypt. the ſonne of his brother Cheops, who eſchuing the wicked acts and deteſtable practiſes of his father, cauſed the temples to be ſet open, giuing libertie to the people being ſo long diſtreſſed vnder the gouernement of his father and vncle, to follow their owne affayres, and returne to their auncient cuſtome of ſacrifice, miniſtring iuſtice aboue all the Kings that were before him, for which cauſe, none of all the princes that haue borne Mycerinus famous for his iuſt gouerning rule in Aegypt is ſo greatly prayſed and renowmed, both for other cauſes which were wiſely taken vp by him in iudgement, and chiefly for this, that a certayne Aegyptian much complayning that the King had wronged him in deciding his cauſe, he commaunded him to value the loſſe which he had ſuffered by him, which the partie doing, he gaue him ſo much of his owne goods to make him a recompence. Mycerinus in this wiſe gouerning the common weale with great clemency, and ſeekyng by vertue to aduance his fame; was ſodeinely daunted by a

great miſfortune, the death of his onely daughter, hauing no more children but her, which was the firſt and greateſt hartbreake that befell him in his kingdome. For which cauſe, being ſtricken with ſorrowe aboue meaſure, and deſirous to ſolemnize her funeralles by the moſt royall and princely kinde of buryall that could be deuiſed: he cauſed an oxe to be made of wood, inwardly vauted and hollow within, which being layde ouer and garniſhed moſt curiouſly with gilt, he incloſed therein the wanne and forlorne corpſe of his beſt beloued daughter. This royall tombe was not interred and buryed in the grounde, but remayned vnto our age in the city Sais in open view, ſtanding in a certayne parlour of the Kings pallace, adorned and ſet foorth for the ſame purpoſe, with moſt beautifull and coſtly furniture. The cuſtome is euermore in the daye time to caſt into the belly of the oxe ſweete and precious odoures of all ſortes that may be gotten: and in the nighte to kindle a lampe, which burneth by the tombe till the next daye. In a chamber next adioyning are certayne pictures of women that were the concubines of Mycerinus, if we may beleeue the talke of thoſe that in the ſame city of Sais are profeſſours in religion, forſomuch as there are ſeene ſtanding in that place certayne mighty images made of wood, twentye or thereaboutes in number, the moſt parte of them bare and naked, but what women they reſemble, or whoſe pictures they be, I am not able to alleadge more then heareſay, notwithſtāding, there were which as touching the gilded oxe, and the other images framed this tale, that Mycerinus being inamoured of his own daughter, dealt vnlawfully with her beſides the courſe of nature, who for intollerable greefe hanging her ſelfe, was intombed in that oxe by her father: the Queene her mother cauſing the hands of all her gentlewomen to be cut off, by whoſe meanes ſhe had beene betrayed to ſerue her fathers luſt, for which cauſe (ſay they) are theſe images portrayed, to declare the miſfortune which they abode in their lifetime. But this is as true as the man in the moone, for that a man with halfe an eye may clearely perceiue, that their hands fel offfor very age, by reaſon that the wood through long cōtinuance of time was

ſpaked and periſhed, whiche euen to our memory were to be ſeene lying at the feete of thoſe which were portrayed. The oxe wherein the yong princeſſe lay, was ſumptuouſly clad, and arayed all the body wyth a gorgeous mantle of Phenicia, hys head and necke beeyng ſpanged and layde ouer with braces and plates of golde of a maruaylous thickeneſſe. Betweene hys hornes was ſet a globe or circle of golde, gliſtering as the ſunne. Neyther is the oxe ſtanding and borne vp vppon hys feete, but kneeleth as it were on hys knees, equall in bigneſſe to a great heighfer. The manner is once a yeare to bring this image out of the parlour wherein it is kepte, hauyng firſt of all well beaten and cudgelled a certayne image of one of It is as good to be a ſlaue in England as a Sainct in Aegypt. theyr Sainctes, whome in thys caſe wee thynke it not lawfull for vs to name. The talke goeth, that the Lady beſought the Kyng her father that beeing dead, ſhe myght once a yeare beholde the ſunne, whereof ſprang the cuſtome and maner aforeſayde.
            After this, there befell vnto him another miſchiefe that ſate as neere hys ſkirtes as the death of his dilling, inſomuch that he was readie to runne beyonde hymſelfe for ſorrowe. A prophecie aroſe in the city of Butis, that the tearme of ſixe yeares fully exſpired, the Kyng ſhoulde ende hys lyfe, leauing hys Kyngdome to be ruled of another. Whereof the Kyng beeing aduertiſed, and greately greeuing at the rigorous and vniuſt dealing of the gods, ſped a meſſenger to the place where the ſeate of prophecie was helde, to expoſtulate with the god, for what cauſe (ſince hys father and vnckle who had beene ſo vnmindfull of the gods, ſhutting vp their temples, and making hauocke of the people had liued ſo long) he hymſelfe that had dealte better with them, and cauſed theſe thynges to bee reſtored agayne, ſhoulde ſo ſoone be depriued of the benefite of lyfe, to whome aunſwere was made, that hys dayes were therefore ſhortened becauſe hee tooke a wrong courſe and dyd not as he ſhould do, beyng appoynted by the celeſtiall powers, that the countrey of Aegypt ſhould ſuffer miſerie, and be afflicted by their princes ye ſpace of an hūdred & fifty yeares,

which the two former princes well vnderſtanding, was neuertheleſſe by him neglected and left vnperformed. Mycerinus hearing this round reply, and perceiuing that his thread was almoſt ſpoon, ſet al at reuell, making great prouiſion of lights and tapers, which at euentide he cauſed to be lighted, paſſing the night in exceeding great mirth and princely banquetting, letting ſlip no time wherein he either wandered not alongſt the riuer, and through the woods and groues of the countrey, or entertayned the time in ſome pleaſaunt deuiſes, following all things that might eyther breede delighte, or bring pleaſure, which things he did, to the end he might prooue the prophecie falſe, and conuince the god of a lie, making twelue yeares of ſixe, by ſpending the nightes alſo as he did the dayes. Mycerinus 
               Mycerinus made tvvelue yeares of ſixe. alſo built a pyre, not equall to that which his father had ſet vp before him, beeing in meaſure but twentie foote ſquare, framed quadrangularly, and another lower then that, of three acres in compaſſe, being built to the middeſt of the ſtone of Aethiopia. There be of the Graecian writers that ſuppoſe thys towre to haue bene erected by a woman of notable fame, called Rhodope, who miſſe of their account, not ſeeming to knowe The ſtory of Rhodope. what that Rhodope was of whome they ſpeake. Beſides, it is very vnlikely that Rhodope woulde euer haue enterpriſed a worke of ſo great value, wherein infinite thouſands of talentes were ſpent before it came to perfection. Laſtly, it was not in the dayes of this prince that Rhodope flouriſhed, but vnder the gouernement of Amaſis, many yeares paſſing from the tyme of thoſe princes that planted the pyres, to the dayes and age of Rhodope. This gallaunt dame was by countrey a Thracian borne, the bondmayd of one Iadmon, whoſe abiding was in the land of Samos in the city of the god Vulcane, who in the tyme of her bondage, was fellowſeruant with Aeſope the inuenter of fables, to whome this ſmooth minion had a monethes mind and more, for which cauſe, being giuen out by ye oracle at Delphos, that it mighte be free for any man to ſlay Aeſope that would, and take pennaunce for his ſoule for his faulte committed, there was none found that would put him to death, but the nephew of Iadmon that came by his ſonne, who was alſo named

               Iadmon: whereby we may gather that Aeſope was a ſlaue and vaſſall to Iadmon. The death of Aeſope wounded Rhodope with ſo great feare, that ſhe tooke her flight foorthwith into Aegypt, accompanyed by one Xanthus a Samian, where ſhe ſet foorth her ſelfe to the ſale of ſuch, as rather then Venus ſhould be ſhut out for a Sainct, thought it no idolatrie to worſhip idols. Whiles ſhee abode in Aegypt, ſhee was redeemed and acquit of her ſeruitude by one Charaxus, who purchaſed her libertie by a great ſumme of money. This Charaxus was of the countrey of Mitilene, ſonne of Scamandronymus, and brother to Sappho the notable poetreſſe. By theſe meanes came Rhodope to be free, and remayned ſtill in Aegypt, where ſhe wanne ſo great credite and liking of all men, that in ſhorte ſpace ſhe grewe to maruellous wealth, beeing ſuch as farre in deede ſurmounted the degree of Rhodope, but yet amounted not to the buylding of a pyre. By the tenth parte of whych her ſubſtaunce, it is eaſie for any man to geſſe, that the maſſe and ſumme of money which ſhe had gathered, was no ſuche myracle as it is made to be. For ſtudying to be famous and remembred in Greece, ſhe deuiſed a worke which had neuer bene imagined or geuen by any other, which in remembrance of her ſelfe ſhe offered in the temple of Delphos. Wherefore of the tenth parte of her riches which ſhe ſente to the temple, ſhe commaunded ſo many yron ſpittes to be made (which were imployed to the roſting of oxen) as the quantitie of the money woulde afoorde that was ſente thyther by her. Theſe ſpittes at this preſent ſtande behynde the aultare, whiche the people of Chios erected iuſt oueragainſt the temple. Howbeit, ſuch arrant honeſt women as are fiſhe for euery man, haue in no place the like credite, as in the city of Naucrates. Forſomuch as this ſtalant of whome we ſpeake, had her fame ſo bruted in all places, as almoſt there was none in Greece that had not hearde of the fame of Rhodope. After whome, there ſprang vp alſo another as good as euer ambled, by name Archidice, whoſe vertues Archidice. were blaſed very farre, but not with like fame and renowne as her predeceſſour, with whome, Charaxus was ſo farre gone, that retyring home to Mytelene, he was almoſt beſides

himſelfe, as Sappho maketh mention, inueyghing in verſe agaynſt hys folly. We haue thus far digreſſed to ſpeake of Rhodope, we will now returne to the text agayne.
            Next after Mycerinus, enſued the raigne and dominion of Aſychis, by whome (as the prieſts report) was conſecrated to Aſychis King of Aegypt. 
               Vulcane a princely gallerie ſtandyng to the Eaſt, very fayre and large, wrought with moſt curious and exquiſite workemanſhip. For beſides that it had on euery ſide emboſſed the ſtraunge and liuely pictures of wilde beaſtes, it had in a manner all the graces and ſumptuous ornaments that coulde be imagined to the beautifying of a worke. Howbeit, amiddeſt other his famous deedes, this purchaſed him the greateſt dignitie, that perceyuing the land to be oppreſſed with debt, and A ſtatute againſt borovvers. many creditours like to be indamaged by great loſſe, he inacted foorthwith, that who ſo borrowed aught vppon credite, ſhoulde lay to pledge the dead body of his father, to be vſed at the diſcretion of the creditour, and to be buryed by him in what manner he woulde, for a pennaunce to all thoſe that tooke any thing of loane: prouiding moreouer, that in caſe he refuſed to repay the debt, he ſhould neyther be buryed in the tombe of his fathers, nor in any other ſepulchre, neyther himſelfe, nor the iſſue that ſhould deſcend and ſpring of his body. This prince deſiring to ſurpaſſe all that had bene before him, left in memorie of himſelfe an excellente pyre built all of clay, wherein was a ſtone ſet ingrauen in theſe wordes: Compare me not to the reſt of the pyres, which I ſurmount as farre as Iupiter excelleth the meaner gods, for ſearching the bottome of the riuer with a ſcoupe, looke what clay they brought vp, the ſame they employed to the building of me in ſuch forme and bigneſſe as you may beholde. And this did Aſychis imagine to aduance the fame of himſelfe to the time to come.
            After whome, the ſcepter was held by one Anyſis a blynde man, inhabiting in a city called after his owne name Anyſis. In time of whoſe raigne, Sabbacus King of Aethyopia inuaded Anyſis the next King. Sabbacus vanquished Aegypt, ruling fifty yeares. 
               Aegypt with a mightie power. Where at the poore blinde King greatly affrighted, crope priuily away, and gayned a priuie couert in the marriſhe places of the countrey, leauyng the gouernement to Sabbacus his enemie, whiche ruled the

ſame 50. yeares, whoſe actes are mentioned to haue beene theſe. If any of the Aegyptians made a treſpaſſe, he neuer vſed to do any man to death for his offence, but according to ye quantity of his fault, to enioyne him to arrere & make higher by forreine ſupply of earth and ſtone, ſome parte of the city wherein he dwelt, for which cauſe, the cities became very high and eminent, being much more loftely ſituated then before. For firſt of all in time of Seſoſtris ſuch earth as was caſt out of the trenches (which were made to geue the water a courſe to the cities that were farre off) was employed to the eleuation & aduancing of the lowe townes, and now agayne vnder this Aethyopian they had increaſe of freſh earth, and grew to be very high and lofty. Amongſt the reſt, the noble city of Bubaſtis ſeemeth The deſcription of the temple of Diana. to be very haughty & highly planted, in which city is a temple of excellent memory dedicate to the goddeſſe Bubaſtis, called in our ſpeach Diana, then the which, albeit there be other churches both bigger and more richly furniſhed, yet for the ſightly grace and ſeemelyneſſe of building, there is none comparable vnto it. Beſides, the very entrance and way that leadeth into the city, the reſt is informe of an Ilande, incloſed round about with two ſundry ſtreames of the riuer Nilus, which runne to either ſide of the path way, and leauing as it were a lane or cauſey betweene them, without meeting, take their courſe another way. Theſe armes of the floud are eache of them an hundred foote broade, beſet on both ſides the banckes with fayre braunched trees, ouerſhadowing ye waters with a coole & pleaſant ſhade. The gate or entry of the city is in heighth 10. paces, hauing in the front a beautifull image. 6. cubites in meaſure. The temple it ſelfe ſituate in the middeſt of ye city, is euermore in ſight to thoſe yt paſſe to and fro. For although ye city by addition of earth was arrered & made higher, yet ye temple ſtāding as it did in ye beginning, & neuer mooued, is in maner of a lofty & ſtately tower, in open & cleare viewe to euery parte of ye city. Round about the which goeth a wall ingrauen with figures & protraitures of ſundry beaſts. The inner temple is enuironed with an high groue of trees, ſet and planted by the hande and induſtrie of men: in the whiche temple is ſtanding an image. The length of the temple is euery way a furlong.
            
               
From the entrance of the temple Eaſtward, there is a fayre large cauſey leading to the houſe of Mercury, in length, three furlongs, and foure acres broade, all of faire ſtone, & hemmed in on each ſide with a courſe of goodly call trees planted by the hands of men, and thus as touching the deſcription of y• temple. Likewiſe they make mention in what maner they ſhifted their hands of y• 
               Aethiopian prince, who admoniſhed in his ſleepe by The departure of Sabbacus. a viſion, haſtned his flight to depart y• countrey. There ſeemed vnto him one ſtanding by his bedſide, willing him in any wiſe to aſſemble together y• prieſts of Aegypt, & to cut thē all aſunder by y• waſte: which the King pondering in his mind, ſaid thus, I wel perceiue that y• gods would picke a quarrel agaynſt me, that by the doing of ſome villany or other, I might either incur their hatred, or the diſpleaſure of men, but ſince the time of my rule in Aegypt, which by y• oracle was prefined, is nowe exſpired, I will kindle no moe coales then I may well quenche, wherewith departing y• countrey, he left the gouernement to y• ſeed of the Aegyptians, & retired himſelfe into his owne lande. For abiding beforetime in Aethiopia the oracles which the Aethiopians vſe, gaue out to the King, that he ſhoulde beare rule 50. yeares in Aegypt, which time being finiſhed, Sabbacus ſore troubled with y• ſtrange ſight of his dreame, of his own proper wil departed the liſtes of the countrey. Inſuing whoſe flight, y• blinde King forſaking his neſt in the fennes, came out, & ſhewed his head againe, exerciſing gouernemēt as he had done before, hauing wonderfully inlarged the Iland where he lay, with addition of aſhes & freſh earth. For whoſoeuer of the Aegyptiās came vnto him either with grayne or other prouiſion, his manner was to giue him in charge, that vnwitting to the Aethiopian prince (who then withheld frō him the right of his kingdome) he ſhould preſent him with a loade or two of aſhes. This Ile before y• time of Amyrtaeus was vnknowne to any mā, named in y• 
               Aegyptiā
                lāguage Elbo, being in bignes. 10. furlōgs. Next after whome, the title ro all was reſigned ouer to a certaine prieſt called Sethon, ſeruing in y• temple of the god Vulcane 
               Sethon. by whom, the ſouldyers of Aegypt were abuſed & had in contempt as men vnfit, & not ſeruing for his purpoſe. Wherefore

beſide other ſlaunderous tauntes & reuiling words, wherby he ſought at all times to greeue thē, he bereaued thē alſo of ſuch lāds and reuenues as had bene graunted vnto them by the former Kings: for which cauſe, after that Senacherib King of the Arabians & Aſſyrians had inuaded Aegypt with a mighty power, they refuſed to yeeld him ayd & aſſiſtāce in his warres. The prieſt driuen to this ſudden blanke, not knowing howe to ſhift, withdrewe himſelfe into a cloſe parlour, where complayning himſelfe before his god, he ſhewed what great & imminent perils were like to befall him. As he was in this ſort powring out his teares & pitiful complaints before his image, he fell aſleepe, where there ſeemed to appeare vnto him the ſtraunge forme of his god, willing him to be of good comfort, and meete his enemies in the field, not fearing the euent of battayle, forſomuch as he would ſend him ſufficiēt aide to aſſiſt and ſuccour him. Maiſter parſon taking hart of grace by this bleſſed viſion, tooke with him ſuch of the Aegyptians as were willing to follow him, & incamped in Peluſia, on which ſide only Aegypt lieth open, and may be inuaded by forreine power, in whoſe cauſe, not one of the ſouldiers would mooue a foote to followe him out of dores, but pedlers, tinkers, & common gadders that ſtrayed here & there about the countrey. Being arriued at the place before named, in y• night ſeaſon, there came into the tents of their aduerſaries an huge multitude of field mice, which gnawed their quiuers, but in ſunder their bowſtrings, & the braces off their ſhields, y• in y• morning being diſfurniſhed of their armour, they betooke thēſelues to flight, not without the loſſe of many ſouldiers. Herehence is it y• the picture of y• ſame prince grauen of ſtone, is ſeene ſtanding in y• temple of Vulcane with this title & inſeription, Learne by me to feare God. Thus far The revvard of godlineſſe. went the Aegyptians & their prieſts in deſcribing the cōtinual ſucceſſion of their kings & gouernours, alleadging that frō the firſt King vnto this prieſt of Vulcane before mentioned, were 341. generations. Three hundred generatiōs conteine ten thouſand yeares, forſomuch as to three progenies of men are aſſigned an hundred yeares, ſo y• the reſidue of the progenies which were 41. are valued at 1340. yeares. Likewiſe they affirmed, y•
               
in the courſe of ten thouſand three hundred and forty yeares, there appeared no god in Aegypt vnder the proportion & ſhape of a man, neyther coulde any ſuch thing be mentioned to haue falne out vnder the gouernance of any of their princes, howbeit, within the tearme of yeares aforenamed, theſe ſtrange alterations Myracles chanced in the Sunne. were marked in y• Sunne at foure ſundry times. Two ſundry times it was ſeene to riſe frō that place where it is now wont to fall, and in like maner to ſet in thoſe regions frō whēce it now ariſeth, which alſo came to paſſe two ſeueral times. Iuſuing which things, there was no change in y• countrey, no alteration in any poynt, neither as touching the effects & courſe of the riuer, nor for any maladies, death, or inconueniences in the lande. In like ſorte, before Hecataeus the writer of monuments (by whome in the city of Thebes a rehearſall was made of the whole diſcent of his ſtocke & kindred, fetching his progeny frō the xvi. god) the prieſt of Iupiter did this, (as alſo to my ſelfe that made no relation of mine alliance) leading vs into a large chappel or houſe of praier, they ſhewed vs both the number of our auncetry according to our own account. Wherin alſo ſtood the images of certaine chiefe prieſts & Biſhops in ſuch forme & maner as euery one had led his life, where, by orderly diſcent & iſſue they ſhewed vs in what maner y• ſonne had euermore ſucceeded his father in y• office of prieſthode, reciting euery one of their images vntill they came to the laſt. Heerein alſo they diſliked y• ſpeach of Hecataeus y• ſought to fetch his progeny frō y• xvi. god, making him another account of his kinſfolke & allies, ſhewing him how abſurd a thing it was, & diſagreeing from reaſon for a man to deriue his iſſue frō a god. For which cauſe, in reciting the genealogies, they diſprooued his account in this wiſe, relating howe each of theſe images were in theyr ſpeach named Pyromis, which name they tooke by diſcent, the ſonne frō the father by line all courſe to y• nūber of 345. whoſe pictures were ſtanding in y• ſame oratory. Theſe Pyromes (as they termed thē) were ſuch mē as had no affinity with y• gods, neither coulde chalenge their progeny of any one of the chiefe nobles & potentates, being ſuch as y• 
               Grecians call 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that is, an honeſt, ſimple, & wel meaning mā. Of which ſort were al thoſe whoſe monumēts were extant in y• place very

far frō being allied wt any of the gods. Before theſe mē, y• gods thēſelues were rulers in Aegypt, hauing their dwelling and abode together with mē. Notwithſtāding, being many in number, they gouerned not the countrey all at once, but ſome one of thē for a time, or ech in courſe, til at lēgth y• ſcepter came to the hāds of Orus ſonne of Oſiris whom the Graecians call Apollo. The laſt & yongeſt of al the gods by the Grecians account, are Hercules, Dioniſius, & Pan. Albeit Pan with the Aegyptians is a grandſire god, one of the moſt auncientſt among them, in the nūber of thoſe eight y• are y• chief & principal. Hercules is reckned in y• nūber of y• xii. meaner ſaints. Dioniſius among thoſe y• are called y• iii. ſaincts, iſſued of the xii. former. From Dioniſius (who is ſaid to be the ſonne of Cadmus by Semele) vnto this our age, are 6000. yeares. From Hercules ſprong of Alcmena to this time welny 9000. From Pan ſonne of Mercury, begotten of the Lady Penelope, vnto theſe daies wherin we liue, the time is not ſo long as frō the Troiane war, to wit, 8000. yeres or there aboutes. In all theſe thinges we leaue it free to euery ones fancy to follow what he will, our ſelues beſt liking of the cōmon opinion which is generally receiued of all men. For if theſe gods beeing renowmed with great fame in Graece, had The Greekes tooke theyr ſaints from the Aegyptians. there alſo waſted the whole courſe of their age (as Hercules deſcended of Amphytrio, Dioniſius of Semele, Pan of Penelope) happily ſome man would haue ſayde that the Aegyptians had worſhipped ſome other gods, whiche beeing of the ſame name with theſe before mentioned, were notwithſtanding in time long before them. Nowe the Graecians themſelues confeſſe, that Dioniſius being begotten by Iupiter, was no ſooner borne, but he cleaued faſt to his fathers thigh, and was caryed away by hym into Nyſſa, which is a towne in Aethyopia neere vnto Aegypt. Of Pan they make ſhorte worke, as ignorant in what parte of the worlde after his birth hee was broughte vp and nouriſhed. Whereby it is eaſily coniectured, that the names of theſe gods came of later dayes to the eares of y• 
               Graecians, and that accordyng to that notice, they began to frame for eache of them a cradle in Greece, as though they had beene borne there, planting more vpō heareſay, then certaine truth.

Thus farre we haue followed the ſayings of the Aegyptians, from hencefoorth minding to ſet downe the conſente of others, wherein they accord with the people of Aegypt as concerning ſuch things as were done in that countrey, adding thereto ſuch matters as our ſelues haue bene beholders of, & eyewitneſſes.
            The laſt King (beeing as before was mentioned the prieſt of Vulcane) leauing the ſeate imperiall void by his death, ye 
               Aegyptians 
               The tvvelue Kings of Aegypt. being now at liberty, & yet vnable to liue without the aid of gouernemēt, choſe vnto thēſelues 12. princes, deuiding ye whole lād into ſo many partes. Theſe 12. ioyning betweene thē
               ſelues mutual kindred & affinity, exerciſed the authority & office of Kings, eſtabliſhing mutuall league & couenaunts, that none ſhould incroch or gather vpō another, but holding himſelfe ſatiſfied with an equall portion, ſhould liue in friendſhip and amity with the reſt, which their league & agreemēt they ſought by ſo much the more diligence & warines to confirme & ſtrengthen, for that in ye firſt entrance to their kingdomes a prophecie was geuen out, that who ſo dranke of a braſen mazer in the temple of Vulcane, ſhould be King alone ouer the whole lād. When the ſacred rites and ceremonies obſerued in ſtriking of league & making couenāt were duly accompliſhed, it liked thē all to leaue ſome cōmon monumēt or worke behinde thē to the continuance of their memories, which they did, making a labyrinth or maze ſomewhat aboue the poole called Maeris toward The Labyrinth. the city, much more greater & famous thā ye brute goeth. This I beheld with mine eies, being named The Maze of the Crocodyles: for if a mā would frame his cōiecture according to the report which ye 
               Graecians make therof, meaſuring the walles & beauty of ye work after their account, certes he ſhal giue but a beggerly iudgemēt of ſo ſumptuous & magnificent a building. For albeit ye temple of Epheſus be an excellent & worthy monumēt, & the church or religious houſe of Samos, yet are they nothing in reſpect of ye pires in Aegypt, one of yt which may well ſtād in cōpariſon wt all ye renowmed works of Greece, and yet euē theſe are far excelled & ſurmounted by ye labyrinth. In this princely monumēt are 12. moſt fair & ſumptuous haules, whoſe gates opē oppoſit ech againſt other, 6. ſtāding north neere adioing together, ye other 6. ſouth, garded about wt ye ſame walls.
            
               
The roomes and lodgings therein conteyned, are of two ſorts, ſome lower, wrought cellar wiſe vnder the ground, other aboue theſe, being together in number three thouſand and ſixe hundred. Of ſuch roomes as were ſituate in the ſeconde ſtory, our ſelues had the full ſight and viewe, ſpeaking no more therof then we beheld with our eyes, following in the reſt the report of others, forſomuch as the vnder buildings were kepte couert from the ſight of all that were trauellers, becauſe in them lay the tombes of thoſe Kings that were the founders of that place, with the bodies and dead carkaſſes of the ſacred Crocodyles. Thus of the neathermoſt houſe we ſpeake by heareſay, of the lodgings aboue viewing with our owne eyes, more ſtraunge & wonderfull miracles then could be wrought by the helpe of men, for the ſundry turnings and windings leading from one chamber to another, did wonderfully amaze and aſtoniſh my wits. Out of the great haules we go into certaine The deſcription of the caues that are in the Laberinth. parlours, wherehence the way leadeth in other bedchambers, next vnto which are ſituate diuers ſecrete lodgings that open into the ſixe great haules, ſtanding on the contrarie parte of the court, all which are coped ouer aboue with wrought and carued ſtone, incompaſſed alſo with a wall of moſt fayre and beautifull ſtone, ingrauen with ſundrie ſorts of pictures. Euery one of the haules are layde with ſmooth white ſtone, beautified on each ſide with a goodly courſe of pillers. To one corner of the Laberinth is adioyning a pyre or towre of ſtone, being fortie paces, wherein are the pictures of many ſtraunge beaſtes hewne out and carued of ſtone. To this towre is a way vndermined in the ground. Notwithſtanding, for all the wonders that are to be ſeene and marked in the Laberinth, the poole called Maeris, neere bounding vnto the ſame, hath (in our iudgemēt) ſundry things thereto belonging of farre greater admiration. The compaſſe of this ponde is three thouſande ſixe hundred furlongs, and ſixty Schoenes as they tearme them, conteyning alltogether as much ſpace as the ſea coaſt of the countrey of Aegypt. The length of the poole lyeth North and South, being in deapth where it is higheſt fiftie paees. Now that it hath not ſprong naturally in that place, but rather hath

bene wrought and digged by the trauell of men, this is an euident proofe, for that welnye in the middeſt of the ponde are planted two mightie towres of ſtone appearing fiftie foote aboue the water, and beeing as much vnder. On the toppe of ech towre is a great image wrought of ſtone, ſitting in a chaire of maieſtie, ſo that the towres conteyne in heigth an hundreth paces. An hundreth full paces do make a furlong of ſixe acres. A pace conteyneth ſixe feete, or foure cubites. A foote is foure times the breadth of the hande. The water of Moeris is not naturally flowing from any ſpring belonging thereto (the grounde beeyng exceedyngly patched and drie) but is deriued from the riuer, the water hauing recourſe into the poole euerie ſixe monethes by ebbing and flowing. The ſixe monethes wherein the water is retyring out of the ponde, the multitude of fiſhe which is there taken, increaſeth the Kings fiſke euery day by a talent of ſiluer, and at ſuche time as it refloweth agayne, it bringeth aduantage of twentie pounde a daye. Thys poole, the inhabitants affyrme, ſearcheth through the vames of the earth, and ſheddeth his waters into the Syr
                  •
               s or quickeſands of Africa, vndermining a ſecrete courſe into the mayne land towarde the countreys of the Weſt, faſt by the ſide of an huge mountayne which appeareth ouer the city Memphis. Now forſomuch as I could not diſcerne how all the molde ſhould be beſtowed that was caſt out of the poole at the firſte making thereof, being deſirous to knowe what was become of it, I queſtioned with the inhabitaunts of thoſe places as touching the ſame, whoſe anſwere was, that it was employde to the rampeiring of the bankes of Nilus, and much of it throwne downe the riuer, whoſe ſpeach obteyned the more credite wyth me, for that I remembred the like thing to haue bene done at the city Ninus, one of the chiefe cities of Aſſyria. In this city it fell out in auncient time, that certayne good fellowes wanting ſiluer, determined to viſit the Kings treaſurie, who at that time was Sardanapalus abounding with infinite ſummes of treaſure, which for that it lay ſafely garded vnder the earth in houſes vndermined for the purpoſe, theſe yonkers aforeſayde beginning at their owne houſes, made a way vnder grounde,

directly leading to the pallace of the King, voyding all the mold which they digged, into the riuer Tigris by night, which floweth faſt by the city, vntill they had brought their enterpriſe to paſſe. After the ſame manner it fell out in Aegypt, in caſting the lake of Maeris, ſauing that the one was digged by night, the other by day, but in this alſo, the greateſt parte of the boyde earth was caſt into Nilus, and diſperſed by the ſtreame. And in this manner ſay the Aegyptians, was the poole of Maeris firſte made. Now when as the 12. Kings of Aegypt had practiſed equity euery one within his owne territory, they drew together at a certaine time to do ſacrifice in Vulcans temple, where (as ye maner was) ye laſt day of ye feſtiuall, the prieſt miniſtred wine vnto thē in certaine chalices of gold reſerued for the ſame vſe, where happily miſſing of his number, hauing but xi. cups for xii. princes, Pſammitichus ſtanding laſt, tooke from his head a braſen coſtlet, and for want of a cup, dranke therein. In lyke maner fel it out with the reſt of the princes, that euery one was there preſente in his headpeece of braſſe. In thus doyng, it was deemed that Pſammitichus meante no crafte or legerde
               
                  •
               ayne, but had a playne & ſimple meaning. Howbeit, it could not ſinke with the reſt but that he did it of purpoſe, and comming in mind of the oracle that was geuen them, that whoſoeuer dranke of a braſen chalice, ſhould vſurpe the whole empyre alone: weying his facte, and finding that it was committed by errour, they thought it not meete to put him to death, but depriuing him of the greateſt parte of his dominion, baniſhed him into the marriſh countrey, with eſpeciall threates, that he ſhould not meddle with any parte of the countrey beſides. Notwithſtanding, Pſammitichus hauing put to flight Sabbacus the Kyng of the Aethyopians, and chaſed hym into Syria, after this conqueſt was acquit of hys exile, and reſtored agayne by thoſe Aegyptians which are of the tribe of Sais, wherefore, once agayne vſing gouernement wyth the reſt of hys confederates, for the olde grudge of the braſen helmet, they forced him to take the fennes agayne. Recounting therefore with himſelfe Pſammitichus became prince alone. ye great deſpight they had wrought him, determined eftſoones to reuenge his cauſe vpon thoſe yt had purſued him, & ſpeeding

a meſſenger to the oracle of Latona in the citie of Butis, which of all the ſeates of ſouthſaying is of greateſt truth, aunſwere was giuen him to be of good courage, he ſhoulde haue helpe inough by braſen men that ſhoulde ariſe from the ſea. Which prophecie for the ſtrangeneſſe thereof could hardly ſincke into his braines, to make him hope for the helpe of braſen ſouldyders. Not long after, certayne pyrates of Ionia and Caria proling alongſt the ſeacoaſtes for their pray, were by conſtraynte of weather driuen vpon the ſhores of Aegypt, where going on lande all in armour of braſſe, a certayne Aegyptian ranne to Pſammitichus in the fennes, and for that he had neuer before ſeene any in the like array, he tolde him that certayne braſen men were ſproong out of the ſea to waſte and deſpoyle the countrey. Pſammitichus reknowledging the truth of the prophecie, foorthwith ioyned himſelfe in amitie with the rouers, inducing them by great and large promiſes to abide with him, which being by him in like ſorte obteyned, with this freſh ſupply of forreyne ayde, and the helpe of ſuch Aegyptians as fauoured his cauſe, he prouided againſt the reſt of the princes. Hauing the whole gouernemente alone, he made in the city of Memphis certayne porches ſacred to the god Vulcane, lying vpon the South winde, and oueragainſt the porches a fayre large haule dedicated to Apis, wherein the god Apis at ſuche time as he appeared, was releeued and nouriſhed. This place was beſet round with ſtately pillers, and ingrauen with ſundrie ſimilitudes and imboſſements of beaſtes, foules, and fiſhes. Wherein alſo in place of ſome pillers are planted diuers fayre images of no leſſe then twelue cubites in bigneſſe. To theſe forreiners of Caria and Ionia, by whome he was holpen in his warres, Pſammetichus gaue certayne manner places to dwell in, lying on each ſide of the riuer Nilus called the Tentes, whereof beeing poſſeſſed, he performed all ſuch promiſes beſides that were couenaunted betweene them. Moreouer, he put vnto them certayne yong impes of the Aegyptians to be inſtructed in the Greeke language, from whome, by diſcent of iſſue came thoſe which are now interpreters in Aegypt, and vſe the Greeke tongue. A long time did the people of Ionia and

               Caria inhabite thoſe places lying againſt the ſea, ſomewhat aboue the city of Bubaſtis, ſituate at the mouth of Nilus, which is called Peluſiacum, from whence, they were afterwardes tranſlated by King Amaſis into the city Memphis to gard him againſt the Aegyptians. After the Greekes were thus ſetled in Aegypt, the people of Greece had traffique thither, by which meanes, ſuch affayres as were atchieued in that countrey from Pſammitichus following, are certaynely knowne of vs without any errour. Theſe were the firſt that inhabited Aegypt, being of a diuers language from the homelings. In like manner, from whence they fleeted thither, the reliques of their ſhips wherein they came, the olde poſtes and groundreels of their houſes were ſhewed me. And theſe were the meanes whereby Pſammitichus obteyned the dominiou of Aegypt. As touching the oracle or ſeate of prophecie, we haue made many wordes, and will make more, as of a thing moſt worthy to be mentioned. This oracle is planted in the temple of the goddeſſe Latona in a great city named Butis ſtanding againſt the mouth of Nilus which is called Sebenniticum, into the which they haue entry that from the vpper parte of the ſea cut againſt the ſtreame. In this city alſo are the temples of Apollo and Diana, and the great pallace of Latona, wherein is the place of diuination, hauing a gallery belonging to it tenne paces high. Heerein ſuche things as might lawfully be ſeene, and deſerued greateſt admiration, of thoſe I meane to make report. In this temple of Latona is a ſmall chappell framed of one ſtone, whoſe walles beeing of equall heigth, were in length forty cubites: which ſemblably was coped ouer the top with another ſtone, beeing foure cubites in thickeneſſe. Wherefore of all thoſe things that were pertayning to the temple, there was nothing that deſerued greater woonder then this little chappell. Next to this is an Ilande called Echemmis ſtanding in the middeſt of a deepe and wide lake a little beſides the chiefe An Iland that ſvvimmeth. temple, whiche the Aegyptians ſuppoſe to ſwimme and to be borne vp of the waters. Howbeit, I neither ſawe it ſwimme nor mooue, maruayling very much (if it were true) that an Iland ſhould be caryed in the waters. In this Ile is planted the

temple of Apollo, a greate and ſumptuous building, lykewyſe three rewes of aultares, and many fayre palme-trees, ſome very kynde and bearing fruite, other fruiteleſſe and barren.
            The Aegyptians alſo render a cauſe of the ſwimming of this Ilande, ſaying thus: that at what time Latona (which is one of the eyght ſaints that are of greateſt antiquity amongſt them) dwelt in the city of Butis whereas nowe the oracle is helde: ſhe tooke the ſauegard of Apollo commended vnto her Iſis, the mother of Apollo by his mother Iſis, and preſerued hys lyfe in the ſame Ilande, beeyng at that tyme ſtedfaſt and immoueable, when as Typhon made ſo diligente ſearche in all places to finde out the ſonne of Oſyris. For heere we muſt vnderſtande, that thys people imagine Apollo and Diana to be the children of Dioniſius and Iſis, and that Latona was but theyr nourſe and bringer vp, that delyuered them from perill. Apollo in the Aegyptian tongue is called Horus. Ceres hath the name of Iſis: Diana, of Bubaſtis, from whence Aeſchilus the ſonne of Euphorion drew his opinion, which alone of all the reſt of the poets maketh Diana daughter to Ceres, after which euent, the Ile (ſay they) became looſe, and was marked to floate and mooue in the water.
            
               Pſammitichus gouerned in Aegypt 54. yeares, 29. of the Pſammitichus raigned 54. yeares. which he ſpent in the aſſeige of the great city of Syria, which at length he ſubdued. This city is called Azotus, which of all the cities that euer wee hearde of, ſuſteyned the longeſt aſſaulte.
            Inſuing the raigne of Pſammitichus, the gouernemente of the countrey fell to Necus hys ſonne: by whome, firſt of all Necus King of Aegypt. was the channell digged that leadeth to the red ſea, whyche afterwardes was caſt afreſhe, and made deeper by Darius the Perſian.
            
            The length of thys courſe was foure dayes ſayling, the breadth ſuch, as two reaſonable veſſels of three oares apeece might well ſayle in it together.
            The water which is deriued from Nilus into this channell, floweth into it alittle aboue the city Bubaſtis, againſt a towne

of Arabia named Patumon, and ſo continueth hys courſe vnto the red Sea.
            They beganne firſt to digge from the playne of Aegypt towardes Arabia, for all the countrey aboue the playne is filled and occupyed wyth a courſe of greate mountaynes neere vnto the citie Memphis, wherein are many pittes and quarries of ſtone, wherefore from the roote of thys mountayne is the channell deriued, continuing a long courſe towardes the Eaſt, vntyll it come to the place where the hyll parteth in twayne, whyche diſtaunce and ſeparation betweene the mountaynes openeth to the South regions, and leadeth to the narrow ſeas of Arabia.
            
            In the digging of thys courſe there periſhed an hundred and twentie thouſande of the people of Aegypt.
            
            When thys enterpriſe was halfe done, Necus brake off and lefte it vnfiniſhed, being diſcouraged by a prophecie that tolde hym that hee toyled for the profite and behoofe of a Barbarian.
            
            The Aegyptians tearme them all Barbarians which are of a ſundry language. Necus therefore leauing hys worke vnfiniſhed, applyed hys ſtudie to the prouiſion of warre, gathering ſouldyers, and preparing a fleete of warring Shippes, ſome of the which were builte at the North Seas, others in the ſtrayghtes of Arabia at the red Sea, ſome tokens whereof are yet to be ſeene in the ſame places. Thys Fleete he employed in hys affayres continuallie ſo long as it fitted hym to the vſe of warre.
            Forſaking afterwards the Sea, and giuing himſelfe to The actes of King Necus. battailes by the land, where, in a conflict with the Syrians at a place named Magdolos, he wanne the renowne of the fielde, and after the battayle was ended, tooke the greate city Caditis.
            
            And beeyng very neate and fine in hys apparrell, he ſent a ſute of hys braueſt array to Apollo in Branchidae, a certayne field of the Mileſians. In the ende, after he had held the Kingdome ſeauenteene yeares, hee then died, leauing the title Necus raigned 17. yeares.
               
of his ſoueraignety to Pſammis his ſonne. During whoſe raigne, a certayne people called Helus ſent meſſengers abrode Pſammis King of the Aegyptians. into all regions, to giue them to vnderſtand how by them was deuiſed a game in Olympus of greater admiration and equitie, then by any that euer had vſed that place, ſuppoſing that the Aegyptians (who had the prayſe of wiſedome aboue all nations) could not better or more iuſtly diſpoſe of theſe matters then themſelues. When they were come into Aegypt, and had told the cauſe of their arriuall thither, the King aſſembled ſuch of the Aegyptians as were moſt excellent for graue and ſage advice aboue the reſt. To whome, when the Helians had made diſcourſe of all thoſe things which they had ordeyned in the ſetting foorth of this noble combate; and had aſked the Aegyptians if they could deuiſe anything better, after deliberation had of the matter, they aſked the Helians whether they had inacted that citizens ſhould mayntayne the controuerſie againſt ſtrangers, or otherwiſe, who aunſwered, that it was indifferently lawfull for all to ſtriue of what countrey ſoeuer he were: wherto the Aegyptians replyed, that it coulde no wiſe ſtande wyth iuſtice, forſomuch as one citizen would ſhew fauour to another, & by that meanes by partial dealing do iniurie to thoſe yt came frō farre, ſo that in caſe they would order ye matter with more equity, and for that cauſe had arriued in Aegypt, it were better to make the game for ſtrangers alone, not ſuffering any of the Helians to ſtriue. Theſe things the Aegyptians put into theyr heads and ſent them packing. Pſammis hauing raigned full Pſammis raigned ſixe yeares. out ſixe yeares, and making a voyage of warre into Aethyopla, incontinently dyed.
            After whome, ſucceeded his ſonne Apryes the moſt fortunateſt of all the princes that had ruled before him, excepting Apryes King after the deceaſſe of Pſammis. 
               Pſammiti
                     〈…〉
                  
                his great graundfire, gouerning the countrey 25. yeares. During which time, he warred vpon Sydon and fought with the people of Tyrus by Sea. Howbeit, fortune owing him a deſpight, ſhe payde him home at length, the cauſe where of, we withriefely touch at this preſent, deferring a more ample diſcourſe of the ſame, till we come to ſpeake of the affayres of the Punickes. When as therefore vndertaking a

iourney againſt the Cyrenians he had ſuffered great loſſe of his men: the Aegyptians cōtinuing hatred againſt him, denied their allegeaunce & rebelled, ſuppoſing yt he had betrayed their liues on purpoſe, to the end that with more ſecurity he might gouerne thoſe yt remained. For which cauſe in great diſdayne, aſwell ſuch as forſooke him & returned home, as alſo the friends of theſe yt had died in the battell, ſtoode at defiance with the king, renoūceing all duties of ſubiection. Apryes witting hereof, ſent Amaſis to treate peace with them: who, when he came & in many words had rebuked their diſloyalty, one of the Aegyptians ſtanding behinde him clapt a Coſtlet on his head, ſaying hee had done it to Amaſis roſe againſt Apryes. make him King. Amaſis nothing diſcontent herewith, was no ſoner proclaymed King by the rebells, but forthwith he put himſelfe in a readineſſe to encounter with Apryes. Apryes vnderſtanding this, ſent one of the Aegyptians named, Patarbemes a man of approued vertue, with eſpeciall charge to bring to him Amaſis alyue. Who arryuing ſpeedely at the place where hee was: tolde him the Kinges pleaſure. Amaſis ſittinge on horſe backe and incouraginge thoſe that were about him, commaū
               ded Patarbemes to bring Apryes vnto him: Patarbemes once agayne willing him to make ſpeede to the King, who had ſente for him: hee anſwered that hee woulde come with all ſpeede poſſible, ſayinge, that the Kinge ſhoulde haue no cauſe to complayne of his ſlackneſſe, for hee purpoſed, god willing, to bee with him ſhortely, and bringe him more company. Patarbemes perceiuinge by his maner of ſpeache and dealinges what hee was mynded to doe, thought with as much ſpeede as hee coulde to geue notice to the King: and being returned, Apryes in a great rage, for that hee had lefte Amaſis behinde him, without any woordes, by and by commaunded his Noſe and his Cares to bee cut of. The reſt of the Aegyptians that followed the Kinges partes ſeeing this, that ſo worthy and renowmed a man ſhould without cauſe ſuffer ſo great ſhame and reproche amongſt them, without any delay fled ouer to the rebelles and came to Amaſis. Apryes increaſing his fury, put in armoure all ſuch as of forrayne countries were

hyrelinges in his hoſte (which hee had of Iönia and Caria, aboute thirty thowſande men) and marched agaynſt the Aegyptians. Hee had in the City Saïs a very great & gorgeous Pallace. The armyes therefore of bothe parties, incamped agaynſt other at the City Memphis, there to abide the lot and euent of the battayle.
            Nowe the people of Aegypt are diuerſly addicted, amongſt whom are to bee marked ſeuen ſundry Trades and kindes of lyuing: which are theſe: Prieſts, Souldiers, Graſiers, Neateheardes, 
               The trades of lyuing in Aegypt. 
               Saleſmen, Interpreters, Maryners: ſo many kindes bee there of this people, taken of the Trade or crafte which euery one followeth. Likewiſe, the ſouldiers are called Calaſiries and Hermotybies dwelling in certayne regions. For the whole countreye of Aegypte is diſtinguiſhed into certaine territories. The coaſtes of the Hermotybies are theſe. Buſiris, Saïs, Chemmis, Papremis, and the halfe parte of the Iland Proſopis, otherwiſe called Natho. In theſe quarters are inhabyting of the ſouldiers Hermotybies 160. thowſande, none of the which geue themſelues to manuary artes or any trade of gayne, but wholly practiſe the ſcience of armes. Moreouer, to ye 
               Calaſyrians are aſſigned theſe regions: Thebana, Bubaſtiana, Aphthitana, Tanitana, Mendeſia, Sebenitana, Athribitana, Pharbaethitana, Thmuitana, Thnuphitana, Anyſia, Myecphoritana, which tribe poſſeſſeth an Iland lying againſt the City Bubaſtis. The tribes of the Calaſyrians, when they are muſtered to the moſt, yeelde to the warre two hundred and fiftye thowſand men, which are neuer trained vp in any thing but in feates of Chiualry, the Sonne learning of his father.
            Which cuſtome, whether the Greekes tooke from the Aegyptians, or borowed it from els where, I can not certainely Craftſmen of all others leaſt ſet by, and ſouldiers moſt. ſay, ſeeing that in Scythia, Perſia, and Lydia, and welnigh all the countreyes of the Barbarians, the baſeſt ſorte of Cityzens are ſuch as exerciſe handicraftes, and their children of leaſte accounte: and they beſt regarded which are leaſte conuerſante in the ſame, eſpecially ſuch as are employed in the fielde.
            The ſame maner alſo doe the Grecians obſerue, and chiefly

the Lacedaemonyans, and euen amonge the Corinthyans, craftſmen and ſuch others are debaſed to the loweſt degree.
            To theſe gentlemen ſouldiers, this chiefe honour is aſſigned The honoure of ſouldiers in Aegypt. aboue all ſortes of men, ſauing thoſe onely that are buſied in the ſeruice of the Sainctes, that to euery one of them is allotted twelue portions of ſinguler good grounde, exempt & free from all kinde of Tribute and Penſion, and ſeuerall to their owne vſe and behoofe. Each plot of grounde contayning euery way an hundred cubyts by the Aegyptian meaſure. A cubyt amongſt the Aegyptians is equall to that which they vſe in Samos.
            
            A thowſand of each company, aſwell of the Calyſirians as Hermatybians, did yearely geue attendaunce, to garde and defend The Kynges Garde. the Kinges body. To whom, beſides the profite & reuennewes of their land, were certayne Farme-places geuen, to each man one. Moreouer, for their lyuery fiue pound of toſted bread, two pounde of Beefe, and a gallon of wyne, which were duely ſerued to them euery day. When as therefore Apryes on the one ſide with his ſtipendaries, and on the other ſide Amaſis with an huge army of the Aegyptians were come into the City Memphis, they cloſed bartaile: where the hyred ſouldiers of Apryes acquited them ſelues very valiauntly, till at the length (being fewer in number) they were put to flight. Apryes was perſwaded that neither god nor the diuell coulde haue ioynted his noſe of the Empyre, hee ſeemed ſo ſurely to haue ſtrengthned it to him ſelfe. Neuertheleſſe, in this fight hee was foyled, taken a liue, and caried to his owne courte in Saïs: where Amaſis kept him more like a Prynce then a pryſoner, for the time that hee lyued. At length the Aegyptians murmuring againſte him, that hee did not well to reſerue a liue a mortall enemy both to himſelfe and the whole country, he delyuered vp Apryes into their handes. Whom they immediatly toke & ſtrangled, & buried The death of Apryes. him in the ſepulcher of his father in the temple of Minerua, neere vnto a certayne Oratory, at the lefte hand as you enter in. Being the vſe with the people of Saïs to burie all ſuch, as out of their tribe haue attayned to the kingdome, within the temple.

For the toumbe of Amaſis is placed vppon the other ſide of the Oratory, contrary to the Sepulcher of Apryes and his Progenitours. Likewiſe, in one place of this Temple is a fayre Chamber builte of ſtone, beautyfied with ſundry Pyllers ingrauen like vnto Palme-trees, being otherwyſe very ſumptuouſly and royally garniſhed. In the middeſt of the Chamber are two mayne Poſts, betwene the which ſtandeth a Cophine. There is alſo a toumbe in the ſame, the name whereof I may not deſcry without breache of Religion.
            At Saïs in the Temple of Minerua, beneath the Churche and neere vnto the walle of Minerua, in a baſe Chappell, are ſtandinge certayne greate brooches of ſtone, whereto is adioyninge a lowe place in manner of a Dungeon, couered ouer wyth a ſtone curiouſly wroughte, the Vaute it ſelfe being on euery ſide carued with moſt exquiſite arte, in biggneſſe matchinge with that in Delos, which is called Trochoïdes. Herein euery one counterfayteth the ſhadowes of hys owne affections and phantaſies in the nyghte ſeaſon, which the Aegyptians call Myſteryes: touchinge which, god forbid, I ſhould aduenture to diſcouer ſo much as they vouchſafed to tell mee. In lyke manner of the Decrees of Ceres, which the Grecians terme 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that is to ſay, the publiſhinge of Lawes and Ordynances: of theſe matters I dare not bee very francke in ſpeakinge, no further then religion wyll permit. This is certayne, that the Daughters of Danaeus were the firſte that brought this cuſtome oute of Aegypte, and made it knowne to the women of Pelaſgos.
            
            But afterwardes miſlyked of the Dores, it was vtterly abolyſhed and lefte off in all the Countrey of Peloponneſus, ſauinge of certayne Arcadians, whom the people of Peloponneſus lycenſed to contynewe in the Countrey, by whome the ſame order was retayned.
            
               Apryes being dead Amaſis raygned in his ſteede being of ye Tribe of Saïs, and trayned vp in a City named Suph. In the Amiſis Kinge of the Aegyptians. firſt entraunce of his raygne the Aegyptians ſet lyght by him, and had him in greate contempte, being ſpronge of no Noble

houſe, but aryſinge of the common troup of the popular ſorte. Whoſe goodwill Amaſis ſoughte to reconcile rather by A deuiſe vvrought by Amaſis to purchaſe the goodvvill of his ſubiects. pollicy then ſeuerity. Being therefore infinitely riche, he had amongeſt other his treaſure, a Baſen of cleane Golde wherein both him ſelfe and his Gueſtes were wont to waſhe their Feete. This Baſon hee cauſed to bee beaten into the forme & Image of a god, and ſet it vp in a fit place of the City. The Aegyptians repayringe to the place, bowed themſelues in great reuerence vnto the Image: which Amaſis hauing learned by his friendes, aſſemblinge the people, tolde them that of the ſame Baſen wherein him ſelfe, and many other of the Aegyptians had bene wonte to vomite, pyſſe, waſhe their feete, and all ſuch baſe exerciſes, was framed the god that they ſo greatly honoured: ſaying, that his owne preſent eſtate was not much vnlyke vnto that Baſon: for albeit, before time he had bene one of the baſeſt degree of the people, yet now being their Kinge hee ought of ryghte to bee had in honour. Whereby the Aegyptians weare ſo allured that they thought it meete afterwards to obeye their Prynce. Who afterwards His cuſtome in adminiſtring the kingdome. obſerued this Cuſtome in dealinge with the affayres of the realme: from the morninge, vntill the places of aſſembly and common meeting were filled, hee ſat vppon all matters, that were brought before him: ſpending the reſt of the day amongſt his companyons in ſwilling, drinking, & ſuch broade and vnſeemely ieſting, as if hee had bene ſome common rybauld or Vyce of a playe. Whereat his friendes aggrieuinge, rebuked him in theſe or ſuch like termes. Moſt worthy Prince, it is a great blemiſh to your name to liue ſo wickedly, more meete it were for you to ſit in a Throne of maieſty and decide the cauſes of your ſubiects, whereby the Aegyptians might knowe them ſelues to bee gouerned by a worthy Prince, and your fame bee increaſed throughout all the lande. To whom hee anſwered. They that owe the Bowe knowe beſt when to bend it: which being alway bent becommeth ſo weake, that it is altogether vnfit for thoſe that ſhoulde vſe it: euen ſo it fareth with thoſe that 
                  •
               yreing themſelues with continuall paynes,

geuing no intermiſſion to their cares, they are ſodenly bereaued either of their right minde, or their perfit members.
            This king, whiles hee lyued without honour, was geuen to His nature. bibbing and ſcoffing without meaſure, neuer greatly minding his affayres: and as ofte as hee wanted to ſerue his turne, and to yeelde ſupply to his pleaſures, he ſought mayntenance by filching and ſtealing, whereof if happily hee were at any time attached, his maner was to ſtand ſtoutly in deniall of the thing and defiance of ye perſon: for which cauſe, being many times brought to the Oracles and places of ſouthſaying: hee was ſometime conuicted by them, and at other times acquited. Wherefore, hauing attayned to the kingdome, which of the gods ſoeuer had acquited him of theft, he had no regard to their temples, did no honour to them, gaue no gyftes, offered no ſacrifice, eſteeming them vnworthy of any reuerence, hauing geuen out a falſe verdite. And ſuch as had pronounced him guilty, to theſe as to the moſt true gods, whoſe Oracles were agreeable to iuſtice, hee perfourmed the greateſt honour hee coulde deuiſe. Beſides, in the City of Saïs hee made a porche to the temple of Minerua, a worke of great admiration, and farre paſſing the reſt, both in heights and bigneſſe, ſo great is the quantity of the ſtones that were employed in the building. Hee erected beſides in the ſame place, diuerſe Images of a wōderfull ſize, & the pictures of many noyſome and peſtilent Serpents. Hee layde there alſo many huge ſtones, to the repayring of the temple, parte of the which were digged out of the ſtone quarryes by Memphis: other of great quantity brought from the city of Elephantina, which is diſtant from Saïs 20. dayes ſayling. Moreouer, that which is not the leaſt wonder, but in my minde to bee reckoned amongſt the chiefeſt: hee brought from Elephantina an houſe framed of one A houſe of one ſtone. ſtone: in the cariage whereof 2000. choyſe men of the Mariners of Aegypt conſumed three yeares. The roufe hereof on the outſide is 21. cubyts longe, 14. cubits broad, & eight cubites highe: being on the inſide 22. cubytes in length, and in height 5. This houſe is ſet at the entring into the temple: geuing this reaſon why it was not brought into the church, for that the chiefe Mariner,

when he had gotten it to that place, as wearie wyth hys dayes worke, tooke reſpite and breached him ſelfe, whereat the King being very much mooued, bad him leaue of work, not permitting him to labour any longer. Some ſay that one of thoſe, which were buſied in heauing of the ſtone with leauers, to haue bene bruiſed to death by it, and that this was the cauſe why it ſtoode without the Pallace. By the ſame King were erected ſundry temples, built by arte very exquiſitely and cunningly, whereof one hee made ſacred to Vulcane: before which lyeth a great Image with the face vpwarde, in length ſeuenty fiue feete, being ſpread along vppon a pauement of ſtone: in the ſelfe ſame place on eache ſide this Image, ſtand two carued monuments of ſtone, twenty foote in quantity. Like vnto this is another ſtone in Saïs, lying in the ſelfe ſame maner. In like ſorte the great temple in Memphis, ſo gorgeous and beautifull to the ſight of all that behold it, was the handiwork alſo of ye ſame King Amaſis. In the time of this Kinges g
                  •
               uernmente Aegypt floryſhed in all wealth, being greatly increaſed, aſwell by the ryches which the ryuer yeeldeth, as in other reuenewes which the people receyue by the countrey, which at the ſame time was ſo populous that there were then inhabited 20000 cityes. Likewiſe, by this Kinge it was enacted, that euerye one ſhould yearely render accounte to the cheife preſident of A ſtatute for arr
                     •
                  rages. the countrey, howe, and by what maner of trade hee gayned his lyuinge: being alwayes prouyding that ſuch as refuſed to doe it at all, or beeinge called to a reckoninge, coulde ſhewe no lawefull meanes, howe they ſpent their tymes; ſhould for the the ſame cauſe bee adiudged to dye.
            Which lawe Solon borowing of the Aegyptians, did publiſh it in Athens, and is by them, for the profite thereof, moſt religiouſly obſerued. Amaſis vppon good affection hee bare to the Grecians, beſides other benefittes franckly beſtowed on them, made it lawefull, for all ſuch as trauayled into Aegypte, to inhabyte the City Naucrates. And ſuch as would not abyde in that place, hauinge more mynde to ſea
                  •
               aring for the vſe of Marchaundize, to thoſe hee gaue lybertye to

Plant aulters and builde churches. So that the greateſt and moſt famous Temple in all the land is called the Grecian temple. The Cityes of the Greekes by whoſe charge and expence this temple was builte in Aegypte, were theſe: of the countrey of Iönia, Chius, Teus, Phocoea, Clazomene: amongſt the Dorians foure Cities: Rhodus, Cnydus, Halicarnaſſus, Phaſelus: one City of the people of Aeolia, namely, Mitylene. To theſe Cityes of Greece is the Temple belonginge, by whom alſo are founde and mayntayned certayne Prieſts to ſerue in the ſame. There are other townes beſides in Greece that haue ſome righte to the Temple, as hauing contributed ſome thinge to the vſe of the ſame.
            Howbeit the Temple of Iupiter, the people of Aegina built of their owne proper coſt. No City toke parte with Samos in ſetting vp the Pallace of Iuno: the Mileſians alone tooke vppon them to erect the Temple of Apollo. Beſides theſe there are no other monuments built by the Grecians which remayne extant in Aegypt. And if by fortune any of the Greekes paſſe into Nylus by any other way then that which ſerueth to lande from Greece, hee is fayne to ſweare that hee was conſtrained agaynſt his will, byndinge him ſelfe by oath that in the ſame Shippe hee wyll ſpeede him ſelfe into Canobicus, another Channell of the Ryuer ſo called: and if by contrarye wyndes hee bee hindered from arryuinge there: hee muſte hyre caryage by water, and ſo ferry the nexte way to Naucrates. In ſuch ſorte were the Grecians tyed to that City, beinge by reaſon of their trafique thyther, had in principall honoure. Nowe whereas the Pallace of Amphiction whiche is nowe at Delphos, beeing ſtraungely pearyſhed by fyre, was gone in hande with a freſhe, vppon price of three hundred tallentes: the people of Delphos which were leauyed at the fourth parte of the charges, ſtraying aboute all countryes, gathered very much, being chiefly aſſyſted by the Aegyptians.
            
            
               Amaſis the Kinge, beſtowinge on them a thowſande tallents of Aſume, and the Grecians that were abyding in Aegypt twenty pound. Moreouer, with the Cyrenaeans Prynce

               Amaſis entred friendſhip, and ſtrooke a league of fellowſhip with the ſame, inſomuch, that he thought meete to enter aſ
                  •
               yaunce Ladyce, vvife to Amaſis. with them, taking a wife of that countrey, eyther for affection he bare to the women of Greece, or in reſpecte of hys loue to the Cyrenaeans. His wife, as ſome ſay, was the daughter of Battus ſonne of Arceſilaus, as others reporte, of Critobulus a man of chiefe credite and regarde amongſt thoſe with whome he dwelt. His Ladies name was Ladyce, a woman of ſurpaſſing beautie, with whome, the King beeing in bed, was ſo ſtrangely benummed, and daunted in courage, as if he had bene an Eunuch, not able to execute any dutie of a man, wherat the King himſelfe beeing greately agaſt, feeling himſelfe frollicke in the company of other women, and ſo faint to hys Lady Ladyce, on a time began to taunt her in theſe tearmes. Can it be thou filthy and deteſtable hagge, that by any meanes I ſhould refrayne from doing thee to the moſt miſerable death that can be deuiſed, which haſt thus inchaunted and bewitched my body? In faith minion, I will coniure this diuell of yours, and aſſure thy ſelfe, if thy lucke be not the better, thou ſhalt not liue two dayes to an ende. The poore Lady ſtanding ſtiffely in her owne defence, and nothing preuayling to appeaſe his fury, vowed within her ſelfe to the goddeſſe Venus, that in caſe it might pleaſe her to inable Amaſis to performe the duties of an huſband, and accompany with her the ſame night, ſhe would dedicate an image vnto her at Cyrenae. Hir prayers being heard, Amaſis became ſo frollicke, that before the morning they aroſe the beſt contented folkes on the earth, euer after that finding hymſelfe ſo apt to enioy the delightes of his Lady, that he tooke greateſt pleaſure in her company, and loued her moſt entirely of all other. Ladyce remembring her vowe ſhe had made to Venus, thought good to performe it, and framing a moſt beautifull and curious image, ſhe ſente it to the city Cyrenae, which ſtoode vnperiſhed vnto our dayes, being placed by the citizens without the towne. The ſame Ladyce, Cambyſes King of Perſia vanquiſhing Aegypt vnderſtanding what ſhe was, ſent her without any manner ſhame or violence into her owne countrey. By this King Amaſis were

many giftes diſtributed of ſingulare price and value. To Cyrenae he ſent the image of Minerua, garniſhed all ouer wyth gilt, and his owne perſonage moſt curiouſly ſhadowed by a Paynter. Likewiſe to the city Lindus he gaue two images of the goddeſſe Minerua wrought in ſtone, with a linnen ſtomacher moſt excellently imbrodered by arte. Moreouer, to the goddeſſe Iuno in Samus, two pictures expreſſing her diuine beautie, of moſt exquiſite workemanſhip. Which bountie he exerciſed towards the Samians for the great friendſhip he bare to their King Polycrates the ſonne of Aeaces. But to the city Lyndus, why he ſhould ſhewe hymſelfe ſo franke and liberall, no other reaſon ſerued, ſauing that the fame wente that the great temple of Minerua in Lindus was builded by ye daughters of Danaus after they were knowne, and had eſcaped the daungers intended againſt them by the ſonnes of Aegyptus. Theſe and many other excellente giftes were diſperſed and giuen abroade by King Amaſis. By whome alſo the city Cyprus which was deemed of all men inuincible, and had neuer before beene vanquiſhed by any, was conquered, taken, and brought vnder tribute.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   