
      
         
            
            
            A brefe and a playne declaratyon of the dewty of maried folkes, gathered out of the holy ſcriptures, and ſet forth in the almayne tonge by Hermon Arcbyſhop of Colayne, whiche wylled all the houſholdes of his flocke to haue the ſame in their bedchambers as a mirror or glaſſe dayly to lokein, wherby they might know and do their dewties eche vnto others, and lede a godly, quiet and louing life togethers, and newly tranſlated into ye Engliſhe tonge by Hans Dekyn.
            Jacob. i.
            ☞ Se that ye be the dores of the worde & not hearers, only diſceyuing your ſelfes.
            Colloſſ. iij.
            ¶ Aboue all thinges put on loue which is the bande of perfectnes.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               FOr aſmuche as the deuyll is moſte redye to make ſtryfe where there ought to be moſt loue: and hath with heddy wyl fulnes, concupiſcence, and ignoraunce ſo blinded the hartes of thoſe which lyue vnder the iocke of matrimonye, that as I maye iudge by their frutes there be very fewe that lede their lyues therin accordinge to the lawes of Chriſt. Therfore (my deare & welbeloued Chriſtians whyche profes the Goſpell) to the intent that you ſhulde lyue therin according to your profeſſyon and knowledge, I haue here brefely and playnlye ſet forthe what it is, and howe you oughte to lede youre lyues therin accordynge to the rules of the holye ſcryptures, ſo that youre pure and

godly life may be a good example and alſo make ſuche aſſhamed as wolde ſclander the holy Goſpell, and profeſſars of the ſame, yee and that there wunted worde (whyche is marke theſe newe men by their liuing) maye ſounde to Goddes glory, to the honoure of hys moſte holye worde and prayſe of al them in Chriſte whych do profes the ſame.
            You ſhall fyrſte vnderſtandeWhat wedlok is. that wedlocke is an hye and bleſſed order ordeyned of God in Paradyſe whyche hath euer bene had in greate honoure and reuerence wherin one man and one woman are coupled & knyt together in one fleſhe and body in the feare and loue of GOD, by the free, louynge, hartye, and good conſente of them bothe, to

the intente that they two maye dwell together, as one fleſſhe and bodye of one wyll and mind in all Godlynes, moſte louyngly to helpe and comfort one another, to brynge forthe chyldren, and to inſtructe them in the lawes of GOD. Alſo to a voyde fornicacyon and all vnclennes, and ſo in all oneſtye vertue and Godlynes to ſpende theyr lyues in the equall partakynge of all ſuche thynges as God ſhall ſende them wyth thankes geuynge.
            And becauſe that the wyfe is in ſubiectyon to hyr huſbande. I wyll begynne wyth hyr and ſhortelye declare what dewtye and obedyens ſhe oweth vnto hym by the commaundementes of the ſcriptures.
            Saynt Paul ſayeth, ye wyues

ſubmyt youre owne huſbandesEphe. 5. The duetye of ye wife to her huſeband. as to the Lorde, for the huſbande is the wyues heade as Chriſte is the heade of the congregacion, Therefore as the congregatyon is in ſubiectyon vnto Chriſte lykewyſe let wyues be in ſubiectyon to theyre huſbandes in all thinges ſo that the wyfe muſte be obedyent vnto hyr huſbande as vnto Chriſt hymſelfe, wheroute it foloweth that the ſayde obedyens extendeth not vnto anye wyckednes or euyll, but vnto that whyche is good, oneſte, and comely. In aſmuche as God delyteth onlye in goodnes and forbyddeth euil euerye where, it foloweth alſo that the diſobediens that a wife ſhoweth to hyr huſbande dyſplayſeth God noles, then when he is dyſobeyed hymſelfe. For

the wyfe ought to obey hyr huſbande in all poyntes as the congregation to Chriſte whych loueth Chriſte onelye, and aboue all thynges, ſhe is glad and willyng to ſuffer for Chriſtes ſake, ſhe doth all for the loue of hym Chriſte onelye is hyr comforte ioye and all togethers, vpon Chriſte is hyr thought day and nyghte, ſhe longeth onelye after Chriſte, for Chriſtes ſake (yf it maye ſerue to hys glorye) ſhe is hartelye wel contented to dye yee ſhe geueth ouer hyr ſelfe hole thereto for Chriſtes loue, knowynge aſſuredlye that hyr ſoule, hyr honoure, bodye, lyfe, and all that ſhe hath is Chriſtes owne. Thus alſo muſte euerye oneſte wyfe ſubmyt her ſelfe, to playſe hyr huſbande wyth all hyr power and geue hyr ſelfe fre

lye and wyllynge to loue hym and obeye hym, and neuer too forſake hym tyll the houre of deathe.
            And forther (ſayeth ſayeth3 Peter) Let the wyues be in ſubiectyon to theyr huſbandes that euen they whych beleue not the worde may wythout the word be wonne by the conuerſacyon of the wyues, whyle they beholde youre pure conuerſacyon couplyd wyth feare, whoſe aparell ſhall not be outwarde wyth brodryd heare and hangynge on of golde ether in puttyng on of gorgius apparell, but let the hydman of the harte be vncorrupte wyth a meke and quyet ſprete, whyche ſprete is before God much ſet by, for after thys maner in the olde tyme dyd the holye women whyche truſted in

God tyre themſelfes, and were obedyente to theyr huſbandes, euen as Sara obeyed Abraham: and called him hyr Lorde, whoſe doughters ye are as lōg as ye do wel.
            And Paul vnto Tytus ſpeak
                  
                     •
                  
                (ſayth he) that the elder women be in ſuche apparell as becommeth holynes, Not beynge falſe accuſars, not geuen to muche wyne, but that they teache oneſt thinges to make the yōg wemē ſober minded, to loue their huſbandes, to loue their chyldrē, to be diſcrete, chaſte, huſewyfelye, good, obedyent vnto theyr huſbādes that ye word of GOD be not euyll ſpoken of.
            Here maye you learne thatWhat a wife ought to be. a wyfe oughte to be dyſcrete, chaſte, huſwyfelye, ſhamefaſte, good, meke, pacyent and ſober,

not lyghte in countynans nor garyſhe in apparall, wyth dyed or curlyd heare paynted nor paſted, but wyth a comelye grauytye and a ſadde behauoure of a conſtante mynde, true tonged and of fewe wordes, wyth ſuche obedyens in all Godlynes too hyr huſbande and heade, as it be ſemes a Chriſtian to haue vnto Chriſte, and to the intente that the huſbande in lyke cauſe maye learne hys dewtye let hym harken what Saynt Paul ſayeth, & take hede that he turne not hys auctorite to tiranny.
            Huſbandes loue youre wyuesEphe. 5. The duety of the huſebande to his wife (ſayeth he) as Chriſte loued the congregacion and gaue him ſelfe for to ſanctifye it, now muſt you vnderſtande that the huſebande is the wyues heade: as Chriſte is the heade of the congregacyon,

and Chriſt ſhoweth to the congregacyon the ſame thynge that the heade ſhoweth to the bodye, for lyke as the heade ſeyth and hearyth for the whole bodye, ſtodyeth and deui ſeth for to preſerue it in ſtrength and lyfe, euen ſo dothe Chriſte defende, teache and preſerue his congregatyon. For he is the eye hart, wyſedome and gide thereof, ſo oughte huſbandes (then) to loue theyr wyues & be theyr heades in lyke maner to ſhowe them lyke kyndnes, and offer the ſame faſſyon to gyde them and rule thē wyth dyſcrecyon for there preſaruatyon and not wyth fors or wylfulnes to intrete them, and ſaynt Paul ſaith forther, ſo oughte men to loue theyr wyues as theyr owne bodyes, he that loueth hys wyfe loueth

ueth hym ſelfe, for no man hath at anye tyme hated hys owne fleſhe, but dothe noreſhe and chereſhe it euen as the Lorde doth the congregacyon. Therefore oughte euerye man moſte faruentlye to loue hys wyfe equallye wyth hym ſelfe in all poyntes, for thys is the meaſure of mutuall loue Matrymonyall, that eyther parte haue nothing ſo deare that they can not be contended to byſtowe one vpon another, yee and yī nede ſhulde be, they ſhulde alſo not ſpare theyr owne lyues one for another, no more then Chriſte dyd for hys congregacyon.
            And lyke as when we repent and beleue in ye promes of God in Chriſte (tho we were neuer ſo poore ſynners) are as ryche as Chriſte and all meretes oures,

ſo is a woman (tho ſhe were neuer ſo pore afore ſhe was maryed) as ryche as hyr huſbande, for all that he hath is hyrs, yee hys owne bodye and hath power ouer it as ſayeth Saynte Paul.
            And yf it ſo chaunce that youCor. vii fynde not youre wyfe ſo perfect in all poyntes as you wolde or as youre ſelfe, yet muſte you not deſpyſe hyr, nor be bytter nor cruell vnto hyr for hyr fautes, but gentelye and louynglye ſeke to amende and wynne hyr. For lyke as Chriſte thoughte no ſcorne of hys churche, deſpyſed hyr not, neyther forſoke hyr for hyr vnclennes and ſynnes, ſo ſhulde no Chriſten man ſpurne at hys wyfe nor ſet lyghte by hyr becauſe that ſometyme ſhe feleth, offendeth, or goyth not

ryghte, but euen as Chriſte noriſheth and techeth hys churche ſo oughte euerye oneſte huſebande (alſo) louyngly and gentlye to informe and inſtructe hys wyfe.
            For in manye thynges (ſaith ſaynte Peter) God hath made the men ſtronger then the women, not to rage vpon them & tobe tyrans vnto them, but to helpe them and bere theyr wekenes. Be curtes therefore (ſayth he) and wynne them to Chriſte, and ouercome thē with kyndnes that of loue they may obey the ordynans that GOD made betwene man and wyfe. Oh howe aſhamed be thoſe men to loke vpon thys texte whiche wyth vyolens in theyr fury will intrete theyr wyues, no beeſte ſo beeſtelye, for in the moſte crewelſt

waye is not mete as when the wife is ſadde and diſquieted, then with ſpitful wordes & wanton faſhions, ſo prouoking hir to anger. Where it is not the duetye of the huſebande, but rather aſhamed to hys owne heade: lykewyſe it is worſhyppe for a mā to haue the feare of the Lorde before his eyes, that he prouoke not the plage of vengeaunce. Let vs therefore haue humy lytye in oure heartes: For as a wyſe man loketh well to hys owne goinges, euen ſo pleaſaūte are the wordes ſpoken in due ſeaſon, whyche moueth the womā in hir wrath vnto pacyence, wherof Salamō ſaith: feare wordesPro. 16 c are an hony combe, a refreſſhing of the minde and a healthe of ye bones, for it is ſyldome ſene that any beaſt is found in y• crewelſt

rage the male doth neuer hurte hys female, and howe vnnaturall a thynge it is for a man to hurte hys owne fleſhe and bodye, who wyll vyolentelye reuenge hym ſelfe (yee) on hys fote yf it chaunce to ſtombele: but wyll not rather yf he haue an yll body chereſh it to make it better.
            The ſtronge (ſayeth ſaynte
                  
                     •
                  o. 14. Paul) oughte to bere the frelenes of the weke, let one ſuffer wyth another, bere ye one anothers burden and ſo ſhall ye fulfyll the lawes of Chriſte and aboue all thynge (ſayeth Saynt4. Peter) haue feruente loue amongeſte you, for loue couereth the multytude of fautes, ſo that loue in all thynge and at all tymes ought to be the whole doar and only inſtrumente to worke

and frame all thynges betwene man and wife.
            By all thys maye ye getherWhat the huſbande ought to be. and learne that the man is the heed, gouernar, rular, and inſtructar (both with gentill wordes and good example) the prouydar, defendar, and whole comforte of the woman, and oweth vnto hyr mooſte faruente loue and affectyon all gentyll behauoure all faythfulnes and helpe, all comforte and kyndnes as to hym ſelfe hys owne fleſhe and bodye, ſo that vnder God there is no loue no affectyon no frendſhyp, no nerenes of kynne, to be compared vnto thys, nor any one thyng vnder the ſunne that pleaſeth God more then man and wyfe that agre well togethers, whyche lyue in the feare of GOD, and how can

that be more lyuelye expreſſed, then in that, that Jeſus Chriſte the ſonne of God, and the holye Chriſten churche and the holyeEcc. 25 body of them both, are ſet forth for an example or myror of the ſtate of wedlocke or coniugall loue, a more holye, a more godly and purer example coulde not be ſhowed. Undoutydlye thys dothe playnely ſhowe that loue matrymonyall is mooſte hyelye accepted afore GOD, and the contrarye muſte nedes folowe, that vnquyetnes hatred, ſtryfe, brawlynge, chydynge, and frowardenes in maryage doth excedingly diſpleaſe God, and is clerelye forbydden by ſaynte Paul, where he ſayeth,Ephe. 4 let all bytternes, fyerſnes, and wrethe, rourynge, and curſed ſpeakynge be put awaye from

you, be ye curtes and louynge one to another and marcyfull forgeuynge one another euen as God for Chriſtes ſake forgaue you. Surelye it is an hye and pure loue perfecte and conſtante that God requyreth to be betwene maryed couples, and therefore oughte they by all wayes, menes, and laboure to get, maynteyne, and increſe thys excedynge loue, and to exchewe, forbere and cut of all thynges that myghte occaſyon anye parte of the contrarye. And vndoutedlye there is nothynge that longer mayntayneth concorde and quyetnes nor more increſeth perfecte loue in maryage, then ſwete & fayre wordes, gentyll and frendelye dedes, and wyth a louyng patyens to take all thynges to the

beſte. Frelye to breke their mindesWhat mainteineth loue & quietnes in mariage Ephe. 5 Gene. 2 togethers and all thynges to be kepte ſecrete, doth glad and wyllynge to amende that is amys, and aboue all thynge not ones one to here yll of another, for ſaynte Paul warneth you, that ye geue no place to the backbyters, but take them as yll wyllars to you both tho that 
                  •
               e neuer ſo nere frendes or kinne, and GOD ſayeth a man ſhall for ſake father and mother and cleue vnto hys wyfe and they two ſhalbe one fleſh, which in lyke caſe is meante to the woman. Therefore oughte no creature alyue to be in ſuche extymaty on, credyte, fauer and loue as eche of you wyth others. Alſo to be of a ſober and temperate dyet dothe muche forther a good agremente, and where

the contrarye is, there is muche vnquyetnes. For Salamon aſkynge where is woo, where is ſtryfe, where is braulynge, euen amongeſt thoſe (ſayeth he) that be euer at the wyne, therefore it is moſte comelye for Chriſtyans to be temporate in dyet, temporate in wordes, temporate in dedes and temporate in all thynges, ſo that at all tymes ye exchewe all exſes and ſurfet rage and furye whyche makes no dyfferens betwyxte man and beeſte, and all other thynges whyche maye brede anyeEccl. 25 parte of vnquyetnes. For Salamon ſayeth, better is a drye morſell wyth quyetnes, then a full houſe and manye ſat cattell wyth ſtryfe. Therefore oughte ye to extreme and imbraſe thys concorde and quyetnes

as the mentenat and onely vpholder of the whole felyſſytye in maryage, whyche is in gendred of faruente loue, faythfulnes and kyndnes, and mayntayned by the ſame wherin ye ought contynuallye to walke in all chaſtenes and purenes of lyuynge whyche (aſſuredlye) ſhyneth as a moſt precyous thynge in the ſyghte of God, and in the cōmendacyon of the ſame ſayeth Salamon in the boke of wyſedome.The cō
                  mendacion of chaſtite. O fayre is a chaſte generatyon wyth vertu, for it is wyth good men, where it is preſente men take example there at, and yf it goo awaye yet they deſyre it, it is alwayes crowned and holden in honoure, and winneth the rewarde of the vndefyled battell, but the multytude of vngodlye chyldren are vnprofytable,

and the thynge that are planted in whoredome ſhall take no depe rote, nor laye anye faſte foundacyon, thoughe they be grene in the braunches for a tyme, yet ſhall they be ſhaken wyth the wynde for they ſtonde not faſte, and thoroughe the vehemencye of the wynde they ſhalbe rooted oute, for the vnprofytable braunches ſhalbe broken, theyr frute ſhalbe vnprofytable & ſower to eate, yee meate for nothynge, and why, all the chyldren of the wycked muſte bere recorde of the wickednes of theyr fathers and mothers, when they be aſked, but to the ryghteous be ouer taken wyth deathe yet ſhall he be in reſte. Here maye you ſe howe vyle filthye and abominable aduoutry, fornycacyon and baſterdye is,

and howe hye in extymatyon a chaſte lyfe is amongeſte al good and godlye folke and in ſpecyallye in the ſyghte of GOD to whome no ſecrete ſynne is hyde.
            And as a chaſte louynge lyfeThat maried folke ought to haue chaſtmaners & cōmunicatiō. in maryage is moſte commendyd, ſo oughte ye to be of chaſtemaners, to haue chaſte talke▪ and to exchewe all wanton faſſyons, vnclenlye communycatyon, fylthye handelynge, and all vnſemelynes, and to be the ſpeakars and very dores of all vertue and godlynes, for Saynte Paul ſayeth, be ye folowers of GOD as deare chyldren and walke in loue euen as Chriſt loued you and gaue hym ſelfe for vs an offerynge and a ſacryfyce of 
                  〈…〉
               ete ſauoure to God, ſo that fornycacyon and all vnclenes or

couetouſnes be not ones named amongeſte you as becommeth ſayntes, neyther fylthye nor folyſhe tawlke, neyther geſtynge, whyche are not comelye, but rather geuyng of thankes for this ye knowe that whoremongers eyther vnclene parſons or couytous parſons whyche is the woreſhypper of Images ſhall haue anye enterans in thee Kyngedome of GOD and of Chriſt.
            Alſo there ought to be a temporanceOftēporaūce in mariage betwene man and wife for God hath ordeyned maryage for a remedye or medycyne to aſſwage the hete of the burnynge fleſhe and for procreatyon, and not beeſtelye for to fulfil the whole luſtes of the deuelyſhe mynde and wycked fleſhe for tho ye haue a promes that

the acte in maryage is no ſynne yf the man receyue hys wyfe as a gyfte geuen to hym of God, and the wyfe hyr huſbande in lyke caſe, as ye haue a promes that ye ſynne not when ye eate and dryncke meaſurablye wyth thankes geuynge, yet yf ye take exceſſe or vſe it beeſtelye, vylelye or inordynatelye, youre miſtēperans make that yll which is good (beynge ryghtelye vſed and that whyche is clene ye defyle thoroughe youre abuſynge of it, God hath not called you to vnclenes but vnto holynes ſayeth ſaynte Paul) and fortherTheſ. 4. (ſayeth he) it is the wyll of God euen that you ſhulde be holye, and that euery one of you ſhuld knowe howe to kepe hys veſſell in holynes and honour and not in the luſtes of concupyſcens as

do the hethen whyth know not God.
            Alſo ſaynte Paul wylleth you that ye wythdrawe not youreCor. 7. ſelfes nor departe not one from another, except it be wyth the good conſente of bothe for a tyme to faſte and to praye which faſtynge and prayer I wolde to God were more vſed then it is, not as Ipocrytes were wonte, but as Chriſtyans oughte and are commaunded (all moſte) in euerye parte of the ſcryptures, for they that in eatyng and drinkynge fulfyll the whole luſtes of the fleſhe can not worke after the ſprete, and as we daylye and hourelye contynuallye ſynne, ſo oughte we contynually to pray and call for grace. And in all the whole Byble you ſhall not finde a more godlye example of mariage

(whyche I wolde to God all maryed folkes wolde rede) then that of Tobyach and Sara the doughter of Raguell, whyche were knytte together in faſtynge and prayer, and ofte vſed the ſame lyuyng a godlye, pure and clene life, for the which they obtayned the bleſſynge of God and ſawe theyr chylders chyldren to the fyfte generatyon. Whyche chyldren (vndoutydlye) is the hyeſte gyfte and greateſte treſure of thys world and mayntynans of the ſame. For chyldren is the verye ſurey• cōmeudaciō of children bande and laſt knot of loue Matrymony all, by the whyche the parentes can neuer be clerelye ſeparatyd a ſunder, In aſmuch as that whyche is of them both can not be deuyded, ſeyng both haue parte in euerye one. And

chyldren are theyre parentes chefe ioye comforte and felycite nexte vnto GOD, theyr ſtaye and ſtaffe & vpholders of their age, and in theyr chyldren do the parentes leue (in a maner) after theyr death. For they dye not all togethers that leaue collopesCor. vii of theyr owne fleſhe alyue behynde them, and by theyr chyldren (yf they be vertuouſly and Godlye broughte vp) then is God honoured and the commen welthe auanced, ſo that the parentes and all men fare the better by them. Youre children (moſte aſſuredlye) is the verye bleſſynge of God for the whiche ye oughte to geue hym mooſte hartye thankes, & be contented and wyth ſuche as he doth ſende you, be they manye or fewe ſonnes or doughters. For yf they

be manye he wyll prouyde for them yf they be faythfull. Yf they be fewe he maye ſende you more, and geue you more ioye of one doughter then of x. ſonnes, therefore be contente wyth hys wyll for he dothe all thynges for the beſte and knoweth what is beſte▪ for you, geue him moſte hartye thankes for ſuche as you haue and be dylygent to ſee them vertuouſlye and godlye broughte vp, and in any caſe ſuffer them not to be ydell.
            For they that will not worke7 Howe children ought to be broughte vp. (ſayeth ſaynte Paul) let them not eate, therefore put them to learne ſome honeſte ſcyens or crafte, wherunto of nature they be moſte apte. For in that ſhall they moſte proffet, by the which they maye get theyr owne lyuynge and ſerue the commen

welthe. And aboue al thyng let them fyrſt learne to knowe God and hys moſt holy word whiche is the ryght pathe and hye way to all vertue and Godlines, the ſure ſhylde and ſtronge bukelar to defende vs from the deuyll and all hys cruell and crafty aſſawtes geue them daylye godlye and louyng exhortaſyons, ſuffer no vyce to take rote in them, but rebuke them for their yll and commende them in their well doinge.
            Prouyde honeſtly afore hand for al neceſſary thinges both for them and all youre houſholde. For ſayeth ſaynte Paul to Tymothee,
                  
                     •
                  
                Yf there be anye that prouideth not for his owne and namelye for them of hys houſehold, the ſame denieth the faith and is worſe then an infydell.
            
               Of the ſparowes maye yeThe order of y• houſe. karne the order of youre houſeholde, for as the cocke flyeth to and fro to brynge all thynge to the neſte, and as the damme kepeth the neſt hatcheth and bringeth forth hyr yonge, ſo all prouyſyon and whatſoeuer is to be done wythoute the houſe belongeth to thee man and the woman to take charge wythin, to ſee all thynges conuenyentelye ſaued or ſpente as it oughte, to bryng for the & noryſhe hyr children, and to haue all the whole doynge of hyr doughters and women.
            Alſo beiouynge vnto youre chyldren and be not fyerſe nor cruell vnto them. For SaynteCol.▪ 3 Paul ſayeth, fathers rate not youre chyldren, leſte they be of

a deſperate mynde, but wy
                  〈…〉
                dyſcrete admonyſyons, and wyth youre pure and good example of lyuynge (whyche is the chefeſte perſuaſyon) lede them to all vertue and Godlynes.
            Yf all parentes wolde vertuouſlye brynge by theyr chyldren in the knowledge and fere of GOD, in the practyſe and exarcyſe of ſome honeſte ſcyens or crafte. Then ſhulde we not ſee ſo manye ydell as be, ſo manye vacabundes, theues, and murderers, ſo manye vycious perſons of all degres, nor ſuche vngodlynes taygne. But then ſhulde we ſe euery man honeſtlye get hys lyuynge prefarring hys neyghbours proffyt as his owne, then ſhuld we ſee all men

ryghtelye do theyr dewtyes▪ then ſhulde loue and charyte ſpryng, and all godlynes raigne, then ſhulde the lawes and magyſtrates be wyllyngelye obeyed, the commen welthe floreſhe, and God ryghtelye honoured, for in thys poynte onelye throughe the grace of God conſyſtes the amendemente of all the whole worlde.
            Therefore (my deare and welbeloued Chryſtyans) ſeing that in thys bleſſed ſtate of matrymonye and Godlye houſeholde of huſbande, wyfe, and chyldren conſyſtes (next vnder GOD) the chefyſte and hyeſt felyſytye of thys worlde, and mayntynans of the ſame, wher in the commen welthe is wholy aduanſed, and GOD mooſte

hyghelye honoured. I exhorte you in the name of▪ Jeſus Chriſte, the ſonne of the lyuyn
                  〈…〉
                God, that you walke worth
                  〈…〉
                therin accordynge to the wyll of Chriſte whyche you profeſſe wythoute faynynge, and that you exchewe all workes and dedes of the fleſhe, whyche be theſe ſayeth ſaynte Paul, aduoutrye,Gala. 5. fornycation, vnclenes, wantonnes, ydolatre, whyche crafte hatred, varyans, wrath, ſtryfe ſedicyon, ſectes enuying, murther, drunkenes, gluttony, and ſuche lyke, of the whyche I tell you before as I haue tolde you in tymes paſt▪ that they whyche commyt ſuche thynges ſhall not inheret the kyngdom of God. Therefore folowe ye the ſprete and workes of the

ſame whyche be (ſayeth ſaynte Paul) loue, ioye, peace, longe ſuffrynge, gentylnes, goodnes, faythfulnes, weakenes, temporans, and ſuche lyke, and yet ones agayne. I exhorte you wyth the exhortacyon of ſaynt Paul. Yf there be amongeſteEphe. 2. you anye conſolatyon in Chriſt, Yf there be anye comfortable loue, Yf there be anye feloweſhyppe of the ſprette, Yf there be anye compaſſyon of mercye fulfyll you my ioy, that ye draw, one waye hauynge one loue, beynge of one accorde and of one mynde, that nothynge be done through ſtryfe or vayne glorye, but that in meakenes of mynde euerye one exteme other better then them ſelfe, and ſo ſhall you lede a ioyfull

quyet and godlye lyfe in thys worlde and after, throughe Jeſus Chriſte come to the lyfe euerlaſtynge wyth GOD the Father to whome be all honoure and glorye. Amen.
            (⸫)
            
               ¶Roma. x.
               Yf the rote be hole, the braunches ſhall be hole alſo.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ❧ Imprynted at London in Temeſtrete by Hughe Syngelton, at the ſygne of the dobbel hood, ouer agaynſte the Stylyarde.
            
         
      
   