
      
         
            
            
            ¶The Hiſtory of Herodian, a Greeke Authour, treating of the Romayne Emperors, after Marcus, tranſlated oute of Greeke into Latin, by Angelus Politianus, and out of Latin into Englyſhe, by Nicholas Smyth. Whereunto are annexed, the Argumentes of euery Booke, at the begynnyng thereof, with Annotacions for the better vnderſtandynge of the ſame Hiſtorye.
            ¶Cum gratia & priuilegio regali ad imprimendum ſolum.
            (?)
            VVILLIAM Coplande.
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧To the ryghte honorable Lorde, Wyllyam Earle of Penbroke, &c. Lorde Preſident of the Kyng and Queenes Maieſties Counſayle, in the Marches of Wales, and one of theyr Maieſties moſt honorable preuie Counſaile, his humble Oratour Nycholas Smyth, wyſheth all thynges proſperous.
            
               AMongeſt all thoſe, that haue by theyr wrytynge, beautifyed the Greke & Latyn tonge, none are ſuppoſed (right honorable & vertuous Lord) ſo much to haue profited mortall affaires, as Hiſtoriographers, who haue faythfully reduced into writyng the actes & deades of ſuch, as in fame (either good or euyll) haue paſſed thys tranſitorye lyfe. They haue put before our eyes, the lyues, maners, and doinges, of all ſortes of men, wt theyr counſelles, fortunes, and aduentures, the whiche theyr poſteritie maye, as in a paynted Table beholde: and therby learne to profyte, aſwell the Common wealthe, as their owne priuate eſtate. Chieflye, through the manyfold examples, bothe good, and euyll, conteyned in Hiſtories, all ſortes of people may attayne by them, to more knowledge in ſhorte ſpace, then otherwyſe they might in al theyr liues, if ye ſame were much lōger then the commō age of man. For profe wherof, we haue the memorie of Lucius Lucullus the noble Romaine: who (as Cicero wryteth) at his departure frō Rome againſt the great kyng Mythridates) beyng vtterly vnſkylfull in warfare, whyles he ſayled on the Sea, ſo trauayled, in conferring wyth learned men, and reading of Hiſtories, that when he arriued in Aſie, he was ſo excellente in warlyke knowledge, that by the confeſſion of Mythridates, he deſerued preferment aboue all the Chieuetaynes in warre, that were before his tyme. Alexander Seuerus alſo, Emperour of Rome, when ſo euer he

made preparation to warre, accuſtomed to conſulte wt ſuch as were expert in Hiſtories. And good cauſe why. For yf Vſe (as ſayeth Afranius) hath engendred wyſedome: and Memorye as the Moother, hath brought her into lyghte: Who oughte to be more ſage, and diſcrete, then they whiche reteyne in memorie, the deades, & maners, not only of one age, or Citie, but of al ages, & nacions? Thys much conſiderynge (ryght excellent Lorde) and enduced by the prudente wordes of Saluſt, in hys Preface to Catilines wonderfull Coniuration, wherby he exhorteth man (yf he entende to be reputed worthyer then other mortall Creatures) ſo to employe hys whole labour, and ſtudye, that he ouerſlyp not hys lyfe, in ſlouthful ſilence, as ſauage, and brute beaſtes, whom Nature hath fourmed prone, & ſubiect, to ye filthie luſtes of the bealy: I haue enterpryſed to trāſlate out of Latyn this preſente Hiſtorie of Herodian, a Greke Authour, treating of the Romayn Emperours, betwene Marcus the Philoſopher, and Gordianus the yonger, not before (I thynke) brought into oure Englyſhe tonge. And haue preſumed, to dedicat ye ſame vnto your good Lordſhyp, whome not onely fame, but alſo experience, doeth apparaūtly proue, to be the perfect Patrone of knyghtlye prowes, and vertue. Humbly beſechyng your good Lordſhyp, of your accuſtomed clemencie, ſo to accepte thys my ſymple gift, beyng the Croppe of my barreyne Harueſt, as may embolden other ioyfullye to embrace it, and encourage me, to employe my poore labour further hereafter. And ſo I remayne a continuall Interceſſor to almyghtye God, for the proſperous eſtate of youre Lordſhyppe, wyth contynuall encreaſe of vertue, and honour.
         
         
            
            ¶THE PROHEME OF the hiſtorie of Herodian, treating of the Romayne Emperours, after Marcus.
            
               THey whiche haue delyuered vnto theyr poſteritie auncient tradicions, and endeuored to renewe by writyng the olde memorye of hyſtories: They I ſaye, earneſtly affecting the renowne of erudicion and learning: and buſyly ſtudyeng to preſerue theyr names from thiniurie of obliuion, did employ moche leſſe laboure in ſearching oute the truthe, then in trimmynge the ſtyle of their Hiſtories. Knowinge preciſely, that althoughe they falſefyed any thing longe before theyr time paſſed, the ſame coulde not be reprehendid, and yet neuertheles them ſelfes ſhold (through the pleaſaunt eloquence, of their finely penned talke) obtayne very muche commoditie, of their paynefull trauayle. Other ſome beyng moued, with perticuler enmityes and hatred of Tyrauntes, or elles fallen into vnmeaſurable flaterye, with prayſyng of Princes, Cyties, & priuate perſons, dyd through ſkylfull knowledge of wryting, blaſe and extoll farre aboue truthe, thinges that by them ſelues were ſymple & of no eſtimacion. But I in contrarie wyſe, haue enterpryſed to wryte an hiſtorye, not receyued of others, vnknowen, or elles wanting witneſſes, but at this preſent, fixed and remaining in the memories of the Readers, and collected with ſynguler trueth and diligence. Truſtyng, that the knowledge of thoſe thinges, (being many and great, and not longe agone happened) wyll not be vnpleaſaunt to the poſterite. For yf a mā wyll well ponder al the ages ſynce the time of Auguſtus, (when the Romayne ſuperioritie was commytted to the arbitrement of one man) he ſhall not fynde in all thoſe .ii.c. yeres (ſo many almoſt perdy are reckened

betwene Auguſtus, and Marcus) ſo diuers ſucceſſions in thempire, ſo variable chaunces and happes in the warres either Ciuyle or foreyn, ſo manie nacions raiſed vp, or ſo many of our owne and barbarous Cities deſtroyed, beſides earthquakes and plagues, the liues alſo of Princes, and Tiraunts ſo ſtraunge and incredible, that none or at the leſt verie few like examples can be founde amongs our elders. Of whiche princes, ſome of longe tyme remayned in authoritie, other ſome a ſhorte while enioyed the dominion yea many of them ſcarcelie entered into honour, and being onlie named Emperours, loſt thempire the verie ſame daye they tooke it vpon them. And when by the ſpace of .lx. yeres, the Citie of Rome had ſuſtained more gouernours then for the time ſufficed, it came to paſſe, that many ſtraunge thinges and worthy admiracion chaunced. For the Princes ſomewhat ſtriken in age, as men expert in ſundry affayres, did prudently gouerne themſelues and their charge. On thother ſide the yonge men ledinge their liues in voluptuouſnes, inuented and commaunded new thinges dayly. wherbie it happened, that the yonge princes, beinge of vnlike age and licence, did alſo folow vnlike ſtudie & maners. How theſe thinges were done, in obſeruinge a iuſt order of the trew tyme and prynces, we will now declare.
         
         
            
            ¶The contentes of the fyrſte booke.
            
               THe Authour beginneth his hiſtorye at the ende of Marcus Antoninus reigne, who was ſucceſſor vnto Aurelius Antoninus ſurnamed Pius: And it behoueth to know, that after ye opiniō of Euſebius in his tables, Marcus Antoninus was the .xiiii. Emperour of Rome. But after the opinion of other Hiſtoriographers, he was the .xvii. The fyrſt was Iulius Ceſar. The ſeconde Octauius Ceſar, Auguſtus. The thirde Tiberius Ceſar. The iiii. Caius Caligula. The .v. Claudius Ceſar. The .vi. Nero Claudius Ceſar. The .vii. Sergius Galba. The .viii. Otho Siluius. The .ix. Aulus Vitellius. The .x. Flauius Veſpaſianus. The .xi. Titus Veſpaſianus. The twelue Domitianus. Of whiche twelue Suetonius Tranquillus hathe wryten compendiouſlye. Paulus Oroſius ſayeth, that Nerua ſucceaded Domitian, after Nerua Traian, after Traian, Adrian, after Adrian Antoninus Pius, wyth hys two Sonnes Aurelius, and Lucius, whome Marcus Antonīus Verus, and Aurelius Commodus, his brother ſucceaded. Which Marcus Antonīus (of whome preſently the queſtion is) ouerliued the other, and remained ſole Emperour beyng the .xvii. in nombre, reckening Iulius Ceſar for the fyrſte. Of the lignage, vertue, ſcience, and deceaſe, of this Marcus, Herodian ſpeaketh in the begynnynge of this fyrſte booke: after whome his Sonne Commodus, raigned: beyng in the begynning, gentle, meeke, and of good diſpoſicion. But after he had eſcaped the Treaſon of Lucilla his owne Syſter, Perennes the Capitayne of his garde, Ma
                  •
               ternus, and Cleander the liuetenaunte of his armie, he altered to diſſolute and diſhoneſt lyfe, and Tirannie. Wherfore he was poyſoned by Martia one of his Cōcubynes, Letus the Capitaine of hys Garde, & Electus his principall Chāberlaine: And after at their appoyntment, ſtrangled by Narciſſus.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶The fyrſte booke of the hiſtorie of Herodian.
            
               THemperour Marcus had many doughters,The childerne of Marcus. Veriſſimus. and .ii. ſonnes onely, of whome the yonger named Veriſſimus,
by myſchaunce died in his tender age. The other named Commodus,Commodus. the father broughte vp wt great diligence and care. And hauynge goten from all partes excellente learned men, waged thē with large ſtipendes, that they ſhoulde euery man for hys parte, garnyſſhe the maners and diſpoſicion of hys Sonne. He maryed his doughters at their rype age, vnto the beſt of the Senatours, chooſyng to his Sonnes in lawe, not ſuche as coulde ſhew furthe large pedegrues of their aunceſtrie, or ſuche as vaunted them ſelues of their great treaſoure, but thoſe which excelled in perfecte modeſtie of maners, and Innocencie of lyfe. For that he eſteamed, to be the onely, perfecte, and ſtable, rycheſſe of the mynde.
            ¶He forgate no vertue,The good diſpoſicion of Marcus. wherin he exerciſed not hym ſelfe: beyng ſo ſtudious of the antiquitie of learnyng, that in the ſame, he might be compared, to the beſt eyther of the Greekes, or of the Romaynes. For profe hereof, there are many thinges bothe ſpoken, and writen, by hym, commen euen vnto our tyme. He was ſo curteis, that he would gentely take euery commer vnto hym by the hande: not permytting, that any man ſhoulde be forbidden by his garde, the approching vnto his perſon. And he onely, amonges all the Emperours, vſed the ſtudy of Sapience, not in woordes, or knowledge of decrees, but in grauitie of maners, and continencie of lyfe. Wherby it came to paſſe, that the ſame age and tyme, brought furthe a great encreaſe of wyſe men, for communely, men are wont to folowe

the lyues and maners of their prynces. But now, as touching the notable actes by hym done, aſwell at Rome, as elles where, how he behaued hym ſelfe alſo, towardes the Barbarous nacions enhabytinge the Eaſte, and the Northe, the ſame are contayned in the monumentes of many excellent learned men. But thoſe thinges, whyche (after the death of Marcus, by all ages.) I bothe ſawe and harde, (whereof many by experience my ſelfe knewe, as one traded in common affayres, and princes buſineſſe) I haue taken vpon me to wryte.
            
               Pannonie.¶Whyles the olde Emperour Marcus ſoiourned amōges the Pannoniens, a very greuous diſeaſe came vpon hym, not onely worne wyth age, but alſo ſore broken wyth continuall trauaile and care. Wherfore, when he perceyued no remedy but death, he beganne greatly to doubte in hym ſelfe, leſt hys Sonne, (who was but then entered the fyrſt yeres of his Adoleſcencie) eyther throughe vehemencie of hys youthe,Adoleſcencie. or elles throughe an inordynate lycence, whyche he ſhould haue after hys fathers deathe, leuynge all good exerciſe, and ſtudy aparte, wold addycte him ſelfe to dronkenneſſe, and ſuperfluous ryot. For he knewe well, that the myndes of yonge men, eaſily declyne, to immoderate ſuperfluytie, from laudable and honeſt dyſciplyne. He was troubled beſydes, wyth the memory of many princes, whiche beyng but yonge men, tooke vpon them the gouernaunce of royaulmes: as well of Dioniſius the Tiraunt of Sicile,Dioniſius. (whoſe intemperatenes of lyfe was ſo great, that he endowed with richeſt rewardes, thinuentours of newe pleaſures: as alſo of them whyche ſucceaded Alexander, of Macedonie: who dyd ſo ſhamefullye and Tiranouſlye raygne, that they purchaſed to hys kyngedome, a notorious obloquy. For Ptolomeus, fell into ſo deteſtable lyfe,Ptolomeus. that contrarye to the lawes of the Macedoniens, and all the Greekes, he was entangled, with thinceſt mariage of hys owne Syſter. Antigonus alſo,Antigonus. Bacchus (to repreſent the GOD Bacchus) was wonte, in ſteade of the Macedonien Diademe and crowne

to were a Garlande of yuie, and for a ſceptre, to carye a thyſtell. The olde man was vexid beſydes, wyth late examples, as of Nero,Nero. who abſtayned not from the murdering of hys owne moother, and made hym ſelfe as a laughynge ſtocke, vnto all the people. He remembred Domytian,Domitiā
                who lefte nothynge vndone that he thoughte to appertayne vnto extreame Crueltye. Wherefore, wayeng wyth hym ſelfe thieſe ymages of tyrannye, he was toſſed betwene hope and feare. The nygh nacion of the Germaynes, encreaſed alſo hys perplexitie: for he hadde not throughly broughte them in ſubiection, but ſome he had taken into hys frendſhyppe, and the reſte, he had vanquyſſhed by force of batayle. Many of the ſame were eſcaped, and hydde them ſelues, for feare of the prynce. Wherefore he doubted greately leaſte after hys deathe, they woulde rebelle agayne, in ſettynge at noughte the youthe of hys Sonne: for he knewe, the nature of the barbarous people, was to be ſturred wyth euery ſmall tryfle. Beynge turmented wyth thieſe troubleſome waues of care, he cauſed as manye hys friendes, and kynſmen as were then in his company to repayre vnto his preſence, and at theyr commynge togythers, hauyng commaunded hys Sonne to ſtande before them, he lyfted hym ſelfe ſomewhat vpon hys pylowe, and made this oracion vnto them.
            ¶It is not to be meruayled at,The oracion of Marcus vpon hys death bed that you are ſorowfull and penſyfe, beholding me in this plighte: for it is the nature of man, to bewaile the miſfortune of other. And thoſe thinges we ſee with our eyes, doo prouoke muche more compaſſion and pitie. Beſydes this my reaſon is commune with you: for in the recompence of the good wyll I haue heretofore borne you, I hope and as of duty loke for a mutuall beneuolence at your handes. And at this preſente it is ſo happened, that I muſt make profe, whether I haue in vayne ſo longe to fore exhybited honour vnto you, (hauing you alwayes in eſtimacion) and employed all my diligent ſtudie towardes your welthe: And you in recompencing the

ſame to ſhewe your ſelues not vnmyndefull of the benefytes you haue receyued: ye ſee my ſon whom your ſelues haue noriſhed, entering nowe the firſt boundes of his youthe. And (as it were) in the ſwolowe and waues of mortall lyfe, wāting gouernours: leſt ye through ignoraunce, beyng drawen from his ryghte courſe, he acquaynte himſelfe with diſordered exercyſes. Be you therfore, (for me but one) many fathers vnto hym, in garnyſhing his maners, wyth prompting, and minyſtring holſome preceptes vnto hym: for, neyther maye the aboundaunce of treaſour, ſatiſfie the ſenſual luſtes of tyranny, neyther can the Emperoure, be aſſuredly defended by the bande of his garde, enuyroning hys perſon, except, he haue the good willes of thoſe whom he gouerneth. For euermore they raigne longe, and peaceably, by whom no feare through cruelti, but loue through gentlenes, is powred into the hartes of the Citezyns: neyther they whome force conſtrayneth, but thoſe which of their free wylles obey, are eyther in doing or ſuffering, exempt frō all ſuſpiciō of flatery. The ſame do not at any tyme, (except they be outragiouſly handeled) grudge, or impugne, the rule of their ſuperiours. But it is very harde for a man, which lyueth in mooſt inordinate licence, to gouerne him ſelf, and bridle his affections. Wherfore, yf ye wilbe Authours of well lyuing vnto him, and oftentimes admonyſhe him of thoſe thinges he preſently heareth, ye ſhal with that one labour, bothe make hym a good prynce vnto your ſelfes, and all other, and alſo deſerue the participation of our memorye, whiche with this one poynt ye maye make immortall. Whyles themperour Marcus was ſpeaking thieſe wordes, his vitall ſpirite began ſo ſodeinly to fayle, that furthwyth, he was enforced to ceaſe his talke, and ſlyde downe into his bed agayne. Then ſo greate compaſſion, perced the heartes of all that were preſent, that many of them, beyng through ſorowe almoſt berafte their ryght ſenſes, rayſed a dolorouſe clamour. He hauyng languyſſhed, onely a day and a nyght after ended hys lyfe: leuing behinde him, a great wante, and deſyre, of hym ſelfe, vnto men of

that age, & vnto their poſterite, a perpetuall renowne of vertue. When the fame of his death, was ſpreadde abroade, an incredible lamentacion was, aſwel amongeſt the hole armye ſelfe, as the common people: So that no man within the Romaine dominion, receiued this meſſage, without abundaunt ſheading of teares. And bewayleng the loſſe of him, wt one accorde, ſome called hym a good father, other ſome a bening Emperour, Certayne a mooſt valyaunt Capitayne, and many a ryghteous and moderate prynce: And truely, there was none of them deceyued. Nowe after a fewe dayes paſſed, when the funerall obſequies were performed, it ſeamed good vnto his frendes, to bryng the yonge Emperour vnto the army, that he myght, both ſpeake vnto the ſouldiours, and (as the vſage of newe Emperours is) in diſtributyng of money largely amongeſt them eſtablyſhe theyr myndes, (as it wer by obligacion) vnto him. It was therfore commaunded, that the ſouldiours, accordynge to the olde cuſtome, ſhoulde repayre togithers in the fielde: After whoſe aſſemblie, Themperour Commodus came furthe, and hauing finyſhed the diuine ceremonies, aſcēded themperiall throne, (for the ſame purpoſe) in the myddes of the campe erected: Where hauing about hym his fathers frendes, (who were many excellent lerned men) he ſpake theſe wordes, or muche lyke that enſue.
            ¶I am fully perſwaded,The oracion of Commodus. that the dolour of this calamite, is common to me with you: And that you are no leſſe ſorowfull, then my ſelfe. For during my fathers lyfe, I neuer behaued my ſelfe as ſuperiour vnto you, for that he loued vs all equally, and dyd more wyllingly call me companion, then Sonne: bicauſe he eſteamed the one, to be a name of nature, and the other, he reckened to be the participaciō of vertue. And often times, he caried me in his armes, whiles I was an infante, delyuered me into your handes, and (as I might ſaye) gaue me wholy vnto your cuſtodie, and fidelyte. Wherefore, I doubt not, but that ye wyll exhibyte vnto me your fauour, for myne elders, oughte to repute me as their ſonne: and myne equalles in age, I

may luſtly call companyons in armes: for euen ſoo, dyd my father loue vs all as one, & prouyded to haue vs enſtructed in all exercyſes of vertue and learnyng. Nowe after hym, hath fortune, gyuen me for a prince vnto you: not a ſtraunger, (as ſome hath bene before me,) nor one whyche vaunteth hym ſelfe of a conquered Empyre: but I was onelye borne vnto you, and brought vp in the verye Imperyall Palayce: And as ſoone as I was out of my moothers wombe, thymperyall purple receyued me, in ſo muche that I was no ſooner a man, then a Prynce. Ponderynge therefore theſe thynges in your myndes, loue & embrace your ryghtful Emperour, not gyuen, but borne vnto you. For my father is taken vp intoo the heauens, & made companyon wyth the Goddes: And vntoo vs, the regymente of the earthe, and gouernaunce of mortall cauſes doo appertayne. What ſucceſſe and effect they ſhall come vnto, it reſteth in youre power: If ye wyll therefore, valyauntly fyniſſhe the reſydue of the warres, and enlarge the Romayne Empyre, vnto ye great Ocean: ye ſhal not onely purchaſe vnto your ſelues, exceadynge muche glorye: but alſo, duely requyte, the memorye of our commune parente. And beleue verelye, that he nowe heareth vs, and preſently beholdeth what we doo: And let vs accompte our ſelues mooſte happye, for that we haue ſuche a witneſſe of our good dedes. As for the actes, ye haue vnto thys daye, valyauntly and proſperouſly atcheued, are attrybuted vntoo hys prudente gouernaunce: But what you ſhall hereafter notablye brynge to effecte wyth me, that is to ſaye, wyth a yonge man your Emperour, the ſame ſhall wynne vntoo youre ſelues, as it were, a peculier fame, as well of truth, as of proweſſe: whereby ye ſhall brynge myne age in more eſtymacyon, wyth executing boldely oure affayres. And the Barbarous people, beyng in the begynnynge of thys newe pryncypalitye throughlye repreſſed, wyll not hereafter ouer boldelye aduaunce theym ſelues, in deſpyſyng my youthe: but being ones taught by theyr owne peryls, wyl he reſtrayned and kepte vnder, wyth contynuall

awe and feare. When he had thus muche ſpoken, he dyſtrybuted amonges the Souldyours, a greate ſumme of money, (that he myghte thereby confyrme their heartes faythefull, and louynge towardes hym) and then retourned into hys Palayce. By a lytle ſpace after thys, all thynges were ruled by hys fathers frendes, who were at no tyme abſente wyth theyr prudēt counſayle, giuyng hym as muche lybertie withall, as they thoughte ſuffycyent, for the preſeruacyon of his healthe. But anone after, certayne of themperours houſholde crepte by lyttle and lyttle forwarde, omyttynge nothynge vndoone, that myghte corrupte the good dyſpoſycyon of the yonge Emperoure. For the table paraſytes,The table of paraſites. who meaſured felicytie by theyr belies▪ and fylthye luſtes, enfourmed hym often tymes of the Cytie pleaſures, nowe, recytynge thoſe thynges whyche were delectable too be hearde, or ſeene there. And then extollynge wyth prayſe, the abundaunce of all thynges. They dyſprayſed beſydes the bankes of Hiſtria,Hiſtria. as vnprofytable at all ſeaſons, for yt it had no pleaſaūt apple trees, or other fruite, & was enuyroned wyth contynual colde & cloudes. Wylt thou neuer, O Emperour (ſayde they) leaue drynkynge of water digged, & congeled togyther as yſe. Shal other mē enioye the clere well ſpringes, the pleaſaunt colde of the runnynge ryuers, and the holſome ayre of Italye? By theſe allurynges to wantonneſſe, they eaſely enflammed the yonge mans mynde wyth vehemente deſyre of thoſe pleſures. Wherfore furthwyth: hauynge called hys frendes togyther, he dyſſymuled not, that he was verye deſyrous of hys natyue countrey: But yet fearynge to declare, the very cauſe of hys ſodeyn alteracyon of mynde, he fayned that he ſtoode in greate doubte, leaſte any ryche manne of the nobylytie, woulde take poſſeſſyon, of the Imperyall Palayce: And thereupon gatherynge vntoo hym a greate power of mē, would, as oute of ye ſtrongeſt fortreſſe, chalenge vntoo hym ſelfe the princypall domynyon of all thēpyre. For (ſayd he) amonges the people, may eaſely be leuied a mighty & approued cōpany of yonge men.

Whiles he thieſe cauſes moued, (all the reſt, hauing their eyes caſte vpon the earth, with ſtyll and ſorowfull countenaunce) Pompeianus, (who in age was the mooſt auncient, and had maried Cōmodus eldeſt ſyſter) aroſe vp and ſayed It is no meruayle, o Sonne and ſoueraigne,The oracion of pompeianus vnto Commodus. that you are holden wyth deſyre of your countrey, for the very ſame deſyre of ſeyng oure houſholdes, dothe vrge and ſturre vs alſo. But we repreſſe that affection, for that thaffaires we haue here in hande, requyre the fyrſte parte, and lyeth vs more vpon to diſpatche. As for the pleaſures of the Citye, you ſhall longer enioye hereafter: And Rome is contynually, where the Emperour ſoiourneth. Nowe to gyue ouer the warre lately begonne, beſydes that it is ſhamefull, it is alſo very peryllous: for thereby we miniſter occaſion of audacitee, vnto the Barbarouſe people: who wyll thinke, that we are not departed for cauſe of recreaciō, but that we are fledde being daunted with feare. And vnto your ſelfe, howe gloriouſe wyll it be, after ye haue vanquiſhed all your enemies, and enlarged the boundes of your Empyre vnto the ocean, to retourne to Rome wyth tryumphe, and therin, to haue ledde bounde as captyues, the barbarouſe kynges and Lordes? for truly after this ſorte, in the former worldes, did the Romaynes, were noble and famouſe. There is no cauſe, why you ſhoulde feare that your affayres in the city, are in any haſarde. For euery principall ſenatour is here preſent wyth you, and the hole army, doth before your eyes defende your Empire: yea, and all your chiefeſt Treaſoure, is with vs alſo. The memorie beſides of your father, hath eſtablyſſhed a ſtedfaſt and perfecte beneuolence towardes you, with all eſtates. When Pompeianus perſwading hym to the better, had thus muche ſpoken, he did ſomewhat at that preſent, repreſſe the wyll and endeuour of the younge Emperour: who fearyng the olde mans ſayinges, hauing nothing wherwith he myght well replye, diſmyſſed the counſayle: promiſyng, that he would more diligently at leyſure, debate with hym ſelfe thoſe thinges. Yet afterwarde (hys ſeruauntes

and paraſites callynge more inſtantely vpon hym) he made no further relacion vnto hys Counſailours. But (hauyng ſent his letters vnto Rome, and appointed whom he thought meete, to defende the bankes of Hiſter, and reſtreigne the attemptes of the Barbariens) he cauſed furthwith his remouing to be proclaymed. Thei that were lefte behynde, diligently executed the offices appoynted them, and wythin a lytle ſpace, broughte many in ſubiection. And ſome they ioyned by great gyftes in frendeſhyp vnto them. The whiche was not verye harde to doo: For the Barbarouſe people beyng naturally gready of money, and deſpyſers of all daungers, do eyther gette their liuing wyth inuaſions, and pylleng of their neyghbours, or elles for an appoynted ſalarie, ſell their peace. The which thing Commodus perceyuyng, (that he might with money (wherof he had innumerable abundaūce) purchaſe hym ſelfe ſecuritee and quiet) he denyed nothing vnto the demaunders. Now aſſone as the fame of hys ſetting forwarde was ſpredde in the armye, ſodeynly a greate ſturre was amonges all the Souldyours, euery man deſyring to returne vnto Rome, and affecting the pleaſures of the citye, to leue theyr enemyes countrey. And when it was blowen abroade, by reporte of purſeuauntes and poſtes, that the Emperour was retourning to the Citye, an incredible ioye wandered amonges the common people, euery man conceuing in hym ſelfe, a ſinguler hope of thēperours preſence, and truſting aſſuredly that he would folowe his fathers ſteppes. Hym ſelfe making ſpeade in hys iourney, and paſſynge wyth a certayne feruencie of youthe, in his charyot throughe the myddes of all thē cities, was receiued with princely reuerence, and ioyfull aſſemblies of the people, & welcomed, as one moſt acceptable, and wyſhed for vnto them. And when he approched nygh vnto Rome, the hole Senate, and the Romayne commons, (eche of them coueiting to preuent other) crowned wyth lawrell, and caryeng all 
                  •
               ynde of flowers, (that the preſente ſeaſon of the yere 
                  •
               yd miniſter) met as farre as they coulde from the citye,

their prince notable in the floure of youth and nobilitie of byrthe. For truely, they loued him with moſt feruent affection, beyng borne and brought vp amonges them,
                  The nobilite of Commodus.
                  Fauſtina Commodus mother. Antonius puis. Hadrian Traian. The beautie of Commodus.
                and then poſſeſſynge in the thirde degree thempyer and regimente of Rome. For of his fathers ſyde he iſſued from the chiefeſt of the Senatours. And hys Mother Fauſtina a Princes wyfe, the doughter of Antoninus Pius, & niece by her mother vnto Hadrian, dyd referre the Pedegrue of her kynred, vnto Traian her grete graundefather. Of this parentage was Commodus deſcended: vnto whome, beſydes the flowre of his age, was giuen alſo an excellēcie of bewtie, a congruent ſtature of body, an amiable and manly countenaunce, pleaſaūt and ſhining beames in hys eyes, and a yelow and curled heare, whiche when he came into the Sonne, dyd ſo glyſter, that manye deamed the ſame, as he paſſed by them, to be ſprinkeled ouer wyth golden duſte. Many alſo eſtemed it a token of diuinyte, coniecturing that the rayes about the top of his heade, were by generacion and nature gyuen vnto hym. The ſofte heares beſydes ſprange oute of hys cheekes, and couered them as it were with flowers. They receyued therfore, this ſuch an Emperour, wyth ioyfull ſhowtes, and ſtrawing of Garlandes, and flowers in the way as he paſſed. After he was enteryd into the Citie, viſyted and ſaluted the Temples, fyrſte of Iupiter, and then of the other Goddes, and gyuen thankes to the hole Senate, and the Pretorian Souldiours, for their fidelite obſerued towards hym, he went into thimperiall palayce. For a fewe yeres after this, he did honourably entrete his fathers frendes, and vſed their counſaile in all his affayres. Thoſe yeres expired he cōmytted the charge of the hole Empyre vnto other, & cōſtituted Capitaine of his garde, an Italyan named Perennes a man verie experte and ſkylfull in warfare.Perēnes The ſame, abuſyng the age of the yonge Emperour, permytted hym to be corrupted wt ſenſuall luſtes and ruffyans. And takynge vpon hym ſelfe all charge and labour, ruled the hole Empyre. There was in the man, an inſatiable thyrſte of money,

ſo that lytle regarding what he had already getē, he dayly gredely gaped for newe lu
                  •
               our and gayne labouryng earneſtly to oppreſſe by accuſacions ye friendes of Commodus father, and to bringe euery noble and ryche man in ſuſpicion, that thereby, the yonge man, beyng put in feare, and they deſtroyed, hymſelfe myght haue opportunite and power, to ranſake theyr goodes and poſſeſſions. But yet a whyle, partelie the memorye of his father, and partelye the reuerence of hys frendes, dyd reſtrayne Commodus. And afterwardes a certayne enuyous fortune, ſubuerted hys diſpoſicion, beyng as yet good and moderate, for thus it chaunced. Lucilla was eldeſt Syſter vnto Commodus.Lucilla Commodus eldeſt Siſter. She was fyrſte maried vnto the Emperoure Lucius Verus, whome Marcus had aſſeciated as his felowe in thempire: And by geuing him his doughter in Mariage, bounde hym wyth an inſolluble knot of frendeſhyppe vnto hym. But after that Lucius was deade, (the habites and tokens of dignyte,Lucius Verus. remayning as yet vnto Lucilla) her father maried her vnto Pompeianus. And Commodus neuertheleſſe permytted her to enioye her former eſtate and honour. For he ſuffered her to ſytte in themperiall ſeate in the Theatre, and to haue the fyre borne before her, as the aunciente vſage was. But after Commodus had maryed Cryſpina, and that it was expediente, to gyue the fyrſte place vnto the Emperours wyfe, Lucilla grudged thereat wonderfullye, reckenynge the others honour, to be her reproche, but yet knowynge, that her huſbande Pompeianus, entierlye loued Commodus, ſhe durſte not ones make any mocion vnto hym, of inuadynge Thempyre. Wherefore hauynge proued the mynde of one Quadratus,Quadratis. a verye noble and ryche yonge man, (wyth whome alſo it was thought ſhe had commytted aduoutrie) ſhe dyd ſo greuouſlye complayne vnto hym of thiniurye ſhe had receyued, that ſhe enduced the yonge man, moſte perniciouſely to conſente, to the vttre vndoing of hym ſelfe and the hole Senate.
            
               For amonges all other of the order of Senatours whiche conſpyred wyth him in this execrable enterpryſe, he adioyned vnto hym a certayne yonge man named Quintianus,Quintianus. of a prompt minde, and ſtoute ſtomake, whome he perſwaded, to hide a dagger in his boſome, watche for conuenient opportunite and place, & there with a ſodeyne aſſaulte ſlea Commodus: As for the reſt, in diſtributing of money, Lucilla promiſed to ſee vnto▪ Quintianus therfore, ſtanding in the entrye of the Amphitheatre,Amphitheatre. (for he truſted in that darke place to be well hydden) furthwith drewe oute the dagger, and cryed wyth a loude voyce vnto Commodus, ſayinge. This dothe the Senate ſende vnto thee. Whiles he ſpake thieſe wordes, he was apprehended by themperours Garde, and receyued condigne punyſhment for his madnes: beyng by his owne fondnes, the Authour of theſchewing hys myſchiefe, his entent being rather opened then accomplyſhed. This loo was the fyrſte and chiefeſt occaſion of Commodus hatred againſt the Senate. For thieſe woordes had ſo perced hys heart, that he reputed them all his enemyes, the voyce of the yonge man, which wold haue ſlaine him, ſtickynge continually in hys memorie. Perennes (not omyttinge, ſoo greate an occaſion) perſwaded themperour, to put vnto deathe, euery one of the principall malefactours, and ſuffre not one of them to remayne a lyue.Thexaction of perēnes. Into whoſe poſſeſſions, hym ſelfe makyng inuaſion, became without difficultie, the rycheſt of all men in thoſe dayes. And after Perennes had diligentlye made inquiſicion of the ſayd Treaſon, the very Syſter of Commodus,Lucilla and her cōplices put to death. with all the Coniuratours, and all other (whiche any ſuſpicion had cauſed to be apprehended,) were put vnto death. Thoſe beynge ones diſpatched oute of the waye, whō the yonge Emperour ſtode in awe of: and who loued hym wyth a certayne fatherly affection, Perennes toke vpō him the tuicion of the Emperours perſon: And hauing obtained very muche auctorite, compaſſed incontinently in hys mynde the occupieng of thempire ſelfe. And for this purpoſe he enduced Cōmodus, to conſtitute hys

ſonnes yonge men, beynge capitaynes ouer thyllyrian armies. He gathered together a wonderfull grete ſome of money that he myght with ryche bribes and giftes alienate the Pretorian Souldiours frō the Emperour. His Sonnes alſo, priuelie leuied their power, to the entent, that aſſoone as their father Perennes had ſlayne Commodus, they woulde by violence: take the dominion and rule vpon them.The treſon of Pirēnes diſcouered. But this conſpiracie, was bewrayed by a wonderfull and incredible meane. The Romaines vſed to celebrate certaine plaies in the honour of Iupiter Capitoline, wherunto aſſembled ſo grete a multitude of people, as is meete to reſorte at any notable ſhewe to ſuch a mighty Cite. Themperour is alſo accuſtomed to beholde the ſame plaies, and to ſyt in the Theatre with the highe Prieſtes, whome the order doth yerely appoynt. Now whē Commodus ſate in Themperiall Throne, earneſtly beholding the gorgeous preparacions for the Tragedies, and when the Theatre was repleniſhed with people, euery mans place according to hys eſtate beynge appoynted him: Sodeinly, before any thing was done or ſpokē on the ſcaffoldes, one in ye habite of a Philoſopher, bering in his hāde a clubbe, and halfe naked, hauing a ſcryppe hanging downe frō hys ſholder, came furth in a Chariot: And ſtayeng in the myddes of the Scaffolde, wt his hande cōmaunded ſylence, and then ſayed. This is no tyme of playe (O Cōmodus) neyther to behold pageauntes, for the Sworde of Perennes is hanging ouer thy ſholders, and except thou take good heade, to auoyde it, the daunger is not immynent but preſent, and thou arte vndone: for hym ſelfe here preſent, dothe leuye power and money agaynſt the. And hys Sonnes doo ſolicite Thillirian armies to rebellyon. Whiche yf thou do not preuente, thou arte but deade. With thieſe woordes, (whether the man were ſtyrred thervnto with any diuine inſpiracion, or beynge but ſymple, was ſo bolde to purchaſe hym ſelfe therby renowne, or elles hoped to obtayne ſome grete rewarde of Themperour) truely he dyſmayed hym. The reſte whyche were preſent alſo, (althoughe they

they coniectured that it was not for nought ſpokē) yet did they fayne not to giue credite vnto it. And Perennes commaunded the man furthewt to be apprehēded and as a furious and ydle talkatiue felowe to be burned. This rewarde had he for hys intemperate lybertye. but they whych ſemed to fauour Commodus, and had tofore deteſted Perennes, as a man of intollerable pryde, hauynge gotten a conuenyente tyme, laboured wyth accuſacyons, too brynge hym out of cō
               ceyte wyth themperour. And truelye, ſo muſte it come to paſſe, that Commodus ſhould eſcape this Treaſon, And Perennes with hys ſonnes be for theyr demerytes worthely rewarded. For no longe while after, certayne Souldiours had conueyed priuely from Perē
               nes eldeſt Sonne, ſundrye pieces of moneye, coyned wyth the ſtampe of hys pycture: And thoſe, vnwares of Perennes (although he wer principal Magiſtrate) they deliuered vnto Commodus. And hauing opened thole cyrcumſtaunce of the pretended Treaſon, were with grete giftes recompenced. The night folowyng were ſent certaine from Cōmodus, to ſtrike of Perē
               nes head,The death of Perēnes who was ignoraunt of al this buſines, and at that Inſtant leſt loked for any ſuche matter. That done, the ſame executyoners, (as they were commaū
               ded) furthwyth wente vnto hys Son, and making very haſty ſpede, preuented the rumoure of thoſe thynges that were done at Rome. At theyr commynge vnto hym, they delyuered hym frendlie letters from thē
               perour, the which puttyng hym in great hope, willed hym to returne vnto Rome: wherby he was ignoraūt of all the dryfte, and fynally of his fathers happe. For ſome of the meſſengers, tolde hym that he was called alſoo for by hys father, who (they ſayde) woulde haue written vntoo him likewyſe, yf he had not ſuppoſed, yt he would ſuffycyently regarde themperours letters. The yonge man beleued it, and although he grudged ſomewhat that his enterpryſe was thus interrupted, yet affying hym ſelfe, in his fathers mighte & aucthoritie (whome he thoughte too be as yet in proſperouſe eſtate,) he prepared him ſelfe to retourne wyth them.

But aſſoone as he approched the borders of Italie, he was ſlayne by them vnto whome the charge of thexecutyon was commytted. Thys ende had the father & the Sonne: After whom Commodus appointed .ij. gouernors, thynkyng it to be more ſure, not to commyt ſo great an aucthoritye vnto one man alone: but deuiding ye ſame in .ij. partes, make it by ye mean, the more weake to rebell againſt the prince.A newe conſpiracye. But no long time after, there were other Treaſons conſpyred agaynſt hym in this maner. There was a certaine Souldiour named Maternus,Maternus. bolde in enterpryſyng many facynorous factes. The ſame ſodeinly forſaking ye Campe and adioynyng into hys felowſhyp certaine of his cō
               panyons, gathered in a ſhorte ſpace an huge multytude of deſperate ruffynes. Fyrſt he deſtroyed vyllages and cornefeldes, and than hauyng gotten a great Summe of money, he ioyned dayly more vacabondes vnto hym, and by promyſyng them greate rewardes, & callyng them to the deuiſion of the pray, he brought the matter vnto ſuche poynt, that they ſemed to haue the aucthorytye, not of theues, but of iuſte enemyes. For they occupyed great Cityes, and therein brake ye common gaoles, and toke out of pryſon wythoute reſpecte all offenders, whome through that releaſe and benefyte, they annexed vnto them. Then they ſpoyled wyth inuaſyons all Fraunce and Spayne, and whā they had taken any great Citie, they would ranſake burne and vtterly deface the ſame and than departe. Whereof when Commodus had knowledge, he ſente letters not wantyng angry checkes, vnto the lieuetenauntes of the Countryes there aboutes, reprouyng theyr cowardyſe, and therwyth commaundyng them to leuie an armye, for ye ſubduyng of thoſe rebellious vacabondes. Which thing when the Ruffines knew, they thought it beſt to depart from thoſe Countries. Wherefore pryuely by ſecrete bypathes and vnknowen wayes, they came into Italie, where Maternus conſulted wyth his complices, of thinuaſion of thempyre, and other weyghty affayres. For ſeyng all thynges

hytherunto had proſpered wyth hym beyond his expectacyon, he determyned to attempt ſome notable enterpryſe, or at the leaſt wyſe, yf it chaunced amiſſe, too dye not obſcurelye or like a coward. But yet perceyuyng hym ſelfe, not to haue ſo greate a power, as ſhould ſuffyſe to reſyſt Commodus, wyth an approued and choſen armye, (for he knew that Commodus was well beloued of the Romayne people and men of armes) he concluded to worke his feate by crafty conueyaunce. And therefore Inuented thys wyle. In the begynnyng of the ſprynge tyme, vpon an appoynted holy day, ye Romaynes vſed to celebrate a pompe vnto ye mother of ye Godes. In yt ſolempnitie, the beſt of euerye mans ryches, and Iewelles, and all thimperyall ornamentes, (whych are eyther for matter or worke worthy to be loked on) are wont to be brought furthe, before the Goddeſſe. And euerye where a lycence too playe, is graunted all men, and too take vpon them the perſones of whom it liketh eche man beſte. There is no magyſtrate or offycer, but he is there repreſented in the counterfaytynge of theyr perſones by ſuche as lyketh ſo to doo: ſo that a man can not raſſhely diſcerne the true parſon from the dyſguyſed. Thys dyd Maternus recken to be a conuenyente tyme for the cloſe atcheuyng of hys trayterous enterpryſe. Truſtyng aſſuredlye, (yf him ſelfe toke vpon hym the perſon of one of themperours garde, and armynge hys confederates after the ſame ſorte, mingle them ſelues amonges the ſpearemen, wherebye they ſhoulde be thought to be of themperours retynewe, no man forſyng the matter) wyth a ſodeyne aſſaulte to ſlea Commodus. But beynge betrayed by certayne of hys adherentes that entered intoo the Cytye wyth hym, (who grudged that they ſhould hereafter accept him not as a Souldyoure theyr companyon, but as theyr prynce) before the feſtyual day were nygh, he was taken and beheded:The deth of Maternus. and all the reſidue of the ſame faciō, were puniſſhed wt condigne tormētes of death. Nowe after the ſacrifice was finiſſhed, Commodus did with

thanſkeſgeuing paſſe furthe the feaſt of the Goddeſſe: yea and the people beyng Ioyfull for the preſeruacyō of theyr Emperour, celebrated meryly that daye. But what the reaſon is, wherefore the Romaynes do ſo muche honoure this Goddeſſe, it ſemeth not amyſſe for me to make mencion of it, as I haue learnid out of Hiſtories, eſpecially becauſe that matter is vnknowen vnto mooſt of the Greekes. The ſame Image therefore (as they ſaye) came downe from heauen, no certayntie remayning of what metall, or by what artificer it was wrought: yea they conſtantely beleaue, it was neuer made with manes handes. Therefore, they affirme, that it fell downe from heauen into a certain fyelde of Phrigya, the whiche they coniecture to haue the name Peſinuntis,Peſumtis. (by the fall of the ſame Imaege) put vpon it. For there they ſaye, it appeared fyrſte. Yet do I fynde amonges other authors, that there betwene Ilus the Phrigian,The battayle betwene Ilus ye phrigian, and Tātalus the Lidian. Ganimedes. and Tantalus the Lydian was foughten the batayle, (eyther begō for the way or rather for ye rauyſſhing of Ganimedes And when they had longe foughten, wyth equall ſtrength, and verye many on bothe ſydes ſlayne) that the name was geuen vnto the fyelde by that calamite. There alſo (the report is) that Ganimedes beyng drawen to and fro by the handes of his brother and louer, was depryued of hys lyfe: And beyng taken away, a fable was inuented for the comfort of his louer, that he was endowed by Iupiter hys rauiſher wyth many dyuine honours. In that fielde Peſinuntes, (whereof I haue ſpoken) dyd the Phrygians in tymes paſte worſhyppe, and celebrate the ceremonies of the infernall Goddes euen at the ryuer of Gallus,The ryuer Gallus. of the whyche the women pryeſtes of the Goddeſſe are ſurnamed. But whan the Romayne Empyre encreaſed, (an Oracle beyng receyued that the Empyre ſhoulde be augmented to the vttermoſte, yf the Romaynes woulde tranſporte the Peſynuntian Goddeſſe vnto them.The Peſynuntyā Goddeſſe) There were Embaſſadours ſente into Phrigya, too requyre the Statue of the Goddeſſe, the whyche was eaſely graunted vntoo theym, becauſe they ſayde that the Romaynes

were of kynred vnto the Phrigians, beynge deſcended of Aeneas the ſame cuntrey manne. When as therefore, they hadde broughte the ymage in ſhyppe vnto the verye mouthe of Tiberys, whyche the Romaynes then vſed in ſteade of a hauen, ſodeynly with a certayne dyuine power, the ſhyppe ſtoke faſte, neyther coulde it be remoued wyth anye ſtrengthe of the people drawynge at it, vntyll a Veſtall vyrgin came thyther.Veſtal vyrgyn. The ſame beynge ſclaundered, that ſhe had deflowred her virginitye, (whiche oughte euermore to be inuiolatlye preſerued) fearynge condempnacion, inſtantlye intreated the people, that they woulde commytte the iudgemente of her, vnto the Peſynuncian Goddeſſe. That ones obtayned, ſhe bounde the maſte of the ſhyppe wyth her gyrdell, mooſte humbly deſyringe, that yf the Goddes knewe her an vncorrupte virgyn, ſhe woulde commaunde the ſhyppe to come forwardes. And when ſhe hadde ſo ſayde, ſhe drewe the gyrdell in her hande, and the ſhyppe beganne to folowe. So dyd the Romaynes togither wonder at the manyfeſt diuinitie of the God heade, and the innocencie of the virgyne. But this much haue I hythervnto treated of the Peſynuncian Goddes, peraduenture ſumewhat more tedyouſlye then it behoued, but yet lyke to brynge no vnprofytable knowledge vnto them that are not throughlye ſkylfull in all the Romayne affayres. Nowe Commodus (hauyng eſcaped the treaſon of Maternus, dyd wyth a greater Garde ſtrengthen hym ſelfe, and came verye ſealdome abrode, conſumed mooſte parte of the tyme in the Suburbes, or in hys Principall Manours farre from the Cyte, and vtterlye abſtayned from ſyttynge in iudgemente, and all Imperyall actes. At the ſame time, a wonderfull plage vexed all Italie:The peſtilence. but it was mooſte furiouſe in the cytye of Rome, as in a place replenyſſhed wyth people, and receauynge ſtraungers from all partes of the worlde. Whereby there happened a meruaylouſe grete morreyne of menne and beaſtes. Then Commodus

departed vnto Laurentum,Laurentum. (for ſo had ſome conninge Phyſicians counſeyled hym) becauſe it was a more coulde Regyon, and ſhadowed wyth many woodes of Laurell, of whome alſo the Countrey hathe hys name. For they ſayde that the ſauoure of the Laurelles,The remedye againſt the peſtilence. and the pleſauntneſſe of the ſhadowes, dyd greatlye preuayle to the auoydynge of the contagion of the ayre: And therefore in the Cyte ſelfe, by the Phiſycians aduyſementes, manye ſtopped theyr eares and noſes wyth ſwete oyntementes, and vſed dayly delectable vapors and perfumes, that the pores of the ſenſes ſhoulde not admytte into them anye peſtyferouſe ſmell, and yf they receyued anye, that the perfumes wyth a greater ſtrengthe ſhoulde vanquyſſhe the ſame. But neuertheleſſe the ſycknes encreaſed, deſtroyeng euery where bothe men and cattell. Yea there dyd alſo a grete famyne vexe and oppreſſe the Cyte, by this occaſion. There was a certayne Phrygyan named Cleander, of that ſorte of menne that are ſoulde openlye by Cryers:Cleāder The ſame beynge put to ſeruyce in the Emperours houſe, encreaſed gretelye in fauoure wyth Commodus, and was enhaunſed vnto ſo hyghe dignytie, that he alone obtayned the cuſtodye of the Emperours parſon, the charge of hys Chamber, and the gouernaunce of hys Garde. Rycheſſe and pryde dyd beſydes ſturre hym to hope of Thempyre. Wherefore hauynge gathered togyther a grete ſomme of money, he boughte a wonderfull quantytie of wheate, and the ſame he hadde coſtely ſhutte vp, truſtynge that he ſhoulde wynne the hartes of the people and the armye, yf that he releued wyth large gyftes, thoſe that before were in greate penurye of neceſſarye foode. He had alſo buylded a verye large ſchole for exercyſes, and many common bathes, that he myght by that meanes allure the people vnto him. But the Romaynes were offended wyth hym before, imputynge all the cauſe of thys dearthe vnto hym onely.
            
               And deteſting him, as man vnſaciable of rycheſſe, thei fyrſt aſſembled by embuſhmentes vnto the Theaters,Theatrꝭ. and afterwarde (Commodus beyng in the Suburbes) ſodeynly they came all thither, wyth huge clamors, demaunding Cleander vnto death, and when the hole ſuburbes were fylled with noyſe and tumulte, & Cō
               modus him ſelfe was at his accuſtomed pleaſures in an vpper chamber, ignoraunt of all that was donne, (Cleander perdy had ſo prouided) ſodenly beyonde all mens expectacion: the Emperours horſemen armed braſſe furthe with violence by the commaundemente of Cleander, driuing downe and wounding euery mā they met. The people beyng on foote, & without weapon, were not able to ſuſtayne the brunte of the horſemen: Wherefore with haſty fleynge they retyred into the Cyte, where many of them were deſtroyed, not onely thoſe whome the horſemen ſlewe wyth weapon, but alſo they whome the horſes had wyth theyr feate troden downe, & thei that fought eyther in the preſe of the fotemen, or elles amonge the horſes. The horſemē ſo purſuyng them without any impedimente vnto the gates of the Cytye, deſtroyed a grete parte of the people. But they that remayned within, knowing the calamytie of theyr frendes without, ſhutte theyr doores and gatte vp into the roofes, and toppes of their houſes, and threwe downe vppon the horſemen bothe ſtones and tyles: Therby was the fortune ſodenly chaunged, when no horſeman durſte at that preſente ſtryue, all the people fyghting ſafely from aboue againſt thē. Wherfore many of them beynge wounded when they coulde no lenger endure, turned their backes and fled: many of them were alſo ſlayne throughe the contynuall and thicke fallyng of weapons, and many ſtriken from theyr horſes, whiche founderid amongs the ſtones that were throwen downe. Yea, and the footemē whyche had ſtations within the cyte, came to reſcue the people againſte the horſemen, whome they vtterly deteſtyd. And althoughe this were a Cyuyle batayle, yet durſte no man for feare of Cleanders power declare it vnto Commodus, vntyll his eldeſt Syſter named

Fadilla vnto hym (for the approchynge vnto his preſence was eaſe for hys Syſter) wyth her heare looſe fel down on her knees, defourmed wyth a mournyng garmente, and ſayde. Truely (O Prynce) whyles ye lye here in peace, ye are in extreame peryll. And we that are of your bloude are almooſte vndone. The people of Rome are deſtroied. The moſt parte of your armye is conſumed. And thoſe thynges we thoughte not to ſuffre of ye Barbariens, the ſame doth our own houſholde ſeruauntes vnto vs. And they vpon whom you haue beſtowed mooſte bountyfull benefytes, the ſame are youre mooſt extreame enemyes. Cleander hath armed the people and Souldyours againſt you, amonges whome he is of ſome abhorred, and of ſome entyerely beloued. Yet are they both in armes, do cō
               myt murdre wythin them ſelues, and fyll Rome with Cyuyle bloude. But vpon oure neckes wyll the myſerye of bothe companyes lyghte, excepte you do deliuer vnto death wyth all haſte, a moſte pernycyous & wycked Seruaunte, whych hath bene aucthour of ſo gret a calamitye vnto them already, and entendeth ſhortly to be ſo vnto vs. Whyles ſhe thus ſayde, ſhe rente her clothes, and manye that were preſente, hauynge taken courage of the womans woordes, dyd put Commodus in feare alſo. He beyng amaſed, and dreadyng the daunger, not as Immynente, but preſente, commaunded Cleander to be called haſtely vnto hym, not knowynge anye certayntye, but yet ſuſpectynge that ſomewhat was tolde themperoure. And as he came before hym, themperoure commaunded hym too be apprehended, and too haue hys head ſtrycken of:The punyſhmēt of Cleander. And beynge ſet vpon a Speare too be caryed aboute. Knowynge that he ſhoulde ſhewe vntoo the people a pleaſaunte and deſyred ſyghte. Thus was thys myſchyefe appeaſed, and the fyghte on eyther ſyde aſſwaged. For the Sduldyours (when they ſawe him dead, for whom they fought) feared the indygnacyon of the Emperour, whom they perceiued too be deluded, and that nothing was done by hys commaūdement. The people on thother parte accompted thē ſelues ſatiſfied

wyth the death of the begynner of the miſchiefe. The chyldren alſo of Cleander, (for he had twoo ſonnes) & all his frendes were at one tyme ſlayne, and theyr bodies being drawen through the Citie, and moſt filthely ordered, were at the laſt throwen into the common ſynkes of the Citie. This was the ende of Cleanders deſtenies. And in hym onelye mans nature, can (as I mighte ſay) boldely bragge, that a man may be aduanced, from moſte vyle and lowe eſtate, vnto the hygheſt type of dignitye, and being ſoo exalted, fall downe in the leaſte and ſodeyne momente of fortune. Then Cō
               modus, (althoughe he feared that the people woulde moue ſome newe tumulte againſte hym) yet by hys frendes perſwaſyons, retourned into the Citie. And being receyued wyth ioyfull ſhoutes and aſſemblyes of ye people,The begī
                  ninge of Commodus tyrā
                  nye. entered into thimperyal palayce. And certainly ſo many perylles beinge paſte, he began from thencefurthe to truſt no creature: but to deſtroy now this, & now that man, gyuynge credyte vntoo euerye falſe accuſatyon. He toke beſides into his frendſhyp, no man in whome was any vertue remaynynge, but dyd withdrawe his mynde equallye from all good ſtudye. For the vnbrydeled luſtes of the bodye, dyd bothe day and nighte oppreſſe him wyth moſt greuous bondage. He remoued as a ſpie from his gate, euery man whom eyther goodnes, or any meane and honeſt qualitie, did beautifie. But ſlaues and ſuche as vſed moſt filthye maners, hadde hym as wholly addicted vnto them.
                  
                     •
                  arting. He vſed alſoo aboue meaſure cartynge and ſleing of beaſtes. For the which exercyſes, the flattering Paraſites extolled him with fame of fortitude. There by he behaued him ſelfe in thoſe thynges more diſhoneſtly,Prodigyouſe tokens in ye ayre. then became a ſober & prudent Prince. At that ſeaſon were apparaunte in the ſkye, certayne prodygyouſe tokens. For ſtarres appeared contynually by daye lyghte, and manye of them beynge ſtretched out in lengthe, ſemed too hange in the myddes of the ayre. Beaſtes beſydes of all kynde were broughte furthe, not obſeruynge theyr nature, wyth monſtrous ſhape of bodye, and membres nothynge agreable.

But the greateſt calamytie partely brought preſente doloure, and eſpecyally afterward wyth mooſt myſerable coniecture, dyd put all men in feare. For when there had neyther anye ſhoures or clowdes, ſauynge onely a lytle earthquake preceaded (wheather it were by chaunce wyth lyghtenynge in the nyghte, or elles wyth anye fyre kyndeled in the earthe) the hole Temple of peace was ſodeynelye burnte.The Tē
                  ple of peace burned. The whyche worke, of all other in the Cytye was greateſte and mooſte beawtyfull, and of all the Temples mooſte ryche, and gorgyouſelye buylded, and adorned wyth muche golde and ſyluer. For almoſte euerye man broughte hys ſubſtaunce thyther, as intoo a treaſourye. And therebye the fyre ſo ragynge in the nyghte, broughte manye that were riche in to extreame pouertye. Wherefore all men bewayled the common calamytye openlye, and euerye man lamented hys owne loſſe pryuatelye. When all the Temple was conſumed, vearye manye the beawtyfulleſt buildinges of the Citie were enflamed with fyre alſo. Amonges the which ye temple of Veſta was one, ſo that the Palladiū was ſene,The Tē
                  ple of Veſta. The Image of Pallas. Veſtal virgins. the which the Romaynes do chiefely worſhip and kepe ſecrete, beynge broughte (as they ſaye) from Troye, and at that time fyrſt ſythens it came into Italye, ſene of all men. For the Veſtall Virgines, hauing with muche difficultye ſaued it, caryed it through ye ſtrete named Sacra via, vnto themperours palayce. Many the goodlyeſt partes beſydes of the Citie were burned. And the fyre ragyng many daies was not ceaſed, before that ſodaine ſhoures quenched it. Wherfore all men that time referred the hole matter vnto the Goddes, by whoſe wil they thought the fyre to be begon and ended, interpreting warres (yt did enſue) to be ſignified by ye burning of ye Tēple of Peace. The whiche coniecture of things the hap did afterward verifie. For (ye Citie being vexed with manye greuous diſcōmodities) the people dyd not (as they were wonte) beholde Commodus beneuolentlye, but euerye one imputed the cauſe of theyr myſerye vnto hys dyſſolute and pernycyouſe vyces,

for his wickedneſſe was not hydden from them neyther wolde he it ſhoulde be kept cloſe. But thoſe thinges that were in his houſe committed, not withoute infamye, the ſame he feared not to blaſe and blowe a brode. He waxed ſo inſolent, that he abandoned the name of his father, and for Commodus the ſonne of Marcus, commaunded himſelf to be called Hercules the ſon of Iupiter. And leuing aparte the apparayle of the Romayne princes, he ware a Lions ſkinne, bearinge in hys hande a clubbe, and couered hymſelfe with purple, and clothes wouen with golde, not with out the deryſion of all men. For in that one garment, he repreſented the wantonneſſe of women, & the proueſſe of noble men. Thus did he daily behaue himſelf. He alſo chaūged the names of ye monethes, & for their auncient tytles, apoynted them new of his owne ſurnames, of the whiche manye were referred vnto Hercules, as vnto one moſte puyſaunt. He cauſed alſo Images to be erected vnto hym throughoute the Cyte, and amonges them, one in the Courte of the Senate, the whiche helde a bowe bente, that the Images them ſelues, ſholde ſhewe terrors and manaces. The which Image the Senate after his death pulled downe, and for it erected agayne the Image of lybertye. But Cō
               modus (when he coulde not aſwage and brydle hymſelfe,) taking vppon him to ſhew furth pageantes vnto the people, promyſed that he would with his owne handes, ſlea before them all kynde of wylde beaſtes, & ſtryue by a ſynguler contencion, with euery valiaunt younge man. When the rumor of theſe tryalles was ſpredde abroade, there aſſembled people out of all Italy, and other nighe nacions to behold that ſyght, whiche they had neuer before ſeane,The 
                     •
                  tee of Commodus. nether by talke herde of. For his hande was reported to be ſo ſtedfaſte, that what ſo euer he had throwen or ſhotte at wyth darte or arrowe, the ſame wold he aſſuredly ſtrycke. And he retayned daily about him mooſte approued archers of Parthia,Parthiēs & Numimidiens. & Numydyane ſlyngers, all the which hym ſelfe in cunnynge farre excelled. Nowe when the daye of this Pageande was come, there was buylded in the

middes of the Amphytheater,Amphitheatre. a gallerie for Commodus. In the which he myght runne rounde about, leſt that fyghting beneth with the beaſtes, he ſhould be in daūger. But by caſting his dartes frō aboue, as oute of a ſafe place, he ſhoulde rather ſhew his cunning of throwing then any valiaūtneſſe. In purſuing them he ſtrake hartes and hyndes, and other horned beaſtes beſydes bulles, and preuenting thē with a ſwyfte courſe ouerthrewe them, by mooſte aſſured ſtrokes. The Lyons and Pāthers wyth other fierce beaſtes of that kynde,Lions & Pāthers runnynge rounde aboute he ſlewe with dartes from aboue, ſo that no man ſaw the ſeconde darte throwen at any of them, nor any woūde but that was deadly. For as ſoone as the beaſt ones ſturred, he wounded him eyther in the foreheade, or at the hart, vſyng none other ſcope, nor appoyntinge to throwe at anye other parte of the bodye, ſo that the beaſte wyth the verye ſtroke, was berafte hys lyfe. There were beaſtes beſydes goten from all partes of the earthe. And thē dyd we beholde with oure eyes, thoſe thinges we meruayled at in paynting. For oute of India & Ethyope,Inde & Ethiope and out of the South and Northe, (what ſo euer were vnknowen in the former worldes,) the ſame dyd he bothe ſhew furthe, and ſlea at one tyme, euery man beynge abaſſhed, at hys ſo ſtedfaſte a hande, and at the dartes neuer faylynge ſtroke. He alſo ſtroke wyth dartes, Oyſtriches of Mawritany, the whiche (throughe the ſwyftnes of their feate, and as it were wyth ſayle of their winges) ranne very ſwiftly) touching the toppes of their neckes, & there withall ſtrikenge of their heades, and the hinder parte of the necke (wher the ſtroke lighted) beyng cute of, they would a lytle whyle continewe theyr courſe, as thoughe they were yet lyuinge. Yea and a Pāther (the which hauing with a very vehemēt courſe ouertaken a man) thruſte into the Theater (ſeamed redy to deuoure hym) he woūded ſo ſodeinly that the beaſte beyng kylled, he preſerued the man, preuentynge the edge of her teathe, wyth the ſharpe hedde of hys darte. He alſo ſlewe an hundreth Lyons, brought furthe of a caue with like many ſtrokes, their

bodyes ſo layde in order, that they myghte eaſelye be nombred, no darte beynge throwen in vayne. Theſe thynges therefore that were hythervnto done (althoughe they ſeamid vnmeate for a Prynce) yet becauſe they declared a certayne fortytude and cunnynge deſerued commendacion of the people.
            But when he enteryd naked into the Amphytheater, and wearynge harneſſe ſupplyed the nombre of the ſworde players, then appeared a lamentable ſyghte to the Romaynes, that theyr noble Emperour, after ſo manye tryumphes of hys father and aunceſtours, dyd not onely beare armes appertaynynge to the Empyre agaynſte beaſtes, but dyd alſo ſpotte the chiefeſte dignitye wyth mooſte fylthye apparell. In fyghtynge he eaſelye conuynced hys equalles, wythoute beyng ones wounded, euery manne wythdrawynge hys force, and acknowlegynge hym rather an Emperoure then a ſwoorde player. And he fell into that furye that he entended to forſake the Imperyall Courte, and to remoue into the ſchole of defence. Neyther ſuffered he hym ſelfe anye more to be named Hercules, hauynge adopted the name of an excellente ſworde player, the whyche a lyttle before dyed. Yea hauynge taken the heade from the greate Image called Coloſſus that repreſented the ſymilytude of the Sonne,Coloſſus (beynge verye moche worſhypped of the Romaynes) he putte thereon the pycture of hys owne heade, and wrate at the foote thereof, not hys accuſtomed ty
                  •
               les of the Empyre and hys father, but for the name of Germanyen, he put in the vanquyſſher of a thouſande Mayſters of defence. But it was requyſyte, he ſhoulde ones fynyſhe hys madneſſe, and the Cytye be delyuered from hys Tyrannye. And that in the begynnynge of the yere, the whiche daye the Romaynes holde verye ſolempne, dedicatynge it vnto Ianus the aunciente GOD of Italye.Ianus. Saturne Iupiter. Of the whiche Regione, thei reported Saturnus (beynge expelled by hys ſonne Iupiter) to be a

ſtraunger, and bicauſe that he there hydde hym ſelfe, the name of Latium to be geuē vnto it.Latium. Wherfore the Romaynes do fyrſte celebrate, after theyr cuſtome the feaſtes of Saturnus,Saturnus feaſtes. and then the begynnynge of the yere. The Image of thys GOD is wroughte with two faces, as of hym by whome the yere begynneth, and in whome the yeare endyth. When the Cite helde (as I ſayd) thys daye with ſolempnitye, in the whiche the Romaynes do ſende one to an other newe yeres giftes, and all ſortes of preſentes,New yeres gyftes. and the magiſtrates wer
                  •
                bewtyfull ſcarlette, (all menne wyth gladneſſe celebratynge the ſame daye) Commodus determyned to come abroade, not oute of the Emperours palayce (as the olde vſage was) but oute of the verye ſchole of defence. And for gorgyouſe apparayle and Imperyall purple to go armed in the companye of the Romayne people. Whyche hys counſell, when he hadde declared vnto Martia one of hys concubynes,Martia one of Commodus concubynes (vnto whome he opened the greateſt partes of hys ſecrettes and eſteamed her almoſte as hys wyfe ſo that all honours ſauynge the fyre were borne before her as Empreſſe) the woman hauynge perceaued hys ſo dyſhoneſte entente, fell vppon her knees before hym, inceſſauntelye deſyrynge hym wyth manye teares that he woulde not ſuffre the Maieſtye of the Romayne Empyre to be defyled, or committe hym ſelfe ſo daungerouſlye vnto myſcheuouſe and deſperate perſonnes. But when ſhe coulde nothynge auayle ſhe departed wepynge. And he hauynge called vnto hym the Capytayne of hys armye named Letus, and Electus hys Chamberlayne,Letus. Electus commaunded theim to prepare all thynges for hys lodgynge the ſame nyghte in the ſchole of defence, that he myght in the mornynge goo from hence to ſacryfyce, and ſhewe himſelfe armed vnto the people of Rome. Thei endeuoured wyth manye interceſſions to dyſſwade hym from enterpryſynge anye thynge vndecente to a Prynce. But Commodus chauffed wyth

anger (hauyng commaunded them to auoyde hys preſence) returned into hys chambre that he myghte, (as he was accuſtomed) ſlepe at noone. And there takyng into hys handes a thynne boke made of the barke of a tree and foldynge to eyther ſyde, he wrote in the ſame all thoſe he entended to ſlea the ſame night. Of whom Martia was fyrſte, and nexte vnto her Letus and Electus, and after them a greate number of thoſe that bare mooſt rule in the Senate. For he determyned to deſtroye all tholde men that were hys fathers frendes (leaſt theyr aucthorytye ſhoulde hynder hys w
                  ••
               kednes) and to dyſtrybute their goodes amonges ye Souldyours and ſword players, yt the one company ſhould wyth ſtrengthe defende hym, and thother wyth pleaſures delyte hym. The ſame boke ſo wrytten he threw downe on hys bedde, not ſuſpectynge that anye man woulde enter into the chamber. But there was a lytle Boye, yet of the ſorte of theym, that beynge clothed wyth no garmentes, ſauing ſuche as are decked with golde and precyouſe ſtones are wonte too be the pleaſures of euerye delycate Romayne. The ſame Boye was ſo entyrelye beloued of Commodus, that he oftentymes laye wyth hym,Philocō
                  modus. and was called Phylocommodus (the name it ſelfe declarynge the Prynces affectyon. Thys chylde by chaunce playinge (whan Commodus was occupyed in the bayne and ryottinge) entered into the chambre, and takynge the booke in hys hande to playe wythall, wente oute of the doores, and by chaunce mette with Martia, who for that ſhe loued the Boye, fyrſte enbraced and kyſſed him and toke the booke oute of hys hande, fearynge leaſt the chylde ſhould through his infancie, vnwares empayre thinges of Importaunce. Afterwarde knowyng the hand of Commodus, and moued wyth deſyre too reade it, when ſhe perceyued the pernycyouſe ententes therin contayned, and her ſelfe to be fyrſt mencioned, Letus wyth Electus to folowe, and fynally ſo great a murdre of others lykely to enſue, ſhe inwardly lamented, ſayinge. Ah Commodus, are theſe the rewardes of frendſhyy and loue? Haue I thus deſerued of the after

I haue ſo many yeres abyddden thy checkes and drō
               kennes? But theſe thinges ſhall not ſo proſpere with the vndyſcrete and dronken perſon agaynſte a ſober & well aduyſed woman. When ſhe had thus ſpoken ſhe called Electus (wyth whome ſhe was accuſtomed to talke famylyarelye, becauſe he was the Emperours Chamberlayne, and wyth hym ſhe was alſo ſuppoſed to haue carnall companye) and deliuered the boke vnto hym, ſaying. Beholde Electus what banquet we ſhoulde haue bene at this nyght folowyng. He beyng aſtonyed wyth the readynge of it (for he was an Egiptyan borne, ſtoute, fumyſſhe, and quyckelye ſtyrred to anger) ſent the boke cloſely ſealed by a truſty frend of hys vnto Letus to reade. The whych alſo abaſſhed wyth it, came furthwyth vnto Martia, feynyng that he woulde conſulte wyth her, concernynge the preparatyon in the ſchole of defence as the Emperour had commaunded. Vſyng therefore thys gloſe, they determyned to doo, or ſuffre ſome thing out of hande, knowyng that there was no tyme of deferrynge the matter. They conſented at laſte that the feate ſhoulde be wroughte by poyſon. The whyche Martia tooke vpon her to mynyſter ſpeadelye. For ſhe was wonte too prepare drynke for hym, and to gyue hym the cuppe that it myghte be thoughte more ſweater beynge delyuered from hys louer. She gaue vnto hym therefore as he came from the bayne poyſon myngled with verye pleaſaunte wyne in a goblet. And he hauynge caughte a thyrſte in waſſhynge hym ſelfe and huntynge, dranke raſſhelye the drynke as of cuſtome proffered vnto him. Wherewyth beynge immedyatelye troubled wyth atche in hys heade and deſyrous of ſleape, (ſuppoſynge it came by laboure,) gaue hym ſelfe to reſte, Electus and Martya commaunded incontynentelye euerye man to departe to hys owne houſe, leaſte they ſhoulde dyſturbe the Emperoure hauynge nede of ſleape, whyche he was accuſtomed alſo to doo at other tymes throughe Immoderate dronkennes. For when he bath
                  •
               d him ſelf, or elles fell to banquetinge, he kepte no certayne tyme of ſleape.

The ſenſualities riſinge and muche differynge one from another, ſo conſtrained the man, (yea ſometyme vnwyllyng) to ſerue thē. Whā he had for a ſmal tyme reſted him ſelfe, and the vehemency of the poyſon was now entered his ſtomake and belye, a gidines cōbred his head, and vomytynge furthwyth folowed, eyther through the meat yt he had before largely eaten, or the drinkyng of muche wyne that reſyſted the poyſon, or elles throughe the vſage that Princes obſerue in taking of medicines before they eate any meat, for feare of poyſonyng. But when he had vomited very muche they fearynge leaſte all the venyme beyng auoyded, he would thereby recouer, and the commaund theym altogyther to be ſlayne, perſwaded for a great reward a certayne bolde and ſtoute yonge man named Narciſſus,Narcyſſus. Commodus ſtrā
                  gled to death. to ſtrangle him in hys Chaumber. Thys ende of life had Commodus, when he hadde raigned after his father in the Empyre .xiii. yeres. A mā of al other Emperours moſt noble, & of all men in yt age the moſt beautifull. But too ſpeake of his prowes & fortitude he might in yt be preferred to any other, eſpecyallye in ſure ſtrikyng that he had throwen at. Neuertheles he defyled (as before is tolde) all the ſtate of hys lyfe wyth abhomynable vyces.
            The ende of the fyrſt booke.
         
         
            ¶The Argumente of the ſeconde booke.
            
               IN the ſecond boke is declared how Pertinax was choſen Emperour, howe longe time he raigned, & how he was ſlaine by the men of armes (whiche ſolde thempyre afterwardes vnto Iulianus) How Seuerus became Emperoure by the delayes of Niger. And howe Iulyanus was ſlayne, and the death of Pertynax reuenged by Seuerus.
         
         
            
            The Seconde Booke of the Hiſtorie of Herodian.
            
               AFter that Commodus was ſtrangled (as we haue in the former Booke declared) the murderers entending to cō
               ceale the facte, and to deceaue ye Emperours garde, deliuered the body wrapped in an olde couerlet, vnto .ii. truſtie and faythfull ſeruaū
               tes to cary furthe of the Palayce, as it were ſome ſtuffe that peſtered the chambre. And they that bare it paſſed throughe the myddes of the watchemen, of the whiche ſome were dronke and ſlepte, letting their halberdes fall out of theyr handes. The other whiche were awake, neglected the fardell whyche they ſuppoſed not to appertaigne vnto theyr charge. Then they ſente the princes bodye, (thus conueyed by ſtealthe, and in the nyghte layde in a wagon) vnto a place named Ariſteus. This ended, Letus, Electus, and Martia, after they had longe conſulted what was beſte to be donne, at the laſte concluded to ſpreade a rumor of his deathe, that he ſodeynlye fell into an Appoplexie. The which bruite they knew wold ſoone be credyted,Appoplexie. becauſe it was euidently knowen that he oftentymes accuſtomed to ſtuffe him ſelfe with immoderate ſuperfluitie of metes. But fyrſte of all it ſeamed good vnto them, to choſe for Emperour ſome aged, reuerende, and modeſt perſone, by whome themſelues myghte be in ſafetye and all other exempt from cruell tyrrannye. And hauyng longe conſulted they founde no man ſo worthye as Pertinax.Pertinax. This Pertinax was an Italian borne, famouſe at home & abrode throughe his valyaunte actes, & manyfolde victoryes obtayned againſte the Germaynes, & Barbaryens of the Oryente,

and he onely remayned alyue of all the graue counſayllors, that were lefte vnto Commodus by his father, and vnto hym amonges all the capitaynes his Companions, he had ſhewed moſte honoure and reuerence. Being yet ſafe, eyther for that Cōmodus feared hys grauitie, or elles dyſſymuled becauſe of his pouertye. For this alſo dyd amplyfye hys renowme, that hauynge moſte aucthoritye of all men, yet of all men he ſeamed the pooreſte. Vnto this Pertynax therefore wente Letus, and Electus, with a fewe of theyr complices aboute mydnyghte, whyles all men ſlepte. And finding his gates locked thei called vp ye porter. Who when he opened the gate, and ſawe Letus the chyefe Capytayne & the ſouldyors preſente with hym, beyng ſore diſmayed wythall, ranne and tolde Pertynax. He furthwyth commaunded them to be lette in, ſayenge that anon woulde happen the myſchiefe he had vnto that daye loked for. He was of ſo conſtante a mynde, that he moued not ones from his bedde, nor chaunged hys countenaunce. But wyth a bolde and ſtoute ſtomacke nothyng abaſſhed ſpake vnto Letus and Electus when they were entered (althoughe he beleaued they were ſente to ſlea hym) theſe wordes. I haue of longe tyme euery nyght loked for this ende of my life, the whyche onely am remaynynge of all hys fathers frendes? Wherefore I meruayled for what purpoſe Cōmodus ſo longe deferred the matter. Why do you therefore thus ſtaye and not execute that ye are commaunded and delyuer me from this dolefull and continual dread. Vnto thoſe wordes anſwered Letus ſayinge. Ceaſe (ꝙ he) to talke of thynges vnworthy youre ſelfe and your former lyfe, we come not to deſyre your deathe, but the preſeruacion of oure ſelues and all the Romaine Empyre. For the Tiraūte is dead, and hath ſuffred condigne punyſhmente, receauynge at oure handes thoſe thinges he entended to do vnto vs. And we are commen hither to deliuer the Imperiall power vnto you, whom onely of all the ſenate for temperaūce of lyfe, aucthoritie, age, and grauyte of maners, we

knowe to be beſte & entyerly beloued & reuerenced of the people, Truſtynge that we doo, ſhalbe acceptable vnto thē, and profytable to oure ſelfes. Vnto whome Pertinax anſwered. Leue of (ſayd he) thus to ſcorne and mocke an olde man and ſo reproue him of timoriouſnes, entendynge fyrſte to deceaue, and after to flea hym. Why ꝙ Electus ſeynge that you do not credyte vs, take this lytle booke (for ſuerly ye knowe the hāde of Cōmodus) reade it your ſelfe and ye ſhall perfectlie perceaue what great daūger we haue eſcaped: neyther ſhal ye fynde in our wordes any temptacion, but truſtye reporte of truethe. The whyche when Pertynax had donne, thynkynge it beſte to beleaue them whyche had bene alwayes theretofore hys eſpeciall friendes, and vnderſtandynge all the matter, he commytted hym ſelfe wholye vnto theyr power. It ſeamed good therefore vnto them to go fyrſte vnto the hooſte and to aſſaye the myndes of the Souldyours, whome Letus promiſed eaſely to wynne vnto his ſentence, becauſe he knewe that hys aucthoryte (beynge theyr Captayne) woulde ſomewhat preuayle amonges them. Wherefore as many as were preſente haſted them vnto the Campe, when muche of the nyghte was paſſed nexte before the fyrſte daye of Ianuarye. They ſente beſydes truſtye meſſengers to ſpreade abrode the rumor that Commodus was dead. And that Pertynax (whyche ſhoulde be Emperour) was nowe goynge towardes the hoſte. That bruyte beynge ones blowen, ſodeynly all the people (as they were madde) ranne throughe the ſtreates. All menne reioyſed, and euery manne ſeuerally wente to tell hys frende, whyche hadde eyther dygnitye or rycheſſe remaynynge: for vppon theim depended the greateſte daunger, whyle Commodus lyued. They wente therfore vnto the Temples to render thanckes vnto the GODDES, talkynge togyther dyuerſely. Som
                  •
                ſayde the Tyrraunte is deſtroyed: ſome other the ſworde player. Yea manye ſpake thynges more deteſtable.
            
               And ſuche wordes as feare had tyll that daye repreſſed in ſylence, the ſame did thei now (thrughe licenſe frealy goten) bluſter oute. A great parte alſo of the people ranne haſtely to the campe, fearinge leſt the menne of armes wold not willyngly accepte Pertinax for Emperour. For thei thought that a moderate Prince was not verye gratfull vnto the Souldiors, who were accuſtomed to ſerue tyranny, and exercyſe all violence. Wherefore they ranne in diuerſe plumpes vnto the Campe for to cōpel them to obedience. And when they were there arriued, Letus, and Electus, wt Pertinax, came thither alſo. And (the mē of Armes beyng called togithers) Letus ſaid thus vnto them. Cōmodus your Emperour is deade of an Appoplexie. No other man was the cauſe of hys death then himſelfe. For whē we in vayne gaue him good and holſome counſel, he orderinge himſelfe as you all knowe he accuſtomed, was ſodeynlye choked with ouermuche meate and drincke ſo that he peryſſhed by the ende hymſelfe ſought. For all men dye not by one kynde of death, but vnto many men there are dyuers cauſes, and yet all tende to one ende. But touching hym, we and the people of Rome haue brought vnto you, a man graue in age, moderate in lyfe, and very experte in warfare, whoſe valyaunte proweſſe, you that are aunciente Souldiors, haue by experience knowen. And the reſte haue iudged (beyng ſo many yeres ruler of the Cyte) not onely worthieſt honour, but alſo admiracion & wōder. Wherfore fortune hath not alonely gyue him as a prudent Prince, but alſo a moſte louing father vnto you. Whoſe ſoueraignitie in thempyre ſhall not perticulerly be mooſte pleaſaunte vnto you that preſently beholde hym, but alſo vnto them that defende the bankes of Riuers, and the boundes of the Romayne Empyre, as thoſe that retaine in memory the notable actes by him atchiued. We ſhall not at thys preſente, wynne the Barbarouſe people vnto vs by gyftes, but beynge myndefull of thoſe thynges they ſuffered whyles thys man was Capytayne, they wyll be rather ſubdued wyth feare. When Letus hadde ſpoken theſe woordes, the people

could no longer wythholde them ſelues. But (whyles the menne of armes ſtoode ſtyll in theyr dompes) they pronounced Pertynax Emperour,Pertynax declared Emperour. and callynge hym theyr parent, they prayſed hym with mooſt ioyful acclamacyons. The ſame dyd the Souldyours alſoo, although not with like alacritie. But the nomber of the people myxed amonges them (beyng voyde of armure and celebratyng the feaſtfull day) eaſely compelled thē to ſhoute, and call Pertynax Auguſtus. Furthewyth (they being ſworne in allegyaunce vnto hym, and the ſacrifice ended) all the people and men of armes crowned wyth Lawrell, folowed hym. After he was conueyed in the nyghte (as we before ſayde) into the Imperyall Palayce by the Souldyours and the people, he was troubled wyth manye cares. And although he ſemed too be of a conſtante and ſtoute mynde, yet dyd thynges preſente put hym in feare, not very muche ſolycyted for hys owne life, (for he had at other tymes contempned greater perylles) but throughe the recordyng in hys mynde the ſodaine mutacion of tiranny, and ponderynge the nobylytie of manye Senatours, who he thought woulde not permyt (after an Emperoure of mooſt noble byrthe) thempyre to come vnto a man of pryuate and baſe ſtocke. For al be it hys temperate and frugall lyfe were well ſpoken of, and that he had gotten in warrelyke affayres great renowne, yet was he of ſymple lygnage. Wherefore after the daye appeared he wente too the Senate houſe, not ſuffrynge the fyre or anye other tokens of dygnytye, too be borne before him, vntyll the determynacion of the Senate were hearde. Whoo as ſoone as they ſaw him receiued him al by one accord wt ioyfull welcommynges, ſaluting him as Auguſtus and Emperour. But he refuſyng the name of Emperoure as a thynge odyous, excuſed his age and deſyred pardon, ſaying there were many of the Senatours more worthy thempyre then he. And wyth that worde he tooke Glabrio by the hande, commaundynge hym to ſyt in Themperyall Throne.The nobilitie of Glabrio. For this Glabrio was the nobleſt of the Senatours, accomptynge the lyne of hys

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
genealogie vnto Aeneas the ſonne of Venus and Anchiſes, and now the ſecond time Cōſull. Who anſwered Pertynax thus. Truely I, whome of all mē your ſelfe iudge moſte worthye, do giue you place in thempyre, and with me al the Senate committeth vnto you thole ſoueraigne aucthoritie. Than Pertinax beyng almoſte conſtrayned by the earneſte prayer of euerye Senatour, and halfe as yet in doubt, aſcended the imperiall ſeate, and ſpake vnto them as foloweth.
            ¶This your conſente and benygne accorde of beſtowinge vpon me ſuche ample benefites,The oracyon of Partynax. amonges ſo greate a company of noble men, ſeing it is voide from all ſuſpicion of flatterye, and ſheweth manyfeſt argumente of beneuolence and truthe, woulde encourage ſome manne to take vpon him the thinges proffered. Truſting that he ſhould with eaſe gouerne, whyle he mighte perceyue ſuche gentlenes in you. But in contrarye wiſe, theſe weightye charges, as they amaſe me with perception of this honour, euen ſo doo they trouble me with great thought and care. For firſte of all in receyuyng of great benefites, it is harde to rendre the lyke. For in the mutual doing of good turnes, if he that oweth lytle, reſtore verye muche, the facilyty of recōpencyng is not ſo much regarded, as the apparaunce of a gratfull minde is in hī cōmended. But whan any man dothe firſt beſtowe ſome greate gyfte vpon an other, if he then litle deſerue it, he ſemeth not ſo muche to wante wherwith he ſhould make recompence, as him ſelfe to be voyde of wytte and moſte vngratefull. I perceyue therfore in my mynde howe vneaſye thys proofe is vnto me, leaſt that by chaunce, I ſhewe my ſelfe vnworthy the honour I haue receiued of you. For the type of dignitie conſyſteth not in thē
               peryall ſeate: but in workes which ſhould not abaſe ye ſame. And euen as muche as we hate thynges paſſed, ſo muche do we hope well of thinges that are to come. And as the memorie of iniuryes is fyred in mynde, (for that whyche hurteth is neuer forgotten) ſo do benefytes ſlyde away through the abuſyng of them. For truely lybertye delyteth not a man ſo muche as bondage

offendethe. Neyther dothe any mā ſuppoſe that he ought to render thankes for vſynge his proper ſubſtaunce after hys owne mynde: (for of ryghte he chalengith that permyſſion vnto hym ſelfe) but he that is dyſpoyled of his goodes, wyll neuer forget the iniurie done vnto him. No man reckeneth that to be his owne lucre which he getteth to the commune profytte. For thoſe thynges that be in commune are lytle regarded of euery manne particulerly. But yf that whyche is proper vnto a priuate manne, do chaunſe worſ
                  •
                then he lokethe for, then thynketh he hymſelfe not to bee well dealte wythall. Beſydes this, they whyche haue accuſtomed the enormityes and vnmeaſurable prodigalitye of Tirauntes, (yf a manne entende for wante of money to lyue thryftelye, and in meaſurable meane) doo not ſo ſoone attribute it vnto a moderate dyſpence, as thei do reproue him furthwith of fylthye couetyſe. Neyther do they eſteame any man able to gyue large gyftes, that dothe abſtayne from vyolence and extorcion. But he which diſpēdeth his ſubſtaunce well, and accordynge to hys degree, dothe not onely not take away from any man, but alſo teacheth others to be frugall, and ſpare that them ſelues gette. Therefore (ryght honorable fathers) pondering theſe thynges in your mindes) endeuor your ſelfes togither with me, and accompte the adminiſtracion of this Empire to be commune vnto vs. For, ſeyng you ſhall liue in a weale publicke of good men, and not vnder Tyranny, your ſelues ought to conceaue good hope of thynges, and to promiſe the ſame vnto others. When Pertinax had ſpoken thieſe thinges (hauyng added vnto the Senate a good courage) he was receaued wyth ioyfull ſhoutes and verye honorabely entertayned. And hauing vyſyted the Temples of Iupiter and the other Goddes, when the ſacrifyce (accordynge to the aunciente vſage) was ended, he retorned into Themperiall Palayce. After it was ſpredde abrode what he had eyther in the Senate houſe ſpoken, or vnto the people wrytten, all men reioyſed: truſtinge that they ſhoulde haue him a gentle and graciouſe Prince, rather a father

then an Emperour. For he commaunded the mē of armes, that thei ſhold hurte or oppreſſe none of the people, neyther do iniury to any waye faring mā, & fynally he reduced all thinges to honeſte behauiour and modeſtie.The maners and behauior of Pertinax. Whē he entered or ſate in iudgement, he ſhewed a curteyſe countenaunce, and for that he chiefely repreſented Marcus, he gaue a greate delectacion vnto the Elders, and the reſydue of the people, he eaſelye drewe to loue hym, beyng deliuered from cruell tirannye, and brought into a quiet lyfe. The reporte hereof beyng once farre of diuulged, prouoked all naciōs and armies, either ſubiecte or confederate to the Romaine people, to gyue deuyne honors vnto hym. Yea yf anye of the Barbarouſe people had forſaken the Romayne ſubiection, or ſtyrred any ſedicion (throughe feare of his proweſſe, whyche they did remember he ſhewed in the former warres, and throughe confydence of hys iuſtyce, when thei knew that he willingly offended no man, but gaue prayſes vnto euery man worthye hys merytes, and that he was voyde of vyolence and crueltye) of theyr free willes they yealded them ſelues vnto hym. There came beſydes from all partes Ambaſſadors, to gratyfye the people of Rome, that they were gouerned by the aucthoritye of Pertynax. But the thing that was moſt acceptable vnto the greateſt part of all men, bothe openly and priuatly was that it happened vnto the Romaynes people to haue a m
                  ••
               eſte and gentle Emperour. Whereat the men of armes in the Cyte appoynted vnto ye Emperours Garde, gretely grudged. For being reduced from extorcions, vnto a modeſte behauior of lyfe, and reckenyng for theyr owne ſhame, that meke and cyuyle gouernaūce, as by the whiche they perceaued theyr inordinate lycence to be taken away, they determyned no lēger to ſuſtayne ſuche a gouernor. Wherefore in the beginnynge they bare themſelfes more ſtubburne and leſſe obedyent to his commaundement. Finally when he had reygned ſcarſely two full monethes, (hauing then ſhewed perfecte profe of his goodnes) and all men beynge erected into a ſinguler hope) ſodeynly a perniciouſe happe enuyenge

it, vtterly deſtroyed all thinges. So that hys notable begynninges and enterpryſes (whiche were lyke greatly to profyte all men) peryſſhed in the myddes of their courſe. For fyrſte of all he adiudged all lande that was vntylled and vnoccupied, eyther in Italye or any other place, and what ſoeuer was vacant in the tyme of Kynges, vnto the tyllers and laborers therof, vnto whome alſo he gaue tenne yeres fredome from Taxes, and perpetuall lybertye. Neyther would he ſuffre his owne name, to be writtē in Thempours poſſeſſiones, ſayenge they were not Themperors, but common vnto the Romaynes. He remytted alſo all trybutes, the whiche Tyrauntes had inuented to get money in the Ryuages of Ryuers, in the hauēs of Cities, and by commen wayes and by pathes, and reſtored them to their aunciente lyberties. Yt ſeamed alſo that he would do many other lyke thynges. For he had dryuen oute of the Citye all falſe accuſers, & commaunded them to be puniſſhed whereſoeuer thei wer founde, forſeyng that no mā ſhold be troubled thrughe wronge accuſacion. And therfore the ſenate and all other truſted to lyue in greate tranquillytie and bleſſyd eſtate of lyfe. For he ſhewed hym ſelfe ſo equall vnto euery man, that he neuer brought hys Sonne beynge a ſtriplyng in yeres, into the Emperours palayce, but kept him in a priuate houſe. So that he went to ſchole after his accuſtomed vſage, nothinge vnlyke pryuate children, and was inſtructed in all thinges, as one of a meane ſorte. Neyther dyd he bragge or ſhew fourthe any tyrrannouſe or Imperyall pompe, durynge the tyme that Pertinax lyued. At this modeſtie of maners and lyfe onely the Pretoriane Sowldyors repyned,Thinſolencie of the men at armes of the Emperors gard▪
                & grudginge at the preſente condicion of thinges affected their olde ſenſualitye and lycenſe, to behaue them ſelues violently and to ryfle all thynges. And amonge their belly bākettes, thei conſulted to deſtroye Pertinax as one comborouſe vnto them, and to ſette in hys place to rule the Romayne affayres, ſome other that were wylde and wantone, and woulde gyue them verye moche lybertye.
            
               Wherfore ſodeynlie (whiles euery man was in quiet) they being madde ran in great companies with much haſte at noonetide vnto themperours Palayce, wyth theyr ſpeares extended and theyr ſwordes naked. And at their thither comming, the Chamberers of the Palayce (being aſtonied with this ſodayne matter vnloked for, and being fewe againſt manye, and naked againſte harneſſed men) were not able to reſiſte them. And therfore euery man lefte hys ſtacion, and ranne dyuerſelye hyther and thither. Yet a fewe of themperours chiefeſt frendes, (hauinge ſhewed vnto Pertynax the flockyng togither of the Souldiours) perſwaded him to make ſhyfte for him ſelfe by fleinge, and to call vpon the people for ayde. But he (althoughe they counſelled him profitably) at that preſente, thinkynge it a ſhamefull thynge, vnworthye themperiall Maieſtie, and hys former lyfe, to committe his ſafetie vnto flighte and corners, determined to preuent the peryll and go furthe amonges them, truſtyng that he ſhould perſwade them what he woulde, and mitigate theyr furyous braynes. He wente out of his chamber & metyng the raging Souldiours, enquyred what was the cauſe of this ſodayne ſturre, willynge them to ceaſe from ſo filthy a tumult. And being not ones abaſſhed wyth the peryll, but retaining a graue countenaunce conuenyent to themperiall Maieſty, nor ſhewing any thing appertaining vnto a ſuppliaunt, he ſpake theſe wordes vnto them. Truelye if ye ſlea me (O Souldyours) neyther do ye atcheue anye notable enterpryſe, or do me any griefe at all,The wordes of Pertynax vnto the Souldiours. being of this age & renown. For certainely there is ſome neceſſarye ende of mans lyfe. But you that are appointed to the charge & cuſtodie of youre Prynce, and to remoue perylles from his perſon, to begin murder your ſelues, and to defile your handes with bloude, not onely Ciuyle, but alſo of your Emperoure, take hede, I ſaye, leaſt it be preſently abhominable, and in time to come daungerous vnto your ſelues. For I haue cōmitted no iniuri or offence agaynſt you. If you be ſorowfull for the deathe of Commodus, truely it was not ſtraunge for him to

die, beyng borne a manne. But if you thynke he was ſlaine by treaſon, verely it was not my default, beyng one (as your ſelues knowe) voyde from all ſuſpycyon. For the thinges that were then committed, youre ſelues knewe fyrſt, ſo that if any ſuſpicyon roſe, it happened in others. As for the reſte, although he be dead, yet wyl I not ſuffre you to want any thynge that you wil modeſtly, and mete for your eſtate wythoute vyolence and extorcyon deſyre. By theſe his wordes ſome of them were euen then pacified and began to depart, reuerencyng the holynes and age of the prince: but he was of the other wyth an aſſaulte ſlayne. Who (after they had commytted this wycked dede) knowyng that the people woulde be dolefull for it, wente ſtreyghte vnto the Campe, and kept them ſelues within the fortreſſe, hauing appointed men of armes in ye Towres to kepe the people from the walles. This end had Pertynax that was for his lyfe and maners (as we haue before ſayde) worthye eternall prayſe. When the rumour of this murdre was ſpred amonges the people, all places were fylled with tumultes and lamentacyons. The people wandered hither and thither lyke madde men vncertayne what they ſhoulde doo. They ſoughte for the Aucthours of the myſchiefe, whome they could neither fynd, nor be auenged on. But eſpeciallye the Senate were meruaylouſe dolefull, reputing it their own calamitye for yt they wāted ſo good a father, and ſoo meeke a Prynce, and fearyd alſoo tyranny, whyche they knewe to be agreable vnto the menne of armes. But when a daye or twoo were paſſed, all the commynaltye throughe euerye mans perticulyer feare remayned in reſte. Thoſe that bare anye aucthorytye, departed vnto ſuche Manours as they poſſeſſed furtheſt from the Cytye, leaſte that in choſynge a newe Gouernoure ſome greuouſe offence ſhould be layd to their charge. And ye ſouldiours (knowynge the people to be in quyet, and no manne remaynynge that woulde reuenge the Prynces deathe) kepte them ſelues wythin theyr Fortreſſe. And hauynge ſet vpon the wall one wyth a verye loude voice

they proclaymed the Empyre to be ſolde, ſayinge they woulde delyuer it vnto hym that woulde gyue moſte money for it, and woulde brynge hym ſafelye into the Emperyall Palayce. That Proclamacyon hearde, neuer moued any man of the Senate that was graue or in aucthorytye neyther anye manne of the nobylytye, or fynallye of thoſe that were ryche, beynge fewe in number, throughe the tyrannye of Commodus. Neyther durſte anye of them approche vnto the wall to purchaſe wt money ſo deteſtable a domynyon. But it was declared vnto one Iulyanus (who had bene Conſull,The ambicyon of Iulyanus. and was ſuppoſed alſo to haue great aboundaunce of money) at nyghte whan he ſate at Supper banquetyng (for he was reckened a man of euyll conuerſacion. Wherupon his wyfe, hys doughter▪ and a companye of Paraſytes, perſwaded him that leauing hys table he ſhould make haſt and knowe what were done And after in hys goynge they exhorted hym to occupie the voide Empyre, affyrmynge that he might conuynce all others by gyftes, he was perdye ſo paſſynge ryche. Wherefore when he approched nyghe the walles, he cried with a lowde voyce that he would giue them what they demaunded, ſaying he had great abundaunce of ryches and Cheſtes full of goulde and ſiluer. And at the ſame time one Sulpitianus who hadde alſo bene Conſull,Sulpityanus. and gouernoure of the Cytye, and was father in lawe to Pertynax, cheapened the Empyre: but the menne of armes ſuſpected in hym his affynytye wyth Pertynax, thynkynge ſome deceyte to be in it, that he myght therebye auenge the death of Pertynax. Wherfore, hauynge lette downe ladders, they toke Iulyanus vp vnto the walles, not beynge ſo bolde as to open the gates vntyll they were accorded of paymente of the money. And he beynge entered the Fortreſſe, fyrſte of all promyſed that he woulde reſtore the honoures and Images of Commodus whyche the Senate hadde taken downe, and that he woulde graunte vnto theym the ſame lycence they hadde vnder Commodus, and further that he woulde gyue vnto euerye Souldyoure more money,

then they eyther durſte deſyre or hoped to receyue, neyther ſhoulde there be anye delaye in the payment: For (ꝙ he) it is ſafely kepte in my houſe. With which promyſes the menne of armes beynge entyſed, and trayned wyth great hope, pronounced Iulyanꝰ theyr Prynce, and gaue hym the ſurname of Commodus.Iulyanus made Emperour bi ye Pretoriā Souldyours. Then dyſplayinge theyr baners (vpon the which they had painted the pyctures of Iulianus) they concluded to brynge hym furthe. Wherefore when Sacryfyce (after the vſage) was ended, he wente furthe enuyroned wyth a greater Garde then other Emperours were accuſtomed: For hauyng boughte thempyre by vyolence agaynſte the peoples wyll, and by fylthye ſhame, wt good cauſe, he feared thinſurrectyon of the Commynaltye. But the Souldyours beynge armed and compaſſed on euerie ſyde like a cyrcle, that if nede requyred they myghte fyghte, toke into the myddes of theym theyr Emperoure, and lyftynge theyr ſhyldes and Targettes ouer theyr heades to be therebye the more ſafer yf any ſtones were throwen from the houſes, they broughte hī into thēperours Palayce. None of the people durſte reſyſte them, neyther dyd they folowe the Emperoure as they accuſtomed with ioyful ſhoutes, but euerye manne curſed hym bytterlye, reprouynge hym for that he hadde purchaſed thempyre wyth money. Then fyrſt of all were the dyſpoſicyons of the Souldyours corrupted, then increaſed the fylthy and inſacyable couetyſe of money, with contempt of themperyall Maieſtye. For when there was no mā remaynynge that woulde reuenge the cruell deathe of the late Prynce, neyther anye that woulde wythſtande that fylthye facte of ſale and vnhoneſte marchaundyſe, the ſame gaue occaſion vnto the menne of armes to waxe thereafter more vnreuerente and rebellynge, in ſo muche that auaryce and contempte of the Prynce daylye encreaſed euen vnto deathe. For Iulyanus hauynge obtayned thempyre, gaue hym ſelfe to ryotte, neglectynge the weake publyke, and leadynge a naughtye voluptuouſe lyfe▪ yea he deceyued the truſte of the Souldyours beyng vnable to

performe hys promyſes vnto them. For he had nat ſo greate ſubſtaunce as he bragged of, and the common treaſure was exhauſted by the immoderate diſpēces of Commodus. For theſe cauſes the men of armes on the one part deteſted him. On the other ſide the people not ignoraunt thereof deſpyſed hym. Wherefore they purſued him as he paſſed by with reproche, vpbraiding hym for hys fylthye and vnſtable pleaſures, ſo that opēly in the very Theater (vnto the which a great multytude of men reſortethe) thei wold rebuke Iulianus,Nyger called to thēpire. and call Nyger ye Protector of the Romayne Empire and Preſidēte of the Soueraine principality, prayeng hym that he woulde wyth all ſpeade come vnto thē and delyuer them from thoſe manyfolde iniuries. The ſame Niger had bene Cōſull, and then was gouernor of all Siria,Syria. the whyche was the chiefeſte dignitye at that tyme.Phenices. For all Phenyces and all the Regyons vnto the ryuer of Euphrates were vnder hys dominion. He was then ſomwhate ſtryken in age,Euphrates. and hauynge bene occupyed in many weyghty affayres, had obtayned the renowne of modeſtye and ryghteouſneſſe, ſo that he ſeamed to folowe the lyfe of Pertynax. By the whiche he chiefly wanne the fauor of the people. For which reſpecte, thei with often clamours called vpon hym, taunting wyth reproches Iulianus beynge preſent, and extollyng wyth prayſes and ioyfull ſhowtes Nyger that was abſente. Whereof when Niger once hearde, (truſting that all thinges wold proſper accordyng to hys deſyre (ſeynge that Iulianus was of the men of Armes neglected, as one that had violated hys truthe and promyſe, and of the people contempned as a man not worthy, for that he had purchaſed hys principalytie) he beganne to hope for the obtayning of the Empyre. And fyrſte he dyſmyſſed home (ſome on time ſome an other) diuerſe of the Capytaynes, Tribunes, and other mē of Armes, who likewyſe had knowledge of all newes that were brought vnto him from Rome. This dyd he to the intēt the rumors mighte be ſpreade verye broade in the Eaſte. For ſo he ſuppoſed to ioyne manye vnto him, yf he ſeamed nat to enterpriſe the occupyeng

of the Empyre by diſceite, but to ſuccor them that deſyred ayde. Wherfore all the people there aboutes came incontinentlye towardes hym euerye man by hym ſelfe, beſechynge hym to take the charge of the common wealthe furthwyth vpon hym. For the naciō of ye Sirians is naturally vnſtable and prone vnto chaunge of thinges: And thei loued Nyger exceadingly, for that he behaued hymſelfe verye gentely amonges them, delytynge them wyth pleſaunte playes and ſūpteouſe ſolempnities. The Sirians are alſo of their owne nature very deſyrouſe of ſuche ſhewes. Amonges whome the Antyochians (enhabyting a great and famouſe Cyte) do throughoute the hole yere eyther in the Citie ſelfe or elles in the Suburbes, celebrate feaſtes and playes. Wherefore in ſettyng furthe ſhewes and ſolempnytes vnto them, he ſo wanne their hartes that they feruently loued hym. The whiche when Niger perfectly perceaued, hauing a certayne daye commaunded the men of armes to be preſente, and all the people commynge togithers, in a hyghe place for that purpoſe erected, he ſaid vnto them as enſueth.The oracion of Niger.
            
            Peraduenture your ſelues know howe gentle my dyſpoſiciō hath bene, & how lōge I haue cōſulted or I wēt aboute any weyghtye matter, neyther woulde I haue come furthe to ſpeke vnto you at this tyme yf I hadde bene ledde eyther by myne owne pryuate counſell or by aſſured hope, or elles with affection ſurmountinge truſte. But the Romaynes call me and with interceſſions weary me to ſtretche my helpyng hāde vnto thē, and that I ſhould not permyt ſo excellente and gloriouſe an Empyre lefte by our elders to be nowe ſhamefully deſtroyed. And as it is a preſumtuouſe and raſhe thinge to medell in ſo weightie affayres without occaſion, ſo yf a mā deny ſuccour vnto thē that wante and deſyre it, then is he then in the laſſhe of Cowardyſe, and Treaſone. Wherfore for this purpoſe am I come furthe vnto you that I myghte knowe youre aduyſe what ye iudge beſte to be done, and that I myghte vſe you as Counſellers in all thys buſyneſſe. Yf it do proſperouſlye comme to paſſe, the commodytie

thereof ſhall be comune vnto you and mee. It is no ſmal riches that ſolicite vs, but it is the very Romain people, vnto whom the Goddes haue giuen the domynion of al thinges, and the Romaine Empyre ſelfe, as yet wauering, and to no man certainely eſtabliſſhed. The counſayle whych we enter is aſſured, yf we conſyder the mindes of the ſuters, no manne being able to reſyſte vs. For they that come from thence, reporte that the men of armes thē ſelues of whome he bought thempire, are not very faithful vnto him, for yt he hath not perfourmed his promyſe. Let me heare now your opinions herein. Whiles he ſpake theſe wordes, furth with thole armye and all the common people ſaluted him as Emperour and Auguſtus.Niger ſaluted Emperour. And when he was clothed wyth Purple and adorned wyth Imperyall veſture, beyng there ſodaynlye as of purpoſe founde, wyth the fyre borne before hym, they conuayed hym fyrſte vnto the Temples of Antyoche, and then to hys owne houſe. The whyche, as it were not nowe pryuate, they decked wyth Imperyall ſignes and ornamentes. With thoſe thinges Nyger beyng ioyfull and perceyuing the mynde of the Romaynes, and beneuolence of al other mē towardes him, thought now al his purpoſe to be in perfecte plyght. When ye bruite of this was blowen abrode, incontinently al nacyons that inhabited ouer againſt Europe, haſted euery mā for him ſelfe, to proffer him theyr aſſyſtence. And Ambaſſadours alſo from al partes came to Antioche vnto hym,Europe. as vnto their lawful prynce. The kinges alſo and the rulers dwelling beyond Euprates & Tygris,Euphrates & Tigrys. ſente to gratifye hym, promiſyng theyr ayde in al hys enterpryſes. The whyche Ambaſſadours rewarded wyth greate gyftes and thankes he dyſmyſſed, ſaying vnto them, he neded not as at that preſent anye ayde. For his Empyre was wel ſtrengthened, he which he wolde wtout bloudſhed wel gouerne. His mynd being thus exalted wt great hope, he began to be more neglygent in executing yt he ſhould, deliting him ſelfe and ye people of Antioche wt pleaſures & ſetting furth of ſhewes and playes, neither thought he once of going vnto

Rome, yt which ſhould firſt haue bene done, neither certified he the Illyryan armies (who ſhoulde chieflye haue bene won vnto hī) of theſe affaires: for he truſted that when they once knew the matter, they would togither with the Romaines and nacions of the Orient condiſcende vnto him. Whiles he thus litle regarded his affayres, the fame thereof was ſpred amonges the Pānoniens, the Illyriens, & al the other armies abiding on the coaſtes of Danuby & Rheyn,Danuby and the Rheyn. Pannonyens. Seuerus for the defēce of the Romaine Empyre againſte the Barbariens. Then was gouernour of ye Pannoniens (for they wer al ruled by one mans aucthoritie) one named Seuerꝰ, of the nacion of Affrique, a man vehement & diligente in furthering his affaires, accuſtomed to leade a hard & ſharpe life prompt in ye inuentiō, and ſpedy in the execution of thinges. The which ſeing ye Romaine Empire to hang vnſtedfaſt, & as it were opened to pillage, deſpiſed the one Emperour as a ſluggyſhe cowarde, & the other as of no accompt. Certaine dreames & Oracles beſides augmented his hope, & other diuinacyons of thinges to come, the which whē they came to effect obtained report of veritie: of yt whiche him ſelfe wrote moſt part in bokes of his own life, & publiſhed theym openlye painted in Tables. But it behoueth me not to ouerpaſſe wtout writing his laſt dreame,The dreame of Seuerus. which being of greateſt weight, brought moſt hope vnto him. For whē it was firſt told him yt Pertinax was made Emperour, Seuerus hauinge ended ſacrifice, and beyng ſworne in obedience to the Prince, aſſone as he came home was takē with a dead ſlepe: In yt which he dreamed that he ſawe a great and gorgyouſe horſe decked wyth the Emperours ſadell, caryinge Pertinax hym ſelfe through the Citie, by the ſtrete called Sacra via. But when he came vnto thentrye of the market place (vnto the which the people whyles they were in libertie accuſtomed to reſort in greate aſſemblyes) it ſemed vnto him that yt the horſe ouerthrew Pertynax 
                  •
               nto ye ground, & offering his backe vnto Seuerus ſtanding nygh
                  •
               , caried him throughe the middes of the market place, where he was reuerenced of all the people.

There remayneth in the ſame place vnto thys day the Image of the ſame dreame beyng verye greate & made of braſſe. After thys ſorte Seuerus beynge extolled in mynde, and thynkynge him ſelfe to be ſollicited vnto thempyre by diuine prouydence, determyned to aſſay the myndes of the Souldiours. Wherfore, adioyning fyrſte vnto him the Capytaynes, Tribunes,Tribun. and the chiefeſt of the menne at armes, in talke with them of the Romayne empyre, ſayde it was nygh deſtroied, no man remaynyng by whome it mighte be valyauntly and prudently gouerned. Inueighyng alſo agaynſt the Pretorian Cohortes,Cohorte Pretoryan. who had defiled their othe of allegyaunce wyth their Emperours bloude, he ſayde the deathe of Pertynax oughte to be reuenged, beyng nothynge ignoraunte that the memorye of Pertinax was fyxed yet in the myndes of the Illyryan armies. For they had by hys guidinge vnder the Emperoure Marcus obtayned many vyctoryes againſte the Germaynes. And beyng lieuetenaūt of Illiria he ſhewed many examples of vertue and proweſſe in warre, and exhibited to hys companions muche beneuolence and modeſtie with a meeke and moderate gouernaunce. Wherfore (worſhipping the memory of ye prince) they greuouſly grudged that ſo greate crueltye ſhoulde be done vnto him. Seuerus therfore takyng vnto hī this occaſion, led them eaſely whither he wolde, faining yt he affected not thempyre, but ſoughte to reuenge the bloud of Pertynax. And as the mē of ye Regyon are of great and tall bodies prompte and redy to warre and murder, ſo are they of dul and groſſe capacitie: where by they do not eaſelye perceyue what a man craftelye ſpeketh or worketh. Therfore whē Seuerus had faithfully promiſed them to perſecute the murdre of Pertynax, he ſo wan al theyr fauours, that he was named Emperour, and receiued the whole aucthority of thē. And after he vnderſtode the mindes of the Pannoniens, immediately he allured vnto him wt giftes the rulers of all the nighe nacions yt were ſubiecte vnto the Romayne Empyre. For Seuerus was ye redieſt of all men to faine frendſhyppe, to that he paſſed not to be

periured yf neade requyred, alwayes hauynge one thynge in his mouthe, and an other in hys ſtomacke. Therefore after he had gotten credite and fauoure by letters with all the Illyryans and Rulers of the Prouinces, hauyng gathered togyther Souldyours from euery parte, and taken vpon him the ſurname of Pertynax, the whiche he ſuppoſed woulde be moſt acceptable, not onelye vnto the Illyrians, but alſo vnto all the Romaine people, and hauyng called them all togither into the fielde, he ſpake vnto theym as enſueth.The oracion of Seuerus▪
                You do euidētly ſhew (O ſouldiours) of what loyalty & Religion you are towardes the Goddes bi whom ye are ſworne and what reuerēce ye bere vnto your Emperour, whē you do ſo muche deteſt the men of armes of ye Citie (being miniſters rather of pompe and ſuper fluitie, then of vertue & proweſſe) for that they haue cō
               mitted ſo horrible an offēce. And certainly I that am now entring into ſo great hope (your ſelues pardie al know how obedient I haue bene vnto Princes) deſire to atcheue and bring to effect yt ſhal be acceptable vnto you: neither to ſuffre the Romaine Empire to runne into ruyne, the whiche being gouerned by our elders wt great aucthoritie, was reuerenced of all men. And after it fel vnto Commodus, althoughe throughe his youth it began manye times to decaye, yet was al the fault therof ſhadowed, partly wt the prynces nobilitie & partely wt the memorye of his good father▪ Neither did his vices deſerue rather hate then cōpaſſiō, for we imputed not ye thinges yt were done, ſo muche vnto hī, as vnto ye flattering Paraſites & other Counſellers & miniſters of vile voluptuouſenes, vntill thēpire came vnto ye godly olde man, the memory of who
                  •
               e vertue & goodnes reſteth yet in your myndes, whō notwithſtā
               dinge it was ſo farre from their entent to ſuſtaine, yt wc abhominable murder they deſtroyed him. After hī hath a man (whom I know not) purchaſed the domynion of Sea and lande. And for that acte is hated of the people. Neyther are the men of armes true vnto hym, becauſe he hathe deceyued them. And yf they woulde defende hym, yet are they not in number or

valyaunte proweſſe to be compared vnto you. Beſydes that you haue bene exercyſed in warlike affayres. For you are accuſtomed to fight with the barbarouſe nacions, to ſuffer al labour, to deſpyſe heate and colde, to paſſe ryuerſe froſen ouer with yſe, to drynke water dygged and not ſpringinge oute of the yearthe, and to watche in hunting of wylde beaſtes: fynallye you are furnyſſhed with all prouiſyons appertayninge vnto valiaūtnes, ſo that it is eaſye for no man to withſtāde your ſtrengthe. For the man of armes is approued by labour, and not by banqueting and ryotte: with yt whiche thei are ſo traded, that thei can not ſuſteyne youre voyce, muche leſſe your ſyghte. But yf the affayres of Siria ſeame terryble vnto any man, let the ſame ponder howe weake they are and wyth howe ſymple hope thei be ruled, that they dare not once come furth or cō
               ſulte of goynge vnto the Cyte, but taking thoſe habitacions in good worthe, accompte the pleaſures eueri daye goten to be the lucre of that vnconſtant aucthoritie. As for the nacion of Sirians is chiefly addicted vnto ieſtes and playes. And thei which enhabite Antioche are thoughte principallye to fauour Niger. For the other nacyons and Cytes ſeynge no man worthye the Empyre, or that ſhould modeſtly and valyauntely gouerne the cōmon wealthe, at the laſte faigned them ſelues to obey hym. But yf they ones knewe that an Emperour were created by the Illyrian armye, and hearde therwithall oure name, the whyche is not vnknow vnto them (for my ſelfe haue heretofore had dominion ouer them) they wyll not alledge cowardiſe or ſlouthe vnto vs. Neyther will they abide your inuaſions or proue your valiaūte proweſſe eſpecially, ſeyng they are not comparable vnto you, eyther in talnes of perſon, warlycke exerciſes, or fyghting hāde to hāde. Wherfore lette vs with all ſpeade poſſeſſe the Cyte of Rome, the verye ſeate of thempyre, and then ſhall we eaſely bryng to paſſe the reſidewe, affyeng our ſelues in the oracles of the Goddes, & in the ſtrength of your weapons & bodyes. When Seuerus had ſpokē thieſe wordes vnto them they receaued hym wyth ioyefull

ſhoutes and callynge hym Auguſtus and Pertinax promyſed hym their beneuolente hartes and myndes.Seuerus is named Auguſtꝰ and Pertinax. And he thinking it not good to prolonge the time, cō
               maunded them with all celeritee to be armed, proclaimed his voyage towardes the Cite, gaue vnto euerye manne vytayle, and other ſufficiente neceſſaries for their iorney, and remoued with all ſpeade, reſtinge in no place, nor ones ſuffring the Souldiors to ſtaye, vntyll throughe theyr greate labour they coulde ſcarſely fetche breathe. And hym ſelfe trauaylinge wyth the formeſte of them, and lodgynge in a ſimple tente, dyd eate and dryncke of the ſame the ſouldyours dyd, neuer ſhewinge anye pompe, or imperyall wantonneſſe whereby euerye daye he waxed more acceptable then other. For ſeynge he was not onely partaker, but alſo authoure and heade of all theyr trauayle he became ſo honourable vnto theim all, that they ſeamed mooſte gladde to do anye thynge he woulde commaunde. After he hadde paſſed Pannonye, and was come vnto the mountaines of Italy, preuenting ſo the fame of his approche that he was in open ſight, before hys commynge was harde of, a meruaylouſe dreade inuaded the Italyen Cityes, when they ſawe ſoo greate an armye. For the inhabitauntes of Italye beynge of a longe ſpace voyde from warre, dyd nowe tyll theyr lande and lyued in peace. For as longe as the Cytie was free, and that the Capitaynes for the warres were elected by the Senate, the Italyen nacions were euer in harneſſe. And hauynge ſubdued the Grecians and Barbaryens, gate vnto theim ſelues the dominion of Lande and Sea. Neyther was there anye clymate, or parte of the worlde vnto the whyche the Romaynes ſtretched not theyr force. But after that Auguſtus hadde obtayned the Empyre, he releaſed the Italyans from laboure, and toke from theym theyr weapons, and reteyned wyth hym for appoyncted wages onely certayne mercenarye Souldyours to defende the Romayne Empyre. Then compaſſed he the boundes of hys Empyre wyth the greatneſſe of Ryuerſe and dytches, wyth

hyghe and ſharpe hylles, and wyth deſerte places. Wherfore when they harde that Seuerus was nighe with ſo greate an armye, beyng (not withoute cauſe) with that vnaccuſtomed thynge aſtonyed, when they durſte neyther reſyſte him, or forbyd hym paſſage, thei mette hym crowned wyth lawrell, and receaued hym into theyr Cytyes, the gates beynge opened. And he abydynge no longer in anye place then ſuffyced to do ſacryfyce and ſpeake vnto the people, kepte on hys iorney towardes Rome. When this was declared vnto Iulianus) he thought hymſelfe vtterly vndonne, he hadde ſo oftentymes harde of the power and multytude of the Illyryan armye. For he myſtruſted the people of whom he knewe himſelfe hated, neyther had he great affiaūce in his garde, becauſe he had deceaued thē. Wherefore hauinge gathered togither a greate ſome of money partely of hys owne, and partelye of hys fryndes, and what ſo euer he foūde eyther in the temples, or anye other places, he diſtributed it amonges the Souldiours, that thereby he myghte reconcyle theyr fauour. But they (althoughe they hadde receaued many ample gyftes) rendred no thankes, interpreting their dutie to be nowe paide, and not one benefite beſtowed on them. Furthermore, althoughe the friendes of Iulyanus perſwaded hym to leade furthe an armie, and kepe the ſtraites of the Alpes, (for this Alpes are moſte hyghe hylles, wherof the lyke are not in thys Regyon,The Alpes. ſtretched furthe in the maner of a wall, and compaſſing all Italy, as thoughe nature for the more felicitie of the countrey hadde added this one heape, that it myght haue a munycion vnpreignable, ſtretchinge from the Northerne vnto the Southerne ſea, yet durſte he not ones go furthe of the Cyte: But ſente vnto the Souldiours deſiring them to arme and exercyſe them ſelues, and to caſte a trenche before the Citye. Hym ſelfe prepared all apparayle for the warre within the Cyte ſelfe, eſpecially he endeuoured to breake the Elephantes (whome he had before ordeined for Pompe and triumphe) to ſuffre ſittars one thē: thynking that the Illirian Souldiours and theyr horſes

ſhould be put in feare with the ſighte and greatnes of thoſe beſtes, whoſe like thei had neuer before ſeane. And all the Cyte was buſied with forging of armure, and makynge of warlycke inſtrumentes. But whiles the Souldiours of Iulyanus delayed the tyme in apparelling them ſelues to battayle, newes wer brought that Seuerus was ariued euen at hande. He had ſente many of hys Souldiours priuely at ſundrye tymes to Rome, the whiche in the nyght entered the City by diuers wayes, hauyng couered theyr harneſſe wyth the habite of Pagans. And now was the aduerſarie with in the Cite, whiles Iulianus dreamed in a mamering vncertayne what to doo. The whiche when the people perceaued, eueri man being ſtriken with feare, & dreadinge the power of Seuerus they feyned theim ſelues to take hys parte, deſpyſenge Iulianus for that he was a cowarde and Nyger for that he was ſlouthefull: yet dyd they greatlye wonder that Seuerus was then ſo nyghe at hande. Nowe Iulyanus ſtaggeringe and voyde of Counſell, hauinge fyrſte called the Senate togithers, ſente letters vnto Seuerus to cō
               clude a peace betwene them taking hym as felowe into the Empyre wyth him. But althoughe the Senate had ordeyned all thieſe thinges, yet perceauing him to tremble throughe deſpayre of hys ſafegarde, thei tourned wholy vnto Seuerus. And two or three dayes after, when they harde that Seuerus was euen at hāde contemnyng Iulyanus, they aſſembled in the Senate houſe by the commaundement of the Conſulles: For thei haue the charge of the Romayne affayres when there is any doute of the Empyre. And when thei had there manye tymes mette togythers, conſulted what was nedefull to be done, whyles Iulyanus yet remained in the Pallayce lamentynge hys fortune, and humbly deſyryng them, that he myght gyue ouer the Empyre, and reſigne all hys aucthoritie vnto Seuerus. But when the Senate perceaued Iulyanus ſo feareful, hys Garde aſtonyed, and hym ſelfe forſaken of all men, they concluded hys death, and pronounced Seuerus Emperour. Then they ſente Ambaſſadours

vnto hym, whereof ſome were Magiſtrates, and ſome had chiefeſt rule in the Senate, the which ſhould giue vnto hym al the honours appertayning to Auguſtus, and the charge of ſleynge Iulianus, was commytted vnto one of the Tribunes▪
               A Tribune ſlewe Iulianꝰ. The ſame Tribune murdered the feable and miſerable olde man (which had purchaſed vnto him with money ſo wreatched an ende) beynge deſolate and abandoned of all perſons and makynge vncumly lamentacions. The which when Seuerus hearde, purpoſynge in his minde greater matters he toke counſell of apprehendynge all the men of armes which had ſlayne Pertinax. The which to brīg to paſſe, he ſēt letters vnto the Tribunes Capytaines and centuriōs exhorting them with many promiſſes, to perſwade the Soldiours of the Cyte to be obedient vnto hym. And he hym ſelfe ſente commaundement; that leuynge theyr armure wythin theyr campe, they ſhoulde come furthe cladde lyke peaſyble perſonnes, as they accuſtomed to goo in Tryumphes, and to celebrate playes) ſwere alleageaunce vnto Seuerus, and conceyuing in them ſelfes a ſinguler hope, ſhould be ready to folowe their newe Emperour. The Souldiours beleauynge this throughe the perſwaſyons of the Trybunes, layed theyr armure aparte, and came fourthe crowned with Laurell in gorgiouſe garmentes. Now when thei came vnto the army of Seuerus, he beyng therof aduertyſed commaunded, them to reſorte togithers in the fyelde, as thoughe he wold gentely welcome them all. And when they approched the Imperial ſeate, ſhouting ioyfully togithers, thei were all by a watche worde ſodeynly encloſed. For ſo hadde Seuerus appointed it that when his ſouldiours ſawe them attentyfely herkenynge vnto their Prince, they ſhould enuyron them all as yf they were enemyes and wounding, or ſtrikynge no man, wyth a compaſſe encloſe them rounde about, onely holdyng fourthe their dartes and ſpeares, that the other for feare of woundes ſhold not, beynge naked, and fewe, preſume to reſyſte thoſe that were armed, & many. Vnto whō (whē he had thus taken and entangled them as it were in a toyle of weapons) with a highe voice and troubled ſpirite,

he ſpake as foloweth. You ſee that we haue ouercome you aſwel, by aduyſe, and pollecy,The wordes of Seuerꝰ vnto the Pretoriā ſouldiours. as by ſtrēgth & number. Ye are taken moſte eaſely, & holdē without great difficuttie, what ſhalbe done of you that lieth in my, power: ye ſtāde now here preſētly as prayes ſubiecte to our Empyre. If for your miſcheuouſe facte ye ſeake cōdigne punyſhmēt, ye ſhall neuer finde it. You haue ſlayne a godly olde mā and worthy Emperour whō your ſelfes ſhold haue preſerued & defended. You haue filthely & ſhamefully, as it were the poſſeſſion of a priuate perſon, & as filthy vſurers, ſolde ye Romaine Empire ſhineng wt perpetual glorie, the which our elders ruled wt vertue & renowne. And (that more is) as moſte timorouſe & cowardly daſtardes, you durſt not ones defēde & ſuccor him, whō after that ſort, your ſelues erected vnto the type of dignitie. For thieſe your heynous offēces & horrible wickednes, a thouſāde tormētes of death are due vnto you, yf a mā wolde ſtudy for a mete rewarde vnto your deſertes. Wherefore what you are worthy to ſuffre your ſelfes apparaūtly perceaue. Neuertheleſſe, I wil abſtaine frō ſheding of bloode, not folowīg your hādes. But becauſe law, & equitie prohibiteth you to garde a Prince, hauing violated your othe, & defiled your hādes wt ciuile & Imperial blode, in falſefieng your allegiaūce & truth, albeit of our boūteouſe clemecye we pardō you your lyues, & yet do I charge my Souldiors, yt thei vngirde you, & after thei haue diſpoiled you frō your armure, thei let you go naked, your ſelfes I cōmaūd to depart far hēce And furder I ordeine, ſwere, & denoūce, yt if any of you be foūde hereafter wtin a hūdreth miles of the Cite, he ſhal loſe his lyfe. Incōtinently after this ſētence pronounced, the Illiriā Souldiors ran vnto thē, & after thei had bereaued frō thē their ſhort ſkeines decked wt golde & ſiluer, (which thei ware for proude pompe and bragging brauerie) & taking frō the by violence theyr purſes with their other apparaile & tokēs of warriors thei diſmiſſed them ſo rifeled of al thei had. Thei ſeing thēſelfes thus betraied, & by crafty diſceite ſo appreheded, toke their fortune paciētli. For what ſhold thei do being naked againſt armed, and fewe againſt manye

They departed therefore bewailyng them ſelues, and interpreting the releaſe of theyr lyues a greate good turne beſtowed vpon them. But yet they lamented that thei came furthe vnarmed, and ſo offred them ſelues to be ſhamefully taken. Nowe Seuerus vſed an other wyle agaynſte them. For (fearynge that they beynge naked and ſpoiled, wold in a deſperaciō retourne vnto their campe, and fall to harnes) he ſente the ſtrō
               geſte and moſte experte of all hys Souldyors by other wayes and pathes: commaundynge theym to enter into the voyde tentes, and ſeaſynge on the armure there lefte, to forbidde them thentry when thei retourned. This punyſhment therfore had the murderers of Pertinax. Then Seuerus with the reſte of hys hoſte apparaled with armure wente vnto Rome. The Romaines were at the fyrſte ſyghte aſtonyed, and dreadefull, ponderynge in theyr myndes hys ſtoutenes and fortune. The Senate and all the people crowned with Lawrell receaued hym (as the fyrſte of all menne and Emperours) bringer to paſſe of ſo great and weighty a matter withoute bloudeſhedde or buſy trouble. All qualyties beſydes were meruaylouſe in hym: ſpecially the ſharpnes of his wytte, his ſufferaunce of laboure, and prompte audacyte of good hope in enterpryſynge of weightie affayres. After the people had receaued him with ioyouſe acclamacions, and the hole ſenate welcommed hym at the gates of the Cyte, he vyſeted the temple of Iupiter, made there his ſacrifyce and ſaluted the other Temples, and then entred into the imperial palayce. The next day, he came into the Coorte: where he made an oraciō with a good countenaunce, and embraſed al menne openly and priuely, ſayeng he came vnto the City to reuenge the death of Pertinax. And promyſed to erecte the fundacions of the eſtate of Senatours and nobles of Rome as longe as he were Emperour. That no man ſhould loſe his life, or goodes, excepte he were by iudgemente condempned: all pykethankes and falſe promoters beyng dyſpatched away. And that he would folow Marcus ſteppes in gouerning the Empyre: hauing not onely the ſurname

he ſaid) of Pertinax, but alſo his full mynde & entent. By this talke he wan hym ſelfe muche fauoure. But many of the auncyent men, knowyng his accuſtomed ſubtylty▪ tolde theyr frendes pryuelye, that he was a deceytfull man, bente vnto fraude, and a meat diſſembler, caring for nothing, ſo that he might obtayn that he thoughte his owne auauntage. The whych report of the Elders experyence dyd afterwarde verifye. Seuerus then remayned but a fewe dayes in the Cytye: but hauyng beſtowed on the people many gyftes, and aboundauntlye rewarded the Souldyours: amongeſt whome he elected the ſtrongeſt and valyaunteſte into theyr places (that were erſte dyſcharged) for the garde of hys perſon, he furthwyth prepared hys iourney towardes the Oryent, whiles Niger lay ſtyll and gaue hys mynde vnto the wantonnes of Antyoche. Thinkyng it beſte to make haſte that (beyng vnloked for) he myght oppreſſe Nyger vnpuruaied of ſtrengthe to reſyſte hym.The preparacyō of Seuerus agaynſte Niger. Thrace. Wherefore he cōmaunded the Souldiours to make them ſelues ready, and after he had gathered togither bandes of men from euerye coaſte, muſtered all the youthe in Italye, ſente for the reſidue of the Illyryan armie remaining in Thrace, and with no leſſe dylygence gotten a great nauye and fylled all the Italyan galleyes of .iij. orders wyth Souldyours armed, he brought to gyther wyth incredyble celerytie aboū
               daunce of al neceſſaries. For he knew well that there neded a great power agaynſt ye naciōs, enhabytyng ye parte of the earthe that is oppoſyte vnto Europe:Europe. all the whyche dyd wyth one mynde folowe and fauoure Nyger. Therefore after thys ſorte dyd Seuerus apparayle hys armie to the warre. But the man, beyng prouydent & of a forecaſtyng wytte, ſuſpected muche the armye of Englande, who were verye myghtye, and warrelyke, and of them was ruler one Albynus,Albinus a manne of the ordre of Senatours, whyche had bene traded in greate wealthe of all richeſſe and pleaſures. Thys man Suerus thoughte good to wynne by craft vnto hym, leaſt yf the ſame, ſtyrred wyth hys ryches,

kynred, armye and renowne (all prompte prouacatyons to couetynge of thempyre) woulde chalenge the domynyon of all thynges vnto hym ſelfe: and whyles Seuerus were buſyed wyth the warres in the Oryente, take poſſeſſyon of Rome, not farre dyſtaunte from Englande. And therefore he determyned to allure vnto hym wyth a coloure of honoure, Albynus beynge ſymple, lyghte of credyte, and beleuynge Seuerus, for that in hys letters myſſyues he proteſted all thynge by ſolempne othe. Wherefore callyng hym Ceſar, and promyſynge hym the partycypacyon of hys Empyre, he preuented hys ambycyon. He ſente lettres alſo vnto hym full of gentle commendacyons, whereby he deſyred hym chyefly to take vpon him the charge of thempyre, ſayinge that it neaded ſuche a noble manne, and of ſuche dyſcreate age as he was. Hym ſelfe (he ſayde) was olde and vexed wt the gowte, and hys twoo ſonnes verye yonge. The whyche Albynus credytynge, accepted gladlye the honoure: beynge ioyfull that he obtayned hys deſyre wythoute batayle or other trouble. And Seuerus (that al thynges myghte ſeame more credyble,) ſente lettres of lyke tenor vnto the Senate: commaundynge the moneye to be coyned wyth the ſtampe of Albynus pycture, hys Image to be erected, and other honoures to be done vnto hym, wherebye he eſtablyſſhed the truſte of hys beneuolence. When he hadde thus prouydentlye fynyſſhed thys dryfte (beynge oute of feare of the affayres in Englande, and hauynge gathered togyther aboute hym the Illyryan Legyons and all other thynges nedefull) he dyd ſet forewarde hys hoſte agaynſte Nyger. As for the places where in hys Iourney he areſted, what Oracyons he made in euerye Cytye, what meruaylouſe wonders appered, what Regyons he paſſed, and fynallye what conflyctes there were, and what numbers on bothe ſides were ſlayne, the ſame all Hyſtoryographers, eſpecyallye the Poetes treatynge of thys matter, and the whole lyfe of Seuerus, do verye plenteouſely make

mencyon of in theyr Verſes. But I entende to put in wrytynge thynges manyfeſtlye knowen vnto me, done by the ſpace of ſeuentye yeares vnder manye and dyuerſe Prynces. And therefore I wyll touche the chyefeſte thynges done by Seuerus: wythoute or fauoure faynynge anye thynge (as I ſe they haue done whyche wrote in that age) or elles ouerſlyppe vnſpoken anye thynge that ſhall ſeame worthye memorye.
            The eande of the Seconde booke of Herodian.
         
         
            
            ¶The Argumente of the thyrde booke of Herodyan.
            
               THE begynnyng of the Thyrde boke dothe treate of the batailes betwene Seuerus and Niger, and of the preparacion of the ſame. Then after of the deathe of Nyger, of the crueltye of Seuerus which would by Treaſon haue ſlayne Albynus, whome he had taken into the rule of thempyre. Conſequentlye of the ouerthrowe of Albynus men, and Albynus owne death. Of the vyage and expedycyon made by Seuerus into the Orient, of thambycyon of Plautyanus and hys death. After that the dyſcorde betwene the twoo brethren Seuerus ſonnes, and of the viage made by Seuerus wyth his Sonnes into England, where he died. And the eande of the Thyrde boke treateth of Antoninus, Seuerus eldeſte Sonnes crueltye, and howe he fayned for a while to be agreed with hys brother Geta.
         
         
            
            ¶The thyrde booke of Thiſtorye of Herodian.
            
               IN the Booke preceadyng we haue at lenght openid the death of Pertinax, the murder of Iulianus, with the comming of Seuerus into the Cytie, and his expedicion againſte Niger. Who (when he ſuſpected no ſuche mater) hearynge that Seuerus was in full poſſeſſion of Rome, taken as Emperour by the Senate, and that the hole 
                  •
               llyrian army was commyng againſt hym by lande and Sea,) had hys mynde wonderfullye troubled, an
                  •
                hys courage meruaylouſely daunted. Neuertheleſſe he gaue furthwith commaundement to the Preſydentes, and rulers of the Prouinces, to defende and ſtoppe all their paſſages, hauens. and ſtreytes: And ſente to the Kynges of Parthia,Parthia Armenia Atrenia. Armenia, and Atrenia, for ayde. But the Armenyā King anſwered that he would take neyther parte, but onelye defende hys Realm
                  •
                
               
                  •
               t the comming of Seuerus. The Parthian Kynge, 
                  •
               t him worde, that he wolde commaunde by commi
                  ••
               on the nobles of his Realme, to muſter and gather th
                  •
               ir powers togythers: For ſo was he accuſtomed wh
                  •
                he ſhoulde make warre, becauſe the Parthiās ha
                  •
                no mercenary Souldiours, or appoynted armye. F
                  •
               om the Atrenians were ſent hym for ayde certayne 
                  •
               hers, by the Kynge Barſemius,Barſemius. the whiche then 
                  •
               eigned in that Realme. The reſte of his power, he 
                  •
               uied of the Sowldyours that were preſent, and man
                  •
                he gathered amonges the people, eſpecially of the Antiochiens (who beyng through the lightnes of their age, and the fauor of Niger ſturred) dyd more raſhely, then prudentlye, proffer them

ſelues. Niger then ſtopped with a myghty municion, and ſtronge wall, the ſtreites, and brokē places of the mountaine Taurus:Taurus thinking that the ſame rockye and ſteape Hyll, wolde be an aſſured ſtronge defence vnto the Oriente. For Taurus riſeng in great height betwene Cappadocia, and Cilicia, dothe deuyde the nacions,Cappadoce Cilicie enhabitynge the Septentrion, and the Oriente. He ſet alſo a Garriſō in Bizantium,Bizantium. which was the goodlyeſt Cite of all Thrace, and at that tyme floriſhing with ſtrengthe and rycheſſe. For beyng ſette in a narowe gulfe of the See Propontis,Thrace. it receaued tribute,Propontis. and fyſhe from the water, and poſſeſſynge on the other ſyde large and fruytfull fyeldes, gate lucre by both theſe Elemētes. And therfore Niger thought it beſt to ſtrengthē this towne, that the ſhippes might be prohibeted paſſage thoughe thoſe ſtreyghtes out of Europe into Aſye.Aſye. This Citie was compaſſed with a ſtrōge and mighty wall, builded of foure ſquare ſtone of Miletum,Miletum with ſo ſmall and ſtreight ioyntes, that a man would not iudge it of many pieces, but all of one continuall ſtone. And yf a man behelde the ruyne at this preſent remainyng, he would wonder, eyther at the arte of them whyche fyrſte buylded it, or at the ſtrēgth of them whyche deſtroyed it. After this ſorte therefore, dyd Niger order hys affayres, wyth verye ware, (as he ſuppoſed) and circumſpecte counſell. Seuerus on the other part, made all the haſt that myght be, with his armye and prouiſiō, reſting in no place. And hearynge that Byzatium was fortifyed wyth a garriſon of Souldiours, and knowynge it alſo to be a verye ſtronge towne, he tourned vnto Cyzicum.Cyzicū
                When this was declared vnto Aemilianus he gouernour of Aſye, vnto whome Nyger had committed the charge and chiefe rule of the warre, he remoued vnto Cyzicum alſo, leadinge with hym all the Legions, whyche eyther Nyger hadde ſente, or hymſelfe, muſte red. When it came to ſtrokes, after certaine ſkirmiſſhes egerly foughte, the victorie fynally fell to Seuerus: and all the hoſte of Nyger was ſlayne, and putte to ſlyghte. Whereby the hartes of Orientall enhabytantes

were abated, and the Illyrians verye muche encoraged. Many there were, that thought Niger to be in the beginning o
                  •
                
               
                  •
               he batayle betrayed by Aemilianus. And for proufe of their opinion, ſome of them ſayde that he enuyed Niger, diſdaininge that he, who a lytle before was hys ſucceſſour in Syrie, ſhold now not onely be hys ſuperior, but alſo hys Soueraygne, and Emperour. Other ſaye that hys chyldren (whom Seuerus fyndynge in Rome, helde hys cuſtody) perſwaded him by letters to regarde their life and ſafety. For this circumſpecte Counſell dyd Seuerus put alſo in vre. Yt was the vſage of Commodus, to deteyne with him, the children of thoſe whiche had the charge to gouerne the prouinces, as pledges of their faithful alleagiaunce and loyaltye. And therefore Seuerus, as ſoone as he was made Emperour, (whyles Iulyanus yet lyued) ſente certayne into the Citye to ſteale priuely hys chyldren, leſte they ſhoulde be in anye other mans cuſtodye. And as ſone alſo as he entred in to Rome, he cauſed to be apprehended all the childrē of the Capitaynes, and of all other which bare any commen offyce in all the Oryente, and Aſye, to the ende, that by thoſe Hoſtages, he myghte cauſe the Chiuetains of Nyger, for the ſauegarde of their children, to betraie theyr maſter: or elles, yf thei remayned faithful, it myghte lye in hys power, to auenge hys anger againſt them in ſleynge of theyr children. Nowe Nygers Souldyors beynge dyſcomfyted at Cyzycum, fledde, euerye manne as faſte as he coulde: ſome eſcapynge by the Mountaynes of Armenye,Armenie. Taurus Aſye. Gallatie Bithinia. and ſome couetynge to paſſe Tawrus into Aſye, & Gallatye, that they myghte put them 
                  ••
               lues in places of municion. Then marched the Armye of Seuerus by the plaines of Cizicum, into Bythinia the nexte region. But whan the fame was ſpredde, that Seuerus hadde the vyctorie, a ſodeyne ſedi
                  •
               iō, inuaded the Cyties there aboute, not ſo moche throughe anye hatred, or amytye, they bare vnto the 
                  •
               mperors, as throughe mortall contencion among
                  ••
                them ſelues.
            
               The ſame was an olde accuſtomed vice of ye Greciās, who (whyles they were at dyſcencion wythin them ſelues, and endeuoured to deſtroy euery man that excelled in dignitye, had nowe conſumed all Grece. And being within thē ſelues worne and waſted, were firſt made Captyues and ſlaues vnto the Macedons, and after the bondemen and drudges of the Romaynes. That peſtiferouſe calamitie of debate and diſcencion, vexed notable and floriſhing Cyties in our tyme. For immediatlye after the battayle at Cizicum in Bythinia, the Nicomedians reuolted vnto Seuerus, ſēding hym Ambaſſadours, to promyſe hym they woulde receaue his armye, and ſubmytte them ſelues vnto hys gouernaunce. On the other ſyde, the Nycians ſtirred with rancor and hatred of them, fauoured Nyger, entertayning hys Souldiors, as well thoſe whiche were eſcaped from the fyelde, as them whiche he had ſent to defēde Bythinia. Out of theſe Cities, the Sowldiers, as oute of their Campes, encountred, and ſkyrmiſhed togythers: and after a greate battayle foughten, Seuerus obtayned the vpper hande. The Souldiors of Nyger beynge from thence alſo dryuē, fledde vnto the ſtreaytes of Taurus, and defended the encloſed municions. But Nyger, (leauing there as greate a Garryſon, as he thoughte nedefull) went him ſelfe vnto Antioche, to leuye an other hooſte of men, and more money. In this whyle the Armye of Seuerus departed oute of Bythinia and Galatie,Galatia Cappadocia. entred into Cappadotia, and beganne to aſſaulte the Bulwarkes, and municions there. Where they were wyth many ſorowes and labours afflicted, the waye beyng verye narowe, and ſharpe, and they which ſtode aboue, throwing ſtones, and moſte fyerſly fyghtinge, and by that meanes fewe kepyng backe a greate number. For the paſſage is wonderfull ſtrayte, whereof the one ſyde is fortifyfyed wyth a huge and hyghe Rocke, and the other is full of waters, falling verye ſwyftely downe from the ſteape hylles. And Nyger had beſydes ſtrengthened it with a mighty and ſtronge wall, that therby, hys enemy myghte on euery ſyde be forbydden entry.
            
               ¶In the meane tym
                  •
                whyles theſe thynges were in doyng in Cappadoci
                  •
                the ſedicion of certayne Cytyes, began to ſtyrre with like dyſcord. That is to wete, the Cytye of Laodicia in Syrya,Laodicia. Syria. Tyrus Phenicia. Berynthyens. abhorring the Antiochiens, and the Citie of Tyre in Phenicia, deteſting the Berinthians. Th
                  •
                whych twoo Cytyes hearyng of Nygers diſcōfytur
                  •
                toke downe all his honours, & Images, & made ioyfu
                  •
                acclamacions vnto Seuerus, wherof when Niger, 
                  •
               yng buſye at Antyoche, was certified, albeit he wer
                  •
                at other tymes of a meeke nature, and gentle dyſpo
                  ••
               cyon, yet beyng iuſtly moued with their vntruth an
                  •
                reuolte, he ſent vnto bothe the Cities, all the Maurit
                  ••
               yan Slyngers that were in hys ſeruyce, and wyth 
                  •
               hem a companye of archers, whome he cōmaunded to ſlea euery one they encountred, and to deſtroy and burne the Cytyes ſelues. And truely, the Moores (being a nacyon naturally fierce,Laodicia & Tirus deſtroyed. and cruell, couetyng ſl
                  •
               ughter, ſturdy in enterpriſes, and lyke mē deſperate deſpiſing all daunger of death) dyd ſodeynly oppreſſe t
                  •
               e Laodicians: and (hauynge tormented the people 
                  •
               here wyth all kynde of crueltye, and ranſaked the Cytie) departed from thence vnto Tyre. The which (after they had deſpoiled euery man of his ſubſtaun
                  •
               e, and cōmytted muche murdre) they wholly burned and raſed to the earth. Whyles theſe cruell actes w
                  •
               re thus executed in Syria, and whyles Niger was buſied in waging and muſtering an other armie, S
                  •
               uerus Souldiours beſyeged the munycyon of the mountayne Taurus: beyng very penſyfe, and wythou
                  •
                hope of vyctorye, for that it was by it ſelfe myghtye 
                  •
               nd inpreygnable, and dfended alſo wyth the ſteape & hygh hyll. But when they were nowe wearyed, and theyr enemyes reſtynge in ſafetye, ſodeynly loo in the nyghte powred downe vehemente ſhoures, whyche fylled all places with ſnow and rayne, (as common
                  •
               e in Cappadocia the winter is very roughe and temp
                  •
               ſtuous, chiefly at the moū
               tayne Taurus: Wherby 
                  •
                ſodayn brooke braſt furth wyth a meruaylous troubleſome ſtreame, and beyng letted from hys ryghte courſe (for the munityon ſtopped

hys paſſage) it waxed more huge & violent, ſo that when the wall (nature ouercomminge arte) could not ſuſtayne ſo myghtye a brunte, the ioyntes beynge by lytle and lytle louſed, and the foundacyons from their places remoued, ye ſtreame made to it ſelfe open way. When the garryſon, whyche garded the entrye, ones that perceyued, dreadyng leaſt they ſhould be by their enemyes encloſed, (no ſtaye or defence to the contrarye remayning, aſſoone as the water were aſſwaged) they forſoke theyr ſtacions, and made ſhifte for theym ſelues by flyght. Then the Seuerian Souldyours reioyſed, and hartened them ſelues, as thoughe thymmortall Goddes guyded them. And knowing that the place was of theyr enemyes abandoned, they eaſelye wythoute reſiſtence paſſed ouer Taurus, and entred into Cilicia. Nyger hearynge hereof, hauinge leuyed an huge armye, (but yet not ſkylfull of warlike trauayle) made greate haſt towardes them by long iourneyes, a wonderfull multytude of men, and almoſt al the youthe of Antyoche, folowing him as their generall gouernoure, and pryncypall Capytayne, wyth muche myrthe, but nothyng comparable vnto the Illyrian Souldidurs, eyther in proweſſe, or knowledge of warfare. In this araye they ariued nyghe vnto a place named Sinus Iſſicus,Iſſicus Sinus. in a mightye and large playne, the whyche beyng on euerye ſyde enuyorned wyth hyghe mountaynes in fourme lyke a Theatre,Theatre hadde a ſteepe banke, extendynge farre alonge by the Sea, as it were a fyelde, faſſhyoned by nature conuenyente to darreigne batayle in. Yea the report is, that in the ſame place, at a cruell and very bloudy batayle, Darius was by Alexander vanquiſſhed,Darius. Alexāder and taken, (thenhabitaūtes of the Septentrion then preuaylyng againſt the nacions of thorient. There remaineth at this day, as a token & witnes of the ſame victorye, the Citie of Alexandria,Alexandria. ſituate vpon an high hyl therby, and a braſen Image of Alexander, by whome the Citie is ſo named. It chaūced beſides, that not onely the metynge of Seuerus and Nigers armyes in that place,The battayle betwene Seuerus & Nyger. but theyr fortune was alſo lyke. For they remayned

on bothe ſyde
                  •
                aboute euenynge tyde, readye to the batayle. And th
                  •
                paſſed ouer the nyght in hope, and feare, wythout re
                  •
               te or ſleape. And at the Sonne ryſynge, the Capytaynes on eyther ſyde hauynge encouraged theyr Soul
                  •
               yours, ran togither with an in credible ſtoutenes, as thoughe in that fynall batayle, they woulde ende the 
                  •
               eſte of theyr hope and feare (fortune at that ſeaſō arbytratyng who ſhould be Emperour of Rome. When they had of longe ſpace fyerſely foughten, there was ſo greate ſlaughter commytted, that the ryuers flowing alonge by the plaine, did run into the Sea with greater aboundaunce of bloud, thē of water. Finally the Oryentalles were ouerthrowē and diſcomfited, & the Illirians purſued them at their backes ſo nyghe, that many of them beyng wounded, were drenched in the Sea. The other fledde into the high hilles nighe at hande, where they were by ye purſuers ſlaine, and with them a great numbre of rurall people, who came togither out of the nexte Cityes add Vyllages, to beholde the batayle from aboue, as from a ſure holde and ſtronge Fortreſſe. But Nyger hym ſelfe eſcaped from the fyelde vpon a ſwyft Courſer vnto Antyoche, from whence alſo, (deſpayrynge of all good ſucceſſe,) and ſeynge the people amaſed and runnynge to and fro, lamentynge wyth howlynges and teares, the deathe of theyr bretherne and chylderne) he furthwyth fledde. And beyng hydden in a certayn village of the ſame Region, was there foūd by the horſemen, and beheaded. This ende of life had Niger,The deth of Niger receiuing worthy reward for his delayes, and protracting of time. A mā (as they ſay) in other thynges very moderate & vpright. After Niger was ſlain, Seuerus incōtinently did put to death all his frendes which either of their own free willes, or by cōſtraint, had fauored him: onely he pardoned the Souldiours, who through feare of Seuerus wrath, were fled ouer Tigre,Tigris. vnto the Barba
                  •
               iens. And in dede to thē was a great multitude eſcap
                  •
               d. Wherby it came to paſſe, yt the barbarous nacions 
                  •
               rō thence forwarde, waxed more valiaūt, & ſtronge in fight againſt ye Romaines,

beyng onely expert before to ſhote wyth the bowe frō theyr horſes, not apparayled in harneſſe, or bolde to fyghte wyth ſpeare, and ſworde, but couered wyth lyghte, and longe garmentes, they did moſt commonlye throwe theyr dartes, and ſhoote theyr arrowes in fleyng awaye. But after that many of the Romayne Souldyours, and Artyfycers, came to enhabyte and leade theyr lyues in thoſe Regyons, the barbarous people learned, not onelye to weare armure, but alſo to forge, and make the ſame. When Seuerus had fynyſſhed hys affayres in the Oryente, according to his owne mynd, he toke an ardente deſyre to make warre vpon the Atrenyan kynge, & to conquere the Realme of Parthia: bothe the whyche Nyger had before aſſocyated vnto hym. But yet deferrynge thoſe warres vntyll an other tyme, he begā to inuent by what meanes he myght aſſuredly eſtablyſh the Romayne Empyre to hym ſelfe and hys chyldren. For, Nyger being diſpatched, there remained no more, ſauing onely Albynus,Albynꝰ. who he reckened woulde do lytle after his mynde, or ſtande hym in ſmall ſteade, the rumour beyng alreadye ſpredde, that he vſurped the dignytye, & name of Ceſar, ouer arrogantlye: and that manye of the Senators had wrytten pryuelye vnto hym, encouragyng hym to retourne to Rome, whyles Seuerus were abſente and buſyed in the Oryent: for all the nobylytye wyſſhed Albinus Emperour, becauſe he was deſcended of noble and famouſe lygnage, him ſelfe beyng a yonge man of great towardnes, and gentle diſpoſycyon. All whych ententes when Seuerus knew, thynkynge it not good to worke wyth open enmytie, and manyfeſte warre, (hauynge none occaſyon that myghte ſeme honeſt thereunto) he determyned to cyrcumuente hym wtih preuy Treaſon, and cloſe deceit. Wherefore he ſente wyth letters of Commyſſion, vnto Albynus, certayne of the moſte truſtye and faythefull Purſeuauntes, whyche vſed to carye themperiall letters: whome he commaunded, that hauynge delyuered thoſe lettres vnto hym, they ſhould ſay they had other ſecrete matters to declare, ſo that al other were

commaunded to auoidaunce. And then getinge hym from his garde, thei ſhould ſodeinly murder hym. He delyuered poyſon alſo vnto them, wherewith they ſhould) yf it were poſſible) allure his taſter, eyther of meate, or drincke, to dyſpatche him. But Seuerus truthe was ſuſpected of Albinus frendes. And therefore thei admonyſhed hym to beware of that falſe and deſloyall perſon, full of diſceit, & treaſon. For he was manifeſtly knowen to be a periured, and vntrue man: hauing by their owne childerne, entyſed Nigers Capitaynes, to betray their maiſter: And then, after he had abuſed their labour, and brought all hys purpoſe as he wold) to paſſe, ſl
                  •
               we bothe them and theyr childerne. Wherefore hys Actes them ſelues made apparaunte hys vnfaythfu
                  ••
                and noughty dyſpoſycion. And for that cauſe Al
                  •
               ynus ſtrengthened hym ſelfe with a greater and ſtronger garde then he was accuſtomed, permitting no meſſanger ſent from Seuerus to be lette in raſhely vnto hym, except he fyrſte laide a ſyde his weapon, and were throughely ſerched. Now when the purſeuaūtes were arriued from Seuerus, and hauinge openly de
                  •
               iuered their letters, ſayed that they had other ſecrete 
                  ••
               ſtructions, to vtter priuelye vnto hym, Albynus incontinenly ſuſpecting the mater, cauſed them to be apprehended: And then by ſeuerall examinacions hau
                  •
               nge founde out the truth, and by order perceyued the hole Treaſon, cauſed execution oute of hande to be done vpon the offenders. And prepared hym ſelfe aga
                  •
               nſt Seuerus, as his apparaūt enemye. The whyche t
                  •
               inge when Seuerus knewe, beynge a man of wrath
                  •
               full, and cruell nature, he reſolued, to hynde no len
                  •
               er the deſpyte and hatred he bare to Albynus. Wherefore he called the hole armie togithers, and made thi
                  •
                oracion vnto them.
            ¶ No man oughte t
                  •
               embrayde me of ouer moche lyghtnes, for that I ha
                  •
               e heretofore done,The oracion of Seuerus neyther accompte me falſe, and vngratefull towardes hym whō I reputed for my frend
                  •
               . I haue performed all thynges. Yea I haue receyued hym into the ſoeretie of my dominion, beinge now moſte perfectlye eſtablyſhed

the which thing a man wyll ſcarſelye doo to his owne brother. And that whiche you haue vnto me onely delyuered, the ſame haue I with hym participated. But all thieſe our bountefull benefites, hath Albinus moſte ſhamefully recompenſed, contempnynge oure proweſſe, forgetting his allegiaunce, and coueytynge with perill, the hole rule, wherof he myght haue bene partaker without batayle, or contencion. He feareth not ye Goddes by whō he hath ſo oftē ſworne. Neither dothe he conſyder, or fauoure your laborious trauayles, whyche you haue wyth ſo greate renowne and glorye for our ſake ſuſtayned. And aſſuredly, him ſelfe wanted not the profites of our ſucceſſes: Yea hadde he obſerued his fidelitee, the greteſt porcion had ben his. And as a man, yf he be authour of myſchiefe, ſhall be accompted vnryghteous, ſo yf he reuenge nat the iniurye receyued, he ſhalbe eſteamed a cowarde. When we made warre agaynſte Niger, we had not ſo iuſte and lawfull cauſes of anger, bycauſe we hated him, not, as a bereuer, and robber of thēpyre, for the ſame hanging in the myddes, and then wauering in cōtrouerſye, eyther of vs affected, and drewe vnto him ſelfe with equall encloſure. But Albinus, neglecting hys loyaulty, allegiaūce, and othe, after he hath obtained by our large liberalitee, the honours whiche are onelye geuen to our lawfull children, had rather become our noyſome enemy, thē our frēdely familiar. Wherefore, as we bewtifyed hym with our manyfolde benefytes of honour, and glory, euen ſo, let vs nowe wyth force, and ſtrength, conuince, and daunte, hys trayterous, and feable harte. As for tharmy of that ſmall Ilande, is not able to ſuſtayne or abyde the brunte of your might. For ſeynge ye haue youre ſelfes almoſte alone, by your owne valyaunt proweſſe, ſubdued the hole orient, who wold doute, but at this preſēt thrugh the ioyneng of ſo great power (for here is welnye the hole Romayne armie) you would not ouerthrow and put to flyghte ſo ſmall a number, who hathe ſerued vnder a man beyng neyther ſober, nor valiaunte Capitaine? for who is I praye you ignoraunte of his voluptuouſe

lyfe, more agreable to Heardes of Swine, thē to Legiōs of Soul
                  •
               iors. Let vs therfore valiaūtly ſet forward againſt h
                  •
               m, wt the ſtoutenes we haue accuſtomed, affienge ou
                  •
                ſelues in the Goddes, (ſo wickedly by him cōtempned) as principall guides of oure voyage, and myndefull of the victorious ſignes by vs heretofore erected, the whiche he hath alſo vtterly deſpiſed. Whē Seuerus had this moch ſpokē, incōtinētly thole armie prono
                  •
               ed Albynus their commune enemy: And hauing re
                  ••
               iued Seuerus wt ioyful acclamacions, & ſhewed by 
                  ••
               eyr ſhoutes their good willes towardes him, thei en
                  •
               med ye mā wt an ineſtimable hope added to his ente
                  ••
               ryſe. Wherefore, after he had liberally deſtributed amōges the Souldiors grete giftes, he led thē al forwa
                  ••
               es againſt Albinus: hauinge ſēt alſo a crewe of mē 
               
                  ••
               rifle & raſe Bizātium,Bizantium clene deſtroyed which was yet ſhut after the 
                  ••
               ceipt of Nigers Souldiours. The which Citie bein
                  •
                at lēgth by famyne cōquered, & defaced, the Theater, 
                  •
               he hote bathes, & al other goodly buildenges therof v
                  •
               erly deſtroied, & it ſelfe reduced into ye forme of a vil
                  •
               ge, was giuē vnto the Perinthiās,Perinthians. as Antioche wa
                  •
                
               
                  •
               nto the Laodiciās. Then he exacted grete ſomes of 
                  •
               oney, to repayre the Cityes, which the Nigriā Sou
                  ••
               iors had batered & deſpoiled. Hym ſelfe cōtinued hi
                  •
                
               
                  •
               orney wtoute intermiſſiō, not gretly regarding ye hol
                  •
                
               
                  •
               aies, or any painefull labor. For he was equally pa
                  ••
               ēt of colde & heate, trauailing oftē times bareheaded, 
                  ••
               er ye highe & craggy moūtaines, in the bytter & ſha
                  ••
               e winter, when the ſnow fell cōtinually out of ye ſkie▪ Wherby he ſtirred his Souldiors, as with his own 
                  •
               āple, vnto alacrite of minde, and ſufferaūce of labor 
                  •
               uſe trauailes. For thei were not cōſtrained to abide 
                  ••
               oſe paines thrugh ani feare, or ſtraite law, & cōmau
                  ••
               ement, but rather thrugh a certaine emulaciō, & ex
                  ••
               ple of their Prince. He ſent certayne alſo before to 
                  ••
               ke the ſtreites of the Alpes, and to defende the entr
                  •
               , and paſſages into Italie. Now when Albinus h
                  •
               rde, that Seuerus made no delaye in the mater, but 
                  〈◊〉
                as euē at hād (being before, as it were in a dreame, a
                  •
               d paſſynge the tyme in ydle

pleaſures, he was now ſtryken wyth a meruaylouſe and ſodeyne feare. Neuertheleſſe he furthewith laū
               ched out of Britaine vnto the coſte of Fraunce, right ouer aneanſte it, where on the ſhore he pytched hys campe, and ſente letters vnto the Rulers of the nexte nacions, deſyring them to ſende hym money, and victualles, for the ayde, and ſuſtenaunce of his armye. Thei that obeyed his commaundemente, or requeſte, dyd moſte vnhappely prouyde for them ſelfes, beynge after the battayle put to deathe wyth dyuerſe terryble tormentes. And thoſe whyche ſet at noughte hys rule and power (although thei did the ſame more happely, then prudently) yet eſcaped they without harme or domage, when as the chaunce and fortune of thynges dyſcerned bothe theyr counſelles. When the Seuerian power was entered into Fraunce, the ſkyrmyſhes were lyght and volant at the fyrſte, vntyll at length, the grete conflict was geuen at Lions, a great and riche Citye. For Albynus remayninge hym ſelfe within the Citye, ſente furthe his Souldiours to the bataile.The batayle betwene Seuerus & Albanꝰ The Engliſhmen valiaūte warriors And when ye two armies ioyned hāde to hāde, the batayle endured a longe ſpace with equall ſtrēgth on eyther ſyde, ſo that the fortune of the victorye depended doubtfull. For the Britons were nothyng inferiour to the Illirians, eyther in ſtowtenes of ſtomake, or gredines of ſlaughter. Thus in the fyrſte onſet, the frontes of two moſte valiaunte armyes; did to neyther ſyde enclyne, or ones recule. Yea (as manye Authours of the ſame tyme (who wrote it nat for any perciall 
                  •
               auoure, but accordynge to the truthe haue lefte in memorye,) the whynge of Albynus Armye was the better, and of more ſtrenghte, againſte the bande that Seuerus ledde: ſo that he fledde, and fell from hys horſe, and throwenge awaye hys cote armure, hydde hym ſelfe. But whyle the Brit
                  •
               ns purſued, reioyſynge euen as perfecte Conquerours, ſodeynlye,Letus. appeared Letus one of Seuerus Capitaynes, wyth a freſhe Crewe of men: who was reproued and yll ſpoken of by the Souldyours, as though he hadde of purpoſe houered, for to ſee the chaunce

of the batayle, protracted the tyme, and detained them from ſettynge forewarde, that he myghte therebye haue raught the Romayne Empyre to hym ſelfe. For he moued not a foote towardes the fyelde, before he was certyfyed of Seuerus ouerthrowe. Whiche ſuſpycyon, the happe afterwardes ratyfyed. For after al thynges were 
                  •
               et in ordre, and Seuerus was at heartes eaſe, althoughe he benefycyally rewarded all hys other Capitaynes with great and riche giftes, yet beyng myndefull of Letus 
                  •
               eſloyaltie, and Treaſon, he put hym (as was expedyente) to deathe. But theſe thynges were done afterwardes. Then (as we before rehearſed) at Letus arryuall, the Seuerians recouered perfyte hope, and Seuerus hym ſelfe was put vpon hys horſe, and gyrte wyth a robe of purple. And ſeyng the Albynians (who thoughte them ſelues vyctoryous vanquyſſhers) ſcattered abrode oute of ordre, thys freſſhe bande of men ſodenlie ſet vpon them. And fynallye (after a lytle reſſyſtence) compelled them to turne theyr backes and flee away, whome beynge ouerthrowen and dyſper
                  •
               led, the Seuerians purſued, and entred into the Citye. The number of them that were on eyther parte ſlayne, is dyuerſelye lefte in memorye, as it pleaſed the wryters of that age. Oute of hand than was the Cyt
                  •
               e of Lyons ranſaked, burnt, and deſtroied, and the head of Albinus ſtryken of,The deth of Albinꝰ and broughte to Seuerus. Thus were two notable victoryes obtained, in ye Eaſt & North. So that there is nothynge, that a man may compare, vnto the contencyons and factes of Seuerus: yf he conſyder, eyther the multytude of men, the r
                  •
               yſing vp of nacions, the nū
               bre of batayles, or elles the lengthe, and ſpedy celeryte of iourneyes. In dede, the affayres of Ceſar agaynſte Pompeius,Ceſar Pompey (eyther of them hauynge to his aſſiſtence the Romayne Souldyours) were great, and meruailous: ſo were thoſe of Au
                  ••
               ſtus agaynſte Anthonyus, or Pompeius ſonnes▪
               Auguſtꝰ Antoniꝰ. Silla. Marius. And ſo were the batayles bothe Ciuile, and Forrey
                  •
               e, betwene Silla, and Marius. But a man ſhall n
                  •
                eaſely fynde ſuche an other as thys: who diſpatche
                  •
                awaye three Emperours

alreadye poſſeſſed of the domynyon,The noble actes of Seuerus. who circumuented with fraude and couine the Citie armye whiche garded Rome ſelfe, and the Senate houſe: who alſo procured one of the Prynces to be murdered wythin themperyall Palayce, deſtroyed an other in the Oryent, (whych obtained the chiefe gouernement, & was erſt by the Romaines taken as Emperour) & finally, broughte into his ſubiectyon the thyrde, whiche was endued with the name, honour, and aucthority of Ceſar. This ende of life had Albinꝰ, enioying but a ſmal while his mortall and bloudye dignitie. After whoſe death Seuerus powred out al the Irous crueltie, and fyerce wrath of his minde, vpon the frendes & alies of Albynus. And fyrſt hauynge ſente hys heade vnto the Citie, and commaunded that it ſhoulde be faſtened openly vpon an highe gybbet, in the latter eande of an Epiſtle, (wherin he certyfyed the people of his victorye) he wrote thys alſo, that he ſent Albynꝰ head vnto Rome of purpoſe to be loked on, to thētent, theyſholde take example euidente, what them ſelues ſhould lykewiſe ſuffer. Then after he had ſet in ordre thaffayres of Brytayne, deuided into .ij. partes thadminiſtracyon of thole Ile, and appeaſed all Fraunce, accordyng (as he thought) to hys owne mynde, and put to deathe all Albynus frendes, (whom eyther free wil, or neceſcitie hadde ioyned vnto hym) he ſet forwardes immediately towardes Rome: leadyng thole army with hym, to thentent he might ſeme ye more terrible. And hauyng fyniſſhed his iourney with ſwyft ſpede, as he accuſtomed, being enemye mortall vnto Albinꝰ frendes, he entered into the Citie, where al the people met & receiued him, wt great reuerence, & ioyfull ſhoutes. And thole Senate togithers welcomed him. Notwithſtanding, feare had greatly aſtonied ſome of them, for they were ſure, yt he wolde not ſpare thē, being of hys own nature ouer outragious, & thē, hauing probable occaſions of hatred againſt thē. After he was entred into the Tēple of Iupiter, he there finiſhed ye accuſtomed rites of ſacrifice, & thē retorned to thimperial palayce. Anone after he diſtributed liberallye amonges

the people riche giftes, i
                  •
                token of victory, rewarded ye ſouldiours wt great ſūmes of money, & gaue thē many thinges they neuer receiued before. For firſte he augmented the ſubſtaūce of their corne, & permitted them to weare ringes of golde, & euery of thē to kepe a womā in his houſe. Al which being dyſagreable to warlike diſcipline, ſeamed theretofore vnprofytable to thē which were euer preſt & ready to the batayle. And he fyrſt of all other altered the auſteritie & hardnes of theyr liuing, the toleraūce of trauailes, and all their accuſtomed reuerence towarde their Capitaynes: hauing brought ye Souldiors acquainted wt the gredy gaping for money, and the loue of ye Citie comelines. When he had after this ſort, ſet theſe affaires in good ordre, as him ſelfe ſuppoſed, he came at length into the Senate houſe: And there ſittyng in thēperial Throne he began with a cruell oracion, to detecte the frendes of Albynus, ſhewing furth, certaine of their priuy Epiſtles which he had foūd with Albinus. He reproued ſome, for that they beſtowed many boūtiful giftes vpon him: And menaced al other, which eyther fauored thorientalles, or were of familiare acquaintaunce wt Albynus. By theſe meanes, he dyd wythout reſpecte, put to deathe, euery notable and prudente Senatour, al other ye bare any rule in the prouynces, or excelled in byrth, or ryches: auengyng hym ſelfe, (as he made ſemblaunte) vpon hys enemyes, but in deade, couetouſeneſſe was the onely cauſe, wherwt, he of al other Emperors was moſt intached. For as he gaue place to no man (were he euer ſo commendable) in pacience of mynde, perſeueraunce in laboures, and glorye of warfare, euen ſo, beynge aboue all meaſure addicted vnto auaryce, he heaped treaſure, throughe vniuſte murders, executed vpon euerye tryflyng cauſe, & ſomtime without anye at all, enioying thempyre, rather throughe force, and feare, then anye beneuolence, or good wyll of the people. Neuertheles, at the fyrſte, he would ſeme familiare, & affable, in ſettyng out gorgeous ſhewes, and pageauntes of al ſortes, wt the ſleing of an .C. cruell beaſtes at a tyme, the whyche he had ſent for, out of our owne, and Barbarouſe Regyons.

He gaue beſydes, ryche rewardes, and publyſſhed a ſumpteous game, gettynge from all partes valylyaunte Champyons, and cunnynge wreſtlers. We ſawe alſo in the tyme of hys Reygne, ſundrye playes of all ſortes, ſet furthe in all the Theatres, with ſupplycatyons, and watches, lyke the ſacryfyces of Ceres:Ceres. Seculer playes. The ſame are called Seculer, celebrated (as they reporte) at the ende onely of euery thyrde age. And the common Cryers went throughe al the Citye, and all Italye, callynge all men to the Playes, whyche they neuer ſawe before, nor thereafter ſhoulde ſe: ſygnyfyyng thereby, that the ſpace of tyme betwene the celebracion paſſed, & that was to come, exceded al thage of a man. Now Seuerus, after he had ſoiourned a while at Rome, and partycypated the regymente of thempyre wyth hys .ii. ſonnes, perceyuyng hym ſelfe to be famouſe as yet, but by one Cyuyle vyctorye obtained agaynſte the Romayne power, (for the whyche alſo he had refuſed to Tryumphe) determyned to become notable, wyth the ouerthrowe, and ſtandardes of the Barbaryens. Wherfore, vnder coloure of reuenging hym ſelfe vpon Barſemius kynge of the Atrenyens,Barſemius. Atremie Armenie (who had aſſyſted Nyger) he led hys armye into thoryent. And there beyng at the verye poynte to inuade Armenia, he was preuented by the kynge therof, who ſente vnto hym wyllynglye, bothe pledges and preſē
               tes, humblye deſyrynge, that he myghte entre into frendſhyppe, and conclude a peace wyth hym. After the whyche done, Seuerus, ſeyng hys purpoſe in Armenia proceade as hym ſelfe wyſſhed, helde on hys iourney towardes the Atrenians. And Agbarus the kynge of the Oſrohenians,Agbarus. Oſrohenians. came alſo and yelded him ſelfe vnto hym. And delyuerynge hys chyldren as hoſtages, amplyfyed the truſte of hys truthe, and loyaltye conceyued, by ſendynge to the increaſe of hys armye, a greate power of Archers. From hence Seuerus paſſed ouer the Realme of Interamna,Interrā
                  na. Albenyans. and the fyeldes of the Albenyans, and made a rode into Arabye the fertyle, from whence come all the ſweete & odyferous herbes, whyche we vſe for pleaſaunt
                  •
                vapours,

and perfumes. And hauing there deſtroyed mamany Cities, & villages, and waſted the hole cuntrey, he entred into Atrenia. There he beſyeged the Citye of Atras,Atras beſyeged. beyng buylded vpon an high Rocke, cōpaſſed wyth mightye and ſtronge walles, and fortifyed with a wonderfull puyſſaunt garriſon of Archers. Wherefore the Seuerian hoſte, aſſaulted this Citye, with all the force thei had, and moued to the walles, Towres, & engyns of all ſortes, omytting nothyng, that might auaile to the aſſaulte, and batterye of the ſame. On the other ſyde, the Atrenyans ſtowtely defended theyr Citie, ſhootinge, and throwing downe, arowes, dartes, and ſtones, wherewith thei gretely vexed the Seuerians. Thei threwe downe alſo, earthē veſſelles fylled with certayne wynged, venemous lytle beaſtes: The whiche falling vpon the eyes, and faces of the Seuerians, or elles creapynge by lytle, and lytle, in at the open partes of their bodies, dyd ryghte ſharpely ſtynge, and wounde them. The Romayne Souldiours beſydes were fallen into diſeaſes, beyng vnable, to away with the feruentnes of the ayre there becauſe it was to extremely hote, throughe the continaunce of the Sonne: ſo that by thieſe caſualties, mamy more of them periſhed, then by the handes of their enemyes. Wherefore Seuerus perceyuinge them all for wearied, and worne, the ſieage not proſpering, and the hoſte receyuinge more domage, and loſſe, thē gayne, or profyt, determyned, before they vtterlye peryſhed, to lede them from thence: verye ſorowefull, that they departed, withoute atchieuing their entended enterpryſe. For beyng theretofore accuſtomed to wynne the victorie in all batayles, thei then accompted them ſelues ouercomen, for that they had not vanquiſhed. But fortune euermore fauorable vnto them, ſo prouided, that thei retourned not wtout any thinge done: but with more fortunate ſucceſſe, then thei loked for. For the hole armye, beyng ſhypped in ſundrie veſſelles arriued not (as thei fyrſte purpoſed) at the hauen of Rome, but throughe the rage, and vyolence 
                  〈◊〉
                the waues, were driuen to lande in the coſtes of Parthian,Parthia
               
nat farre from the Citie of Cteſiphon,Cteſiphō
                wherein ſtandeth the Palayce royal of the Parthenyā Kinge. Who then liuing in reſte, and reckening the warres, which Seuerus had with the Atremās, nothing pertinent to his charge, did not in that his ydle tranquillitie, ſuſpecte, or thinke vpon any peril, or myſhappe, towardes hymſelfe entended. When the Seueria armye was, (as I ſayd) by vehemencie of weather, driuen on lande, at the bankes of this Royaulme, thei began oute of hāde, to ſpoyle and ryfle all the Cuntrey, driuing before them all the heardes of Catel, and flockes of ſheepe, thei founde. And burning many vyllages in their waye, thei marched by ſmall iorneyes, to the Citye ſelfe of Cteſiphō, in the which the great Artabanus then laye.Artabanus. And there, fyndenge the Barbarouſe people vnpurueyed of defence, thei ſlew all that reſiſted, ſacked the Citie, and caryed away as Captiues, bothe women, and children. The king hym ſelfe, with a fewe horſemen, only eſcaped. His treaſure, ornamentes, and houſeholde ſtuffe, the Seuerians, as conquerours, ſeaſed vpon, and then retourned. Thus Seuerus, more thrughe fauorable fortune, then prudent policye, obtayned the Parthian Conqueſt. After the proſperous atchieuinge wherof, he ſente vnto the Senate, and people of Rome, gloriouſe Letters, full of oſtentaciō: & Tables, wherin were gorgeouſlie paynted, and at length ſette out, his myghty batailes, and valiaunt victories. For the which the Senate decreed many honours vnto him, and gaue him the ſurnames of the nacions by hym, before Conquered. In the meane whyle, after this happe in the orientall affaires, he retourned towardes Rome: hauīg his two Sonnes, (who were then of rype age) in hys Companie. And after he had finiſhed his iorney, cōmitted the rule of ye prouinces, vnto thoſe which lyked hym beſt, and muſtered the Miſians,Miſians & Pannonyens, he finally entered into the Citie with Triumphe. The people receyued hym wt ioyfull ſhoutes,Pannoniens. and all other Ceremonies to the ſame appertaining, vnto whome he graunted certayne extraordynary holye dayes, ſacryfyces,

and ſhewes. And hauynge gyuen amonges theim great giftes, hym ſelfe alſo ſolemnyzed ſundrye playes, for his victorye. After this he remained a longe tyme at Rome, ſate oftentymes in iudgemente, vpon the Cytye controuerſies, and gaue hys hole mynde to enſtructe hys chyldren. But they, beyng yonge men, had corrupted their diſpoſicions, wyth ſenſuall pleaſures of the Citye, and ouermoche delyte in riotting, and vaulting. The Bretherne alſo fell at varyaunce wythin theim ſelues, theyr debate riſynge of childiſhe contencion, and boyiſhe brawle, in ſettynge fourthe cockefightes, & quaylefyghtes, and the wreſtlynge of lytle boyes. For what ſoeuer thei had ſeene,The debate of Seuerꝰ two Sonnes. or hearde in the Theatre, thei euer lyked it diuerſly, the one not louyng, that the other did: but the thinge whiche was acceptable vnto thone, incōtinently became odious to the other, theyr Paraſit
                  •
               , and ſeruaūtes, egging thē to diſcencion, & flatering them, to thentēt, thei might allure theyr maiſters to theyr owne noughty wyll, & appetites. Whereof when Seuerus hearde, he endeuoured to reconcyle them, & to correcte their corrupted maners. And then vnto Baſſianus (who at that tyme enioyed thimperiall dignities & honours,Baſſianꝰ had receyued the ſurname of Marcus, beynge called Seuerus Antoninus, & was his eldeſt Sonne) he gaue to wyfe the doughter of Plautianus, the Lord great Mayſter of his houſeholde. This Plautianus, being (as it is reported) by byrthe of baſe eſtate,Plautianus. was detected, and founde gyltye of ſedicion, and other notorious crimes, & therfore puniſhed wt vanyſhemēt. But he was Seuerus countrey man, borne in Aphrique, and as ſome coniecture, nyghe of kynred vnto hym, but as other ſurmyſe, rather gratefull vnto hym in vycyous lyuinge, throughe the flowre, and bewtye of his youth. Hym did Seuerus enhaūſe frō ſimple and low degre, vnto wōderful abundaunce of Treaſure. And giuing vnto hym the goodes of many that were condēpned, enriched him aboue all other:Thinſolē
                  cye of Plauti
                     •
                  
                  nus. refrainyng only, from the admytting him into the gouernaunce of the empyre. The whyche rycheſſe, and lybertye, he abuſynge, omytted no kynde of cruelty, in doing.

what pleaſed hym: and became more outragyouſe, then anye Prynce thertofore raygnynge. His doughter (as is ſayde) dyd Seuerus gyue for wife vnto his Sonne. But Antonyne hym ſelfe was nothynge ioyful of the ſame, enforced thereunto, rather by neceſſitye, then good wyll. For to the vttermoſte he deteſted the mayden, and her father: ſo that he vſed neyther one bed, nor one houſe wyth her, in ſuche wyſe abhorrynge her, that he dayly menaced, to put her father & her vnto deathe, aſſoone as by hym ſelfe he ſhould poſſeſſe thempyre. The whiche when ſhe had eftſones reported vnto her father, and opened howe greatlye ſhe was of her huſbande diſdaigned, ſhe kyndeled the mā maruaylouſlye vnto wrathe. So that Plautianus (perceyuyng on the one ſyde Seuerus to be decrepite and aged, and many tymes vexed wyth dyſeaſes, eſpecyallye the gowte, and on the other ſyde Antonius to be a fyerſe, ſtoute, and cruell yonge man, became veary fearefull of hys threatenynges, and determyned to commyt ſome notable myſchyefe, before hym ſelfe peryſſhed. There were manye thynges, whych enflammed hym wyth ardente ambycyon of thempyre. That is to weete, hys aboundaunce of rycheſſe (the lyke whereof, no pryuate perſon at any time theretofore poſſeſſed) the obedyence of the Souldyoure, the great honoure he enioyed amonges al the Romaines, and the ornamentes of apparaylle, wherein he wente abrode. For he ware a garmente called Latus Clauus, and hadde bene twyſe Conſull. He ware alſo a ſworde, and all other tokens of promocyon, and dygnitie: beyng whereſoeuer he went ſo terrible, that he was not onely vnapproched vnto of any man, but alſo, yf anye by ſodayne chaunce happened to meete him, they woulde turne theyr faces from hym. And what way ſo euer he made hys Iourneye, he had certayne Vſſhers going before him, whiche cōmaunded euerye man to auoyde the ſtretes, and no man to be ſo hardye, as to beholde hym, but to turne awaye theyr eyes, and loke vpon the earthe. The which when Seuerus knew, him ſelfe toke it not paciently: but grudged

greatlye thereat, ſo that he diminiſſhed muche of Plautianus aucthoritie, and endeuored to perſwade hym, to abate ſomewhat, at the leaſt wiſe, of his ſo inſolent arrogancy. But Plautianꝰ being therof impacient, doubted not to compaſſe by conſpiracy, & Treaſō, thempyre ſelfe: and therfore ymagined thys dryft. There was a certayne Tribune named Saturninꝰ,Saturninus. whiche chiefly reuerenced Plautianus, and albeit all other did ſo likewiſe, yet dyd he more and more crepe into his fauoure, by a greater token and apparaunce of honouryng hym. Thys man Plautianus reckened to be hys moſt truſty and faythfull frende, and ſuche, as onely woulde kepe ſecrete, and cloſe, hys counſell, and execute, what ſo euer he ſhould commaunde him. And therfore ſent for him in the euentide, and hauing remoued al other aparte, ſayd theſe wordes vnto him. ¶Nowe is (ꝙ he) the time come,The Treſon of Plautianus. wherein thou muſte make perfect, thy loue, & obeyſaunce towardes me (of the whiche thou haſte hytherunto ſhewed euidente proofe) and wherin I may ſuffycyently recōpence thy deſertes. The choyſe is gyuen vnto the, whyther thou wylt eſchew my daunger, whom thou now ſeeſt, and become vaſſalle vnto my power, or ellis oute of hande peryſh, wt the worthy puniſhment of a ſtubburne ſtomake. Feare thou not the greatnes of the enterpryſe, neither diſmay thy ſelfe with the names of thēperors. It is lawful for the, to go alone into the Chaumbers, where they ſlepe, & as if yu diddeſt returne to the night watche, thou maieſt eaſely without any interruptiō, atcheue what thou deſyreſte. There is nothinge elles wherin thou ſhouldeſt longer awayt for my cōmaundement. Go thy way now into the courte as thoughe thou haddeſt ſome priyue & weighty meſſage of mine to do, and there, as becommeth a valiaunt man, murdre that olde manne and Boy, wythin eyther of theyr Chaumbers. And as thou arte partaker of the daunger, euen ſo, after it is eanded, thou ſhalt enioy parte of the greateſt honoures. Theſe woordes albeit they ſomewhat aſtonyed the Trybunes mynde, yet dyd they not vtterlye confounde and expell hys counſell.

But as a man of a prompte and readye wytte (for he was a Syryan borne, and for the moſt parte, thenhabytauntes of the Oryent are of exacte and ſharpe iudgementes) perceyuynge the frantyke folye, and mere madnes, of Plautianus, and knowynge alſo what he was able to do, durſt not reprehende any thynge that was ſpoken, leaſte hym ſelfe ſhoulde furthewyth be ſlayne. But faynyng that all he hadde hearde, was acceptable vntoo hym, fyrſte he ſaluted Plautyanus as Emperoure, and then requyred a lybell of hys hande concernynge the commaundemente of the ſayd murdre. For it was the vſage of Tyrauntes, when they hadde wythoute lawfull iudgement, commaunded anye manne to be put vnto deathe, to gyue the charge therof, wrytten in ſome lytell boke, leaſte there ſhoulde no argumente, or proofe, remayne of the ſame appoyntmente. Wyth that Plautyanus, blynded wyth ouer muche couetyſe, delyuered vnto the Trybune a boke, and ſente hym towardes the murdre, wyllynge hym that aſſoone as he had ſlayne bothe the Prynces, before the facte were publyſſhed, he ſhoulde ſende for hym, to the entente he myghte be ſene wythin themperyal Palayce, before any man hearde of hys poſſeſſyon of thempyre. Vpon thys couenaunte the Trybune departed from Plautyanus, and as he was wonte, paſſed freelye throughe all the Courte: where, ponderynge wyth hym ſelfe and perceyuynge howe vneaſye it were for one manne to murdre the twoo Prynces, lyinge in ſundry Chambers, he fyrſte wente to Seuerus lodgyng, and there wylled certayne of hys pryuye Chaumber, to helpe hym to the ſpeache of the Emperoure, ſayinge that he broughte newes, whych appertayned to the Emyerours ſauegarde. They made ſpeadye relacyon hereof vnto Seuerus, who furthwyth commaunded the Trybune to be let in. And he beynge entered before the Emperoure ſayde theſe wordes. I am come hyther (O Emperoure,The Treaſon diſcloſed. ꝙ he) as he that ſente me fyrmelye ſuppoſeth to murdre youre perſonne.

But as I my ſelfe bothe wyſſhe, and wyll, to be the aucthoure of a greate benefyte and the preſeruacyon of youre healthe. Plautyanus lyinge in awayte wyth Treaſon for thempyre, hath appoynted me to murdre bothe you, and youre Sonne. And that not onelye in wordes, but in wrytynge alſoo, the Teſtymonye whereof is thys boke. And in dede, I promiſed hym to accomplyſſhe that he commaunded, leaſt yf I reiected it, an other woulde haue taken it in hande. But nowe I am here preſente, to bewraye the matter vnto you, leaſte hys preſumptuouſe Trecherye, ſhoulde oppreſſe you vnwares.
            Notwythſtandynge, that the Trybune ſpake theſe wordes wyth aboundaunce of teares, yet dyd not Seuerus at the fyrſte credyte it, ſo muche was the memorye of Plautyanus loue towardes hym, fyxed, as yet in hys breſte: yea, he ſuſpected all the matter too be contryued of a purpoſe, thynkynge that hys Sonne, who abhorred Plautyanus, and deteſted hys doughter, had Imagyned thys craftye Couyne, and mortall ſlaunder agaynſt hym. Wherefore, hauynge called hys Sonne vnto hym, he beganne to rebuke hym, for that he hadde deuyſed ſuche myſchyefe agaynſte hys frende, and well wyller. But Antonyne at the fyrſte, ſware, and proteſted, that he was ygnoraunte of all thys buſyneſſe, and afterwardes encouraged the Trybune (whoo perſyſted in hys tale, and ſhewed furthe the booke) to declare the hole Treaſon. Than the Trybune (perceyuynge intoo howe greate daungere he was entered, not ygnoraunte howe muche in fauoure Plautyanus was wyth Seuerus, and knowynge precyſelye, that yf the Treaſon laye hydden, and the matter not throughly proued, him ſelfe ſhould receyue extreame and cruell deathe,) ſpake thus vnto them. My Soueraigne Lordes (ꝙ he) what more ample argumente or perfecte proofe do you ſeke hereof? permytte that I maye go furthe of the Courte,

and by ſome ſecrete and truſty perſon certifye Plautianus, that all his commaūdement is fulfilled. He be leuyng it, wilbe here out of hande, to occupie the Palaice as voide. Thē ſhal it be your partes, to examine, and trye oute the truth. And after he had thus muche ſpoken, he choſe a faythfull, and truſtye perſone vnto hym, whych ſhould in his name exhorte Plautianus, to make haſte and come furthwith to the Coorte, ſeynge bothe the Princes were ſlayne: for it behoued hym, before the deade were publyſhed amonges the people, to be within the Palaice: that therby, occupyenge the Principall Tower, and eſtablyſhenge thempyre vnto hym ſelfe, all men ſhould maugre their hartes obey hym as one not entringe into thempyre, but as already poſſeſſed therof. Plautianus crediting this matter, was puffed with a meruailouſe preſumption and hope. And putting on hym a ſhyrte of mayle for the ſure defence of hys bodye, aboute the euenynge of the ſame daye aſcended into hys Chariotte, and made haſte towardes the Coorte with a fewe whyche were preſent attending vpon hym, who thoughte he hadde bene ſente for by the Emperours, about ſome earneſt and weighty buſyneſſe. And when he was wythoute let of any manne, entered into the Palayce, the porters beynge ignoraunte, what the matter mente) the Trybune mette hym, ſaluted hym as Emperoure by colluſyon of purpoſe imagined, toke hym by the hād, and ledde hym into the Chamber, where he feygned that bothe the dead Emperours Corpſes laye. Nowe hadde Seuerus appoynted certayne of hys Garde to laye handes vpon hym, as ſoone as he were commen in. But when Plautianus, hauinge at that inſtaunte other fāſyes in his heade, was entred into the Chamber, ſawe the two Emperours there ſtandynge, and perceyued hym ſelfe apprehended, beyng wyth that ſo greate a matter, very ſore agaſte, he began humbly to entreate, and deſyre pardon, affyrminge that all thys dryfte was forged vniuſtely, of malice againſt him. Thē Seuerus reproued hym, reherſynge the manye tolde benefites, and honors, he had beſtowed on hym.

And Plautianus replyed agayne, repetynge the teſtimonies of hys accuſtomed truthe, and good wyll towardes themperour: wherwith Seuerus began ſome what to relente, and credite the wordes of Plautianꝰ: vntyll that the ſhyrte of mayle appeared throughe a ſlyt of his vpper garment. Whiche Antonyne perceiuing being a ſterne, and fierſe yonge man, and thertofore deteſting Plautianꝰ, ſaied. I wold gladli wete (ꝙ he) what anſwere thou wylte make vnto thieſe two pointes. Why cameſt thou in the euening, vnto themperours vnſent for? And what meaneth this ſherte of mayle thou weareſt? for who commeth in armure to a Supper or banquette? And hauinge ſo ſayde,The punyſhemēt of Plautianus. he commaunded the Tribune, and thoſe that were preſent to ſtabbe hym in with their ſwordes, and daggers, as a manyfeſt Traitour, and open enemye. And thei makinge no delaye in the mater, executed Themperours commaundement, ſlewe the man, and threwe hys body into the highe waye, to be ſpurned at, & ſkorned of the people. This iuſte ende of lyfe had Plautianus, a man of inſatiable auarice. After this done, Seuerus conſtituted two Capitaynes ouer the men of armes, and hym ſelfe moſte commenly ſoiourned in the Suburbes, or elles nyghe the Sea coſtes of Campania, ſitting in iudgement, vpon maters of controuerſy in the lawe. And beyng very diligent in Ciuile affayres, chiefly coueyted to haue his childerne traded at Rome with decente, & honeſt maners. For he perceiued that theyr myndes were bente vnto playes, and ſhewes, more vehementlye, then became theſtate of Princes. Wherby it wold come to paſſe, that the yōge mēs ſtudies, & cōtencions, tending to diuerſe purpoſes, their willes alſo, and appetites woulde become dyſagreable, whē (as it were) certaine brondes of debate, ſhold be kindled betwene them. But eſpecially Antonyne, after the death of Plautianus, wexed terrible vnto al men. Beſides that, he compaſſed wyth all the crafte, & ymaginacions, he could deuiſe, how he might deſtroy the doughter of Plautyanus, hys owne wyfe. But Seuerus ſent her with her lytle Sonne, whyche ſhe

had by Antonine, into Sicilia, with as much richeſſe, as abundantely ſuffyced, for her meate, and drincke, & other neceſſaries: Enſuyng in that point, Auguſtꝰ, who entreated after the ſame ſort, the Sonnes of Antonius, after he was adiudged a Traitour. Seuerus endeuoured in all that he coulde, to reduce hys Sonnes to loue, and concorde, and to reconcyle eyther to other, admonyſhing them, with auncient Hiſtories, and examples, wherin many calamytes, riſē thrughe diſcorde of Bretherne, wer reherſed. He added therunto the Treaſure him ſelfe hadde gathered togither, all the Temples filled with money, and the richeſſe, whiche encreaſed daylye of foreyne Tributes, howe the Souldiours, might through that abundaunce, be retayned with ample, and riche gyftes, and how the mē of armes in the Citye, were augmented foure times, more thē thei were before, and ſo greate an armye, ſoiorned nyghe the Citye, that no forreyn power (yf a man conſidered the ſelfe multitude, or the greatnes of their bodies, or elles the abundaunce of money) could be founde comparable vnto them. But all thieſe thinges, he ſayed, wolde be of none effecte, whiles the two brethren dyſagreed & kepte ciuell warre within them ſelues. With reherſall hereof, and entermedlyng corrections with praier, he laboured, to repreſſe their inſolent courages, and to bringe them to an atonement, and concorde. But all was in vaine, for thei had throwen the brydelles out of theyr mouthes, beyng continually enclyned to the worſte. And although the yōge men, through the feruencie of their youth, and immoderate lycence, were ſturred too much alreadye, vnto delytes of ſundrye voluptuouſe luſtes, yet were there euer redi at their elbowes, flockes of paraſites, which allured them vnto diuerſe, & cōtrary diſpoſicions: not only extolling their diſſolute vices, but alſo inuēting newe pleaſures, wherwith the one myght be pleaſed, and the other offēded. Of the which paraſites, Seuerus hym ſelfe, apprehended many, in the verye minyſtery of theyr flatterye, and therefore dyd put theim to death. As the olde man was thus in mynde moleſted,

wyth the ſenſuall, and vnhoneſte lyfe, and delytes of hys Sonnes, he receyued letters from hys lyuetenaunte of Englande, wherby he was enformed, how the barbarouſe people rebelled, and waſted thole Region with inuaſions, and Commocions.Commocion and mutine in England Wherefore, he neaded a greater puyſſaunce of men, to reſiſte, and ſuppreſſe them: there wanted the Emperours preſēce alſo. Glad was Seuerus hereof: for beynge a man of his owne nature, greadie of renowne, after his vyctories, in thoriente, and Septententrion, and his ſurnames by ye ſame obtained, he coueyted to make ſome Conqueſt, ouer the Englyſhemen. And to lede hys Sones, fourthe of the Citie, that being farre from the pleaſures therof, thei might accuſtome them ſelfes, to warlike, and ſober dyet. Wherfore, he proclaimed his expedicion into Britayne, beynge very olde, and ſore troubled with the goute, but yet of ſo valiaunte a ſtomake, as neuer was any yonge man. In hys iorney, he roade mooſt communely in a horſe litter, neuer reſting longe in any place. When he had ended his voyage, and paſſed the Ocean Sea, with as muche celeritee as can be thoughte, he entred into Brytaine, muſtered his Souldiours, hauing gathered a wōderfull power togithers, and prepared hym ſelfe to batayle. The Britons, beynge aſtonied, and agaſte wyth thys ſo ſodeine arriuall, of themperour, And hearinge that ſo huge, an hoſt was aſſembled againſt them, ſēt Ambaſſadors vnto him, to purge their miſdemeanours, & entreate for peace. But Seuerus, makinge delaies of purpoſe, leſt he ſhuld retorne to Rome, wtout ani thīg done, & being very deſyrous of ye Cōqueſt, & Surname of Britaine, diſmiſſed the Ambaſſadors home againe, wtout any reſolute anſwere, geuē to their ſuite. Him ſelfe, with circumſpecte induſtrie prepared all thinges expediente vnto the warre. And his chiefeſt care, was to buylde bridges ouer, and in the mariſhes, to thentente hys Souldiours myghte ſtande and fyghte in ſafetye. For manye places in Britaine,England full of mariſhes Thoceā. are full of watery maryſhes, throughe the often flowynge ouer, of the Ocean Sea. By thoſe maryſhes dyd the

Brytons ſwymme and ſkyrmyſhe therin wyth theyr enemyes,The aū
                  cyente & olde maners of Englyſhmen. beyng couered wyth water vp vnto the nauell, and not muche caring, that men ſe the priuy partes of theyr naked bodyes. Neyther dyd they knowe the vſe of apparaile, but accuſtomed to compaſſe their belyes and neckes onely wyth Iron, whych they eſtemed an ornament, and token of richeſſe, as other barbarous people ſuppoſed golde. They paynte theyr bodies, wyth dyuerſe pyctures, and fourmes of beaſtes, and therefore weare no garmente, leaſt the paynting ſhoulde be hydden, beynge a nacion verye valiaunte, and warlyke, gredye of ſlaughter, and contente onely wyth a ſmall target, a ſpeare, and a ſkeyne hangynge by theyr naked ſydes, ignoraunte vtterlye of thuſe of ſhyrtes of mayle, and helmettes for: they reckened the ſame cumberous vnto them, whē they ſhould ſwim ouer the lakes, throughe whoſe vapours and heate, the ayre is there alwayes myſtye and darke. Seuerus omytted nothyng vndone, that myghte auayle the Romaine Souldiours, and endomage the Britons. And when all thynges were prepared, as hym ſelfe wyſſhed, he lefte hys yonger Sonne named Geta,Geta. in a parte of the Iſle, whyche was ſubiecte vnto the Romaines, to ſe to the iudgementes of matters in law, & thadminyſtracyon of Cyuile affayres: vnto whom he appoynted as Counſellours, certaine of hys frendes, beynge graue Perſonages. And hym ſelfe toke Antonyne in hys companye agaynſte the Brytons. After the Romayne armye was paſſed the Ryuers, and Bulwarkes (whyche beyng buylded ouer aneanſt the Brytons, at that tyme eanded the boundes of the Romayne Empyre) there were foughten manye lyghte ſkyrmyſſhes, wherof at al tymes the Romaines were vyctours. But the flyghte ftom them was eaſye vnto the Barbarous: for they hidd them ſelues in woodes, lakes, and other ſecrete corners, wherwith they were throughlye acquaynted.The ſickneſſe of Seuerꝰ. All the whyche beynge contraryous vnto the Romaynes, cauſed muche delay in the warre. In the meane ſeaſon, a greuouſe diſeaſe came vpon Seuerus, beyngeſore appaled wyth

age, ſo that he was conſtrained to kepe his Chambre, and ſende Antonine vnto the warres, there to execute themperours offyce. But Antonine, not regardynge any buſyneſſe of the Brytons, endeuoured by all the meanes he could, to winne, and confyrme the heartes of the Souldyours vnto hym, deprauynge often tymes his brother, to thentente they ſhould onely obey, and ayde hym, to the attaynynge of the Soueraignytye. The longe maladye of hys father, and the ſlowe procraſtynacyon of hys death, cauſed the yonge man to be verye penſyfe, and doubtfull, ſo that he laboured to perſwade hys fathers Phyſycions,The deth of Seuerus. and mynyſters to rydde in anye caſe, wyth all celerytye poſſyble, the olde man oute of the world: vntyll that Seuerus, beyng rather throughe thoughte, then ſyckenes, conſumed, eanded hys lyfe: who was the moſte famouſe of all Emperours in warlyke affayres. For none other had obtayned ſo manye vyctoryes,Hys victoryes. and Conqueſtes, eyther Cyuyle agaynſte hys aduerſaries, or forreyne agaynſt the Barbarous nacyons. Thus deceaſed he, after he had gouerned thempyre the ſpace of .xviii.Seuerꝰ reygned xviii. yeres. yeres, leauynge hys Sonnes for hys ſucceſſours in the ſame: vnto whome he lefte alſo ſo greate aboundaūce of riches, as none of his predeceſſours had before him done, and a greater army, then anye forreyne power was able to reſyſte. When Anthonyne had ones gotten the Supreame aucthorytye,The crueltye of Antonyne. he began to deſtroye euery man from the verie bedde ſyde, as the prouerbe ſayth. For he put to deth the Phiſicians, becauſe they obeyed not hys commaundemente, in haſtyng hys fathers deathe. And ſlewe all hys owne, and brothers Nouryces and enſtructers, for that they wente about to reconcyle theym, leauynge throughe hys crueltye, none a lyue, that was eyther in dygnyty, or had reuerenced hys father. The Chyuetaynes of tharmye, he entyced, to perſwade the Souldyours, to proclayme hym onely Emperoure: ymagynynge daylye manyfolde myſchyefes agaynſte hys brother. But he could not wyn the Souldyours good wylles, or aſſent therunto. For they remembred that Seuerus brought eyther

of them vp from theyr infancie, wyth equall diligence, & them ſelues had euer ſhewed lyke honoure & obedyence to them both. Wherfore Antonine, perceiuynge that he coulde not ſpeade of hys purpoſe wyth tharmye, hauynge taken truce wyth the Brytons, graunted them peace, and receiued theyr hoſtages, he remoued wyth great ſpede towardes hys Moother & Brother. Whē the two Brethren met togither, theyr Moother laboured to bryng them to agrement, wherin alſo, many of the moſte prudente, and ſage of Seuerus frendes, and Counſailors, earneſtly trauailed. Antonyne thereby (ſeyng all men repyned hys ſenſualytie) was enduced, rather of force, then good wyll, to counterfaite loue. After whych done, the two Brethren, gouernynge thempyre wyth equall honoure, and Soueraignitye, launched oute of Brytayne, and ſayled wyth the Relyques of theyr father, towardes Rome. For when they had burned the bodye, they caried the aſſhes, intermedled wyth certayne pleaſaunt odours, in a boxe of Alabaſtre to Rome, that it might be there enteared, & encloſed amonges the ſacred monumentes of other Prynces. Them ſelues ledde thus theyr armye, as Conqueroures of Brytayne, and paſſed ouer Thocean, vnto the next coaſte of Fraunce. After what ſorte therefore, Seuerus deceaſed, and howe hys Sonnes tooke vppon theym thempyre, it is in thye preſente booke at lengthe declared.
            ¶ The ende of the thyrde booke of Herodyan.
         
         
            
            
            ¶The Argumente of the fourthe Booke of Herodian.
            
               THe fourthe Booke, ſpeaketh of the pompe, that was at the Cononizacion of Seuerus. The diſcorde, and debate, of the two two Bretherne, and the deathe of Geta ſlaine by his own Brother Anthonyne, who remayned after ſole Emperour, and was very cruel and vncōſtaūt. After that, of the Treaſō, done by hym to the Alexandriens, and the cauſe therof. Of an other Treaſon done vnto Artabanus the King of Parthia. And howe Anthonyne hym ſelfe was ſlayne by Martialis one of hys Garde, and howe Macrinus was made Emperour, who ſuſtayned, and helde on the warre with Artabanus, and fynallye made peace and concorde with hym.
         
         
            
            ¶The fourthe booke of Thiſtorie of Herodian.
            
               THe Actes of Seuerus by ye ſpace of .xviii. yeres, are in the former booke ſufficiently ſhewed. After whoſe deathe, the yonge Emperours his Sonnes, wt their Moother, retourned haſtly towardes Rome: vſyng in their iorney continuall rancor and debate. For thei neuer lodged in one Iune, or vſed one table: ſuſpecting daily, all theyr mete, and drynke, leſte eyther of them preuenting other, ſhould couertly in their ſeruices, worke hys feate wyth poyſon. And for that cauſe, thei made the ſpeadier remouinges: thinking to liue more ſafely within the Citie, where thei purpoſed, to deuyde themperial palaice betwene them, or elles (as thei bothe chieflye wyſhed) to lye a ſunder, in other the largeſt, & beautyfulleſt houſes of the Citye. When thei were entered into Rome, all the people crowned wyth Lawrell, receyued, and the Senate welcommed them. Formoſte rode themperours themſelfes, clothed in Imperiall purple. And nexte them folowed the Conſulles, beringe the veſſell wyth Seuerus reliques. Which veſſell, the people, after they hadde ſaluted the newe Emperours, dyd reuerentlye worſhyp. Themperours & Conſulles beynge thus accōpanied wyth pryncely pompe, caryed the ſame into the Temple, where the diuyne monumentes, of Marcus, and other Emperours, are ſeen. After they had fynyſhed the ſolempne ſacrifyce, and, according to the aunciente vſage, celebrated the funerall Cerimonyes, bothe the Bretherne departed into thimperiall palaice: which thei deuided betwene thē, cloſed vp all backe doores, and priuey poſternes, and mette togither onely at the vtter gates. They choſe beſydes, eyther vnto hym ſelfe a ſundrye Garde, and neuer came togithers, vnles it were ſome tyme for a lytle whyle to be ſeen of the people. Neuertheleſſe, firſt

of all, thei accōpliſhed the due funeralles, of their Father. For the Romaines accuſtome, to cōſecrate with. Immortalityee, ſuche Emperours, as at their death, leue eyther Childrē, or Succeſſours, in thempyre behinde them. And thoſe whiche are endowed with that honour, thei Canonize amonges the Goddes. There is throughout the Citye, a certayne dolefull lamentacion, mixed with feaſtfull ioye. And thei vſe to enterre the dead Corpſe, very ſumptuouſely, after the cōmon ſorte of men. But then, thei haue an Image, made as lyke the deade Emperour, as maye be. The ſame, within the porche, of the Imperiall palayce, thei laye in a great, & highe bedde of Iuorie, couered ouer with cloth of golde. And truely, the ſame Image, loketh very pale, lyke vnto a diſeaſed pacient. About the bedde on eyther ſyde, a great parte of the daye, do certayne perſons ſyt. That is to weete, on the left ſyde, the Senate, clothed in blacke garmentes: And on the ryghte ſyde, many Matrones, whome either their huſbādes, or parentes dignitees, do bewtify. None of thieſe, are ſeene to were any owches, or chaynes of golde. But beyng cladde, wt thinne white veſture, thei ſhewe the countenaunce of mourners. And thus doo thei continewe the ſpace of .vii. dayes: dureng the which, euery daye, themperours Phiſicians, 
                  •
               oo repayre vnto the Bedde. And, as thoughe thei hadde felte the pacientes pulces, declare that he waxeth more ſicke then before. Finally, when it ſemeth that he is deceaſſed, Certane of the moſte noble, and worthy yonge mē, of thorders of knightes, & Senatours, doo take vp the bedde, on their ſhoulders, and cary it throughe the ſtrete called Sacra via, vnto tholde market place, where the Romaine magiſtrates, are accuſtomed to rēder vp their offices. Ther, on both ſides, are certaine ſtages made with ſteppes, vpō the which, on thone ſide, is a quere of boyes, beyng noble mens Sonnes, and on thother ſyde, are many bewtyfull women, ſinging Himpnes, and balades, in prayſe of the dead Emperour, meaſured with diuerſes lamētable verſes. When thoſe are fynyſhed, the yonge men do take vp the bedde againe, and bere it out of the citie, into the fielde called Campus

Martius.Campus Martius In the broadeſt parte whereof, there is erected a towre foure ſquare, wt ſides of equal height, builded of great timber, lyke vnto a Tabernacle. The ſame within furth, is filled with drye chippers, & Rodes: And on the vtter ſyde, hāged with Arras clothes of golde, and decked with ymages of Iuorie, and ſundry painted pictures. Within it alſo, is an other leſſe Towre, but lyke in forme, with doores and portalles opened. And ouer yt the .iii. & fourthe, wt manye other roumes, aſcending continually, vntil thei reiche vnto the higheſt, which is leſſe then all the other. A man may cōpare this building, vnto Towres, whiche are ſet in hauēs, with fyre on the Toppes, to directe ſhippes, which ſayle by nyght on the ſeas, into their perfecte portes, and ſure ſtacions. The ſame are cōmonly called Phari.Phari. Now whē thei haue put the bedde in the Seconde Tabernacle, they gather togythers all kyndes of ſpicerie, and perfumes, wt diuerſe odoriferous fruites, herbes, & iuyces, the which thei throwe on heapes, in the Tabernacle. Neither is ther, any nacion, Citie, or perſon, whiche excelleth in honour, or dignitie, but at ye time, wil to the vttermoſt of hys powere, honorably celebrate, the laſte funeralles, of thē
               perour. When thei haue couched a great heape of ſpices togithers, & ſtuffed ye building therewyth, all the Romaine knightes, do ride about ye Towre, wt a iuſte courſe, & order to & fro, called of thē Pirrhichius.Pirrhichius. Chariottes are alſo drawē about, wherin many do ſit, clothed in purple, repreſētīg ye perſōs, of all noble mē, being Magiſtrates, & Capitaines, of Rome. The Ceremonies being thrughly ended, the Succeſſor in thempire, taketh a brāde of fire in his hāde, & fireth therwt the Tabernacle. After whō, all other yt are preſēt, doo throwe fire likewyſe, into the ſame. And immediatly al ye buildīg, being filled wt thoſe drie ſtickes, & ſpices, begīneth to burne vehemētli. Then out of ye higheſt, & leſt Towre, as out of a hyghe ſteaple, is let fourthe an Egle, the whyche they beleue, dothe beare Themperours ſoule, into heauen. And from thence fourthe is that Emperour worſhypped as the other Goddes.

When theſe twoo yonge menne,The dyſcorde of ye two brethren. had after thys ſorte, conſecrated theyr parent, they returned home: where they dayly exercyſed priuye grudges, lying in awayte one for an other, and ymagynyng al ye meanes, wherby they myght entrappe eyther other. Fynallye, they omytted nothynge, wherewyth eyther of them might deſtroy, and defeate other, and aſpire to thole Monarchye by hym ſelfe. Beſydes that, the myndes of all the noble men, and Cytezyns, whych had anye honourable offyce, or dygnytye, were ſeuered into dyuerſe faccyons (either of the brethren, ſending theyr ſecrete letters, to allure wyth ſundrye promyſes, manye vnto theyr pryuate appetytes. The greater parte leaned vnto Geta,Geta better beloued of ye people. becauſe he ſhewed a greate token of goodnes, behaued hym ſelfe modeſtly in theyr companyes, and vſed honeſt ſtudyes. For he retayned commonlye aboute hym, manye that were well learned, and exercyſed hym ſelfe, in wraſtelyng, and other lyke cōmendable recreacyons. And wyth hys gentle hauoure towardes all men, he wanne very manie vnto hys frendeſhyp, and loue, through a certaine pryncypal glory. But Antonyne in contrary wyſe,Antonine outrageouſe and cruell. behaued hym ſelfe in all thynges more cruellye. For being alienat, from the maners I before rehearſed, he affected, to ſeme an embracer of warlike lyfe, and company. And through orderyng all matters irefully, he purchaſed vnto him ſelfe frendſhyp, rather through menacyng, and feare, then gētle perſwaſions, or good wyl. Now after their Mother had a long time in vain, endeuored to reduce thē into brotherly concord,The partynge of thempire betwene the twoo brethren Propontis. and vnitie, it ſemed beſt, to deuide thēpyre betwene thē. Wherfore, hauing called togither theyr fathers frendes, they agreed of ye ſame dyuiſion. So that all Europe fel vnto Antonines lot, & the lande ouer aneanſ
                  •
               e it, called Aſya, was appointed vnto Geta. Therbi, either of thē, as it wer, thrugh a certaine diuine prouidēce, ſhould be ſeperated wt the Sea of Propontis. And it was concluded, ye Antonynes army ſhould remaine in Bizantiū, and Getas, in Chalcedon a Citie of Bithinia.Bizātiū Chalcedon. The which Cities, being ſituate one againſt ye other, ſhould defend either of

theyr limittes, & prohibyte thē bothe, from inuaſions. As many Senators as were of Europe, ſhold remain in Rome, & al the reſt attend vpon Geta: who appointed for the Seates royall of his dominion, Antioche,Antioch Alexandrie. Mauritanians. Numidians. & Alexandrie, bothe Cities of greatnes, not muche inferyor to Rome. Then of the inhabitaūtes of ye South, leuing the Mauritanians, & Numidians, vnto Antonine, him ſelfe toke al ye reſidue, euen vnto the Oriental coſtes. Whiles thei debated theſe matters, al other beholdynge the earthe with ſorowfull countenaunce, theyr mother Iulia, ſpake as enſueth.
            ¶Ye haue found out my ſonnes (ꝙ ſhe) how to deuide the land, & Sea betwyxt you:Iulia the ii. Emperors mother. Her wordes vnto them. and eyther of your boū
               des, ye ſay, the Pontian ſea doth ſeperate. But now, how wil ye deuide your Mother? or how ſhal I 
                  •
               ortunate creature be departed betwene you? Fyrſte ſlea me, and either of you, bury the part, he ſhall haue, yt I my ſelfe may alſo, wt the Sea, & land, be diſſeuered betwene you. When ſhe had ſo ſayd, ſhe layd her armes vpōn their neckes, & enbracyng them bothe, endeuored in al yt ſhe could, to reconcile thē. Wherfore, being moued wt compaſſion, they lycenced euery man to departe, wythout any finall, or determinate concluſyō, and them ſelues alſo, returned home. But their rācor, and enuy, encreaſed daily. For whē any Capitaines, or Magiſtrates, were elected, either of the brethrē, aided his own frende chiefly. Or when they ſate in iudgement, they helde euer dyuerſe opinyons, to the intollerable domage, & loſſe, of the party, who had ye matter in controuerſye. They omytted beſides no kynde of ſecrete wyles, and entrappynges, labourynge to entyſe eyther others Cookes, Butlars, and Cupbearers, to poyſon theyr Mayſter. The whyche endeuors, when they proceaded not, as either would, for that they tooke theyr meate wyth greate watche, and dyligence, Anthonyne beynge impacyente of delaye, and prycked wych ambycyon of the hole Empyre, determyned eyther to commytte, or ſuffer, ſome notable facynorous facte. And therefore, he compaſſed the matter, wyth ſtrengthe, and murder. For ſeynge that

hys priuy attemptes toke none effecte, he thoughte it neceſſarye, ſettynge all hope, and feare aparte, to fynyſſhe his begon enterpriſe oute of hande. Wherfore, ſodeynlye breakynge open hys Brothers Chaumbre dore,Geta ſlayne by hys Brother An
                  
                     •
                  yne. he moſte cruelly there ſlew hym, vpon hys Moothers lap, whē he thought not of any ſuche miſchief. The which dede, being accompliſſhed, he immediatly lepte furthe, and runnynge throughe all the palayce, cryed, that he hadde wyth greate dyffycultye, eſcaped a maruaylouſe daunger. And therewyth, he cōmaunded the Souldyours of hys Garde, to ſafeconduyte hym furthwyth into the Campe, where he myghte abyde in more ſuretye: ſayinge that he ſhoulde periſſhe yf he remayned anye lenger in the Courte. And they credytynge hys wordes, and beyng ignoraunt of that was happened wythin, accompanyed hym, as he ran runnyng alſo. Thys moued a greate tumulte, amonges the people, whyles the Prynce wente priuylye in the nyghte, through the myddes of the Citye. Aſſoone as he came vnto the Campe, he entered into a lytell Chappell, wherein, the Signes, and Images of the hooſt, were worſhypped: and there fallyng proſtrate, gaue thankes wyth vowes, as yf they had beene for hys healthe. When the ſame was reported to the Souldyours, whereof ſome were waſſhynge, and ſome other repoſynge theym ſelues, they ran thyther as men amaſed, in dyuerſe plumppes. And he, commynge furthe into the myddes of theym, dyd not at the fyrſte, open the matter throughlye, as it was commytted, but cryed that he had eſcaped a maruaylouſe daunger, and Treaſon, of a malycyouſe manne, hys enemye, for ſo he named hys brother. And that wyth much dyffyculty, after longe ſtryfe, hys aduerſaryes were vanquyſſhed. For whyles they both contended, fynallye, he was by the fauoure of fortune, lefte onely Emperour. But in this darke & ouerthwart inueighyng of theſe woordes, he wyſſhed, rather to haue hys dede vnderſtanded, then openlye harde. Then for hys ſafetye obtayned, he promyſed vnto euerye Souldyoure, twoo thouſande, fyue hundreth gr
                  •
               tes, and he

alowed theym halfe as muche more vyttayle, as they were accuſtomed to haue before that tyme. He lycenced theym alſo, to take theym ſelues, money oute of the Temples, and Treaſouryes, lauyſſhynge out at large, in one daye, as muche as Seuerus had in xviii. yeares, gathered, and of other mennes calamytyes and myſeryes, heaped togythers. The Souldyours, beynge wyth ſo greate aboundaunce of money entyſed, perceyuynge thole cyrcumſtaunce of the aforeſayde murdre, by thoſe that were fledde from the Courte, pronounced hym ſole Emperoure, and declared Geta a Traytour. Antonyne remayned the ſame nyghte in the Temple, and affayinge hym ſelfe, in the rewardes, wherewith he had wonne the Souldyours heartes, wente the nexte daye into the Senate houſe, beynge enuyroned wyth all the armye, and more armure and weapons, then were accuſtomed to garde the Prynce, beynge entered into the Senate, he made hys ſacryfyce, and that eanded, he aſcended thimperyall Throne, and made an Oracyon, as foloweth.
            ¶I am not ignoraunt that euery murdre of a mannes owne kynred,The oracyon of Antonyne. as ſoone as it entreth into the eares of others, wyll ſeame odyouſe, and the name it ſelf, when it is heard, wil adde a maruaylous ſclaū
               der. For compaſſiō foloweth the vnfortunate, and enuy purſueth the mighty. The vanquiſſhed is thought to receyue iniurye, and the Conqueroure is ſuppoſed to commyt wronge. But if any man wyll ponder the matter it ſelfe, rather with attentife Counſell, then any percyal fauoure towardes hym that is dead, and exactly conſyder hys cauſe and entente, he ſhal eaſely fynd that it is both iuſt and requiſyte, to reuenge, rather then to receiue iniurye. For the infamye of tymorouſenes, doth enſue the calamity of the murdred, but the ouercommer, beſydes that he is in ſafetye, dothe alſo beare awaye the renowne of fortytude. Now al other thinges the which he entended againſt me, wyth poyſons, and al other kinde of Treaſon, it lyeth in youre handes, to wreſte oute by tormentes.

Therefore perdye, haue I commaunded all hys ſeruauntes to be here preſente, that you may vnderſtāde the trueth. There be many of them already racked, whoſe confeſſion ye maye throughly heare. Fynally, whyles I was wyth my Moother, he came vpon me, bringing in his cōpany, many armed wt weapōs. But I knowīg the matter before, reuēged my ſelf on mine enemy. For he neither bare any minde, nor yet purpoſed anye thynge, pertayninge to a brother. And to deſtroy him, the which doth firſt entēde miſchief; euē as it is rightfull, ſo is it alſo receaued in vſe. For Romulus hym ſelfe,Romulꝰ. the buylder of this Citye, forbare not his Brother, which deluded hys workes of ſo greate importaunce. I omytte Germanicus the brother of Nero, and Tytus the brother of Domitian. Marcus the Philoſopher, did not ſuffre ye checkes of his Son in lawe. But I, in thauoyding of poyſon prepared againſte me, and the ſwoorde that henge ouer my ſholders, haue ſlayne myne enemye: for that name, hathe he, throughe his deades deſerued. Render you thākes vnto the Goddes, for that they haue preſerued one Prince vnto you. And let not your myndes, be ſeuered into ſondry opinions, but obeyenge youre onely Emperour, lede your lyues hereafter in trāquillitie. For Iupiter, euē as he poſſeſſeth, the onely Empire, and dominion, amonges the Goddes, ſo hathe he appoynted, the ſame vnto one alone, amonges mortall men. After he had ſpoken thieſe woordes, wyth loude voyce, full of yre, and cruell countenaunce, beholding the frendes of Geta, whyche trembled, and waxed pale throughe feare, he retourned into the palayce. Furthewith then, were the alyes, and frendes, of Geta,The extreme Crueltie of Antonine. put to death, euen thoſe, which dwelt in the houſe, wyth hym, and all his ſeruauntes, ſo that the age of infantes, was not ſpared. Beſydes that, the deade karkaſſes, were layde in Cartes, for a reproche, caried oute of the Citye, & there throwen on heapes, and burned. Neyther ſuffered he to remayne alyue, anye one, which was but of lytle acquayntaunce with Geta. The wreſtlars, Carters, and Stage players, and

finallye all kynde of thynge, that was eyther gratefull or acceptable, to the eyes, or eares of Geta, were euerye where deſtroyed. And euerye Senatour, that excelled in nobilitie, dignitie, or ryches, was putte to deathe, as his frende vpon euerie ſmale trifle: yea ſomtyme, without any cauſe, vpon euery lyght accuſatiō. He cauſed to be ſlayne alſo the ſiſter of Commodus, beinge verye aged, and thitherunto of all Emperous: entertayned with great reuerence, as it became the doughter of Marcus: takynge for occaſion, that ſhe had bewayled vnto hys moother, the death of Geta. And with her his owne wife the doughter of Plantianus, whiche before was ſente into Cicilia, and a kynſman of hys owne named Seuerus, the ſonne of Pertynax, and Lucilla the ſuſter of Commodus. Finally, he roted out, as it were from the botom, euerye one, whiche remained of Thimperal bloude, or in the Senate, of the nobilitie. He commaunded alſo, all the rulers; and officers, of the Prouinces, to be ſlain, as the frendes of Geta: ſo that all the nyghtes, were ſpent in murderynge, a meruaylous numbre of men. Yea, he buried quicke in the yearthe, the Veſtall virgines,The veſtall virgines. as thoughe they had violated theyr virginitie. Fynally, that whiche neuer before was done, he committed. For whiles he was lokynge vpon the playes called Circenſes,Circēſes. the people of Rome, reprouynge, I knowe not howe, a certayne Carter, whome he attentiflye behelde, he takynge it for an obloquie towardes hymſelfe, furthwyth commaunded the whole armie, to runne vpon the people, and to ſpoyle, and ſlea euerye one, that had ſpoken agaynſt the Carter. And the ſouldyours, hauing once gotten licence of rifling, and robbyng when they (whiche had ſpoken agaynſt the Carter, coulde not be dyſcerned amonges the people, (for no man woulde in that multitude, confeſſe the trueth) as they happened vpon anye man, either ſlewe hym, or elles, takynge them all captiues, after theyr raunſome payed, dyd with great difficultie releaſe them. When theiſe thynges were finiſhed, Themperour ſtyrred with remorſe of hys euyl actes,

and deteſting the liuinge in the Citye, remoued from Rome, to ſet the Souldiors in order, and viſyte the prouinces. After he was paſſed Italye, he wente vnto the bankes of Danowe, the which are ſubiecte to the Romayne Empyre. There, eyther he exercyſed his bodye in Cartinge, or huntynge all kynde of wylde beaſtes, or elles, ſate in iudgemēt: but that was very ſealdome, giuing ſentence brifely, and anſwering verye ſhortly, after he had harde but lytle of the matter. He there beſydes, ioyned all the Germaynes into hys ſocietie: ſo that of them, he elected euery moſte valyaunte, & goodly of ſtature, for his companyons in warre, and garde of his perſonne. And oftentymes, layenge aſyde the Romayne apparaile, he put on the Germaien garmē
               tes, and was ſondry tymes ſeene in theyr Caſſockes, enbrowdred with golde. He ware beſydes on his head, a yelowe buſhe of here, rounded after the Germanyen ſorte. Wherwith the barbarous people beyng ioyouſe, loued him excedingly. The Romayne Souldiors alſo reioyſed therat, bicauſe he gaue vnto them ſundry bountiefull gyftes. Hym ſelfe exercyſed all the offices, of a priuate Souldiour. For if there were any trenche to dygge, hym ſelfe fyrſte dygged, anye brydge to be made ouer a ryuer, any bulwarke to be buylded, or anye other handye worke, or labour, to be taken in hande, hym ſelfe fyrſte enterpryſed the ſame: contēted alwaye with thynne fare, in cuppes, and dyſſhes of woode,The ſobrietie of Antonine. eating continually courſe bredde. For he accuſtomed, to feade him ſelfe with a Cake of Rye, the whiche he grounde, and baked vppon the coles, wyth hys owne handes. Fynally, he reiected all wanton pleaſures, and vſed ſymple thinges, appertayninge vnto the pooreſte common Souldior. Beſydes that, he had rather be called Companion, then Prince. And vſed to trauayle moſte commonlye on hys feete, as the Souldyors dyd, ſeldome ryding on horſe, or in chariote, and alway bering his owne harneiſſe.The ſtrength of Antonyne. Yea many times; he bare on his owne ſhoulders, the Stāderdes, that were heuyly laden with pictures of golde, and ſcarcely light ynoughe, for the ſtrongeſt Souldior. For thieſe, and

oher ſemblable thinges, did hys army loue hym, as a warrelyke perſonage, and maruayle at hym, as a valyaūt Capitaine. For it ſeamed a miracle vnto them, that a man of ſo lytle ſtature, was able to endure ſo greate labors. When he had eſtablyſhed ſome Souldiors at Danowe,Danuby and paſſed into Thrace, which boundeth vpon the Macedony
                  ••
               s, furthwith he became an other Alexander. For he 
                  •
               newed the memorie of the ſame kynge, by all the me
                  ••
               es he coulde deuyſe: commaundyng his ymages to 
                  •
               e erected, in euery towne, and replenyſſhinge Rom
                  •
                ſelfe, the Capitole,Capitole and all the Temples, with the ſtatues of Alexander. We then ſawe many ymages foolyſhly wroughte, that bare in one body two faces, of Alexander, and Antonyne: who wente abroade, in the Macedonyen apparayle, wearing a diademe on his heade, and ſlippers on his feate. He named a choſen company of yonge men, the Macedonien Phalanx: commaundinge his Capitaines, to take vnto them, the names of Alexāders Chieftaines. And the yonge mē, which he had ſent for out of Sparta, he called ye Laconike, & Pitanyte Cēturie. Whē he had ended thieſe thinges, & ordered euery Cytie,Pitanite as he might, he made a ve
                  •
               age vnto Pergamꝰ a Citie of Aſia, yt he might vſe ſome of Aeſ
                  •
               ulapius Phiſicke.Pergamus. And whē he was ther arriue
                  •
               , after he had re
                  •
               eated hī ſelf wt ſufficiēt ſleape, he remoued to Troye,Troye. viſited all the olde monumentes of the Citie, & wente vnto Achilles Toumbe. And hauyng ſumptuouſly decked the ſame,Achilles wt flowres, & Garlādes, he began of newe to counterfayte Achylles. But as he wyſſhed, for ſome one lyke vnto Patroclus, his deareſt lybertine named Feſtus, whiles he ſoiorned at Troye, deceaſſed: diſpatched, as ſome thought, wt poiſō, yt he migh
                  •
                
               
                  •
               e buried as Patroclus was: but as other affirme, extinct wt ſicknes.Patroclus. His body, did Antonine cōmaūde to be brought fourthe, & ye place wher it ſhuld be burned, to be piled with much woode. And putting the corpſe, into ye middes therof, & ſacrificīg diuerſe kindes of beaſtes, he threw fire into it, & holding a glaſſe in his hande, dranke of the wyne therein, makynge peticion vnto the wyndes.
            
               And beinge ſomwhat balde, whē he ſought for heare, to laye into the fyre, it became a ſporte, vnto all that were preſent: yet at the laſt, he notted of thoſe heares he had. Chiefely amonges al valiaunt men, he praiſed Sylla the Romain,Sylla. Hannyball. and Hannyball the Aphricane, whoſe Image he alſo erected. After he was departed from Troye, he paſſed ouer all Aſye, Bythynye, and the other adiacent countreyes. And hauinge ſet order in hys effaires, euerye where, he wēt vnto Antyoche,Antyoche. where he was receyued verye honorably, and taryed a litle while. From thence he remoued to Alexandry, clokynge this voyage, with pretence of deſyre, to ſee the Citie,Alexandrie. buylded by Alexander, and to conſulte with the God of that countrey, whome the inhabitauntes do greatly worſhip. Faining theſe two cauſes, he cō
               maunded firſt aulters, for ſacrifice to be erected, with all kinde of funeral celebration, to the honour of their God, and the memorie of Alexander. When this was declared vnto the Alexandryen multitude, beinge naturally chaungeable, with euerye trifle, they al together, as it were men diſtracte of theyr wyttes, reioyſed at the prynces wyll, and beneuolence.
            And prepared them ſelues, to receaue hym more honorably, then euer they dyd any other Emperoure. For all kynde of muſicall inſtrumentes, mette him in his paſſage, making a wonderfull melodious ſowne. Beſides that, al the gates, and ſtretes, being repleniſhed with the flauour of ſpices, and perfumes, they welcomed hym with bonefyres, & ſtrowing of floures in hys waye. After his entrie into the Citye, he fyrſte viſyted the Temples, & when he had there offred manye ſacrifices, and heaped the aulters wich frankenſence, he went vnto the Tombe of Alexander, wher he put of his owne robe of purple, hys rynges adorned with precious ſtones, his gyrdle, & all his other goodly ornamentes, and layed the ſame vpon the Tombe. The Alexādriens beholding al theſe thinges, reioyſed wonderfullye, and made feſt, bothe nyght, and daye, throughout the Citie, beynge ignoraunte, what was hydde in the Emperours cancarde ſtomacke.
            
               For theiſe thinges did he, thrughe ſubtyltye, to thenient, he might ſlea, all the multitude togithers. The cauſe, of his priuey indignaciō, and grudge, was this. It was reported vnto hym at Rome, that whyles hys father lyued, and after his death, the Alexandriēs,The occaſion of- Antonines hatered agaīſt the Alexā
                  driens. had bluſtred out many opprobriouſe wordes againſt him. For in deade, thei are of nature, talkatyue people, faſhyoned to mocke, and ſcorne, all others, babelynge againſt euery noble man, and chyefly wyth quyppes, and tauntes, as them ſelfes thinke, pleſaunt, & ſwete but thoſe, by whō thei are ſpoken, accompte theim verie odious; & bitter. For of ſuche ſcoffes, thoſe, wherwt vyce is reproued, doo ſooneſt ſtyrre anger. Wherfore when they had ſpoken many thinges agaynſte Antonyne, not kepyng in ſylence, the murder of hys Brother, commonly callynge his Mother Iocaſta,Iocaſta. & ſcorning him, becauſe that beynge of ſo lytle ſtature, he woulde ſeame to counterfayte Alexander, and Achilles, whyche were moſte valiaunte, and mighty Capitaynes, thei ſo encenſed hym, beynge alreadye of hys owne nature, yrous, and bloodthirſtye, that he fullye determined, their death, and deſtructiō. When he had therefore fyniſhed this laſte reherſed ſolempnitie, and feaſte, ſeyng ſo great a multitude of the next nacions, reſorting vnto the Cytie, he commaunded by proclamacion, that all the Alexandrien youthe, ſhuld aſſemble into a certayne fyelde, without the walles: promyſynge, that as he had of the Macedonyen, and Spartayne yonge men, euen ſo wold he of them, conſtitute a ſquare battell, called Phalaux, in the honoure, and remembraunce, of Alexander. When thei were ſo aſſembled, he commaunded them, to ſeperate themſelfes in bandes, a greate ſpace one from an other, that he mighte electe oute of them, the apteſte ages, ſtatures, and perſonages, for the warres. The yonge men creditynge the ſame, and perſwaded wyth a coloure of truthe, thrughe the greate honoure, he had before ſhewed towardes theyr deade Prince, reſorted thither in many cōpanyes, bringinge with them, their Parētes and Bretherne, with ioyouſe acclamaciōs & ſhoutes.

Then Antonine, went about eche companye, vewing them, and praiſinge this and that, in euerye one as he liked, vntil his whole hoſt had compaſſed them vnwares, and loking for no ſuch thinge. And when he perceaued them al to be encloſed with his armie, & entangled, as it were with nettes, him ſelf came furth with his garde, and gaue a watche word vnto the Souldiours: who furthwith ran vpon the people, and ſlewe with meruaylous ſlaughter,The murder of the Alexandriens by treaſon. the naked, and vnarmed youth, & al other that wer preſent. Of the Souldiors, ſome were occupied in murdering onely, other ſome buried the deade corpſes, in huge pyttes, & coueringe them with earth againe rayſed a meruaylous highe hil. Many were drawen half dead into ye pittes, & many were buryed quicke. There periſhed beſides very many of the Souldiours them ſelfes. For they, which had any breth remaining, and not fully loſt theyr natural ſtrength, clipping the Souldiors, which ranne vpon them, drewe the ſame alſo, into the pittes wyth them. And there was ſo great a murdre committed, that with ſtreames of bloud, which ranne alonge the playnes, not onely the mouthe of Nylus,Nilus. but alſo the Sea by the Citie, became red of colour. Thys eanded, Antonyne affecting the Parthyane ſurname, and renowme of Thoriental conqueſt, (although the people were nowe in perfecte peace) inuented this crafte. He wrate letters vnto Artabanus king of Parthia, and ſent vnto him Ambaſſadors,Letters ſent vnto Artabanus. with ſundrie ſumptuous giftes. In thoſe letters he wrate, that he wold take to wife the kinges doughter, for yt him ſelf was a prince, and a princes ſonne. And therfore it beſemed not hys eſtate, to become ſon in law, of any priuate or meane perſone, but rather to mary a Queene, or the doughter of a great and puiſaunt king. He alledged, that the Empires of Rome, and Parthia, being the .ii. mightieſt of the world▪ ſhoulde by this affinitie ioyne togethers, and no ryuer diſſeuerynge them, be of ſo great ſtrength, that it were impoſſible, for any forreyne power, to vaynquiſhe them. For (quod he) all the Barbarous nations, whiche are nowe ſubiecte, vnto both

theſe Empires, wyll eaſely continewe in ſubiection, when euerye of them, ſhall haue theyr owne rulers and gouernours. The Romaynes (he affyrmed) had an armye of fote men, the whyche wyth ſpeares, and in playne battayle, excelled all other. And the Parthians had a greate power of horſemen, and experte archers. Wherefore, theſe thynges ioyned togethers, and agreinge in one, they ſhoulde (he ſayde) eaſely retayne, vnder one Scepter, and Diademe, the Empire of the whole worlde. The pleaſaunte ſpyces, and fyne clothe alſo, whiche came from them, to the Romaynes, and the goodly metall, and all curious wroughte thynges, which were tranſported from the Romains to them agayne, ſhoulde not after thys mary age be ſeldome caried, as it was wont by marchauntes, but thuſe therof, ſhoulde be in common to them, without let or interruption, in one land, and vnder one gouernour. After the Parthian kinge, had receaued theſe letters, he fyrſt denied the requeſt, ſaying, that a barbarous matrimony became not a Romain. For what cōcord (quod he) woulde be betwene them, which vſed not one language, nor one kind of liuing, & appayrel? There were (he ſayde) at Rome manye Senatours doughters, amonges whome the Emperoure might choſe hym a wyfe: as there were in hys dominion, certayne called Arſacide.Arſacide. Neyther was there anye cauſe, he thoughte, why anye of them, ſhoulde be alyenated from theyr natiue countrey. With thys aunſwere, he repulſed the Emperours ſuyte.
            But Antonyne, neuer lefte of ſendynge manye gyftes, and promyſynge by othes, hys perfecte loue towardes hys doughter, vntyll the Barbarous prynce beleuynge hys wordes, promyſed to geue hym hys doughter to wyfe. When the fame of thys was ſpredde, all the Barbarous people prepared themſelues to receaue the Romayne Emperoure, reioyſynge wyth a certayne hope, of contynuall peace thereafter.
            
               Then Antonine, (hauing paſſed without let, or ſtaye, of anye man, the Riuers,) entred into the Parthian Region, and rode thrughe the ſame, as hys owne. And in hys waye, all the people, celebrated ſacryfices burning encenſe, vpō the decked Aultares, wherwith he fayned hym ſelfe, to be greatly pleaſed. After a lōge iorney, he approched at the laſte, nyghe the Palaice of Artabanus: Who met wyth him, in a certaine plaine before the Cytye, to receaue hym, as a newe Brydegrome, and hys Sonne in lawe. And a greate multytude of the Barbarouſe people, crowned wyth theyr countrey floures, and apparayled in garmentes, adorned wyth golde, and varyable colours, celebrated the ſame, as a feaſte, and ſolempnytye, daunſynge togithers, by the ſounde of Pypes, and Tabors. For in thoſe inſtrumentes, they are aboue meaſure delyted, eſpecially, when thei are ones wel tyipled with wine. But when all the multytude, were aſſembled togythers, and hauing lefte their horſes behinde, and laide aſyde their bowes, and arrowes, applyed them ſelfes to banquetynge, and gatheringe togither in a rude plumpe, ſtode withoute order, whyles thei ſuſpected no harme, but euery mā, thruſting forwardes, to ſee the newe maryed man, Sodeynly, Antonyne wyth a preuy ſygne, commaunded all hys men, to ſlea, and deſtroy the Barbarouſe people. They, beyng aſtonyed with that ſodeyne chaunce,The Parthians ouerthrowē by diſceyte. turned theyr backes, and fledde from the Romaynes whyche purſued, and ſlewe them. Artabanus hym ſelfe, beynge ſocoured, and ſet vpon a horſe, by ſome of hys Garde, dyd wyth greate dyfficultye eſcape. But the reſidewe of ye Parthians were euery where ouerthrowen, and murdered. For thei neither had their horſes, which thei moſt vſed (thei hadde perdie ſente theim before to graſſe) neyther coulde thei flee: for theyr wyde garmentes, hangynge downe to theyr heales, interrupted theyr runnynge. Thei broughte not beſydes theyr bowes, and arowes, with them, for what neaded that at a weddynge? Thus, after a great murder, done on the Parthiens, and a greate bootye of men, and beaſtes,

taken captyues, and ledde awaye, Antonyne departed. And withoute any reſyſtence, burned the Townes, and vyllages, geauing lycence vnto his Souldiours, to ranſake, and ſpoyle, all that they woulde, or could. This miſchief, & calamitie, did the Parthiens, vnwares, receiue. Then Anthonyne, hauing vyſeted the inwarde partes of Parthia, and his Souldiours beyng weryed, wt rapyne, and murder, retourned into Meſapotamye.Meſapotamye. From thence, he ſygnified vnto the Senate, & people of Rome, that he had ſubdued Thoriente, and brought in ſubiection, all the men of thoſe Regiōs. The Senate, (albeit thei before knewe perfectly the hole circumſtaunce, (for Princes affayres, can by no meanes, contynew longe, in hugger mugger) yet throughe feare, and flaterye, decreed all honours of victorie, vnto hym. After this, Antonine ſoiourned in Meſapotamie, gyuing hym ſelfe, to Carting, and hunting of wylde beſtes. There were two generall Capitaines of his armie, Audentius, & Macrinus, of the whiche the one was aged, rude,Audentius, Macrinus. & bluntyſhe, but yet, experte in warfare. And the other, alway exercyſed, in matters of the lawe, and therin exactly learned. This man, the Prince vſed to taunte, & checke openly, as a man nothyng valiaunte, or apt to warre. For hearing that he fedde very delycately, and reiected thoſe ſymple, and warlycke meates, whyche Antonyne vſed, and that he ware a gowne, and other decente apparayle, lyke vnto a Cytizen, he reproued hym, as a womanly perſon, threatnynge oftentymes to kyll hym. Macrynus beyng therof impacient, was ſturred with meruaylouſe anger. Thereunto happened this chaunce: it was perdie expediēt, that Antonine, ſhould ones fynyſhe hys lyfe. For beynge of hys owne nature, ouer curiouſe, he ſtudyed, not onely, to knowe the priuey affayres of men, but alſo, to ſerche oute, the ſecretes, of the Goddes, and Dyuels. And throughe continual feare of Treaſon, conſulted with many oracles, and retayned aboute him, diuerſe Magiciens, Aſtrologiens, and Sothſayers, omytting no creature, whiche profeſſed thoſe fantaſies, and ylluſions.

But ſuſpecting them alſo, as lyers, and Prophetes of flattery, he accuſtomed to wryte, vnto one Maternianus in the Citie:Maternianus. vnto whome he had committed, the charge of all hys affayres, and hym amō
               ges all his Frindes, he had choſen, for the truſtieſte, & pertaker, of all his ſecrete counſelles:) willing him, to ſende for the beſte Magiciens, from all partes, and cōſulte with them, of thende of his lyfe, and whether any man, wente aboute by treaſon, to obtayne thempyre. Maternianus, (hauing accōplyſſhed, his Princes commaundemente (whether the Magiciens tolde hym ſo, or elles bycauſe he hated Macrinus, wrote agayne vnto Antonyne,The Letters of Maternianus to Antonine. that Macrinus conſpyred Treaſon againſt him, and that it was expedyente, to rydde hym oute of the waye. And theiſe letters ſealed with other, as the vſage was, he delyuered to Purſenauntes, who were ignoraunt, of that they hadde in hande. The ſame, (hauynge ended their iorney, with accuſtomed celeritie) came vnto Antonyne, when he prepared hym ſelfe, to Carteng, and was alredy aſcē
               ded his Chariot. Then deliuered thei vnto him thole Packquet of Lettres, amonges the which were thei alſo, that touched Macrinus. But Antonyne, beyng at that tyme fully bente to Carting, cōmaunded Macrinus, that he ſhould open, and peruſe the Letters, and, yf there were any matter of importaunce, in thē conteined, make relacion therof, vnto hym agayn. Yf not, he ſhould execute, his owne office of Pretorſhip. For ſo at other tymes, he was accuſtomed, to commaunde hym in ſemblable cauſes. Hym ſelfe then departed, towardes hys paſtyme. And Macrinus, hauing vnſealed, & ſeuerally peruſed, the Letters, happened on the ſame, that mocioned his deſtruction. Then vnderſtanding the greate miſchief, that henge ouer hys heade, & knowing alſo Antonynes wrathe, and outragiouſe cruelty, ſpecially, when he ſhoulde haue ſuche occaſion, he kepte backe, the ſame Lettre, and of the reſte, declared the contentes, vnto Themperour. But yet, fearing leſte Maternianus, woulde eftſones certefye the Emperour, of the ſame matter, he determined, to commyt ſomme acte fourthwyth,

rather than in delayeng tyme, him ſelf ſhould periſh. And therfore, thus cōcluded. Ther was a certain Cē
               turiō named Martialis,Martialis. one of Antonines priuey chā
               ber, accuſtomed alwaies, to be next attendaūt, on his perſone: Whoſe brother, Antonine had put to death, vpō ſimple accuſaciō, wtout leful iudgement, & vſed of tentymes, to checke Martialis himſelf, callinge hym cowarde, & cōfederate of Macrinus. This mās ſorow for ye death of his brother, Macrinꝰ throughly perceiuing, & knowing alſo, how he was ſufficiētly ſtyrred to malice by his own reproches, called ye ſame, as one alredy bounde, by his manifolde benefites, vnto him. And perſwaded him, yt as ſone, as he could finde oportunite, he ſhould ſlea Antonine. Martialis, beinge wt his promiſes allured, & throughe his owne grudge, to the reuenge of hys brothers death, already enflāmed, promiſed to accompliſh his minde, whē time cōueniēt ſhould ſerue. And truly, it chaunſed ſhortely after. For Antonine,Carre Meſapotamy. ſoiorning at Carre a Citie of Meſopotamie, viſited ye Tēple of Diana: yt which, being nigh vnto the Citie, is there of the inhabitaūtes, hadde in great honour, and reuerente. Thither he went, with a few horſemē, leuing the armie behinde him: for after he had finyſhed his ſacrifyce, he purpoſed, to returne vnto yt Citie again. And in the midde waye, beinge accōpanied wt one ſeruaunt, & hauing cōmaūded the reſte, to ſtaye aſide, he wēt, to do the requiſites of nature. Then Martialis, (which awaited euery conueniēt howre) ſeyng the Emperour alone, & all other farre of, made haſte towardes him, as though he were called for ſome buſineſſe, & running vpon him vnwares, as he was vntruſſing his pointes, ſtabbed him in wc a dagger, which he of purpoſe, ſecretly bare in hys ſleaue. And ye ſame ſliding in betwene ye ſhort ribbes,Antonyne murdered by Martialis. gaue vnto Antonine, being vnarmed, a mortal, & deadeli woūde, whereof he furth wt died. That done, Martialis lept vpō his horſe, & beāg to flee. But ye Germaniē horſeme, (whō Antonine entierly loued, & had appointed for the garde of his perſon) being then nearer ye place, then ye reſte, & ſeinge ye ſame murder,Martialis ſlaine purſued Martialis wt maine gallop, & ſlew him wt their dartes.

when the reſidue of the hoſte heard therof, thei ranne togethers furthwyth to the Emperours dead corps: vpon the whiche Macrinus fyrſte of all fell, and fayned, to lament it exceadynglye. Thys chaunce, was dolorouſe vnto the Souldiours, who accompted them ſelues berefte, not onelye of theyr Soueraigne, but alſo of theyr Companion in armes. Neyther dyd they ſuſpecte Macrinus, for they ſuppoſed, that Martialis had committed the murder, for the reuenge of hys owne priuate iniuries. Wherfore, euery man departed to hys owne cabban. And Macrinus, hauynge burned the body of Antonyne, ſent the aſhes vnto his Moother, to burye. She then ſoiorned at Antioche, where anone after, (were it of her owne minde, or by anye mans compulſion) for the calamities of her children,Antonies mother ſlew her ſelfe. ſhe ſlewe her ſelfe. Thys eande of theyr lyues, had Antonyne, & his mother Iulia, after they had lyued, as we before reherſed, and he raigned ſyxe yeres alone, withoute hys father, and brother. Antonyne being thus ſlayne, the Souldyours, vncertayne what they myght doo, abode two dayes, without a prynce,Antotony raigned alone vi. yeres. conſultynge, whome they myght fyrſte electe for Emperoure. For they hearde, that Artabanus was commynge agaynſt them, with a great and myghtye armye, to reuenge the deathe of hys ſubiectes, whiche were ſlayne in the tyme of peace. Wherefore, they choſe fyrſte for Emperoure, Audentius, a man experte in warfare, and a polytyke Captayne. But he excuſynge him ſelfe, through hys age, refuſed thempire. Then with one conſent, thei elected Macrinus, through the perſuaſions of the Tribunes (who, as the ſuſpition after roſe, were conſentynge to the murder of Antonyne, and pertakers of Macrinus cō
               ſpiracie) as I ſhall at large hereafter declare. Then Macrinus receaued Thempire,Macrinus toke the rule of thimpire vpō hym. not for any cōfidēce, he had in the Souldiours, but conſtrained therunto, through neceſſitie, and the preſent ſtate of theyr affaires. Whyles theiſe thynges were in doyng, tydynges came vnto them, that Artabanus was euen at hand, wyth a wonderfull puyſaunce of men, amonges

the whiche, he hadde broughte a greate numbre of horſemen, Archers, & men at armes, vpō Cāmelles, whiche vſed to fyghte, wyth longe ſperes. Macrinus hearinge therof, called all the armye togythers, and made this oracion vnto them.
            ¶It is not to be meruailed, that you are dolorouſe,The oraciō of Macrinus. for the deathe, of ſuche a prynce, or (as I maye more truly ſaye) ſuche a companion. But it is the property of wyſe men, to ſuſtayne moderatly, all mortall calamityes. The memorye of him, ſhall cōtinually be fixed in your hartes, and by you, lefte vnto you poſteritee, wyth an eternall commendacion, of the valiaunt actes, by hym atchyued. Beſydes that, of hys loue towardes you, and hys partakinge of youre paynefull trauayles, whyles he lyued. But nowe, the tyme, and caſe requyreth, that (after hys funeralles with due honoure parfourmed) we prepare our ſelues, to reſyſte the daunger imminent. Ye ſee the Barbarouſe king at hande, with a wonderfull multitude of the oryentalles, hauing, as it ſeameth, iuſte occaſion of warre. For we fyrſte prouoked them, with breche of our promiſe, and mouing war againſt them, when thei were in quiete tranquyllytie. All the Romayne Empyre, & ſtrength, lyeth in your valiaunt proweſſe, and faithfull allegyaunce. We doo not now contende, for oure owne boudes, and Ryuerſe, with a mighty, and puiſſaunt kynge: but we muſte nowe fyghte, for the ſaufe garde of our owne lyues, and all ours, ſeynge he is comme, to reuenge the murder, of his chyldren, kynred, and ſubiectes, (who were by vs ſlaine (as he thinketh, contrarie to all equitie, and trueth. Wherefore, lette vs nowe fall to Armes, and (as the Romaynes are accuſtomed) obſerue a iuſte order, in oure batayles. For the Barbarouſe multytude, beyng rude, and oute of order, may happen thereby, to do them ſelues domage. But your order, agremente, and knowledge in warrefare, as they defende your ſaufegarde, euyn ſo, doo thei woorke youre enemyes deſtruction. I would therfore, that you ſhould with haulte courage, and hope of victorie, ſo fyghte, as it becommeth Romains:

& as you haue cōtinually hitherunto done. So ſhall ye not onelye vanquyſhe the Barbarous people, but alſo, hauynge obtayned a famous renowmed glorye, adde vnto the Romaynes, and all other, a perfecte confidence, that the former Conqueſt was atchyued, not by fraudulente diſceyte, but by notable valiauntnes, and ſtrengthe. When he had thys muche ſpoken, the Souldiours perceauynge the neceſſitye preſente, fell vnto armes, and ſet them ſelues in order of battayle. At the ryſyng of the Sonne, they ſawe Artabanus, marchynge forwarde with an huge armye. And aſſone as the Barbarous people had, accordynge to theyr vſage, worſhypped the Sonne, furthwith, they ran at the Romaynes, wyth a mightie,A ſore battayle. and clamorous ſhoute, ſhoting from their horſes, manye arrowes, and dartes. But the Romaynes (hauyng ſtrongely planted theyr fronte, diſtributed the Maurytanian horſemen, on eyther ſyde, and receaued into the mids of theyr battaile, the Dimilaunces, and lyght horſemen) reſiſted valiauntlye the Barbarous people at the fyrſte, the which vexed them greuouſly, with the multitude of arrowes, & longe ſpeares, wher with the men at armes that rode on Camelles, & horſes, foughte and ſkirmiſhed. On thother ſyde, the Romaines (as ofte as they moued forwardes) eaſelye obtayned the better. But when they wer oppreſſed with the Barbarous horſmen, & Camelles, faining to flea, they planted Caltrops, & other engins of yron, ſharpe at thone eand in ye groūde. The whiche beyng hid vnder the ſand, & ſeen of no man, were very pernicious, vnto the horſmen, & thoſe that rode vpō the Cameles. For, after that they were fallen, on the ſame Caltroppes, the horſes, and ſpecially the Camels (for that the ſame beaſt hath very tēder hoofes) became furthwith lame, and ouerthrewe theyr riders. The Barbarous people, as long as they ſate on their horſes, and Cammelles, fought very fierſly. But when they eyther alighted, or were ouerthrowen, they were eaſelye taken. For then, they durſt not abide the battayle. And yf they ſhould flea, or purſue theyr enemies, thei were

interrupted, with longe and wyde garmentes, retchynge downe to theyr heeles. The battayle continued two dayes, from mornynge to nyghte.A longe battayle. The nyghte ſeuered them, and eyther armye retourned into their Campes, as Conquerours. The thyrde day, they met in the playne, preſte, to daraigne battayle. Then the Barbarous people, attempted, as thoſe whiche were many more in number, to compaſſe the Romains, and entangle them, as it were, in a nette. But the Romaynes, ſeynge the ſame, ioyned not together, in a rounde compaſſe, but ſet them ſelues in a longe front, that they myghte thereby, prohibyte the compaſſynge of theyr enemies. And there was ſo great a multitude of men, and beaſtes, ſlayne, that all the fielde,A meruaylous ouerthrowe. was ouerwhealmed wyth them: and a wonderfull number of dead carcaſes, were heaped in greate heighte, eſpeciallye of Camelles, the whyche laye one vpon an other. Whereby, there was not ſcope ynough, for the Souldyours to fyghte. For ſo manye carcaſes were heaped togethers, that they coulde ſcarſcelye moue to and fro. Wherefore, they retyred into theyr campes. Nowe Macrinus, knowynge that the Barbarous kynge foughte ſo vehementlye, for none other cauſe, but that he thoughte, Antonyne to be preſente, in the battayle, ſente certayne Ambaſſadours, vnto hym wyth letters (for althoughe the Barbarous people, are accuſtomed after a lytle ſkyrmyſhynge, to were faynte, and werye, and to leue of theyr begonne enterpriſe, yf at the fyrſte bronte, it proſpereth not, accordynge to theyr myndes: yet then they perſiſted, readye to renewe the fyghte, as ſoone as they had burned the dead bodyes, beynge ignoraunte, that he was dead, whyche had cauſed thys myſchiefe, and calamitie) in the whiche letters, he certyfyed hym, that the Emperoure was deade, and hadde receyued condigne puniſhemente, for the violatynge of hys othe, and promiſe: And that the Romaynes, had delyuered the Empyre, and gouernaunce of all affayres, into his handes, who was wonderfullye diſpleaſed, wyth the thynges alreadye done.
            
               Wherfore, he woulde deliuer the captiues, and all other ſpoyles, he had taken: couetynge of hys enemye, to become his confederat, and frend, and to eſtabliſhe truce betwene them, by othe, & ſacrifice. After theſe letters were redd, and Artabanus aduertiſed by the Ambaſſadors, of the death of Antonyne, accomptyng that he which had broken the peace, was ſufficientlye punyſhed, and beynge contente, that the pryſoners, ſhoulde be reſtored, without more effuſion of bloude, and with them all the pray, and botie, he tooke agrement, and truce with Macrinus, and retourned towardes hys owne palaice. And the Romaine Emperour led hys armye oute of Meſopotamie, and marched to Antioche.
            ¶The ende of the fourth booke.
         
         
            ¶The Argumente of the fyfth boke of the Herodian.
            
               THe fifth boke reciteth the cauſes, for the whiche Macrinus, loſt the fauor of the Souldiors: who chaſe Baſſianus Emperour, & named him Antonyne. The battailes made agaynſte Macrinus, the ouerthrowe of hym, and his armye, with hys death. And thinſolence of Antonyne, after he was Emperor And how he aodpted his coſyn Alexyanus, otherwiſe named Alexander, and made hym hys felowe in the Empire. And finallye it telleth the cauſes, wherfore, and how, Antony and Soemis hys Moother, were ſlayne.
         
         
            
            ¶ The fyfte booke of the Hyſtorye of Herodyan.
            
               WE haue in the former Booke, treated, of the Raigne, death, & deſtructiō, of Anthonine. When Macrinus was come vnto Antyoche, he ſente letters vnto the Senate, and people of Rome, in thys forme.
            ¶ For aſmuche, as your ſelues perfectlye knowe,The Letters of Macrimꝰ to the Senate. what hath bene the trade of my lyfe from the beginnyng, howe muche my maners haue bene bente vnto gentlenes, and what clemency I haue ſhewed towards you, in that my dygnitie, whyche dyffered not muche from the hygheſt tipe of dominion, (for Themperour alwaies committeth the cuſtodye of him ſelfe, vnto the fidelytie of hys Pretor) I thinke it ſuperfluous, vſe to many wordes vnto you. Your ſelues are not ignoraūt, yt I alowed not, the thīges by Anthonine done: wherby for your ſakes, I was ofte in peril of my life: whiles he, geuīg credit vnto euery vniu ſte accuſation, as a man void of reaſon, imagined your hole deſtruction, he vſed to checke me ofte times, vpbrayding me openly for my modeſt humanytie, and calling me ſluggard, & cockney. For beinge a man delited wt flatery, whoſo euer incenſed him to flagitiouſe crueltie, or prouoked to malice ye furious ſēſualitie, of his frāticke brayne, or els ſturred wt accuſacions, hys exaſperate madnes, thoſe he accompted, his moſt truſty, ſecrete, and faith full frēdes. But for my part, there hath bene nothing more acceptable vnto me from the begynninge, then diſcrete modeſtie. We haue now ſo finiſhed, this meruelous Parthian warre, wherin thole Romaine Empyre ſtode in haſarde, that beyng nothing inferioure

in fyghte, vnto our aduerſaries, we haue made theyr mighti king, of an extreme enemy, our faithful frēde: Who brought againſt vs, an innumerable multitude of people. Further, whiles I am your Prince, ye ſhal lyue frealy, wtout trouble of diſcencion. So yt, ye ſhal haue cauſe, to name my gouernaūce, rather a cōfederacy of good mē, thē an Empire. Neither is ther any occaſion, why any man ſhuld iudge me vnworthy to be Emperour, or impute it to anye faulte of fortune, that being but a Knight, I haue attained the Principall Soueraignite. For of what effecte, or value, I praye you, is yt the nobilyty it ſelfe, yf it be not cōioyned wt gētle, & meeke clemencie? And the gyftes of fortune, doo bewtifye many vnworthily: but ye vertue of the minde, bringeth vnto euery man, vſing the ſame, a peculier glorie. And although the nobilyte of byrth, & kinred, wt abundaūce of treaſure, is accompted the proper ſubſtaunce, of bleſſed men, yet are not ye ſame in them cōmēded, as frō them ſelfes iſſuing, but as deliuered of others. But gentle mekenes, & modeſt affability, as thei be to be wōdred at, ſo doo thei win much prayſe, vnto the hauer. For what profited you, the nobilytie of Cōmodus, & the ſucceſſiō of Anthonine, after his father? Certes, ſuch hauing obtained thēpire, as it were, their iuſt enheritaūce, are wonte to abuſe it, as their priuate patrimony. But thei, whiche receaue the ſame at your handes, being as it were, boū
               den of dutie vnto you, endeuour them ſelfes, to requit your manifolde benefites. Further ye natiue nobilitie of Princes, chāgeth oftē times into pryde, deſpyſīg al others, as their inferiors. But thei, which haue obtained ye ſame, through profe of modeſty, do defēd, & ordre it, as a thing gotē by labor, & haue al thoſe inreuerēce, which thei had before time. And I for my part, am fully determined, to do nothing, wtout your coūſel, & aucthority, & to vſe you, as ſole aſſiſtaūtes, & Coūſayllors in thaffaires of ye cōmē wealth. And ye ſhall al lyue, at your own pleaſures, wt the ſame libertye, (whiche beinge by yōge Empers, ſucceding their parētes, takē away frō you) both Marcus, & Pertinar, endeuored, &

entēded, to reſtore vnto you again. Both the which, aſpired to thēpire, frō priuate eſtate, & degree. For it is much better for a ma, to leue vnto his poſteritie, ye beginninge of his kynred, by him ſelfe adorned, then to defile wt ſenſuall maners, ye nobilitie vnto hym from his predeceſſors, deſcēded. After this Epiſtle was red, al thole Senate with one voice, decreed the honour of Auguſtus, vnto Macrinus. Neither was the Senate ſo ioyfull, wt the ſucceſſiō of Macrinus, as the cōmon people were glad, wt the death of Anthonine. For euery mā (as he excelled in aucthoritie, & riches, ſo much the more he reckened, yt he had auoided yt ſworde, whiche before hēge ouer his ſhulders. Then wer al bribed Promoters, Accuſers, & Seruaūtes, whiche had betraied their Maſters, & Lordꝭ, hāged vpō Gibbettes. And al thole Citie▪ yea, thole Romaine Empire, was clēſed, of al falſe Harlotes, Vacabūdes, & Pikethākes Of yt which, ſom were out of hād put to deathe, other ſome puniſhed wt banyſhemēt. And yf any of thē laye hid, for feare of good mē yt wer now at reſt, ye ſame ſhe wed ſom apparaūce of liberti, by the ſpace of one yere in yt which onely Macrinꝰ enioyed thēpire.The fault of Macrinus. For that was his only fault, yt he furthwt diſmiſſed not thole army, & hauīg ſēt euery mā to his own Cōtrey, him ſelf cānot immediatli to Rome, whiche was veri deſirous of him, (the people eueri day loking, & callīg for him.) But he remained at Antioche, in delicat lyfe, & vſed a flower pace in going, thē he was before accuſtomed, geuing anſwer rarely, & ſcarſely, vnto Ambaſſadors, & other perſons, yt cam vnto him, & the ſame wt ſo low a voice, yt none could well vnderſtād him. And in yt doynge, he endeuored, to folow Marcus, but to the reſydew of his condicions, he did in no point attaine. For he vſed daily volupteouſe diet, taking pleaſure in daū ſynge, and wraſtelyng, neglectinge the regimente of thempyre, & wearing Agglets of Golde, & a Gyrdle adorned with precious ſtones. The which ſumpteouſe apparaile, was nothīg gratefull vnto the Souldiors. For thei eſtemed it more congruente, to the Barbarous people, and women, then to theyr Prynce.

Wherefore, in beholding thieſe thinges, thei greatly reproued it, and deſpyſed the trade of hys lyfe, as a thing more wanton, then became a warlyke perſon. And they compared the wanton ſenſualitie of Macrinus, and the wyttie, and warlyke maners of Antonine. Further, they greatlye grudged, that they laye ſtyll in the Campe, farre frō their natiue Conutrey, oftentymes wanting their neceſſary foode, and were not diſcharged home, after peace made, & truce taken, whiles he, led hys lyfe in wanton pleaſures. Wherefore, hauynge throwen, as it were, the brydle out of their mouthes, thei ſpake euery daye agaynſte him, ſeeking ſome occaſion, were it euer ſo ſmall, to flea hym. And ſo it was by deſtenye appoynted, that Macrinus, after he had one onely yeare voluptuouſely Raigned, ſhould loſe, both hys Empyre & his lyfe: fortune hauing miniſtred, lyght, and ſymple occaſyon to the Souldiors, to commytte, that thei had deſyred.Phenicia Moeſa Emeſa. There was a certen Phenycien woman, named Moeſa, borne in a Citye of Phenicia called Emeſa, Suſter vnto Iulia the wyfe of Seuerus, & Moother of Anthonine. Who during the Raigne of Seuerus, and Anthonine, and the lyfe of Iulia, had dwelte in themperours Palayce. The ſame Moeſa, after the death of her Suſter, and murdre of Anthonyne, Macrinus had commaunded, to retourne into her owne Countrey, wt all her ſubſtance. And in ſothe, ſhe was wonderfull ryche of money, as one whyche of verye longe tyme, had bene brought vp within thimperiall Treaſourie. And being retorned home, ſhe there continually remayned, hauynge two daughters: of the whiche the eldeſt hyght Soemis, and the yōger was named Mammea.Soemis Mammea. Baſſianꝰ Alexianꝰ The eldre had a Sōne called Baſſianus, and the yōger had an other named Alexianus. Bothe theſe yonge mē, were brought vp vnder their Moothers, & Grandmother. Baſſian, was fourtene yeres olde, and Alexianus. x. Thei were prieſtes of the Sonne, whiche thenhabitauntes of that contrey, do chiefly worſhip: naming it in the Phenicien tōgue Heleogabalus.Heleogabalus. Vnto hym haue thei dedicated, a very

great Temple, decked, and adorned, with abundaūce of Golde, Syluer, and preciouſe ſtones. And not onely thenhabytantes them ſelues, do worſhyppe it, but all the noble menne alſo of the nexte nacions, and the Barbarouſe Kynges, doo euerye yeare offer vnto it, ſumptuouſe, and precyouſe gyftes. There is no ymage made after the Romayne, and Grecien facion, lyke vnto thys God. For it is a myghtye ſtone from the botom ſharpened, more, and more vnto the toppe, much lyke a Pynaple. The colour of the ſtone is blacke, whyche they reporte to be fallen oute of heauen. In the ſame ſtone, are ſene very many formes, and colours, which they affirme, to be the ſhape of the Sonne, made by no mans hande. Vnto this ymage was Baſſianus ſacred prieſt. And becauſe he was thelder, hym ſelfe moſte commonlye executed the office, apparelled gorgeouſlye after the Barbarous maner. For he ware a cote wouen with gold, hauing longe ſleues, and retchynge downe to hys heeles. Hys legges were couered from the hāmes to the toes, with lyke veſture of golde, and purple. And he ware on hys head, a garland of freſhe floures, ſhining with colours. He was then beſydes in the floure of hys youth, and the beautifulleſt of all yonge men, at that tyme lyuynge. And becauſe hys beautye, wyth the proportion of his bodye, the floure of hys age, and his gorgious decked apparel, wer ſo agreable togethers, men compared him, vnto the goodly Images of Dionyſe. Nowe whyles thys Baſſianus was celebrating the ſacrifice, and daunſyng after the Barbarous maner, men dyd attentiuely loke vpō him: but chiefly the Romayne Souldiours (either for that they knew him to be of the Imperiall bloude, or elles, becauſe hys floryſhynge beautye, allured euerye man, to caſte hys eyes towardes hym) for the Romayne hoſte laye then nyghe that Cytye: beyng ſente thither, for the defence of Phenicia, and ſhortly after departed from thence, as we ſhall hereafter declare. As they reſorted to the Churche daylye, throughe the pretence of religion, they gladlye behelde the yonge man. Amonges them

certayne banyſhed Romaynes, familier with Moeſa. Whome ſhe perceyuynge, to wonder at the beautie of thys Striplinge, reported vnto thē, that he was the Sonne of Antonine, although he were ſuppoſed anothers: doubtfull it is, whether ſhe ſpake the truth, or not. For ſhe ſaid, yt whiles ſhe abode in thimperial palaice, with her ſuſter, Antonine had to do with her .ii. doughters, being then yong & faire. This being once told vnto them, & by them told againe vnto the reſidue of their felowes, was furthwith publiſhed throughout thole Campe. It was beſides reported, that Meſa had whole heapes of money, which ſhe would gladlye diſtribute amonges the ſouldiors, if thei wold reſtore thempire, vnto her iſſue. They promiſed her therfore, (yf ſhe would come priuely by night into the Campe) to opē the gate, & receaue her wt her folkes in. For the which promiſe, the olde woman denied them nothyng that they dyd demaunde: being contente, rather to attempt, or take in hād any daūger, thē to lede a priuat, & abiect life. Wherfore ſhe departed ſecretly by night out of ye citie, wt her doughters & neuewes, & was conueyed, by the afore named fugitiues, into the Campe. And beinge into the ſame wythout interruption receaued,Baſſianus named Antonine & called vnto thempire. furthewyth all the Souldyours called the yong man Antonyne, apparelled hym wyth purple, and kepte hym with a ſure garde, amonges them for a whyle. Then they broughte all the vitayls, and neceſſaryes, that they coulde gette, in the nexte vylages, and fyeldes, wyth theyr wyues, and children, into the Campe. And ſo fortified them ſelues within the ſame, that yf nede required, they myght abyde the ſiege. When theſe thinges were reported vnto Macrinus, then ſoiornyng at Antioche, and a rumour was ſpred throughout the hoſt, that Antonynes ſon was foūde, & that the ſuſter of Iulia, gaue money vnto the Souldiors, when all that was ſpoken of, or thoughte to be poſſible, was holden for trew, euery man beganne to doubt▪ and reuolt from Macrinus: ſtyrred partly ther vnto, through the hate thei bare vnto him, & partelye through the pitie, whiche they had of the memorye of

Antonine: but eſpecially encenſed, wt deſire, & hope, of monei. So yt furth wt many fled vnto ye new Antonine. But Macrinus, cōtēpninge thole matter as childiſh, & vſing his accuſtomed alacritie of minde, abode him ſelf at home, & ſent one of his capytains furth, with as great a power, as ſeamed ſufficient, for the ſubduing of the rebelles.Iulianus. But when Iulianus (for that was the Capitains name) came thither, & began to lay ſiege to the walles, the Souldiours yt were within, ſhewed frō their Towers, & other high places, the yong man: criyng with loude voices, that he was ye Son of Antonine, & lifting vp great bagges of money, which are the only baite of treaſon. And they crediting, that he was Antonines ſon in deade, & becauſe they wolde haue it ſo apeare, eſteming alſo his face, & liniamentes of bodye to be verye lyke, ſtrake of Iulianus head, and ſent it vnto Macrinus. That eanded, the gates of the fortreſſe were opened, and them ſelfes receiued in. Thus was theyr power augmented, able, not onely to abide a ſiege, and repulſe an aſſaulte, but alſo, to pytche a fielde, a great number of fugitiues, dayly reſortynge vnto them. When Macrinus heard therof, he incontinently marched forwardes with thole armie, to aſſaulte the fortreſſe. And Antonine led his power futh againſt him, for that his Souldiours woulde not tarie the ſiege, beynge able ynough to fyght in playne battayle. Then bothe the armyes encountred togethers, in the confynes of Phenicia, and Syria.
            On the one ſide, Antonines Souldiours fought more corageouſly, through feare of greuous puniſhment,A cōflict. if thei were vāquiſhed. On thother ſide, tharmie of Macrinus, fought faintly, amonges whō many reuolted vnto Antonine. The which when Macrinus perceaued, fearinge, leſt beinge forſakinge of his all men, he ſhould be taken priſoner, & ſuffer great reproche, whiles his ſouldiors fought, he threw away hys Cote armour, & other imperial ornamēts, & being accōpanied with a few of his meaneſt ſouldiors, he fled awai. And hauing ſhauen his beard, leaſt he ſhould be knowē, & clad in a ſimple garmēt, & his head, & face, cōtinuallye

couered, he trauayled both night & day, preuenting wt celeritie, the fame of his fortune. For as yet hys men foughte wt great prowes, as though Macrinꝭ poſſeſſed ſtil thēpire. He ſo eſcaped, as we before haue declared. In the meane whyle, the Souldyours on eyther ſide fought valiauntlye. And of Macrinus ſyde, the men at armes of hys garde, named Pretorians, ſuſtayned alone the whole burnte.The pretorian men of armes. For they were talle, & mighty men, and choſen, and approued warriours. The reſte of the multytude, toke Antonynes parte. But when they, whiche a great whyle had foughten for Macrinus, coulde neyther ſee Macrinus hym ſelfe, nor the Imperiall Diademe, and ornamentes, beynge ignoraunte where he was become, whether he were ſlaine or elles fledde, they wyſte not what counſayle to take. And althoughe they purpoſed no longer to fight for hym, whyche appeared, or coulde be founde no where, yet feared they, to yeld them ſelues, vnto theyr enemyes power, as recreant, and vanquiſhed Subiectes. Then Antonyne, knowyng by the Captyues, that Macrinus was fledde, ſent incontinently, to aduertiſe them, that they in vayne foughte for a timorous and fugitiue Coward: promyſynge them on his othe, that he woulde forgyue, and forget, all that was by them done, and vſe theym from thenceforthe, for the garde of hys perſonne. The which, they all creditynge, ceaſſed furthwith from further fyghtynge. Then Antonyne without delaye, ſent certayne after Macrinus, who was longe before eſcaped. And beynge founde in Chalcedon a Cytye of Bythinia, verye ſore ſycke,Chalcedō
                and worne throughe hys contynuall trauayll, and hydden in a houſe of the Suburbes,The death of Macrinus. Pr
                     •
                  pontis. Bizantium. had hys head there ſmytten of. It is thoughte, that he mynded to go to Rome, affyenge hym ſelfe in the beneuolence of the people. But in ſaylynge towardes Europe, in the narowe Sea of Propontis, nygh vnto Bizantium, a contrarious wynde draue hym backe, as it were of purpoſe, towardes the place, where he ſhould fynyſhe hys lyfe. Thus happened it, that Macrinus eſcaped not, by fleynge awaye, the

handes of his enemies: receauing a vylanouſe death, and entending to late to goo to Rome, when he ſhold in the beginning haue done the ſame, and hauing at this his ende, bothe his counſell, and fortune, cleane againſt him. After this ſorte, was Macrinus ſlayne,Macrinꝰ and hys Sonne Diadumenus ſlayne. Anthonine full Emperoure. wyth hys Sonne Dyadumenus, whome a lytle before, he had aſſocyated vnto him, in thēpyre. Now after thole army had pronoūced Anthonine for Emperour, when him ſelfe had taken vppon hym the chiefe gouernaunce of thempyre, and all the oriental affayres were ſette in order, as euery one moſt neaded, by the diſcretion of his Graundmoother, and other his frendes, (for that hym ſelfe was verye yonge of age, and vnſkilfull in matters of greate importaunce) ſoiourning there but a ſhorte ſpace, he cauſed hys remouing to be proclaymed, accordynge to the wyll of Moeſa, which chiefly coueted, and made haſt, towardes Thimperyall Pallaice of Rome, wherewith, ſhe ſo longe before hadde bene acquaynted. When the Senate, and people of Rome, harde of thieſe thinges, euery man began to be ſorowfull, with the tidinges. But thei muſte of force, and neceſſytye, then alow it, ſeynge he was choſen, by the men of war. And accuſynge within them ſelues, the necligent mynde, and ſenſuall maners, of Macrinus, thei imputed thole defaulte of his ouerthrowe, vnto hys owne ſlouthe, and to none other man, as cauſer thereof. Anthonine beinge departed out of Siria, wintred his army at Nicomedia,Nicomedia. Thinſolencye of Antonyne. the ſeaſon of the yeare ſo conſtraining him. Then he began to waxe inſolent aboue meaſure, celebratynge dailye the honour of his Countrey God, with ſuperfluouſe, and vndecent pompe, & daunſes. Hym ſelfe was cladde in wanton, and luxuriouſe apparel, wouen wyth Purple, and Golde, decked with Ouches, and Braceletes, Chaynes, and Kynges of Golde, & ware a Crowne like vnto a Chaplet, adorned with Golde, and preciouſe ſtones. The forme of hys habyte, was, as it were, a meane, betwene the Phenicien, and Median Apparayle. He deſpyſed the Romaine garmētes, bicauſe thei were made of wolle,

the which was, as he ſaid, vile, & of no eſtimaciō. Neither wold he any webbe, but ſuche as were of Sirian ſilke, accuſtomīg to cō abrode, wt ye ſown of fleutes, & Tabors, as though he ſhuld celebrate, ye feaſt of Bacchus. Whē Mocſa beheld theſe his doſſolute maners, ſhe begā wt hūblepeticiō to perſuade him, to were ye Romayne apparaile, leaſt yt yf he entred into the Citie, & Senate houſe, in yt ſtraūge & Barbarouſe veſture, he ſhould offēde the eyes of the beholders. Which being vnaccuſtomed vnto ſuche wātonnes, ceputed it more ſeamely for womē, then mē. But he, cōtempning the olde womans wordes, entending to truſt no mā, (for he retained none about his perſon, but ſuche as were agreable vnto his owne ſenſualitye) and fullye mynding, to vſe the ſame apparayle continually, determined being abſent, to make a profe, with what countenaunce, & after what ſorte, the Senate, and people of Rome, would accepte his vſage. Wherefore, he ſente to Rome, his owne picture painted lyuely in a table, with the linyamentes, & facyon of apparell, wherein he was wōt to ſacrifice, vnto his God. And therwt the figure of his God alſo, vnto whō he was ſacred: commaūding them yt caried it, to ſet it in ye middes of the Senate houſe, in ſome high place, ouer ye head of victory: yt when ye Senatours were aſſembled, thei ſhuld offre encenſe & wyne. He cōmaūded alſo, yt all ye Romayne Magiſtrates, whiche vſed to execute publique Sacrifices ſhuld before all their Goddes, whō thei vſed to ſacrifice vnto, name, & honor, his God Heleogabalus. Whereby it happened, that when he entred in to the Citie, ye Romaynes beheld no newe, or ſtraūge ſyghte, for that thei daily before had ſeen his picture Thē, after he had diſtributed amōges ye people boūtifull giftes, as al new Emperours are accuſtomed, he ſet furth many ſūptuouſe ſhewes, & plaies. And builded a large, and gorgeouſe Tēple, for his God, & wtin the ſame, many aulters: vpon the whiche, euery morning,Vaine ſacrifyces. he ſacrificed a .C. Bulles, & a greate number of ſheepe. And heaping vpon the aulters, all kindes of odoriferouſe ſpices, he vſed to powre down, many Cuppes, ful of ye beſt olde wines, yt could be gotē. So yt they

ran down, ſūdry ſtreames of wine, mīgled wt bloud. About ye aulters, he cauſed many to daūſe, wt ye ſowne of diuerſe inſtrumētes, amōges whō ſūdry Pheniciē womē plaid vpō Ciballes, & Tibrelles. Al ye Senators, & knightes behelde thē, ſtādīg in a roūd circle, like vnto a Theatre Thinwardes of beaſtes, & ſwete ſmellīg perfumes, wer thē caried vpō mēs heades, in diſhes of Gold; not by any baſe or priuate perſō, but by prīcipal Magiſtrates, Capitanes of ye war, & Rulers of ye Prouīces: who wer al clad in lōg garmētes, wouē through out wt purple, & ware linne ſockes vpō their feate, as ye Prophetes accuſtomed to do in thoſe regiōs. And he thought, yt he did very honorably entreate thoſe: whō he made partakers of this ſolēpnity. But albeit, he celebrated daily wt daūſes, & melody, thoſe ſacrifices, yet did he put to death, many noble, & rich mē: being accuſed vnto him, yt thei wer nothīg pleaſed, wt thoſe vaine Ceremonies, and his volupteouſe ſenſuality, but vſed dayly to ſpeake yl of it. He toke to wife, a noble womā of Rome, whō he named Auguſta. But ſhortlye after forſoke her, and depriuīg her, of all Imperial honour, he cōmaūded her, to lede a priuate, and ſymple lyfe. Then fayning him ſelfe to be rauiſhed wt loue, (that he might ſeme to do ſom māli act) he maried by force, a veſtal virgin, whō ye lawes had boūd to be cōtinually chaſte. And cōforted wt letters, ye Senate,Veſtale Virgyns beyng ſorowful for ye facinorouſe act) ſayīg, yt it was an humaine ſyn, bicauſe he was rauiſhed wt her loue. He affirmed, yt it was decēt for a prieſt, to Maria Nunne. For ſo ſhuld ye mariage be more fortunate. Neuertheleſſe, ſhortli after, he reiected her alſo, & maried ye third wife which was thought to be deſcēded of ye bloode of Cō
               modꝰ. Neither did he only delude mortal matrimoni, but he ſought alſo a wife for his god. For he cauſed to be brought into his Chāber, ye image of Pallas,The Image of Pallas. whō ye Romains do gretely worſhip: being ſecretly hiddē, & permitted to be ſene of no mā. The ſame goddeſſe, I ſay, being frō yt time, it was brought fourth of Troy, vnto that day vntouched (ſauing when ye Tēple was burned) did he remoue out of her Seate, & ioyned her in mariage vnto his God, wtin thimper all Pallaice.

But ſoone after, he altered that mynde, ſayenge, that it was vnpleaſaunt for his God, to haue a warlyke, & armed wyfe. And therefore he cōmaunded the ymage of Vrania,Vrania. to be brought vnto hym. The whych was chifly worſhipped of ye Carthaginenſes, & al Africque ſuppoſed to be erected by Dido the Pheniciā, when ſhe builded Carthage,Carthage. Aſtroarche. wtin the cōpace of an oxe hide. This Goddeſſe, the Affricans name Vrania. And the Pheniciens cal her Aſtroarchen, affirming her to be the Moone. Wherefore, he ſaid, that the Mariage of the Sonne & the Moone was agreable. Her Image therfore, he cauſed to be broughte fourthe, and all the Golde, and Siluer, which was in her Temple, he cō
               maunded to be giuen to his God for a dower. And after it was brought, and ſet vp by the Image of Heleogabalus, he cōmaunded feaſtfull daies, wyth banketing, and ſolempnitie, to be celebrated openly, & pryuely, throughout thole Cytie, and Italy, for the Mariage of the Goddes. He builded alſo in the Suburbes, a mighty, & ſumptuouſe Temple: into yt whyche, in thende of Sommer, he caried his God. Thynking that he muche pleaſed the people, with hys Enterludes & Comedies, with his open bākets, & nyght watches. He cōueied his God, as I ſaid, out of the City, in to ye Suburbes, in a Chariot adorned wt Golde, & preciouſe ſtones, drawne by .vi. goodlye white horſes, of great height, notably decked with Golde, and varietye of harneſſe. No man rode in that Chariot, but the people ran on euery ſyde of it, gaſinge vpon the God. And Anthonine hym ſelfe rode before the Chariot, wt his face backeward towardes the horſe tayle,The mere folye, of Anto
                  
                     •
                  yne. & wyth beholding ye image, continually as he rode, he ſo finiſhed this his fonde iorney. And leaſt he ſhould fall, or ſlyde vnwares, in that his vnwyſe ridinge, he cauſed the ſtretes to be thicke couered with ſāde, & his Gard helde hym on eyther ſyde, that he might wt more ſafty ſit on his horſe. The people rā about him wt Torches & Creſſettes, ſtrowinge of floures, & Garlādes, in his waie. There accōpanied beſides this Pōpe, ye images of al ye Goddes, & al other preciouſe ornamētes which

wer in ye Tēples, the tokēs of honor, & ye beautifulleſt houſehold ſtuffe of Thempire, wt the men at armes, & al the Romayn hoſt. When he had brought theſe thinges into the Temple, layed the ſame there, and finiſhed hys ſacrifice, he went vp into the hyghe towers, whych wer of purpoſe there erected, & out of them, he threwe manye thynges amonges the people. That is to weete, cuppes of Syluer and Golde, garmentes of ryche worke, and all ſortes of lynnen clothe. He diſtributed amonges them alſo, all kynde of tame beaſtes, except Swyne, from the whyche (accordynge to the Phenicien vſage) him ſelfe abſtained. In the catching wherof, many periſhed: ſome beynge thruſt to deathe in the preſſe, other ſome ſlayne wyth the Souldyours weapons. So that the ſame feſtiuall Pompe, was turned into a dolorous calamitie of manye men. Hym ſelfe beſydes, was manye tymes ſene cartynge, and leapynge. For he woulde not permitte hys owne flagitious exerciſes to be hydden: goynge often tymes abrode, wyth hys eyes painted, his browes made red, and hys face (beynge naturallye beautyful) deformed, with vndecent colours. The whiche when Meſa perceaued, ſuſpectynge the indignation of the Souldiours, and fearynge, that yf oughte but good came vnto hym, her ſelfe ſhoulde be conſtrayned, to retourne to her priuate lyfe, ſhe perſuaded the fooliſh, and raſhe yonge man, to adopte into the Empire with him hys kynſman, and her neuewe, beynge borne of her doughter Mammea. And that ſhe myght the better pleaſe hym, ſhe ſayde, that he, whiche executed only the office of a Prieſt, & celebrated the ſacrifices of the Goddes, ought to haue ſome Subſtitute, which ſhould gouerne the Empire, out of care, and trouble. Nowe was ther no ſtraunger, nor forreyne perſon, ſo meete to be elected thereunto, as hys owne kynſman. The ſame was Alerianus, whiche then was called Alexander, by hys fathers name, chaunged into the name of the Macedonien kynge. For the ſame kynge, being of great renowne, dyd Anthonine the Sonne of Seuerus, chiefelye eruerence. Whyche Anthonine, theyr

Graundemother perſuaded the Souldyours, to be the Father of them both: blaſyng therby, the Fornication of her doughters, that ſhe might therby cauſe the Souldyours the better to loue them. Wherfore Alexander was declared Emperoure, and created Conſull wyth Antonyne:Alexander made Emperoure. the Senate determinyng wyth ſkorne, and laughter, that whyche Antonyne required. That is to ſaye, hym ſelfe, beynge but fourtene yeares olde, to be the Father, and Alexander, whyche was vneth entred the twelueth yere of hys age, to be the Sonne. After Alexander was pronounced Emperoure, Antonyne endeuoured to corrupte him, wyth hys ſenſuall maners, that in ſyngynge, and daunſynge, beynge partaker of hys Prieſthode, he ſhoulde weare the ſame apparell, and vſe the ſame facions with hym. But Mammea the Moother of Alexander, preſerued hym from all diſhoneſtye, and fylthye lyfe, bryngyng him vp priuely vnder diuers learned men, in litterature, modeſtie, and good maners: accuſtomynge hym vnto wraſtelynge, and other decent exerciſes, and inſtructynge hym, in the Greeke, and Latyn tongue. Wherat Antonine greatly grudged, repentinge him of his adoption, and participation of the Empyre. And therfore, he expelled out of his Palaice, all thoſe Inſtructours, of whome ſome the excellenteſt, he put to death, and thother he afflicted with exile, allegyng agaynſt them, fooliſhe, and vaine cauſes, that they corrup
                  •
               ed hys Sonne, not ſuffering hym to vſe lybertye, and daunſynge, but inſtructinge hym, in modeſt, and comelye exerciſes. And he fell into ſuche extreme folye, that he diſtributed the chiefeſt dignityes, in the common wealthe, amonges players of Commodies, and Enterludes. For he made Liuetenaunt generall of the Armye, a certayne daunſer, whiche in hys youth, had bene a common Player vpon Scaffoulds. Another of the ſame rabel, he appoynted gouernour of the youth, and another, chiefe of the order of knyghthode. Vnto Carters, Ruffyans, and diſordered Brotheis, he commytted the chiefe charge of the Empyre. And vnto hys Bonde men

and Lybertynes, as euerye of them exceaded another in abhomination, he delyuered the rule of the Prouynces. Thereby, all thynges, whyche before were honeſt, were tourned into vyle beaſtlyneſſe: whyche cauſed that all men, and chiefely the Romayne Souldyours, deteſted hym, as one whych faſhyoned hys countenaunce, more wantonlye, then became anye honeſte woman. For he was decked wyth chaynes, and ouches of golde, and apparelled wyth laſciuious clothynge, vncomlye for a man, and daunſed daylye in the ſyght of them all. Wherfore they bare more beneuolent myndes vnto Alexander, and had better confidēce in that Child, for that he was modeſtly brought vp. And they all ſaued hym, from ye treaſon, and myſchiefe of Antonyne. Neyther woulde hys Moother Mammea, ſuffer hym to touche any meate, or drynke, that was ſent from the other. The chylde alſo vſed not any of the Imperiall, or common Cookes, and Paſtelers, but ſuche as hys Moother had choſen for hym, whyche were both truſty and honeſt. She gaue hym money alſo to diſtribute priuelye amonges the Souldyours, whyche chiefelye couete the ſame, that he myghte by it, as by a ſure lynked Chayne, drawe them vnto hym.
            When Antonyne perceaued that, he inuented all the miſchiefe he coulde agaynſte Alexander, and hys Moother. Neuertheleſſe, theyr common Graundmoother Moeſa avoyded all ſuche crueltye. For ſhe was a woman of a ſtoute corage, and had alſo of longe tyme ſoiourned in the Imperiall Palayce, wyth her Suſter Seuerus wyfe, whereby ſhe was throughlye ſkylfull of that whiche Antonyne entended: who was naturallye full of talke, and wythoute diſcretion, accuſtomed to blaſe abrode, what ſoeuer he mynded, or woulde haue done. And then ſeynge hys enterpriſe not to proceade, as he wyſhed, he determined to depriue the Chylde all of Imperyal honours. And therefore, commaunded that he ſhoulde be no longer ſaluted as Emperoure, neyther woulde he ſuffer hym to go abrode amonges the people.
            
               But the Souldiours deſyred hym wonderfullye, diſdaynyng that the Empire ſhould be taken from him. Then Anthonine cauſed a rumoure to be blowen abroade, that Alexander was deade, to the entente he myght thereby perceaue, after what ſorte, the Souldyours woulde take the ſame. But they ſeynge the chylde not appeare abrode, and hauynge theyr hartes perſed wyth thoſe ſorowefull tidynges, waxed wonderfull wrothe, withelde from Antonine hys accuſtomed garde, and hauynge ſhutte the gates of theyr Campe, ſayde, they woulde perforce ſee Alexander, within theyr Temple. Antonyne beyng thereby ſmitten wyth feare, rode vnto the Campe in the Imperiall Chariot, beynge adorned wyth precious ſtones, wherin alſo ſate Alexander. Whome the Souldiors, (after they were bothe entred into the Campe, and brought into the Temple therof) ſaluted aboue meaſure: folowynge hym wyth ioyfull acclamations, and vtterlye as I myghte ſaye, contempnyng Antonyne. He beynge therwyth meruaylouſlye chaufed, after he had lyen one nyght within the Temple, and noted the Souldyours, whyche had ſhouted vnto Alexander, commaunded them all to be put to deathe, as authors of ſedicion, and rebellion. They thereat diſdaynynge, and abhorrynge before tyme Antonyne, whyſhyng alſo to diſpatche out of life, that monſtrous Emperour and to helpe theyr Companyons, and perceauyng the tyme to be apte for the deede, furthwyth ſlewe Antonyne hym ſelfe,Antonyne & hys Mootehr ſlayne. and hys Moother Soemis, who was by chaunce at that tyme ther preſent, and with them, all theyr Seruantes, and miniſters of vice, that came wyth them into the Campe. Then they delyuered vnto the common people, the bodyes of Antonyne, and Soemis, to be drawen wyth ſhame, throughoute the ſtretes of the Cyty. The people dyd ſo, and then threw them into the common ſynkes, that they myght be caryed into Tyber. And the Souldyours, hauynge ſaluted Alexander for Emperoure, broughte hym into Themperiall palaice, beyng verye yonge, and as yet obediēt vnto the cōmaūdemetes of his grandmother.
            Finis.
         
         
            
            ¶The Argumente of the ſyxte Booke of Herodian.
            IN the ſyxte Booke, the Authour treateth of the bountie and clemencie, of Alexander, & the auarice, of his Moother Mammea. Of the warre, made by Artaxerxes Kynge of Perſia, and the occaſyon therof. Againſt whome Alexander apparayled a great army, and deuided it into thre partes. Then enſuen, the cauſes wherefore, Alexander loſte the loue of the Souldiours. Who in the beginning of the warre, againſt the Germaines, chaſe Maximinus Emperour, whiche procured Alexander, with his Moother, and all hys frendes to be ſlayne.
         
         
            ¶The ſyxte booke of the Hyſtorie of Herodian.
            
               IT is manifeſtly, in the former booke, declared, what ende of lyfe, had Anthonine theldre. After whome, Alexandre alone poſſeſſed the name, and regimente, of Thempire. But thadminiſtracion of all affayres, and gouernaunce of the weale publique, appertained to the women:Alexāder & the Empyre, ruled by women. who endeuored to reduce all thinges, to their priſtina
                  •
               e ſeemelynes, and modeſty. For fyrſt of all, thei elected .xvi. of the ordre of Senators, excelling in grauity of maners, and cōtinencie of life, to be aſſiſtaūte & of preuy vnto Coūſaill Thēperor, wt oute the conſent of whiche Counſaylours, there was nothing, eyther in word, or writīg, cōfyrmed. Where by this forme of prīcipality becam grateful vnto ye mē
               
at Armes, and Senate of Rome, for that it was chaū
               ged, from moſte peſtiferous Tiranny, vnto the ouerſyght, and rule of noble men. Then were the ymages of the Goddes, whiche Anthonine in hys lyfe tyme, had remoued oute of theyr Seates, reſtored agayne into theyr owne Temples, and places. Then were all thoſe, whiche Anthonine had raſhelye, for their 
                  •
               uyll maners, aduaunced vnto highe dignities, depoſed, & ſet to their accuſtomed lyfe, and occupacion. Then all Ciuyle, and foreyne matters of iudgemente, were apoynted to thordring of wyſe, and profoūde learned men, in the lawes: And all warlyke affayres, cōmitted to the rule, of valiaunte Capitaines, and experte men of warre. When Thempyre had bene after thys ſorte a greate ſpace gouerned, Moeſa whiche was 
                  •
               ery aged,The deth of Mo
                     •
                  ſa ended her life. Vnto whome, all imperial honours were appoynted, and, as the Romayne vſage is,The wiſedome of Māmea. ſhe was canonized wyth immortalitye. After her death, Mammea, perceauing her ſelfe to be leafte alone vnto her Sone, endeuoured to continewe the ſame forme of gouernement, which was begon. And ſeynge that the yonge man, enioyed nowe alone thole dominion, ſhe feared leſte his yonge age, ſhoulde walowe in extreme liberty, and thereby fall into ſome of his kinſmans vices. Wherefore ſhe awayted wel his perſon, and all places of the Coorte: not ſufferīg him, to be approched vnto, of any yonge man, whoſe lyfe, and maners, were ſuſpected, leaſt that his good dyſpoſiciō, ſhould be corrupted, through Paraſytes, and Flatterers, which wold prouoke his minde, & appeti
               
                  •
               e, then floriſhing, into wāton & naughty affections. She perſwaded him, to exercyſe hys body, in decente recreacions, the better parte of the daye, and that very often, leſte there ſhould be anye ſpace lefte, for yll thoughtes, whyles he myghte be better occupyed, in apoynting thinges neceſſary to be done. There was naturally beſides in Alexander a gētle, and meeke diſpoſition, bent vnto affabilytie. The which thyng, his age folowing, made apparaunte. For .xiiii. yeares, he gouerned Thempyre, withoute effuſion of bloode, not as muche as one man, in that time, throughe his

procurement, beyng put to death. And although many, through greuouſe offences, iuſtly deſerued death, yet dyd he euermore abſteyne from the execution of them. The whiche thing, a man ſhall not eaſely finde, in any Emperour, eſpecially in thoſe whiche ſucceaded Marcus. No man can remember, that (whyles he raigned,) any was without iudgement put to deathe. He accuſtomed to reprehende his Moother, & blame her greatly, for that ſhe was ſomewhat coueytouſe of money, and ſeemed ouer gready in heaping of Treaſures. For taking vpon her, that ſhe gathered money togythers, to enryche Alexander withall, yt he myght therby, more abundauntlye beſtowe gyftes vpon the Souldiours, ſhe fylled her owne Coffers, wyth the ſame. The whiche her couetyſe, blemyſſhed greately Themperours honour, that maugre hys mynde, the couetouſe woman, ſhould catche, and pyll, by couine, and fraude, the enheritaunce of many mē. She gaue to her Sonne in Mariage, a Mayden deſcended of noble bloode, whome (notwithſtanding that her huſbād entyerlye loued her) her ſelfe ſhortlye after expelled Thimperiall pallaice, wyth greate obloquy, & ſhame. And coueyting her ſelfe to be onely named Auguſta, ſhe enuyed for that cauſe the mayden, and became ſo outragiouſe agaynſte her, that the maydens father, (albeit he were in greate aucthoriſe with Alexander) beyng impacient of the iniury, done vnto his doughter, and hym, by Mammea, fledde into the Campe for his owne ſafegarde, ſaying, although he were muche bounde vnto Alexander, for hys manifolde benefites, yet he muſte of force, accuſe Mammea, for the greate reproche ſhe had done vnto him. But ſhe being ther wt chaufed, cōmaūded him to be ſlaine, & yt yōge woman his doughter, beīg thruſt out of ye imperiall Pallaice, ſhe exiled into Aphrique. Neuertheles this was done agaīſt ye wil of Alexāder. For his Moother ruled hym aboue reaſō,Alexāder to muche obedient vnto hys Moother & had hī alway obediēt vnto her cōmaūdemētes: ſo yt this one thing may be reproued in Alexā
               der, yt he vſed more humilitie, & reuerence, towardes his Mother, then becam him, in obeyeng, & accōplyſſhing her commaundement, againſt hys owne wyll.

Now whē he had after this ſorte, by the ſpace of thirtene yeres, raigned, the which tyme, he alone enioyed the Empyre, in tranquillity, without diſturbaunce, or complainte, of any perſon, Sodeinly loo, there cam letters out of Siria,Siria. Meſapotamye. & Meſopotamia, wherby he was certified, that Artaxerxes King of Perſia had ouercomen the Parthianes & Artabanus theyr king, which firſte ſurnamed hī ſelf great,Artaxerxes. & waxe twoo Crownes, and not onely bereft him thoriētal dominion, but alſo his lyfe, ſubdued the Barbarouſe people his neighbours, and made them his tributaries. That he helde not him ſelfe within the Riuer of Tigris,Tygris. but had recouered the bāckes therof, & was entred wtin the boū
               des of Romaine Empire, inuading, & pyllīg Meſapotamia, & menacing war vnto Siria. That he chalengid all the Scite of Lande called Aſia,Aſia. Europe. The Aegian Sea. Propōtis ſituate ouer againſt Europe, whiche was enuironed wt the Aegiā Sea, & the ſtraites of Propontis, as the auncient poſſeſſion of the Perſyans. Bicauſe that frō the tyme of Cirus,Cyrus. Medes. who firſt of all tranſlated the kingdome, from the Medes, to the Perſians, vntil the raigne of Darius their laſt Kyng, (whom Alexander depriued of his dominion) all thorientall coſtes, as far as Ionia,Ionia. Caria. and Caria, were gouerned by the Perſian Rulers, & Capitaines. Wherfore, he affirmed, yt it was his duty, to ſee vnto the reſtauraciō of ye aunciēt & whole Empire vnto the Perſiās again. Whē Alexāder heard hereof, beīg greatly diſquieted wt thoſe ſodeine tidīges of battayle, (for he had from his infancie ben traded in quiet tranquility, & noriſhed wt the Citie pleaſures) and hauing firſt cōſulted wt his frendes, & Counſailours, he cōcluded, to ſēde Ambaſſadours into thoriēt, with his letters, which he ſuppoſed wold repreſſe the Barbariens hope, and pacify their tumulteouſe inuaſiōs. The letters were of this ſorte directed.
            That it behoued Artaxerxes, to holde him ſelfe content wt his owne Boundes, and Limites of dominiō. Not to ſturre, or cauſe anye more dyſcencion, neyther beyng puffed wyth vayne confydence, and raſhe hope, attempte anye greate warre.
            
               That euerye man, ought to quiet hym ſelfe wyth hys owne ſubſtaunce, and that he ſhoulde not haue ſuche ſuceſſe in hys fyghte, agaynſte the Romaynes, as he had obtayned agaynſt hys neyghbours. He dyd putte hym in remembraunce beſydes, of the victories, whiche Auguſtus, Traianus, Lucius, and Seuerus, had gotten agaynſt them. Wyth theſe letters, Alexander ſuppoſed to reduce the Barbarous kynge vnto peace, and concorde, throughe feare of the menaces in them conteyned. But he vtterlye contempnynge the ſame, determined (all talke ſet a parte) to trye the matter, wyth weapon, and fyghte. And then wyth more crueltye, foraged, and ſpoyled, the whole countrey of Meſopotamia, and caryed awaye the Inhabitauntes as a bootye, and aſſaulted all ſuche Fortreſſes of the Romaynes, as were buylded vpon the Riuage, to defende the boundes of the Romayne Empire.
            And being a man naturally glorious, & haulty of ſtomacke, he thought to ſubdew the whole worlde, enflamed therevnto wyth the proſperous ſuceſſe of all hys affayres, euer, without loking for, obtayned. Neyther were the thynges of ſmale importaunce, whych kyndeled hys mynde, to the coueitynge of a greater Realme, then hys owne: takynge fyrſte vpon hym, to inuade the Parthians, wyth warre, and to recouer the Parthian kyngdome.
            For many yeres, after the death of Darius,Darius. Alexander. from whome, Alexander the Macedonian, bereft hys kyngdome, the Macedonians them ſelues, and thoſe which ſucceded Alexander, gouerned ye regiōs of the Orient, and Aſia, diſtributed in ſundry partes amongs them. But when the Macedonian power was greatlye worne, through ſundrye battayles, growen by diſcention amonges them ſelues, Arſaces the Parthian,Arſaces. is cyted by Hyſtories, to be the fyrſte Perſuader of the Parthians, to reuolte from the Macedonians. And he, by the conſente of the Parthians, and other Barbarous people hys neyghbours, wearynge on hys head the Diademe, obtayned the kyngdome, and lefte the ſame vnto hys poſteritye, euen vnto the time

of the kynge Artabanus, whome Artaxerxes hauing ſlayne, reſtored (as it is ſayde) the kyngdome vnto the Perſians, and broughte in ſubiection, the nygh Barbarous nacions, he dyd nowe prouoke, the Romayne power to armes.
            When relacion was made hereof to Alexander at Rome, he determined no longer to 
                  •
               eare the inſolencye of the Barbarous kynge, eſpecyallye ſeynge hys Liuetenauntes, and Captaynes called hym thyther. Finallye, wyth greate grudgynge, and ſore agaynſte hys wyll, he prepared hys expedition into the Orient. And therfore, generall muſters were made thoroughout Italye, and the Prouinces, of all ſuche as ſeamed apte, eyther in ſtature of bodye, or ſtrengthe of yeares. In the ſame muſters, were many muties, and tumultes, amonges the Romayne Subiectes, reaſonynge, what power myghte be equall, vnto ſo great a multitude of Barbarous people. And Alexander commaunded all the Pretorian Souldyours, and other men at armes, whyche were a Rome, to repayre into the fieldes: where hym ſelfe veynge aſcended into the Tribunal ſeate, ſpake theſe wordes vnto theym.
            I woulde wyſhe (my felowes in armes) to make ſuche an oration vnto you,The oration of Alexāder as ſhould (according to the accuſtomed wont) vnto me the ſpeaker, get loue, and honour, and vnto you the hearers, brynge ioye, and gladnes. For ſeyng we haue now many yeres lyued, in peaceable tranquillitie, yf ye ſhal heare of any new thing lately happened, peraduenture ye wylbe a feard of the ſame, as of a thynge vnluckelye chaunſed. Neuertheles, it becommeth valiaunt & moderat men, in deede to wiſhe for the beſte: but yet to ſuffer, & take in worth, what ſoeuer happeneth. For as the thynge we do with pleaſure is ſwete, and delectable, ſo is that we do with vertue, cōmendable, & glorious. And as he which firſt geueth occaſion of warre, ſeameth iniurious, euen ſo he which withſtandeth wronge, is more confident in his cōſcience, & conceaueth a better hope of his quarell, for that it is ryghteous. Artaxerxes a

man of Perſia, hauynge ſlayne hys Soueraygne lorde Artabanus, and tranſlated hys kyngdome vnto the Perſians, doth nowe enterpryſe, in contempnynge the Romayne Maieſtie, to prouoke vs to battayle: inuadynge at thys preſent, and waſtynge oure Prouinces. I endeuoured at the fyrſte to reduce hym by gentle letters, from hys vnſaeiable gredines, and exhorted hym, not to coueyte that was not his owne. But he, being puffed vp with Barbarous inſolencye, wyl not holde hym ſelfe within hys owne boūdes, but chalengeth vs vnto Battayle. Let vs not therfore tri
               
                  •
               le in the thyng, or deferre the matter. But you which are bere preſent, of the auncient ſorte of Souldyours, cauſe hym to knowe the manifolde victories, whyche you haue obteined, vnder the gouerment, and leading of Seuerus, and my father Antonine. And you whiche are yong men, ſeke and coueyte (I ſay) this praiſe, and glorye: whereby all men maye perceaue, that you knowe, not onely, howe to lyue in peace quietlye, and obſerue it reuerentlye, but alſo when nede requireth, to fyght valiauntly. Touchynge the Barbarous people, as it is theyr vſage, to purſue vehementlye, all ſuche as at the fyrſt flee, and recule, euen ſo doo themſelues tourne theyr backes, vnto thoſe whyche manfully perſiſt in the fyght For they loke not for anye victorye in fyghtynge a playne Batayle, but vſynge Inuaſyons, and Rodes, accompte them ſelues Conquerours, of all they can gette by ſtelth and robberye. But we, on the contrarye parte, haue all thynges decked meete for the warres, wherewyth, we haue learned to ouerthrowe, and vanquyſhe them.
            When Alexander hadde ſpoken theiſe wordes, the men of armes receaued hym ioyfullye ſhoutyng, and ſhewynge theym ſelues readye, to goe wyth good wylles into the warre. Then he diſtributed a greate Summe of money amonges theym, and commaūnded them, to prepare them ſelues to the iourney. Anone after, he made the lyke Oration in the Senate houſe, and appoynted the daye of hys departure.

The whiche beyng comme,The departure of Alexā
                  der frō Rome. after he had (acccordinge to the auncient vſage) fyniſhed hys ſacrſfice, he departed (the Senate, and all the Romaine people conueyyng hym out of Rome: vpon the which he loked backe wyth wepynge eyes. Neyther was there anye of the common people, whyche watered not hys plantes, in the beholdynge of hys departure. For all the multitude was deſyrous of hym, becauſe he was broughte vp amonges them, and had gouerned thempire, verye manye yeares, wyth muche modeſtye.
            When he was departed, he vſed dilygent ſpede in his iourney, viſited the Illirian people, & men of war, encreaſed hys power euery where, & wēt vnto Antioche. In that Citie, he prepared all ſuche neceſſaries, as were expedient for the warres. And cauſed hys Souldiours to exerciſe them ſelues in feates of armes. Him ſelfe prouyded wyth muche dilygence, weapons and harneſſe for the ſame.
            It ſemed then good vnto hym, to proue by another Ambaſſade, whether the Perſian Kynge, woulde condiſcende vnto peace, and vnitie. For beynge hym ſelfe preſente, he lytle doubted, eyther to perſuade Artaxerxes, as he woulde, or at leaſt wyſe put hym in feare, wyth menaces. But the barbarous kynge, diſmiſſed the Romayne Oratours home agayne, wythout any thynge concluded. And in theyr companye ſent fourtye of the goodlyeſt men of ſtature,The Ambaſſade of Artaxerxes. in hys armye: who were gorgiouſlye apparelled, in ryche Robes adourned wyth gold, rode vpon great Courſers, and caryed great Bowes in theyr handes, thynkynge to abaſhe the Romaynes wyth the ſyghte of theyr talnes, and ſumptuous rayment. The effect of theyr Ambaſſade was this.
            The great Kyng Artaxerxes, commaunded the Romaynes wt theyr Emperour, to depart out of Syria, & al that part of Aſia, which is ſituate ouer againſt Europe:Ionia. Caria. The Aegeanſea. Pontus. & ſuffer the Perſians, to raygne, & haue dominion, as farre as Ionia, and Caria, and all ſuche lande as the Aegean Sea, and Pontus doo enuiron. When theſe fourtye Ambaſſadours had declared their

meſſage, Alexander commaunded them, to be apprehended, toke from them al their ſumpteous apparail, and ſēt them into Phrigia, where he alotted vnto thē certayne Vilages, and fieldes to tyll, and enhabit, beynge ſatyſfied wyth this punyſhmente of exyle, from their natiue Countrey. For he rekened it very cruel, and nothing agreable to māhood, to put thē to death, for thexecutynge theyr Maiſters commaundemente, not beyng taken in battayle.
            When thieſe thynges were thus ended, and whiles Alexander was buſyed in preparacion of Bridges to paſſe ouer the Ryuers, and to leade the Romayne Armye into the confynes of the Barbariens, there reuolted, and fledde frō hym, many Egiptian Souldiours, and in Siria alſo, dyuerſe Commocions, beganne to kyndle agaynſte hys gouernemente. But the ſame were furthewyth appeaſed, and the Rebelles taken, and put to deathe. Then Alexander ſente certayne armyes of Souldiours, into the nigh Regiones, that thereby the inuaſions of ye Barbarouſe people, myghte more eaſylye be reſtrayned. All whiche thynges, beynge thus ſette in ordre, and as greate an armye leuyed, as he thoughte, would be equall of power, vnto hys enemyes Hoſte,The Armye of Alexander deuided into three partes. Armenia. Medians Tigris. Euphrates. he deuyded them, by hys friendes counſayle, into three ſundrye armyes. Of the whiche, one he commaunded to marche towardes the Northe, throughe Armenia, whyche was reputed frendely vnto the Romaynes, and to inuade the borders of the Medians. An other army he ſent towardes the North alſo, commaūding them, to paſſe by thoſe fyeldes of the Barbariens, where Tigris, and Euphrates, are receyued, into greate Maryſhes, & Pooles, and thereby it is vncertayne where they ende. The thyrde parte, hym ſelfe promyſed to lede betwene bothe the other Armyes, agaynſte the Barbaryens. Thynkynge by that meanes to oppreſſe them ſodeynly, wyth dyuerſe inuaſyons, when they were vnready, and loked for no ſuche chaunce. He ſuppoſed, alſo that the Perſian power, ſhoulde throughe thoſe dyuerſe encoūtres wyth the

Romaynes, on euerye ſyde, be dyſperſed abroade, were more faynte, and entre into battayle, wythoute order. For the Barbariens, vſe not anye mercenarye Souldyours, as the Romaynes are accuſtomed, neyther haue they anye armye in pytthed Campe, where they myghte exercyſe theym ſelues, in feates of warres. But the hole multytude of men, yea often tymes of women alſo, doe aſſemble togethers, at the Kynges commaundemente. The whyche multitude, after the warre fynyſhed, are dyſmyſſed home agayne, to theyr pryuate habytacions, caryenge wyth theym, ſuche bootye of the battayle, as euerye one of theim, for hys parte, canne gette by thefte. Thei occupye Bowes, and Horſes, not onely in battayle, (as the Romaynes are wonte) but they are euen from theyr chyldehoode, brought vp togythers, traded wyth hunting, and bearynge alwayes theyr quyuers of arowes wyth them. Thei neuer lyghte from theyr Horſes, whether thei fyghte in Battayle, or hunte wylde beaſtes.
            But thys Polycye of Alexander, albeit at the fyrſte, it ſeamed, wythoute controuerſye, to be the beſte, yet was it fourthewyth, by fortune, made deſtytude of good ſucceſſe. For the armye, that was commaunded to marche by Armenia, (hauynge wyth greate payne, and diffycultye, (althoughe the ſommer ſeaſon, cauſed theyr iorney, to be meatelye tollerable (paſſed the ſharpe mountaynes, and craggye rockes) entred into Media, and there burnte the vilages, and draue away great bootyes, of one thing, and other.
            When relacion hereof, was made to the Perſyan Kynge, he came to reſcue the Countrey, wyth as greate a power, as he coulde leuye. But he coulde not dryue away the Romaynes from thence, for that the ſame craggye Countrey, miniſtred ſure footing, and eaſye paſſage, vnto the Romayne footemen. And

the Barborouſe horſemen, throughe the ſtepenes, of the ſharpe rockye Mountaynes, hadde a more vneaſy trauayle, and laboriouſe iorneye. There, was it declared, vnto the Perſian Kynge, that an other armye of the Romayns, was entred, into ſuche borders of the Parthians, as extended towardes the orient. Wherefore, fearynge leaſte the Romaynes, after they hadde Conquered the Parthians, woulde inuade Perſia alſo, he lefte as greate a Garyſon behynde hym, as ſeamed ſufficiente, for the defence of Media, and hym ſelfe, wyth thole Armye) made ſpeedye haſte into thorientall coaſtes.
            The Romayne Armye, marched forwarde verye ſlowelye, for that no manne reſyſted theim. Thynkynge, that Alexander wyth the thyrde parte of theim, (wherein were the chyefeſt menne of warre) was alreadye entred, into the myddes of the Barbaryens. And therefore they reſted them ſelues: iudgynge, that it was not beſte, to make any greate haſte, ſeynge they were nowe in ſafetye, and knewe the place, wherein they ſhoulde altogether meete, wyth theyr bootye, and Pryſoners.
            But Alexander deceaued theim.Alexāder deceyued his Armye. For he neyther came hym ſelfe, nor broughte anye Armye forward. Doubtfull it is, whither he ſo ſlacked, through feare of puttynge hys lyfe in haſarde, in defence of Thempyre, or whether hys Moother deteyned hym at home, throughe womanly fearefulneſſe, and ouer muche loue of her Sonne.
            For, in deade, ſhe blemyſſhed, and blunted, all hys noble, and valyaunte courage, in perſwadynge hym, rather to ſende other furth to the warres, then ſtande hym ſelfe in battayle. The whyche thynge dyde vtterlye betraye the Romayne Armye, that was entered into the Barbarous Regyons. For the Perſyan Kynge dyd meete, and ſette vppon theim, vnreadye, and lookynge for no

ſuche chaunce, wyth hys hole power, and encloſynge theim, as it were, in a nette, dyd vtterlye dyſcomfyte, and ouerthrowe, euerye perſonne of theim, beinge fewe in number, & not able to reſyſte, ſo great an Hoſte of theyr enemyes. Neuertheleſſe, at the fyrſte thei defended ſtoutly, with their Targettes, and weapons, the naked places of theyr bodyes, from the violent ſhot of arrowes: Accomptynge them ſelues happely dealte wyth all, yf wythoute anye playne battayle, they myghte ſafely eſcape, from domage. But when thei had for a lytle ſpace, encloſed theim ſelues wyth theyr Targettes, and were aſſaulted lyke vnto a walled Citye,The Romaynes vanquiſſhed. and ſlayne on euery parte, hauynge vnto the ende valyauntly reſyſted, they were murdered downe ryghte.
            This was a meruelous calamitie, vnto the Romayns, the lyke whereof, can be in no age remembred, for thei had nowe loſte a greate armye, worthy, eyther for Loyalte, or ſtrengthe, to be compared, vnto anye auncient Hoſte, before paſſed. But the wyſhed ſucceſſe of thieſe affayres, enhaunſed the mynde of the Perſyan Kynge, wyth hope of greater enterpryſes.
            Whereof when Alexander heard (beynge at that tyme, verye ſore ſycke, eyther throughe peſyuenes of mynde,The Army waxed wroth wyth Alexander or els thintemperatnes of the ayre) he toke it verye greuouſlye, and thole armye, waxed wonderfull wrothe, agaynſte Themperoure. For thei ſayde, that theyr Companyons, were betrayde by hym, throughe hys lyenge, & not performenge of promyſe. Then Alexander, beynge impaciente of hys dyſeaſe, and the heate of the ayre, (thole armye alſo, vexed wyth ſyckenes, and eſpeciallye the Illyrians, (who before accuſtomed vnto moyſte, & coulde ayre, & then feading more largelye) fell throughe ſyckenes, into danger of deathe), determyned to retourne vnto Antyoche: whyther he cauſed hys Souldiours alſo to come, verye fewe in numbre remaynynge, for that the mooſte parte of theim, were peryſhed, throughe the ſharpenes of the Wynter, and Mountaynes.

The handes, whiche were attendaunt vpon hys perſonne, hym ſelfe ledde backe vnto Antioche, hauynge loſte manye of them alſo. Wherfore, thys matter broughte muche ſorowe vnto the armye, and greate diſhonour vnto Alexander, Fortune hauynge deceaued hym in all places, and tourned hys entent to none effecte. For a meruaylous numbre of thoſe .iii. armies (ſo perdye, had he deuided them) were deſtroyed by diuers calamities, as ſyckenes, battayle, and colde. When Alexander was come vnto Antioche, he recouered health, refreſhed wyth the temperat ayre there, and aboundaunce of water, after the burnynge heate of Meſopotamia, refreſhed alſo hys Souldyours, cō
               fortynge theyr ſorowe, wyth geuynge theym money, (whiche he rekened to be the pryncipall meane, to winne theyr heartes) renewed hys armye, and repayred the ſame wyth freſhe Souldyours throughout, as though he woulde ones more leade them agaynſte the Perſyans, yf they proceaded to be troubleſome, and deſiſted not from their iniuries.
            But then was it declared vnto hym, that the Perſyan Kynge, hadde dyſmyſſed all hys Souldyours home to theyr habytacions. For althoughe the Barbaryens, ſeamed to be the Superyours in Battayle, yet throughe often, and ſundrye Batayles, foughte in Media, and Parthia, a great parte of them were ſlayne, the reſt whyche remayned, were eyther empayred wyth dyſeaſes, or elles in Skyrmiſhes ſore wounded. Neyther were the Romaynes flowlye ouercome, but them ſelues were many times noyſome vnto theyr enemyes: beynge by none other meane vanquiſhed, then for that they were, fewer in numbre, entrapped.
            For when almoſte lyke numbre, was on bothe ſydes ſlayne, the reſt of the Barbariens, not in ſtrength and proweſſe, but onelye in multitude, ſeamed to be the better, whereof, this is ſufficient profe, that the Barbariens, in .iii. or .iiii. yeres after, fell not againe vnto armes. The whyche when Alexander vnderſtode, he made hys abode ſtyll at Antioche. And being

from thence forwarde, more merye, & liberal, & forgettyng the care of the warres, gaue him ſelfe to the voluptuous pleaſures of the ſame Cytye. But whiles he thought, that the Barbariēs would frō thence furth, remayne quiet, or at the leaſte wyſe, it woulde be a longe tyme, before they coulde aſſemble againe their power, vneaſy to bring together, after they were once ſeperated, for that they were rude, and out of order, & rather a multitude of rural people, then an armye, hauing onely as much vitayle,What ye Perſiās armie is. as euerye man bryngeth for his preſēt neceſſitie, frō his houſe: vnwilling alſo, to depart frō theyr wiues, children, & habitaciōs, loo, furthwith came meſſengers & letters vnto him, from the Rulers of Illiria, the which troubled hym wōderfully, & caſt him into great thought, and perplexitie of mynde. For they ſignified, that the Germaynes had paſſed ouer the Rheyne,The Germaines rebell. and Danowe, were entered into the boundes of the Romaine Empire, aſſayled the armies, which defended the banckes, & made theyr rodes through the Countrey, by the Cities, & Vyllages, with a great power of men. And that thereby the Illiriās, being a nacion borderer, and neighbour vnto Italye, ſtode in great haſſarde and daunger, wherfore, it was requiſit, that Themperour ſhould be ther in hys owne perſon, and brynge all the power he had wyth hym.
            Theſe newes, ſtrake marueylous feare, into Alexander, and doleful ſorowe into the Illirian Souldyours. For they perceaued them ſelues to be afflicted, wyth two miſerable calamities, at one inſtaunte: hauing fyrſt euil ſucceſſe in the warres, againſt the Perſians, & after, hearyng that their frendes were ſlaine at home, by the Germaynes. Wherfore, they greatly grudged againſt Alexander, as yf by hys cowardyſe, theyr former affayres, had bene betrayed in Thorient, and that now he protracted his remoue, when as the Northerne cauſes, earneſtly called for hym. Now ſtode Alexander, and hys frendes, in greate doubte of Italie: the affayres of the Perſians and the Germaines, beyng of vnlyke daunger. For thoſe which inhabite

the Orient, are ſequeſtred wyth great diſtaunce of lande, and Sea. And thereby do ſcarſelye heare the name of Italy. But the Illirian nacions, dwellynge in a ſmale ſtreyte, and poſſeſſing verye lytle grounde,The Scituatiatiō of Illiria ſubiecte to the Romaynes, doo onelye make ſeperacion betwene Italye, and Germanye. Wherfore, he cauſed hys departure to be proclaymed, agaynſt hys wyl, ſauynge that neceſſitye conſtrayned hym therevnto. And hauyng left behynde hym, as many men as ſeamed ſufficient, for the tuition of the Romayne lymittes, and fortifyed the Cytyes, and Caſtels, with ſtrōg Garriſons, hym ſelfe departed ſpedelye agaynſte the Germains, wt the reſidue of hys hole armie. And hauinge wyth ſpede eanded his iourneye, he pitched his Campe, vpon the banckes of the Rheine, & there made prouiſion, for al neceſſaryes, belongyng to the warre.
            Fyrſt, he made a Bridge of Shippes and Galleyes, ouer the Rheyne, and Danowe, that the Romaynes myghte paſſe to the other ſyde, by the ſame. For thoſe twoo are counted the greateſt Ryuers of the Northe.Rheine. Danubie. Of the whych, the one paſſeth by the Germaynes, the other, by the Pannonians. And in the Sommer ſeaſon, they are nauigable, wyth a large, and depe channell. In wynter ſo harde ouerfroſen,Pannonye. that they are ridden vpon, as it were a field. For the Iſe of the channell is ſo ſtronge, and harde, that it not onelye beareth hoofes of horſes, and feete of men, but alſo, they whyche come to fetche water there, bryng not wyth thē, ſo many Cuppes, or Pailes, as they doo Hatchettes, & Mattockes. And when they haue therwith brokē the Iſe, they cary the ſame away, without any veſſell, as it were a ſtone. Suche is the nature of thoſe ryuers.
            Alexander dyd ſet in Battayle, agaynſte the Germaynes, manye Mauritanians, and a greate power of Archers, whyche he had broughte oute of the Orient, ſome of theym beynge people called Oſrohenians,Oſrohemians. the reſte Parthyan fugytyues, whome he hadde allured with money vnto him. For thoſe Souldiours dyd moſt diſpleaſure, & domage vnto the Germaines.

Bycauſe the Mauritanians do ſhoote theyr arrowes from farre, are quycke, nymble, and ſwifte to ſkyppe, to and fro. And beyng all Archers, can eaſelye ſtrike, the bare heades, of the Germaynes, and theyr greate bodyes, as it were an appoynted marke, in a Butte. Often tymes alſo, they foughte in playne batayle, hande to hande, from whence, the Germaynes, often tymes departed, nothynge Inferiours vnto the Romaynes.
            Alexander beynge wyth theiſe troubles occupyed, concluded to ſende Oratours vnto them, to entreate of peace, in promyſynge them money, and to geue thē whatſoeuer they neaded, wyth great aboundaunce of treaſure. For the Germaynes, are chiefelye greadye of money, and often tymes for the ſame, doo ſell theyr peace to the Romaynes. wherfore Alexander endeuored to bye peace of them, rather then to haſarde the matter, in batayle. But the Romayne Souldyours grudged greatlye, that they waſted theyr tyme in vayne, wythoute occaſion of atchieuyng any thynge, whereby they myghte ſhewe theyr valyaunte corage, whyles Alexander, gaue hym ſelfe to Cartynge (as they ſayde) and voluptuouſnes, when it was more expedient to reuenge them ſelues, vpon the Germaynes, and to punyſhe them, for theyr preſumptuouſe audacitye.
            There was then in the armye, one Maximinus, of a certayne Village of Thrace, and that the obſcureſt wyth all,Maximinus had been a ſhepherd a man halfe Barbarous, whyche in his youthe, had bene a Shepherde, and after, hys yeares beynge encreaſed, for the heyghte of hys bodye, and hys myghtye ſtrengthe, was waged for a horſeman. Finallye, Fortune, as it were, leadynge hym by the hande, and goynge before hym, after he had aſcended, by all degrees of offyces, in the warre, he aſpired vnto the gouernement of the Armie, and Prouinces. Thys Maximinus therefore, for hys experte knowledge in warrefare, dyd Alexander ordeyne Gouernour of the youthe, to exerciſe them, in the feates of warre, and to make them apte, vnto fyghte.
            
               And he omyttynge no dilygence,Maximinꝰ Lorde of the Souldyours. ſo behaued him ſelfe in that office, that he gayned fauoure, of thole army: not onely, inſtructynge them, in all ſuche thinges, as were dayly to be done, but excecutyng hym ſelfe, fyrſt of all, the deades wyth the preſente vſe required. So that, he had them, not onely as Scolers, but alſo Cō
               panions of hys proweſſe, whom he ioyned vnto hym wyth ſundrye gyftes, & all kynde of honour. Wherefore the yonge men, of whom the greateſt parte were Pannonians) beynge ioyefull of the valeauntnes of Maximinus, did opēly ſpeake againſt Alexander: ſaiynge that he was yet vnder hys Moothers aucthorytye, and dyd all thynge after her commaundemente, ſettynge forwarde the warres verye ſlowelye, and with much cowardiſe. Thei repeted oftē within them ſelues, the greate myſhappe, they had receiued in thoriente throughe his delayes, and reprehended, that he had done nothyng valeauntly agaynſt the Germaynes. Wherfore being prone of their nature to chaūge of thinges, greued with ſo longe contynuaunce of regiment (whereof they receyued lytle lucre) for that all ambition was longe before aboliſhed) and aſſuredlye truſtynge that ſome other Prynce which ſhoulde attayne vnto the Soueraignitie, without lokyng for it woulde beſtowe ſome more giftes, and honoure vpon them, thei concluded to murder Alexander, and afterwardes to create Maximinus Emperoure beyng their Companion in armes, and all other exercyſes, and by his ſkyl in warfarre, moſte apte for the warre preſently in hande. Wherfore hauing by ſundry bandes aſſembled into the fielde, when Maximinus came amōges them to inſtructe the yōge Souldiours, they clothed hym with purple, and ſaluted hym as Emperour. Doubtfull it is, wether he were ignoraunte of the dryfte, or els made pryuie vnto the matter before. At the fyrſt he refuſed it, and reiected the purple. But when he ſaw the mē of armes drawe furth their ſwordes, threating to kyll him, wiſhing rather the daūger to come, then the peryll preſente, he toke the honoure vpon hym: proteſtynge, that althoughe the ſame fortune,

were erſte by dreames, and viſions, ſhewed vnto him, yet was he nowe vnwillyngly enforced by thē to receiue it, onely becauſe he would obey their myndes. Then he wylled theim, to appoynte all thynges as they would them ſelues, and taking their weapons, in preuenting the rumor of this matter, goo ſlea Alexander (who was ignoraunt of all that was done) that thereby his Souldiours, & the Garde of hys perſon, beyng with the ſodeyne chaunce diſmaied, ſhould either willingly aſſent vnto them, or els beyng vnready, & loking for no ſuche happe, ſhoulde maugre theyr heades, be brought in ſubiectiō. Then after he had enflamed their good willes towardes him, in dublynge their wages, and promiſyng to geue them greate rewardes, & to pardon all their punyſhmentes, he ledde them all vnto Alexanders Pauyliō, incontinētly, for that it was not farre diſtant frō thence. When thieſe thinges were declared vnto Alexander, he was greatly diſmaied wt the noueltye thereof. So that he ran out of his Tent, as a mad man, weaping, & trēbling, now callyng Maximiuus deſloyall, and periured perſon, with reckening of the benefytes, which him ſelfe had beſtowed vpon him: and then, accuſing the yonge Souldiours, which neglecting their othe, would enterprice ſo perniciouſly, that facinorouſe facte. And fynally, he offered to giue them what thei woulde deſyre, and amende ſuche thinges as were amiſſe. Then the Souldiours which apartayned to ye Garde of hys perſon, making ioyfull acclamaciōs vnto him, promiſed to defende him, with all their might and power. When the night was ones paſſed, and the daye began to dawe, certaine of the Souldiours, brought worde vnto him, that Maximinus was at hande, for that they myght ſee the duſte rayſed, and heare the noyſe of a greate multitude not farre of. Wherefore Alexander came agayne into the fielde, & called togythers his Souldiours, beſeaching them to ayde, and defende him, whome them ſelues had brought vp, and during whoſe raigne, by the ſpace of .xiiii. yeres, they had liued without diſcention. Then hauynge moued

them all with compaſſion, he willed theim to arme them ſelfes, & ſtande in ordre of batayle, to reſyſt their enemies. But the Souldiours (althoughe thei had before promiſed ayde vnto their Prince) dyd not wtſtanding ſhrincke away, by lytle, and litle. Some of theim required the Captaine of the Garde, & other of Alexā
               ders frendes to be put to deathe: alledginge that they were the occaſion of this Commociō. Other of them accuſed hys Moother, for that ſhe was a coueteous woman: who in heaping, and hording of money, and throughe her pynchynge, ſparynge, and greedy keaping, from the Souldiours, had broughte Alexander into dyſdayne wyth them all. Thus ſtode they talkyng, and moued not as yet. But as ſoone as tharmy of Maximinus was in ſyghte, and after he had encoraged them, to forſake a fylthy woman, and a weake yonge man, whiche lyued as yet vnder his Moothers commaundemente, and ioyne them ſelues vnto a ſtronge, and valeaunte man, theyr companion in Armes, and exercyſed contynually wyth them, in feates of warre, furthwith, thei all togethers reuoulted frō Alexander, and with one aſſente ſaluted Maximinus as Emperour. Then Alexander fledde backe agayne into his Pauilion, trembling, and halfe beſydes hym ſelfe, and embraſyng his Moother, and (as it is reported) blamīg her for that he ſuffered this calamity, for her ſake, he aboade there, loking for the murderer.
            Now Maximinus, after he was created Emperour by thole Armye, gaue in charge to the Tribune,Tribun. and Capitaines, the murderinge of Alexander wyth hys Moother,Alexander & hys Moother wt theyr frendes ſlayne. and all other whych ſhould make anye reſyſtaunce. Thei furthwith entering by vyolence into the Pauilion, ſlew both Alexander, and his Moother, with hys frendes, and euerye noble man, excepte a fewe, whyche a lytle before had made ſhyfte for theim ſelues by fleeing away, and were hyd in corners. All the which, being ſhortly after apprehended, Maximinius dyd put to death. This ende of lyfe had Alexander, with hys Moother, when he hadde by the ſpace of .xiiii. yeares reigned, withoute any complainte of the Citezins, yea with out any bloodſhead eyther.

For deteſting crueltye, and murder he permitted no man to ſuffer, withoute he were by iudgemente condempned, ſo muche was he addicted to gentle beneuolence. So that yf the coueyteous, and greadye Moother, had not with fylthy couetiſe defamed her Sōne, there coulde nothynge haue bene wantynge, or wyſhed for, in hys gouernement of Thempyre.
         
         
            ¶ The Argumente of the ſeuenth Booke of Herodyan.
            
               THe Begynninge of the ſeuenth Booke maketh mencion of Maximinus Crueltye, which paſſed ouer, and made warre vpon the Germaines. And at his returne to Rome, oppreſſed the people, wyth greuous exaccions, and commytted much ſacrilege, whiche cauſed muche hurley burley amonges the people. How the nacion of Aphrique rebelled, and made Gordianus Emperoure, who was vanquyſſhed by Capellianus, Gouernour of Mauritania. And after Gordianus deathe, howe the Senate elected Maximus, and Albinus, and with them yonge Gordianus. The audacytie of Gallianus foloweth, and the myſchiefe that enſued therevpon.
         
         
            
            ¶The ſeuenth booke of the Hyſtorye of Herodyan.
            
               WE haue in the former booke, at lēgth declared, after what ſort, Alexander behaued him ſelfe, duryng the .xiiii. yeres of his raygne. After whoſe death, Maximinus, hauyng obtayned the Type, and regimente, of the Impyre, altered the eſtate of all thynges, and abuſed verye cruellye, hys obtayned Power, ſo that frome a Gentle Gouernemente, he endeuored to chaunge it vnto cruell tyrannye. For perceyuynge him ſelfe to be odious vnto all men, bycauſe he fyrſte of all other, had aſpyred vnto that Fortune, frō a baſe eſtate, beſydes that, beynge aſwell Barbarous of maners, as by nature greadye of bloudſhed, he endeuoured chiefelye, to eſtablyſhe the Empyre vnto hym, through crueltye, fearyng leaſt he ſhould be had in contempte of the Senate, and all other Romaines, whyles not hys preſent Fortune, but the obſcurenes of hys byrthe, was ſpecially noted in hym. For it was openlye knowen vnto all men, that he had been a ſhepherde in the Mountaynes of Thrace, and receaued amonges the ſymple, and baſe Souldyours of that region, for the greatnes, and ſtrengthe of hys bodye, and nowe exalted vnto the Romayne Empyre, Fortune (as I myghte ſaye) leadynge hym by the hande.
            Wherefore, fyrſte of all, he rooted oute of the Senate houſe, all the frendes and Councelours of Alexander, of the whyche ſome he dimiſſed to Rome,The tyranny of Maximinus. other ſome he depriued of theyr offyces, accuſynge their former adminiſtration therein. This dyd he, to the entente he myghte be alone, in the armye, hauynge no man of the nobilitye nyghe hym, but wythoute the reuerence of anye ſuch, as in a ſtrong Fortreſſe, exerciſe hys tyranny. Then dyd he expell oute of the Imperial

palaice, al the Seruauntes of Alexāder, whom he had by ſo many yeares retayned in ſeruice, and did put ſome of them to death, fearing treaſon, becauſe he perceaued them dolefully to lament the death of Alexander. But his tyranny was more augmented, thorough the opening of a certayne conſpiracie agaynſt hym, wherin many of the Captaynes, & the whole Senate, were confedered.
            There was a certayne man of the nobilitie, which had been Conſul, named Magnus.Magnus The ſame was accuſed vnto Maximinus, that he had entended treaſon againſt him, & perſuaded the Souldiours, to tranſlate the Empyre vnto him. Thys counſayle was ſuppoſed to be ſuche. Maximinus had made a Brydge ouer the ryuer, to paſſe agaynſt the Germayns, hauyng a gredy appetite (after he had gottē thempyre) vnto warlike affayres. For being erected vnto Thempyre, through the huge quantitie of his bodie, his ſtrength, and ſkill in warfare, he endeuoured with open deades, to confirme ye ſame opinion of the ſouldiours, to proue, therby, that the feare, cowardiſe, and ſlouth of Alexander, in warlyke exerciſes, was iuſtly by him condempned. Wherfore, he omitted nothynge that appertayned to the exerciſe of the men of warre. And beynge hym ſelfe daylye in armes, dyd therewith greatlye prouoke the courage of the Souldyours.
            After the aforeſayde Brydge was fynyſhed, he determined, to paſſe ouer into Germayne. But then it was reported, that Magnus had entiſed a great nū
               ber of Souldiours, who excelled the other in prowes, eſpecially of thoſe, vnto whō the cuſtody of the Bridge was committed, that aſſone as Maximinus were paſſed vnto the other ſyde of the riuer, they ſhould throw downe the bridge, exclude him from all retourne, and thereby betray him vnto the Germains. For ye depth, and breadeth of the Ryuer was ſuche, that it ſeamed vnpoſſible for hym to gette ouer agayne, eſpeciallye, becauſe there was no kynde of veſſell, on the further ſhore. Suche was the rumor of thys enterpryſe. But vncertayne it is, whether the ſame were truelye reported,

or els forged of a purpoſe. For it is hard, to giue a reſolute Iudgemente therein, bycauſe that wythoute anye tryall, aunſwere, or ſentence, as manye as were onelye ſuſpected, were putte vnto deathe.
            At the ſame time, there began a great commotion, of the Oſrohenian Souldyours alſo. For they beynge verye ſorowfull for the deathe of Alexander, and by happe, meatynge wyth one of hys frendes,Quarcinus. named Quarcinus (who a lytle before hadde been dimiſſed by Maximinus from the Campe) tooke hym agaynſte hys wyll, when he loked for no ſuche matter, elected hym to theyr Captayne, clothed hym wyth Purple, caryed the fyre before hym, and ſo adorned wyth perniciouſe honours, exalted hym vnto the dygnitie of Emperoure.
            The whyche man, ſhortelye after, ſleapynge in hys Pauilion, was by one of hys owne Companions, and (as it is ſuppoſed) hys frende, trayterouſlye murdered. The ſame was named Macedonius,Macedonius. whyche had been before, Ruler of the Oſrohenians, and at that preſent, was fyrſte Authour vnto them, of reuoltinge from Maximinus. And, althoughe there were no cauſe of grudge betwene him, and Quarcinus, yet dyd he thus murder hym, whome hym ſelfe had fyrſte compelled to become Emperour.
            Then thynkynge to ſhewe Maximinus ſome great pleaſure, he caried vnto hym the head of Quarcinus. But Maximinus, albeit he were glad of that facte, for that hys enemye was rydde oute of the waye, yet dyd he putte vnto extreame deathe thys Macedonius, (whych loked after ſome greate rewarde, and hoped to receaue great thankes for hys trauayle) becauſe he was Authour of the rebellion, and murderer of one, whyche hym ſelfe had induced, maugre hys head vnto that miſchiefe, and had been falſe vnto the man, whyche had moſte affyaunce in hym.
            Theſe cauſes therfore, dyd exaſperate the mynde of Maximinus, and kyndled hys furye, beynge already? of hys owne nature, ouer prone vnto crueltye.
            
               He was beſydes, horrible of viſage, & of ſo huge, and myghty ſtature, that none of the moſt valiaunt Grekes, or moſte warlyke Barbariens myghte be compared vnto hym.
            When theſe thynges were thus ſet in order, he gathered together the whole Armye, paſſed wythoute feare ouer the Brydge, and made Battayle vpon the Germaynes. There folowed hym a wonderfull nomber of men, almoſte all the power of the Barbariens, and wyth theym verye manye Mauritanian Slyngers, and Archers. There folowed hym beſydes, the Oſrohenians, and Armenians, the one nacion beinge ſubiecte vnto the Romaynes, the other aſſociated in frendſhyppe wyth them, they were accompanyed wyth as manye Parthians, as beynge hyred or fugityues, from theyr natyue countrey, or els taken in the warres, ſerued the Romaynes.
            Thys multytude of people, was fyrſte leuyed by Alexander, & then augmēted, and exerciſed, by Maximinus. The Slyngers, and Archers, ſeamed verye profytable in the warre agaynſte the Germayns, bycauſe they coulde eaſelye ſtryke theyr enemyes vnwares, and recule theym ſelues furthewyth, into ſure defence.
            Maximinus beynge entred wythin hys enemyes lande, and fyndynge no man to reſiſt hym (for all the Germaines were fledde) pylled and foraged the countreye (the Corne beynge then rype) and permitted the Souldyours to burne, and deſtroye, all the Vyllages. And in deade, the Townes and houſes there, are verye muche ſubiecte to daunger of fyre. For amonges the Germaynes, the Buyldynge wyth Stone, and Tyle, is verye rare and ſcarce. But wyth great peices of Tymber ſet in the earthe, and Ioyned together in thycke woodes,The Germaynes houſes. they make (as it were) tabernacles. Maximinus then goynge forwardes, in waſtynge the Countrey, ſackyng the corne, and diſtributynge the Cattell, whyche was taken amonges the Souldyours, founde not as yet, anye of hys enemyes. For they had abondoned all the

fielde, playne, Countrey, and all places, deſtitute of trees, and hydde them ſelues couertly in the woodes, and mariſhes, that thei myght there fyght, and with ſodeyne aſſaultes, inuade their enemyes: becauſe the thickeneſſe, and nygh growing togither of the trees, ſeemed to become a great impediment vnto the arrowes, and dartes, of theyr enemies. And thei thought, that the depth of their maryſhes, and Pooles, would be daūgerouſe vnto the Romaynes, for that thei were ignoraunte of the paſſages, and Countrey. But vnto themſelues, very eaſye, and profytable, becauſe they wading daily through them, vp to the knees, perfectly knewe, whiche were the paſſable foordes, & whiche vnpoſſible to get ouer. And truly, the Germaines are verye cunnynge in ſwymming, as men, which onely ſwymme, and bathe them ſelues in Ryuers. In theiſe places therfore, was the battayle begon, where fyrſte of all the Romayne Emperour enterpryſed the confllycte very valiauntly. For when thei were come vnto a greate, & broade Maryſhe, within the which, the Germaines had retyred them ſelues, the Romaines, beinge afearde to purſue their enemyes, Maximinius fyrſte entered vpon a great Courſer, into the Maryſhe (wher his horſe foūdered to ye belye) & ſlewe with great māhode, many of the Barbarous people, whyche reſyſted. Wherefore the reſydue of tharmye, beynge pricked wyth ſhame, yf they ſhoulde forſake their Emperour, nowe fyghtynge for them, aduentured theim ſelues alſo into the Maryſhe. And then were there ſlayne, many of eyther parte, but ſo, that there was no Barbarien lefte a lyue, the Romayne Emperour fyghtynge moſte valyauntlye. Whereby the Maryſhe beynge fylled wyth deade carcaſes, and the lake beynge myngled wyth bloode, cauſed it to ſeame, that thys foote Battayle was foughte wyth ſhyppes vppon the water.
            This victory, wyth other hys ſtoute, and mightye factes, he not onely ſygnifyed vnto the Senate, and people of Rome, by letters, but alſo beynge Printed in a great Table, cauſed it to be publyſhed before the

Coorte, that the Romaynes myghte not onely heare of hys valyaunte deades, but alſo haue theim perfectly expreſſed before theyr eyes.
            The ſame Table, with the reſte of hys honours, the Senate afterwardes pullyd downe, and abolyſhed. There were manye other ſkyrmyſhes, and batayles foughten, wherein hym ſelfe, throughe hys fyrſte gyuynge the onſette, and manfull fyghtynge) gate euer the price, and renowne. Then he retourned, againſt the wynter ſeaſon, into Pannony, wyth manye pryſoners, and greate bootye of Catayle. And wynterynge wythin the Cytye of Syrmium,Sirmiū. (whyche is the greateſt Cytye of that Countrey) he prepared all neceſſaries, for hys vyage, agaynſt the ſprynge time: threatnyng, wholy to ſubdue all the Barbarouſe nacions of the Germaynes, euē to the Ocean. The whiche thing, it ſeamed, he woulde aſſuredlye brynge to paſſe, ſuch a one was he, in the affaires of warrefare, and ſhuld haue obtayned a wonderfull glory through hys factes,The exaccions of Maximinus. yf he hadde not bene more outragiouſe to hys owne ſubiectes, then to hys enemyes. But to what purpoſe, are the Barbariens ſlaine, yf much more murder, be commytted wythin the Cytie ſelf of Rome, and the nacions ſubiecte thereunto? or what auayleth it to haue plentye of Captiues, and prayes of beaſtes, yf by hys conqueſtes, and fortune, the Romaynes theim ſelues, be dyſpoyled of all they haue. For, not onely free lybertye, but alſo entyſynge, was giuē, vnto perniciouſe promoters, to accuſe, and cyrcumuente wyth fraude, whome thei would. Yea, and to renewe (yf neade were) faultes before done, by mens Aunceſtours, ſome of them vnknowen, and vnharde of, vntyll that preſent inſtaunt. Neyther was there any man detected of anye offence, but the ſame was furthwyth condempned, and all his goodes confyſcate. Whereby, a man myghte daylye ſee, dyuerſe whiche before were wonderfull ryche, and welthye) nowe begge theyr breade: So greate was the couetyſe of hys Tyrannye, whyles he dyſtrybuted

money continually, amonges the menne of warre. His eares beſydes were open vnto all complayntes, ſo that he had no regard, to any mās age, or dignitie.
            For manye Capytaines of armyes, Gouernours of prouinces, wyth dyuerſe that hadde bene Counſulles, and for theyr merites tryumphed, being ones for anye fonde trifle, or lyghte cauſe accuſed, he cauſed furthwyth to be apprehended: and puttynge theim in Chariottes alone, wythout any Seruaunte attendynge vppon theim, compelled theim, to come oute of the Eaſte, and Weſte (yf the chaunce ſo happened) and oute of the Southe alſo, vnto Pannony, where hym ſelfe ſoiourned. And there ſpoylynge theim of all theyr ſubſtaunce, and entreatynge theim wyth moſte ſhamefull ſclaunders, he afflycted theym wyth death, or banyſhemente. But as longe, as one, or two, ſuffered thieſe domages, and the ſayde calamity paſſed not theyr lynage, the common people, lytle regarded it. For the aduerſe chaunces of Ryche, and welthy menne, were not onely of the Commons, neglected, but alſo manye of theim, of a frowarde mynde, and peruerſe wyll, in deſpyte of the Ryche men, were verye gladde wyth the ſame theyr myſeryes.
            But after that Maximinus,The ſacrileges of Maximinus. hadde thus broughte vnto extreme pouertye, the famylies of many noble, and famouſe menne, reckenynge theim of no value, and but tryfles towardes the ſatyſfienge of hys outragiouſe coueteouſnes, he tourned hys mynde vnto the Robberye, and ſpoylynge, of the common Treaſorye.
            For what ſo euer money hadde bene before layde vp, for the Common prouyſyon of Corne, or what ſo euer Ryches remayned, to be dyſtributed amonges the people, wyth all ſuche Treaſoure as ſerued to the deckynge of the Theaters, and gorgiouſe ſettynge furthe of feſtyuall Pompes, and playes, the ſame euerye iote, he adiudged to hymſelfe.
            
               Beſydes that, the gyftes of all the Temples, the Statues, and honours, of all the Goddes, and famouſe men, wyth what ſo euer publycke worke, Ciuyll ornamentes, or matter, whyche ſeamed conuenyente to make money of, were put to the fyre. Whiche thing dyd chieflye gnawe, and vexe the hartes of the people, & cauſed, as it were, a commō mourning, ſaying, that wythoute warre, or battayle, the Cytye was lyke to be aſſaulted, & taken, ſo that many of the people auentured to reſyſte hym, and to defende the Temples, wyſhynge rather to be ſlayne before thaultars of the immortall Goddes, then to ſee theyr Coū
               trey deſtroyed.Rebelliōs & bytter Curſes againſte Maximinus. And hereby chiefly, did the myndes of the Commō people, beginne to grudge againſt him, thrughoute all the Cytyes of Thempyre. Neyther were the Souldiours thē ſelues very glad with it, for that theyr neyghbours, and kynſfolke rebuked them, and imputed to theyr faulte, that Maximinus dyd thus behaue hym ſelfe. Thieſe enormityes, therefore, beynge of no ſmall importaunce, dyd prouoke the people to hatred, and rebelliō. But hithervnto thei medled not, ſaue onely wyth wordes, callynge vppon the Goddes, whome Maximinus had offended, for that there was none durſte take vppon hym, to reuenge the cauſe: vntyll that after three yeres eande of hys Reygne, vppon a lyghte occaſyon (as the affayres of Tyrrauntes, are waueringe, and ſubiecte to chaūge) the Affricans, fyrſte enterpryſed to fall to Armes, and rebellyon,The Gouernour of Affriane. and this was the cauſe. There was a certaine Liuetenaunt in Carthage, who wanted nothynge, that appartayned to extreme furye, and outeragiouſe Tyrranny. The ſame crepte into his Princes fauour, by condepning of men, & extorting of monei. For Maximinꝰ loued thē moſt of al other, whō he knew to be of his own ſecte & factiō. So yt, whoſoeuer therfore had the charge of Thēperors treaſour, whether thei were good mē (which very ſealdome happened) or depoſed frō their office, or elles feared wt the preſent peryll, beynge ſkylfull of hys vnſatiable auarice dyd (althoughe vnwillingly) folow, & accōpany ye reſt.

Thys aforenamed Liuetenaunte of Affryca, hauynge violentlye commytted, manye greate enormities, dyd alſo compaſſe, to exacte money furthwyth, of certayne noble, and ryche yonge men (whome he had by fraude circumuented wyth condempnation) and to depryue thē of all theyr Patrimonye, & ryches, which theyr Aunceſtours had left them. With which thynge, the yonge men beynge incenſed, dyd in deade promyſe to paye the ſame, demaundynge three dayes reſpyte, for the payment.
            And in the meane whyle, conſpyrynge togethers, as manye as had alreadye ſuffered, or feared hereafter to ſuffer affliction, commaunded the yonge men theyr ſeruauntes, to come from theyr Vyllages, and Farmes, with Clubbes, and Axes, vnto them. They executynge theyr Maiſters commaundementes, came all together before daye lyghte, into the Cytye, hydynge vnder theyr Garmentes, ſuch weapons, as in that ſodayne tumulte, they had gotten.
            There was aſſembled, a wonderfull greate number of men. For in Affrica (beynge it ſelfe greatlye replenyſhed wyth people) there were at that tyme, manye Labourers, and Huſbande men alſo. After the daye appeared the yonge men, commaunded theyr ſeruauntes to wayte neare vpon them, as thoughe they were ſome of the Towne people, and not to ſhewe theyr weapons, or begynne anye violence, vntyl they ſawe the menne of Armes, or elles of the common people, aſſaulte theym to reuenge the facte, whyche they woulde ſhortlye commytte.The Gouernour of Affrik ſlayne. They theym ſelues, hydynge theyr Daggers in theyr boſomes, went into the Liuetenauntes houſe, faynynge they woulde ſpeake wyth hym, touchynge the payment of the money, and furthwyth ſodeynlye there ſlewe hym, when he ſuſpected no ſuche caſualtye.
            Then hys Souldyours, drewe furthe theyr ſwordes, and endeuoured to reuenge the murder. But the Huſbandemen, and Laborers, ranne immediatlye to the byckerynge, and there ſtoutly foughte for their Maiſters, and eaſelye conſtrayned all theyr enemyes

to turne their backes, & flea. Whē ye enterpriſe was after this wiſe atchiued, ye yong mē, hauing ſo deſperatly ſet vpō ye matter, rekened one only helpe to remaine for them. That is, if thei heaped vpō this late cōmitted miſchiuous act, a more heinous offēce. Wherfore thei determined to aſſociat in the peryl vnto them, the gouernour of the Prouince, & to induce ye mindes of the people, vnto rebelliō, yt whiche thei knew to be wiſhed for, of thē al, through ye hatred of Maximinus, but as yet prohibited frō it, through feare. wherefore, in the deape of the night, thei went wt all ye multitude, to the Proconſuls houſe. The ſame was Gordianus, who obtained ye office, whē he was .iiii. ſcore yeres old, and had been gouernour of many Prouynces before, and approued in ſundry weyghty affaires. And therefore thei thought, that he would, without difficultie, take ye rule of thempyre vpō him, as ye fynall eande of his former dignities, & that he ſhoulde be a Prince gratefull vnto ye Senate, & people of Rome. For that, beſides his noblenes of byrth, he had by diuers honors, as by ſteppes,Gordianus choſen Emperoure by the yōge mē. aſcended vnto the regyment of Thempyre. Now it happened, yt the very ſame day that theſe thinges were in doing, Gordianus remained within hys owne houſe, hauing defferred his buſynes vntill another time, & ſuſpended for then the adminiſtratiō of all thynges. The yonge men wyth their ſwordes being accōpanied wt a great number of people, repulſed his Porters, & entred wt force into the houſe, and foūd him reſting him ſelf vpō his Bed, where thei thrōged about the old mā, clothed him wt purple, & ſaluted him wt imperiall honors. But he beinge aſtonied wt the ſodayn chaūce, & ſuppoſing it to be a deceite, wrought of purpoſe againſt him, let him ſelfe fall to the groūd frō his bed, beſeching thē, to haue cōpaſſiō vpō an old mā, whiche had neuer offended thē, and to obſerue theyr trueth, and allegiaunce, towards their Prince. Then whiles thei thus perſeuered, holding their ſwordes in theyr handes, & whiles Gordianus, partlye throughe feare, partly through ignoraūce, knewe not what the matter ment, or what was the cauſe of ſo ſodayne fortune,

one of the yongmen, whiche excelled the reſte in nobilitie, & eloquēce, hauing cōmaūded thē vnto ſilēce, holdyng his ſword by the Hyltes, ſpake after this ſort.
            Of twoo peryls, of yt which thone is preſent,The wordes of one of ye yong me vnto Gordiā. & manifeſt, thother doubtful, & of vncerten eand, thou muſt this day choſe one. That is, either to preſerue vs, & thy ſelf, & cōceaue as good hope, as we already haue, or els without delay, ſuffer death by our hands. And if thou choſe the better, thē are there many occaſions of good hope. For thou ſhalt rid out of the waye Maximinus, of all the worlde abhorred, as a peſtiferous plague, of cruell tyrannye, & adde vnto thy life (whiche thou haſt hitherunto vertuouſly led) famous glory & renowne, obtayninge of the Senate, and people of Rome eternal honour, & perpetual praiſe But if thou reiect it, & deny to conſpire with vs, we wyll out of hand put the to death: and our ſelues alſo (yf neade be) wyll accompany the in diyng. For we haue enterpriſed a greater matter, then that we can be ſafe without deſperation. The miniſter of tyrannye is dead, and hath receaued condigne punyſhement for hys cruelty, beinge a lytle earſte, ſlayne wyth oure handes. Wherefore, yf thou wylte conſent wyth vs, and become partaker of oure perylles, thy ſelfe ſhalte obtayne the Empyre. And then the faulte, whyche we haue committed, ſhall be reputed, more worthye, prayſe, then punyſhemente.
            Whyles the younge man ſpake theyſe wordes, the reſte of the multytude, beynge vnpacient of ſtaye, or tariynge (ſeynge all the Cytyzyns whyche had hearde of the matter, were aſſembled, together) wyth one accorde, pronounced Gordianus Emperour.
            Then he (albeit, he had before refuſed it,Gordianus ſaluted Emperoure. and excuſed hym ſelfe by hys age, yet beynge of nature ambitious and deſyrous of glorye) dyd wythoute reſiſtence, take the honoure vppon hym: myndynge, rather to enter into the daunger to come, then the peril preſent. Beſides that, he thoughte not good, to refuſe it, ſeynge his age was come to that perfection, but (if the caſe ſo required) to dye Emperoure of Rome.
            
               Wherfore, incōtinently after thys, al Affrique began to rebell, and manye Cytyes, pulled downe the honors of Maximinus, and erected Images of Gordyanus. And hym they named of theym ſelues, Affrican. For thoſe whyche inhabite the Northe Coſte of Lybya,Libia. Affrikes are called in the Romayne tonge Aphryques.
            Then Gordianus hauynge ſoiourned .v. dayes at Tyſdrum,Tiſdrum in the whyche Cytye, all theſe thynges were done, and poſſeſſynge the name, and apparell of Emperour, remoued vnto Carthage,Carthage. The ryches and bygneſſe of Carthage. Alexandrie. that in the ſame Cytye, beynge verye great, and muche frequented, all thynges myghte be ordered, as in Rome. For Carthage, in haboundaunce of rycheſſe, reſorte of people, or greatneſſe of compaſſe, geuynge onelye preheminence to Rome, dooth contende wyth Alexandrie in Egypte, for the ſeconde place. Thyther folowed Gordyanus, all the pryncypall Pompe, wyth all the Souldyours in thoſe partyes, and the Cytye yonge men, of tall, & comely ſtature, like in ſimilytude vnto them at Rome, whyche garde the Emperours perſon, with Laurell roddes in theyr handes, whereby the Prynces are diſcerned from priuate perſonnes. There was fyre alſo, accordynge to the vſage, caryed before hym, ſo that Carthage, for a ſmall ſpace, dyd repreſente the forme and Fortune of Rome.
            From thence, Gordianus ſent manye letters, vnto euerye Magyſtrate of Rome, and to the noble men of the Senate, amonges whome there were verye manye hys frendes and alyes.
            He wrote beſydes, vnto the whole Senate and people of Rome, ſygnifiyng vnto them, the fauour of the Affrycans towardes hym: and therwithall accuſing the crueltye of Maximinus, whyche he perceaued to be deteſted of al men. Hym ſelfe vſed al gentlenes, and affabilitye. For he punyſhed wyth exyle, all vntrewe Promoters, and Accuſers, and vnto theym whyche were vnryghteouſly therefore condempned, he gaue free lybertye, to defende theyr owne. Yea, he reſtored thoſe whyche tofore were banyſhed, to theyr natyue Countreyes agayne, & promyſed to geue to the Souldiours,

more rewardes, and to dyſtribute amonges the people more gyftes, then any man before him had done. He brought to paſſe alſo, that Vytalian,Vitalianus. ye Lord greate Maiſter of Maximinus houſeholde, a mā outragiouſe and cruell, but moſte deare, and welbeloued of Maximinus, was ſlayne within the Cytie ſelfe of Rome. For ſuſpecting, that that man, in reſyſting of hys enterpryſes, would with feare cauſe other alſo to turne from hym, he ſente the Lyuetenaūt of the Prouince, a ſtoute yonge mā, ſtronge of body, of flouryſſhynge age, and ready to attempte any peryll for hys ſake, with certayne Capitaynes, and dyuerſe Souldiours in hys company: vnto whome he delyuered letters ſealed wyth two Seales, by the which Themperours vſed to ſygnifye their priuye Coūſelles, and affayres. Thoſe he commaunded to entre into the Cytye before daye lyghte, and (whyles Vytalian were buſyed in hys accuſtomed affayres) to go vnto him in to the Chamber, where he was wonte to enquyre of the ſecret thinges, which appertayned to the ſafegard of hys Prince: ſhewynge hym, that thei had ſecrete letters vnto him from Maximinus, and woulde, all other ſet a parte, commune with him, of thinges belonging to the Princes perſon, in declaring vnto him the Emperours mynde. And then, whyles he were occupied in the loking vpon the Seales, thei ſhuld murder hym, wyth their daggers, hydde in their boſomes of purpoſe. All whych enterpryſe, was atchyued as he wyſhed. For before the dauning of the daye (when as he accuſtomed to come furthe) thei foūde Vitalianus almoſte alone, wt a fewe onely ſtandinge aboute him) becauſe ſome were nat as yet come vnto him, ſome other, after their ſalutaciō done, were departed before it was day light. Wherefore, finding him at leyſure, and a fewe ſtanding before the Chāber dore, after thei had declared thoſe thinges which we before ſpake of) thei were eaſely let in, & hauīg deliuered their letters whiles he diligently regarded the ſygnettes thereof,The deathe of Vitalianus. drewe out their daggers, & ſlew him. And then departed out of the Chamber, with their daggers naked in

their handes, euery man giuing them place, and way to paſſe. For thei ſuppoſed, it had bene done by Maxminus commaundement, for that he was wont often tymes ſo to do by them, whome a lytle before, he moſt entierly loued. Then thei goyng through the ſtreate, which hight Sacia via, ſhewed furthe the Epyſtle of Gordian vnto the people, and delyuered letters from hym, vnto the Counſulles thē ſelues, and other Magiſtrates of Rome, ſpreading by rumors abroad, that Maximyne was already ſlayne.
            The which thing being ones divulged, immediatly al the people ranne thrugh the ſtreates, frō one place, to an other, lyke men dyſtracte of their right ſenſes. For as the cōmon people,The vnconſtācy of the Romayne people. are in euery place, vnconſtaūte, & prone to newe chaunges, ſo are the Romaine people, chiefly, more wauering, and vnſtedfaſte, then all other: beyng knytte, of a greate, and dyuerſe, multitude of ſtraungers.
            ¶Then were the Images of Maxymyne, with the reſte of his honours, furthwith pulled downe. And the hatred againſte hym, before, throughe feare hydden, thei did now, after a free lybertie goten, and no man prohibyting them, powre, and ſpytte oute. The Senate alſo, beyng often aſſembled (albeyt they had no certayne reporte of Maximinus eſtate, yet coniecturing by the preſent fortune, the rumour to be true) did abolyſhe all his honours, and pronounced Gordianus, & his Sonne, Emperours.
            
               Gordianus & his Son pronounced Emperours.Immediatly after that done, all Promoters, eyther fledde away, or elles were ſlayne, by thoſe, whom thei had before offēded. The Solliciters, beſydes of Maximine, and ſuche as ſate in iudgemente, in the minyſtring of his Tirranny, were by the common people, drawen throughe the ſtreates, and throwen into the common ſynkes of the Citye. In this vprore, there were many innocentes ſlayne. For euery leude perſō entered violentlye into the houſe of hys creditor, or aduerſarye in the lawe, or of any other, whome vpon neuer ſo lyghte an occaſiō he hated, and ther diſpoiled him of hys goodes, and murdered him. Thus vnder

coloure of lyberty, and pretence of peace, the very deades of Cyuil warre were cōmytted, ſo that there was ſlayne with the dinte of a clubbe, Sabinus the Lyuetenaunte of the Citye,Sabinus ſlayne. whiche endeuoured to appeaſe this buſye tumulte. Thieſe thinges dyd the people. After the Senatours hadde ones entered into thys peryl, thei dyd, throughe feare of Maximine, ſollycite in all thei coulde, the Prouinces to rebellyone. Wherfore, ther were Ambaſſadors choſen of the chiefeſt of the order of Senatours, and Knyghtes, the whiche were ſente vnto the gouernours of the Princes, with letters, wherein was at length, declared the mynde of the Senate, and people of Rome, which exhorted the ſayde Rulers to haue a ſpecyal regarde to their natiue countrey, to defendethe Coorte of Rome, and perſwade the nacions vnder them, to continewe in their allegiaunce, towardes the Romayne people, whoſe dominion ouer them, and auncient bonde of amitie with them, was by their progenitours longe agone, ordeyned. Many of thoſe Gouernors, receaued the Ambaſſadors very greately, and enduced the people to reuolte: the which was eaſely brought to paſſe, in ſo greate hatred was Maximinus had wyth euery man. Thei therefore, hauing oute of hande ſlayne all ſuche Magiſtrates amonges them, as were of Maximines parte) did all togither turne vnto the Romaynes. Yet were there a fewe Rulers, which either flew the Ambaſſadors, yt cam vnto them, or elles ſent them vnder ſure cuſtody vnto Maximyne, who with mooſt cruel tormentes, dyd put them to deathe. This was the mynde, this was the wyll, of the Citye of Rome. The whyche hurley burley, beynge reported vnto Maximinus, althoughe he were ſorowfull wythall, yet dyd he ſayne, that he vtterly contempned it, and the fyrſt, and ſeconde daye, remayned quiete, wythin hys owne houſe, conſultinge wyth hys ſecrete friendes, aboute the ſame mater. And althoughe the hole armye, and people of that Regyon knewe, and vnderſtode, all thys buſyneſſe, and were prone

alſo to reuolte, ſturred with the boldenes, and noueltye of ſo greate enterpryſes, yet dyd euery man holde his peace, taking vpon him to be ignoraūt of the caſe ſo greatly was Maximinus, feared amonges thē, that nothing was hidden from hym. For he dyd not onely herke vnto euery mans wordes, but alſo, watch, and prye, vpon the geſture of their faces, and handes. The thyrde daye, he cauſed all the Souldiours, to aſſemble in a playne before the City, and there him ſelfe ſytting in a highe throne, reherſed oute of a booke, an oration, his by frendes compoſed, and penned before, thus.
            
               The oracion of Maximinus.I know verily, that I ſhal declare vnto you, a thing ſtraunge, & incredible, but (as I my ſelfe ſuppoſe) not worthy ſo muche wonder, as laughter. Thei are not the Germaynes, ſo often vanquyſſhed, that do moue warre againſt you, and your valiaūtnes, neyther the Sarmatyans,Sarmatians. whiche dayly treate wyth vs for peace The Perſyās alſo, which ones waſted Meſapotamia dothe nowe waxe wyſe, in quietinge theim ſelues, wythin their owne houſes:Meſapotamye. beynge taughte, partely wyth youre valiaunte prowes in warrefare, partely with the enpriſes, whiche I haue atchiued: wherewith, thei became aquaynted, when I had the gouernaunce of the Armye, for their paſſage, ouer the Ryuers.
            But (leſte I ſhould deteyne you with a thyng more woorthye laughter,) the Carthaginenſes are become madde, and wyth an infortunate olde man, which doteth throughe extremitye of age (I doute whether he were perſwaded, or compelled therunto) thei do, as it were, in a ſtage enterlude, play, and take the Principalytie vpon them. For to what Armie do thei truſte, when as Sergauntes, and Catchepolles, doe ſupplye the Proconſulles roume amonges theim? what weapons wyl thei beare,Proconſull. ſeynge thei haue none but ſmale ſpeares, to hunte wilde beaſtes withal? And in ſteade of warlike exerciſes, thei vſe daūſing, & ſīging of Ballades, & Carroles. Let not ye thīges which are reported

to be done wythin the City of Rome. Diſmay you 
                  〈◊〉
                that Vitalian is ſlayne, by diſceyte, howe vnſtable the myndes of the Romaynes be, and howe prompt theyr corage is, onelye to make ſhoutes, it is manifeſt vnto you. If theſe .ii. or .iii. armed men, they thruſte one another forwarde to the daunger, in ſpurnynge one another: and fleinge awaye, euerye man from hys owne daunger, they neglecte the common peryll.
            If any man hath reported vnto you, the thynges done by the Senate, there is no cauſe why you ſhoulde meruayle, that oure contineneye ſcameth ouer harde, vnto theym, and thereby that the agremente of Gordianus maners, wyth theyrs, and hys voluptuouſe lyfe, is by theym preferred before vs. For amonges them all, valiauntneſſe, and graue deades, are counted auſtere, and tyrannous, and all diſſolute lyfe, is eſtemed gentle, and pleaſaunte. They feare therefore oure gouernaunce, becauſe it is moderate, and laborious, and they reioyſe at the name of Gordian, whoſe infamye of lyfe is not vnknowen vnto you. Wherfore, agaynſt them, and ſuche as they are, you haue to warre (O Souldyours) yf a man maye, at the leaſte wyſe, call it warre. For my mynde geueth me, and ſo maye all other thynke, that before we approche neare vnto Italye, the greateſt parte of theym, wyll humblye meete vs, wyth Laurell Bowes in theyr handes, and caryinge theyr Chyldren wyth them, fall proſtrate at oure feete: or elles, beynge ſtryken wyth cowardlye feare, runne awaye, leauynge all theyr goodes behynde theym for me to take, and diſtribute amonges you, that you may enioye the ſame for euer.
            When he had thus muche ſpoken, and enterlaced hys talke, wyth manye ſkornefull reproches of the whole Cytye, and Senate of Rome (threatenynge them, wyth the geſture of hys handes, and wyth terrible countenaunce, and menacynge them as though they had been preſet) he proclaymed his voyage towardes Italy. And then hauinge geuen vnto the Souldyours much monei, he ſoiourned ther for one dai. That paſſed, he entred into his iourney, leadynge wyth him

a meruaylous great armye, and all the Romaine power. There folowed hym alſo a great number of Germaynes, not to be neglected, whome he had eyther by force ſubdued, or els aſſociated in amitie vnto hym. He caryed beſides diuers engens and Inſtrumentes of warre, with other thynges whiche he had prepared before againſt the Barbarous nacions. Now did he marche ſlowelye becauſe of the wagons, and other neceſſaries for the warre, whiche were caryed in hys companye. For ſeyng that iourney happened ſodeynlye vnto hym, the thynges expedient for the Souldyours were not gathered by anye mans prouiſion, as it was tofore accuſtomed, but they were then haſtelye as it came to hande, taken and caryed. Wherfore he determined to ſend before, the Pannonian bandes, in whome he had great confidence, whiche alſo fyrſte ſaluted him for Emperour, and willyngly attempted all perylles for hys ſaufegarde. Theyſe he commaunded to ſet forwarde, before the reſte of the hoſte, and to enter into Italye.
            But whyles Maximinus was thus in hys iourney, his affaires had better ſucceſſe in Carthage, then he loked for. For there was a certayn man named Capellianus,Capellianus Mauritania. Numidia. of the order of the Senatours, Liuetenaūte of Mauritania, which is ſubiect to the Romains, and of thē named Numidia. This naciō was fortified with ſtronge armies of men, whiche defended it, from the inuaſions of ye Barbariens theyr neyghbours, wherby he had aboute hys perſon, no ſmall bande of men at armes. Betwene this Capellianus, and Gordyan, there was muche diſcencion, aboute a certayne controuerſie in the lawe. Wherefore, after Gordian had obtayned the name of Emperour, he ſente one to ſucceade Capellianus in hys office, & cōmaunded him to depart from the rule of the Prouince. But he diſdaynyng therat, & beyng true to hys Prince (of whom he had receaued that dignitie) gathered all the power he had together. And after he had exhorted them, to continewe theyr trueth, and othe of allegiaunce, he remoued towardes Carthage, leadynge wyth hym a wonderfull

greate and ſtronge Armye, in the whyche there were verye manye menne, not onelye of floryſhynge age, but alſo inſtructed in the handelynge of all kyndes of weapons, and expert in warrefare, and (through vſage of ſkyrmyſhes wyth the Barbaryens theyr neyghbours) verye prompte, quycke, and readye to battayle, at all tymes.
            When it was declared vnto Gordyan, that Capellianus was commynge towardes Carthage, bothe hym ſelfe, was ſtryken wyth a ſodeyne tremblynge feare, and all the Carthagynenſſes greatly diſmayed, who in a dyſordered heape wythoute anye warelyke order (yet hauinge hope of victorye) thruſte themſelues forwardes oute of the Cytye, to meete wyth Capellianus.
            The olde man Gordian (as ſome reporte) aſſone as Capellianus approched to the Cytye, deſpayring of al good hope, becauſe he perceaued Maximine to haue a greate power of men then in Affrica remaynynge, hanged hym ſelfe. But the Commynaltye, kepyng ſecrete hys death, did choſe his ſon for theyr Capitayne.Gordianus hanged hym ſelfe. So it came to hande ſtryppes. The Carthagynenſes were many more in number, but yet out of order, and vnſkylfull in the warres, and being effeminated with bankettes of voluptuouſnes, wanted weapons, and all other warrelyke inſtrumentes.
            For no man brought out of his houſe, any other weapon, then eyther a Dagger, a Hatchet, or a Huntynge ſtaff, or els a Speare hardened in ye fyre, as they could get for ye defence of their bodies. On the cōtrary part, were Numidians, notable Slingers, and verye connyng horſemen, ſo that wtout Bridle, they coulde rule their horſes wt a Rodde. Wherfore ye Carthaginenſes were eaſely repulſed, & conſtrained to flye. For beyng vnable, to abide the brunt of their enemies, thei threw away theyr harneſſe, and weapons,The Cattheginenſes ouercomen. and tourned theyr backes altogether in a rude plūpe, & thruſting through and treadyng one vppon another, there dyd a greater number peryſhe amonges theym ſelues, then was ſlayne by theyr enemyes.
            
               And in thys thronge, was Gordianus Sonne ſlayne, and as manye as folowed hym.Gordianus Son ſlayne in ye thrōge. So that for the multytude of thoſe that were deade, they coulde not diſcerne the bodyes that ſhoulde be enterred. Neyther coulde the bodye of the younge Gordian be founde. For of ſo greate a number, whyche fledde, there entered but verye fewe into the Citye agayne, who ſaued themſelues, by lurkyng, in darke, and vnknowen corners. The reſte, remaynynge in heapes at the gate, & preſſynge forwardes, euerye man to get in fyrſte, were by the Numidian Slyngers, and other armed Souldyours, ſlayne. Whyche cauſed a meruailouſe lamentacion, and houlynge of women, and Chyldren, for that they ſawe before theyr owne faces, theyr deareſt frendes, ſlayne.
            There be whych reporte, that as ſoone as Gordianus (who for hys age abode wythin hys owne houſe) hearde that Capellianus was entered into the Cytye, diſpairyng of hys ſafegarde, went into hys chamber, as thoughe he woulde ſleape, and wyth hys Gyrdle whych he had about hym, hanged hym ſelfe.
            Thys was the eande of Gordianus, who was fortunate in the former parte of hys lyfe, and nowe 
                  •
               anded the ſame, in a ſymilytude of the Imperyal dygnitye.
            Then Capellianus entred into Carthage, & ther put vnto deathe, euerye one of the noble men, whyche remayned oute of the furye of the Battayl. Neyther dyd he abſtayne, from the ſpoylynge of the Temples, and ranſackynge all Publyke, and priuate Treaſures, And goyng vnto other Cityes, whyche had abolyſhed the honours of Maximinus, the chiefeſt therin he put to deathe, and the reſte he afflycted wyth tormentes: permyttyng the Souldyours, to burne, and robbe, the Vyllages, & Fyeldes therabout, vnder a pretence of reuengynge Maximinus: but yet priuelye allurynge the Souldyous heartes vnto hym ſelfe, to the eande, that if Maximinus ſped not wel, him ſelfe might haue the Souldyours good wylles, for the obtaynynge of the Empyre. Suche was the eſtate of the affayres in

Affrica. But after yt the death of Gordian was heard of in Rome, a meruaylouſe terrour enuaded the Senate, & people of Rome, for that he was loſt, in whō, all their hope, was ſytuate. For thei knewe now perfectly, yt Maximinus wold ſpare no mā being partely of his owne mynde alyenated from theim, and then with an enemyes ſtomake, and manifeſte hatred, for iuſte cauſes, deteſting them. Wherfore, thei aſſēbled oftētymes togithers, conſulting what thei might do, and fynally (ſeyng thei had entred into one peryll) determined to prepare for warre, and elected two Emperours, whiche ſhoulde wyth equall aucthorite, gouerne the common wealthe, leſte that the Principall dominion, ſhoulde returne vnto Tyranny.
            Thei aſſembled therefore, I ſaye, not in the Coorte as thei were wonte before, but in the Temple of Iupiter Capitolyne, the whyche beynge buylded in the higheſt place of the Citie, the Romaines haue in moſt eſtimacion. There, the doores beynge ſhute, they ſate alone, & hauinge, as it were, God to their witneſſe of their Coūſell, and the beholder of all yt thei entended, thei choſe furth ſuche as excelled the reſte in age, and dignity, to giue their voyces of election vnto. Out of the which hole numbre, ther were two, named Maximus,Maximꝰ and Albinus created Emperours. and Albinus, through the mooſte voyces, created Emperours. Of thieſe two Maximus hadde often bene generall Capitaine in the warres, and alſo ordered hym, ſelfe very politiquely, in the gouernaunce of the Citie, wherby he cauſed the people to haue a very good opinion of hys wytte, prouidence, and continēt lyfe. And Albinus, being a noble mā borne, twiſe Conſull, and hauing ruled many prouinces, without ſtrife or complaynte, was reputed the meker. Thus were thei made Emperours, by the decree of the Senate, and endewed wt all Thimperyall honours. But whiles theiſe thinges were in doing in the Capitolle, the Romain people (vncertain it is, whether through the ſolliciting of Gordianus frēdes, or els ſtirred thervnto, by ſome peruerſe rumors) came with force vnto the gates, and filled with multitude of people, ye waye

which goeth into the Capitoll. And ther hauīg Clubbes, & Stones in their handes, labored to interrupte the thinges that were cōcluded in the Capytoll, refuſynge chiefly Maximus: alledging that he was more ſeuere, then the ſymple Commons could well bere wt
               all. Wherefore, thei were moſte of all offended wyth hym: cryenge, and threatninge, that thei woulde 
                  ••
               ea them bothe, for his ſake. For thei requyred a Prince of Gordianus kynred, that in that famyle, and name, Thimperiall Dominion myght continew. Then Albinus, and Maximus, beynge garded wyth all the youthe of the order of knighthode, and the men of Armes of the Cytie, wearing ſwordes, attempted to go furth of the Capitole. But thei were dryuen backe, wt Clubbes, and Stones, vntyl that through the inuētione of ſome one man, thei beguyled the people after this ſorte.
            
               Gordianus an Infant.Ther was a litle infāt, ye Son of Gordianꝰ doughter, whych was named after hys Grandefathers name. The ſame, thei commaunded certayne, whome thei ſente furth, to fetche vnto them, who findinge hym playeng at home, did put hym vpon their ſhoulders, & caryed hym thrughe the myddes of the people, declaringe that he was Cordianus neuewe, and callynge hym by name, vntyll thei had brought hym into Capitol, the people makinge ioyfull acclamacions, and ſtrowing bowes before hym. And after that the Senate had pronounced him Emperour, ſeing he could not gouerne Thempyre, becauſe of his tender infancie, the yre of the people was aſſwaged, and thei ſuffered the olde Emperours to enter in to Thimperyall Pallayce. But ther happened at that tyme, a peſtyferouſe Calamitye vnto the Citye of Rome, throughe the raſhe boldenes of two Senatours. For when as the Senate was aſſembled, about certaine Publicke affayres, two of Maximinus Souldiours, which wer departed from the Campe, bothe of mydle age came vnto the Coorte gate, to herken, and ſpye, what was done, or determyned, beyng withoute weapons. And ſauing only theyr Iackes, and their Clokes thervpō,

thei ſtods togyther, amonges the reſte of the people. But whyles all other ſtode at the dore, two or three at the moſte beyng more deſirouſe to heare what was ſayde, then the reſte, entred into the Coorte, and paſſed a lytle further, then the Aultare of Victoria. Therwithall, a Senator, which a lytle before had ben Counſull, named Gallicanus, a Carthagineſe borne,Gallicacanus. Mecenas and an other whyche had bene Pretor, named Mecenas, ſodeinly (when thei loked for no ſuche chaun
                  •
               e, and had theyr handes ſtyll vnder their Clokes) with their daggers ſtabbed the Souldiors to ye hartes. For all the Senate, becauſe of the late ſedicion,Souldiors ſlain in the Tē
                  ple. dyd weare theyr weapōs, ſome openly, ſome pryuely, to defende their bodyes wtall, frō the trechery of theyr enemyes. The Souldiours beynge thus murdered (when they were not able, ſo ſodeinlye, to defende theim ſelues) laye proſtrat before the Aultare. With which ſyght, the other beynge diſmayed, throughe the murder of theyr Companiōs, and fearynge the flockynge togyther of the people, becauſe them ſelues were wythout weapons, furthwyth they fledde a waye.
            Then Gallycanus lepte haſtely oute of the Coorte into the myddes of the people,The Audacitee of Gallicanus. and there ſhewing hys ſworde, and his hande, ſtylling with bloode, exhorted them, to purſue, and ſlea the enemyes of the Romaine people, and Senate, and the frendes, and Companyons of Maximinus. Wherwt all the people being prouoked, receaued Gallycan wt ioyfull ſhoutes, and purſued the Souldiours with ſtones, as farre as thei well myght. And the Souldiours, hauing goten into their Campe, a fewe of thē beyng woūded, and hurt, their harneſſed them ſelues, & defended their Trenche. But Galicanus (ſeyng he had already ſet vpon ſuche a myſchiefe) rayſed vp a ciuyle, and very perniciouſe battayle. For after he hadde commaunded all the Armoryes to be broken vp (in the whyche were kepte weapons, rather of pompe, then of warre) wherewyth euery man myghte arme hym ſelfe, accordynglye) And hauing opened the Swordeplayars Halles, cauſed euery mā to arme himſelf wt his own harneſſe.

And taking out of the houſes, and ſhoppes in the Cytie, what ſo euer weapon was within theim, eyther ſworde, ſpeare, dagger, or are, when as furye & anger had made all thing yt came to hande a weapon, furthwith thei went in plumpes, withoute ordre, vnto the Campe, and, as yf thei ſhuld aſſaulte a Citie, thei beſieged the walles, and gates of the Campe. But the Souldious within, beyng expert in fyghting, defended them ſelues with the battailementes of their walles, and their Targettes, repuſyng the common people, with often ſhotte of arrowes, and their lōge ſpeares. Finally, when ye people determined to returne in to the Citie, becauſe thei were weried, and the moſte parte of the Sworde plaiers ſore wounded, beyng verye neare nyghte, the Souldiours, perceauynge the recheleſſe regarde of the people in departinge (for the Romaines thoughte not, that the Souldiours durſte fyghte with them, hande to hande, or being ſo fewe in number, to enter oute of their fortreſſe, to fyght with ſo great a multitude) ſodeinly ſettinge open their gates, made a ſtronge, and forcible inuaſiō againſt that dyſordered heape of people. In that conflicte were all the Sworde players ſlayne, and a greate number of the people, thruſte to death in the preſſe. Which ones eanded, the Souldiours returned to their Campe, bicauſe it was not farre of. Herevpon, there roſe more vehemēt indignacion amonges the Senatours, and people of Rome. Wherefore thei choſe for their Capitaynes, euery noble, & valyaunt man, throughout all Italye, and leuienge all the youthe togyther, armed them with ſuch weapons, as in that ſodeine tumult, thei coulde get. The chiefeſt, and ſtrongeſt parte dyd Maximus, leade to fight againſt Maximinus, the reſt remayned for the cuſtody, and defēce, of the Citie. In the meane whyle, there were daylye ſkyrmyſſhes, and aſſaultes, at the walles of the fortreſſe, but to no purpoſe, nor proffyte, the Souldyours, defending them ſelues from aboue, and driuing away ſhamefullye, the common people, whyche they ſtrake, and wounded.
            
               Albinus, whyche remayned at home, required the people by Proclamation, to take truce, and become frendes, wyth the Souldyours, vnto whome he promyſed alſo perdone of all they had committed. But he coulde induce neyther partye therevnto. The miſchiefe encreaſing dayly, more & more. For the people diſdayned, that ſo great a multytude, ſhould be had in contempte of ſo ſmall a number. On thother ſyde, the Souldyours greuouſly grudged, that they ſhould ſuffer that of the Romaynes, whyche they neuer loked for of the Barbarous nacions.
            Finallye, when the aſſaultes proceaded not, as the people woulde haue it, it ſeamed good to their Captaines, to turne away, al the Riuers, & waters, which came by Cundittes into the Campes, that the Souldyours myght be afflicted wyth wante of water, and wyth thyrſte. Wherefore, in makynge of Trenches and cuttynge the Cundyt Pypes, they tourned away all the ſtreames of water from the Fortreſſe.
            But the Souldyours, perceauynge the peryll imminent, and ſtryken wyth deſperation, opened their gates, and runnyng vpon the multytude, whych ranne awaye, purſued theym vnto the verye Gates of the Cytye.
            Then the Common people, beynge Inferiour, and not able to ſuſtayne thys cruell conflict, gat them into theyr houſes, and from thence, vexed the Souldyours, who durſte not enter into the houſes to theym vnknowen. Wherfore, they ſeynge the houſes, & ſhoppes ſhutte, caſte fyre to the doores and porches, whiche ſtoode out towardes the ſtreate, wherof there are verye manye in Rome. Wherby it came to paſſe,The Cytye of Rome ſet on fyre. that partlye through the farre diſtaunce of the houſes, and partlye through the tymber buyldynge, a great parte of the Citye was burned, and many men of ryche ſubſtaunce, ſodeynlye became poore: hauynge loſte notable poſſeſſyons, eyther welthye, throughe the reuenewes therof, or elles of great eſtimation through the beauty of the ſame. Neither was there a ſmal number of men deſtroyed. For that theyr portalles and doores

beynge on fyre, they had no waye to eſcape furthe of the houſes. The ſubſtaunce, and goodes, of ryche men, was ranſacked, the Souldyours geuynge theyr whole myndes to ſpoyle, and robberye, and neadye Beggers of the Cytye, mynglynge theym ſelues amonges them.
            But the rage of the fyre ſo wandered, that it burned and conſumed more houſes, then ſome greate Cytye hathe in compaſſe of buyldynge. Durynge the tyme that thys calamytye was done at Rome, Maximinus, makynge haſte in hys iourneye, was come vnto the borders of Italye. And hauynge ſacryfyced vpon the Aultars, whyche were there erected, he contynued on hys voyage, commaundynge the Souldyours to kepe on theyr Harneſſe, and marche in order of Battayle. But ſeynge we haue made mencion alreadye, of the reuolte of Affrike, the Ciuyll warre at Rome, and the actes by Maximinus, wyth hys iourney hythereunto, we wyll declare the reſte hereafter.
            ¶The eande of the ſeuenth Booke.
         
         
            
            ¶The Argumente of the eyghte Booke of Herodian.
            
               IN the beginnynge of the eyght, and laſte booke, is ſhewed, how, and in what order, Maximinus came vnto the Confynes, and boundes of Italye, by the Alpes, as farre as the Cytye of Aquileia, where he founde reſiſtence. After that is deſcribed the ſcituation of that Citye, the preparation for the warre, the aſſaultes made by Maximinus armye, & the ſtoute reſyſtence of the Aquileyens. Conſequentlye, howe Maximinus was ſlayne, and what ioye was made therefore. And how Albinus (which the aucthour in the former boke called Balbinus) & Maximus, after they had a litle ſpace, raigned in great trāquilitie, were ſlayne by the men at armes. After whome, Gordianus beynge .xiiii. yeares of age, enioyed the Empyre alone.
         
         
            
            
            ¶The eyghte booke of the Hiſtorye of Herodian.
            
               WE haue in the laſte booke recyted, what Maximinus did, after the death of Gordiā, his iornay into Italie, wyth the ſedicion, and reuolte, of the people, and Souldiours, within the Cytye ſelfe of Rome. When Maximinus was arryued in the confynes of Italye, he ſente certayne Scowrers before, to eſpye, wether there were any ſtale, or enbuſhmentes, lying in the bottom of the Alpes,Alpes and the thicke woodes there: And led the Armye, into the playne, commaundynge the men of Armes, to march forward, in a ſquare ordre, to thende that a great parte of the fyeldes, myght be couered with them. And hauing brought all impedimentes, and Cariage, into the myddes, him ſelfe folowed, with the Yeomē of his Garde, to reſcue them, yf they were diſtreſſed. On eyther ſyde, the wynges were of mē of Armes, on Barbed Horſes, with Mauritanian, Slyngers, Archers of the oriental Regiōs, and horſemen of Germanye, whome he had waged, for thencreaſe of his ayde. And he was accuſtomed, to ſet them in the fore fronte of the battayle, againſt his enemyes, becauſe their ſhoulde ſuſtayne, and receaue the fyrſte brunte, beyng boulde, and ſtronge mē. And (yf nede ſo required, he had rather, thoſe Barbarous, & rude people, were loſte, than any other of his owne Souldiours.
            After thei had paſſed the plaines, obſeruing theyr due order in marchinge, they came to a cytie of Italye, named of the enhabitauntes Eumona.Eumona. The ſame is ſytuate in a lowe playne, at the foote of the Alpes.
            There, the Scourers reported vnto Maximinus, that the Towne was voide, and forſaken of thenhabitauntes, who were all ſledde, the gates of the Tēples, and the houſes, conſumed wyth fyre, and all thynge,

whiche was in the Towne, or fielde, caryed awaye, or burnte, no foode remayninge, eyther for man, or beaſte.
            Wherwith Maximinꝰ was veri glad: for he thought, that other people, wold doo ſemblably, through feare of him. But contrarywyſe, the Souldiours murmured, and grudged, that they ſhould in the very begynning, be vexed wt famine. And when thei had paſſed ouer the nyghte, ſome of them, in the open, and cōmen houſes, other ſome, in the playne fyelde, immediately after the Sonne ryſing, they came vnto the Alpes.
            
               The gretenes of the AlpesThieſe be wonderfull longe Hylles, compaſſynge Italie, in maner of a wal, and ſo high, that thei ſeame to pearce the cloudes, ſo long alſo, that thei enuirō all Italye, touching, on the lefte hande, the Tirrhenian, and on the right ſyde,The Tyrrheniā & The Ioniā Seas the Ionian Seas: beyng full of brode, and thicke foreſtes, with very narowe pathes, and vnneth paſſable, by reaſon of the height of the broken Rockes, and ſtepenes of the highe banckes: hauīg notwithſtanding many narowe paſſages, made with laboure of hande, by the auncience Italions. Wherefore, a meruelous feare entred into the Souldyours hartes, to paſſe that waye: dreading, yt the hyll toppe: was already taken by their enemies, and all the ſtraites ſtopped, to forbid them paſſage. Neither did theyr feare ſeame fonde, to them that behelde the nature of the place.
            After thei had paſſed the Alpes, and were deſcended into their Campe, thei began to reioyce, and bāquet, together. And Maximinus then cōceiued a ſure truſt, that all hys affayres, ſhall haue proſperous ſucceſſe: ſeyng that the Italians, truſted not vnto the difficultie of the places, wherein, them ſelues were wonte to lurke, and prouide for their ſafety, and where, they might lye in wayte for their enemies, and fightynge frō aboue, eaſely diſtreſſe thē. When thei were entred into ye playne,Aquileia ye Scourers brought word, ye Aquileia the greateſt Citye of Italye, had ſhut their gates, and that the Pannoniā bādes, which went before, had very fierſely aſſayled the walles, yet not withſtandyng,

theyr often attempes were all in vayne. Wherefore, beynge weried, they were conſtrayned to departe, a great number, of Stones, Speares, and Arowes, hauing hurte them, from the toppe of the walles. Then Maximinus, being very angry with the Pannonians, as thoughe thei had not foughte valeantlye ynoughe, made haſte thitherwardes: truſtinge, with out any more labour, to wyn the Citie.
            But Aquileya, as it is a myghty Towne,The ſcituaciō of Aquileia was abūdā
               tely enhabited of people. And as it were the Marte Towne of Italy, & the territorie of Illiria, it did frō the mayne lande, miniſtre, to thoſe that ſayled in the Seas, plenty of all ſuche neceſſaries, as was brought thither by the Ryuers, and the lande: And from the Sea, vnto the mayne lande, thinges very neceſſarye for the hygher Countreys, whych throughe the bytternes of wynter, were nothynge fertyll. But chyefely it myniſtred wynes, wherewyth that Regyon abounded, vnto the nighe Countreyes, that hadde no vyne trees at all. The whyche cauſed, that beſydes the greate number of Cytezins, there repayred vnto that Cytye, very many Straungers, and Marchauntes alſo. And Certes, the multitude was at this tyme muche more augmented, by the aſſembly of Countrey people, who hauynge forſaken theyr owne ſmall Droupes, and Vylages, dyd truſte them ſelues, vnto the greatenes of this Cytye. The olde wall, whereof, was a greate parte fallen downe. For, whyles the Romaynes floryſhed in Dominion, the Cytyes of Italye, neaded neyther wall, nor weapon, lyuynge in quyet tranquilytie, and beynge aſſocyated in the Rule of Thempyre with them. But nowe, neceſſitye compellynge them,The preparacion of the Aquilyens for the defence of their Citye. they buylded vp theyr walles agayne, wyth Towres, Bulwerckes, and Rāpiers: and hauynge fortyfyed their Cytye wythin furth, and ſhutte theyr Gates, ſtode all togyther, bothe daye, and nyghte vppon the walles, valeauntely dryuynge backe theyr enemyes.
            
               Their Capitaynes of chiefeſt power, were two me
                  •
                which had bene Conſulles, choſen by the Senate, named Criſpinus, and Menephilus. Thieſe procured wt muche diligence,Criſpinus Menephilus all thynges neceſſary, to be brought before hande into the Citye, to thende their mighte the longer time ſuſtaine the ſiege. Ther was in ye Towne great abundaunce of water, throughe the great number of welles, the Riuer whyche ran a longe by the walles, and the dyches, betwene them, and their enemyes.
            Thieſe thinges beyng thus ordred within the Citie, when Maximinus hearde, that thei defended their walles ſtoutly, and had ſhut their gates againſt hym, he reſolued to ſende, vnder color of Ambaſſade, ſome which ſhould ſpeake vnto them, and (yf it were poſſyble) perſwade them, to open the gates of the Cytie vnto hym.
            He had then in hys Armye, a certayne Magiſtrate of Aquileia, whoſe wyfe, childrē, and houſehold, were encloſed within the Citie. This man therfore, with a certaine Capitaines, he ſente as orators vnto theym: truſting, that the Citezyns wold eaſely obey his aucthoritie. When thei approched nighe the walles, they ſpake vnto the people on this wyſe, and ſayed. That their Commune Emperour commaunded them, layenge al armes a part, to obſerue peace, to receaue him as their frende, and not as theyr enemye, and to occupye them ſelues in prayers, and ſacrificeng to theyr Goddes, rather then in deſyre to murder. To take cō
               paſſion of their natiue Countrey, ſhortly (yf thei perſiſted in their obſtinacie) lyke to come to vtter ruine, & decay. That thei might, yf thei would, with on deede, ſaue them ſelues, & their Country. For thei ſaid, that their good Emperour, would forget, and forgiue, all offences, there before commytted, ſeynge that it was not their tranſgreſſion, but the peruerſe fault of other men. Suche wordes did the Ambaſſadors ſpeke vnder the wall, wyth ſo loude voyce, that thei mighte eaſely be harde, although, not of all the people, yet of as many, as ſtode vpon the walles, and Towres.
            
               For they dyd wyth ſylence, 
                  〈◊〉
                attētiuelye geue eare vnto that the Ambaſſadours ſpake. But Criſpinus, fearyng, leſt through thoſe allurementes, they would be perſuaded, to take peace for warre, and open theyr gates vnto theyr enemyes (as the common people are euer wauerynge and vnconſtaunte) ranne from one wall to another, earneſtly deſyrynge, and inſtauntlye beſechynge them to perſeuer valyauntlye, and reſiſte manfully, and not to violate theyr faythe, and allegyaunce, towardes the Senate, and the people of Rome, nor yet neglecte the Title, and Fame of Italy, ſo long tyme preſerued from the inuaſions of forreyne enemyes, nor geue credit, vnto a falſe, periured, and trayterous Tyraunte, nor beynge allured wyth gentle fayned talke, runne headlonge vnto theyr owne manifeſt deſtructiō. But truſt to the fortune of ye warre, whyche moſt commonly is ſo vncertayne, that ſometymes a greate huge hoſte, are of a ſmall number diſcomfited: and thoſe, whych ſeame the mightier, are by theym whiche are compted the weaker, diuers tymes vanquiſhed. Neyther that they ſhould feare the greatneſſe of hys armye. For (quod he) they that fyghte in another mannes quarell, when they ſee, that the good happe of the victorye ſhall departe to another, doo but fayntlye endure the Battayle: perceauynge them ſelues onely to be pertakers of the peryll, and the verye profyt of the victorye, to remayne vnto another man. But they whyche fyghte for their countrey, beſydes that they ought to be of better hope (for they contende to take nothyng of others, but to defende theyr owne) are alſo of a greater ſtomacke, as thoſe whome no deſyre of dominion, but euerye mans owne neceſſitie, compelleth to fyghte, becauſe the commodytye of the Victorye, is chyefelye due vnto them.
            Criſpinus ſpeakyng thoſe wordes, nowe vnto euerye man perticulerlye, and then to all generallye, beynge a man of hys owne diſpoſition honourable, and floryſhynge in the Romayne eloquence, beſydes that, gratefull to euerye man, for hys meke gouernaunce, did eaſly ſtabliſhe the hartes of ye people to continue in

their duty and allegiaunce. Wherfore he cōmaunded the Ambaſſadours to departe to Maximinus againe, wythout anye thyng concluded. It was reported, that Criſpinus was hartened to abide the fortune of ye battayle, by the anſwere of the Southſayers,Southſayers. whiche reported, that the inwards of the beaſtes, betokened luckye ſucceſſe of his affaires. And in deade, the Italians vſed to geue much credit to ye ſuperſtition. There wer ſpred abrode beſydes the Oracles of a certayne Idole in that countrey, which promiſed victorye. The enhabitauntes there cal the ſame Idole Beles,Beles. and do with great reuerence worſhyppe it, interpretyng him to be Apollo. Whoſe Image, certaine of Maximinus owne Souldiours, affyrmed that they ſawe in the ayre fightyng for the Citie. Which thing, whether many beleued it for a trueth, or whether the Fable pleaſed thē, to mittigate thereby the infamy of ſo great an army (becauſe thei were vnequal in battayle, to ſo ſmall a number of Cytezyns, not exerciſed in the warres (that it might ſeame they were ouercome rather by ye Goddes then men) I am not very certayn. But the ſtraūgenes of the matter, made it ſeame more credible.
            After the Amdaſſadours were retourned wtout any reſolute cōcluſion, Maximinus being ſtyrred wt much more fury, made greater haſt then he dyd before. But when he came vnto the Ryuer, whyche runneth xii. miles of from the Cytye, he found it of a very depe and breade Channell. For in that ſeaſon of the yeare, the Snowe (which the longe wynter before, cauſed to endure) beyng molten vpon the next hylles, had made ſo great a floude, that the Armye coulde not paſſe ouer it, by anye meanes. For the Aquileians had broken, and caryed away the Bridge, which was a goodly and ſumptuous peace of worke, buylded by the auncyent Emperours, of ſquare ſtone, with many ſmall pillers ſtanding one by another vpon the ſame. Wwherfore when tharmie coulde paſſe ouer, neyther by Bridge, nor veſſell (for there was none nigh hand) he ſtode ſtyl in a dumpe, muſyng what to do. But certayne Germaynes, being ignoraunt, wyth what ſwyftnes, and

violence, the Ryuers of Italye did runne, & ſuppoſing that theyr courſe was gentle, and flow ouer the fields, as the Riuers in theyr Countrey (which for that they haue no ſwift ſtreame, are eaſlye congeled ouer wyth Iſe) aduentured them ſelues, & their horſes that were perfect in ſwimming, into the middes of the Chānell: where, throughe vyolence of the Streame, they were drowned. After Maximinus had lyen ſtyll in Campe, ii. or .iii. dayes, he caſt a depe trenche aboute the ſame, that no enemies ſhoulde ſodeynly ſet vpon them, & remayned vpon that ſide of the Riuer, conſulting howe he myght make a Bridge to paſſe ouer. Whyles he ſo abode very penſife, becauſe there was no tymber, nor Boates with the whiche ioyned together, he myghte make a Bridge, certayne Carpenters declared vnto hym, that in the Vyllages rounde aboute, forſaken of the Inhabitauntes, there were many round Tubbes and Hoggeſheades, wherin the people were wonte to cary wyne: the which beinge rounde like ſhyppes, yf they were bounde togethers, in maner of ſmall Boates, would eaſly carye them ouer. For being faſtened togethers, couered with Oziars, or Twigges, & well baleſſed with earth, they would neuer be drowned. When yt was finiſhed, ye ſouldiours eaſlye paſſed ouer to thother ſhore. And there, hauing burned al ye vyllages which they founde abandoned of thin habitaūtes, did cut down all ye vines, & trees, wherby they greatly defaced ye beauty of ye region. For all the countrey ſeamed to be cōpaſſed aboute, in maner of a Theater, wt trees ſet in due order, & vynes ioyned together, lyfted vp in height like vnto a Scaffold. Al which being plucked by ye rootes, tharmie approched nigh vnto ye citie. Neuertheles becauſe they were all wery, Thēperour would not yt they ſhould furthwt begyn ye aſſault. But hauing encāped, more then an arrowes ſhoote frō the Citie, deuided thē into hundreds, appoynted the order of their marching like vnto a wedge, ſmal before, and broade behinde, & limitting to euery Company, a part of the wall, to ſcale, and batter, he gaue them lycence to recreate them ſelues, for one daye.
            
               That paſſed, he began to geue the aſſault, and hauing moued to the wall, all ſortes of engyns, when no kynd of Batterie was omitted, there was almoſt euery day cruell ſkyrmyſhes fought. For the Souldyours enuironed the walles, as it were with a toyle, or nette, and fought with muche ſtoutnes of ſtomacke. And on the contrarye parte, the Aquileiens reſyſted verye valiauntlye: who hauynge ſhutte the dores of their temples, and houſes, dyd all together, wyth theyr wyues, and Children, vpon the walles, Towers, and Batylmentes, defende theyr Cytye. Neyther was there any age, whiche refuſed to fyghte for their Countrey. Maximinus then pulled downe al the Suburbes, and whatſoeuer buyldynge was without the Cytye, with the tymber wherof, he made all kynde of engyns, and inſtrumentes, wherwith he might batter the walles, or at leaſt wyſe, ſome part therof, whereby the armye myght enter into ye Cytye, and in ſpoylyng, ſackyng, and defacynge, the ſame, leaue it deſolate, and voyde of habitation. For he thoughte it yt woulde be againſt his honour, to go vnto Rome, before he had deſtroyed the Cytye, which fyrſt reſiſted him in Italy.
            Wherefore, he rode wyth hys Sonne, whome he had ioyned vnto hym in the Empyre, amonges the Souldyours, promyſyng them many good morowes, and exhortynge theym, to ſtande lyke menne to theyr tacklynge.
            But the Cytezyns of Aquileia, threw downe great ſtones vpon them. And hauing fylled verye many Ladels with Brimſtone,A ſore repulſe. Lyme, and Pitche, as ſoone as the Souldyours began to ſcale the wals, they powred downe ye ſame ſo ſaue, that it ſeamed violent ſhowres. Whē ye Pitche & baggage, fell vpō ye naked partes of ye ſouldiours bodies, thei threw frō thē their brigāders, & the reſt of their harneſſe, ye yron wexing very hoate, and their timber engyns being ſet on fyre. Then a mā mighte ſee the Souldiours, throwe away their owne harneſſe. Which thing, hauīg a colour, that thei were diſpoyled by the vanquiſſhers) was inuented, rather by ſubtlitie of arte, then force of batayle. Whereby it

happened, that many of the Souldiours, eyther loſte theyr ſyghte, or elles had their faces, and other bare partes of their bodies, burned. The Aquileyēs threw downe alſo, into their Towres, & engins of woode, many torche ſtraues, couered wyth Roſen, and pitch, whoſe endes, were ſharpened, with heades, lyke vnto arowes: whyche beyng kindeled, and ſticked faſte into the Timber worke, dyd eaſely ſet all on fyre. That notwithſtanding, the fyrſte daies, the fortune was equall on eyther ſyde. But anon after, the courage of Maximinus armye dyd aſwage, and becauſe theyr hope was fruſtrate, and had deceiued thē, thei wexed euery day more peſife then other. For thoſe, who thei before ſuppoſed, wold not abyd the brunt firſt of theyr force, thei nowe perceiued, not onely, not to ſhrincke, but alſo, to reſyſte valeaūtely. Contrariwyſe, the ſtomackes of the Aquilenſes, were daylye, more, and more enhaunſed. And hauinge, thrugh vſe, obtayned, bothe thexperte feate of fyghtinge, and therwithall manfull corage, thei ſo deſpyſed the Souldiours, that they mocked them, with ieſtyng at Maximinus, when he came nighe vnto the walles, and bluſtering oute, many opprobrious taūtes againſt him, and his Sone. Wherewith he being chaufed, when he could not auenge him ſelfe vppon hys enemyes, he put to cruel death, many of his own Capitaines: alleging, yt thei had nor like valeaunte men, and true ſubiectes, done their full endeuour, in the aſſaultinge of the Citye. Wherby it came to paſſe, that the Souldiours be came more angry towardes hym: And his enemyes, had him in more contempt, and deriſion. It chaunſed beſydes, that the Aquileyens aboūded with plenty of vitayle, and all other neceſſaries. For what ſo euer was expedient, to the ſuſtenaunce of men, and horſes, the ſame was before hande brought into the Citye. On thother ſyde, the armye languiſhed with penury of foode. And after all the trees were cut downe, and the fieldes waſted, ſome of the Souldiours lay in Cabbans, ſuch as thei could for haſte make, and other ſom in the open fieldes, ſubiect to the heate of the Sonne,

and the weatenes of the Rayne. Neyther was there anye kynde of noryſhmente, broughte vnto theim, for them ſelues, or their cattell. For all the wayes, and paſſages, were by the diligence of the Romaines, ſhut vp with greate walles, and Gates. The Senate alſo, had ſente certayne Senatours, with a companie of armed perſonnes, choſen oute of all Italye, to defende the Shores, and Hauens, geuing no man licēce to ſayle. So that all thinges done at Rome, were kept cloſe, from the eares of Maximine. All the highe wayes beſydes, and Bypathes, were diligently watched, that no man ſhould paſſe by them. So it came to paſſe, that the Armye, whiche beſyeged the Towne, was it ſelfe alſo encloſed rounde aboute. For thei coulde neyther take Aquileia, nor paſſe forward towards Rome, through wante of ſhyppes, and wagons, whiche were all before hande taken vp by the Romaines. The rumor alſo thrughe ſuſpicion augmented, that all the Romayne people, were already in Armes, and that Italy, with all the Illyrian, and Barbarous naciōs, whiche enhabyte the Eaſte, and Southe Contreys, had wyth one conſent, conſpyred, to ioyne together, againſt Maximinus, for the deſpyte, and grudge, they bare vnto hym. Wherefore, the Souldiours fell into diſpayre of good hope, beyng afflicted, wyth ſcarcetye of all thinges, and hauyng no water, but ſuch, as thei drew out of ye Ryuer, which was defiled with bloode, and deade Carcaſes. For the Aquileyens, threwe into the Ryuer, ſuch deade bodies, as thei coulde not bury. And thoſe whyche periſhed with ſworde, or ſicknes, in the Campe, were throwen into the Ryuer lykewyſe. Amonges whome, there were many, whyche died by famin, hauing when thei were drowned, ſome breath remaynynge.
            Whyles the Army aboade thus ſorowfull, voyde of all ſuccoure, ſodeinly, when Maximinus reſted in hys Pauilion, one daye vacant from batayle, and all the Souldiours, were gone to reſte theim ſelues, in theyr Cabans, and Tentes, the men at Armes, which had theyr Stacions, within the Citye of Rome, vnder

the Hyll Alban, and therin, their wiues, & childrē, cō
               ſulted, and agreed, to ſlea Maximyne: that thei might be ones exempt, from that longe, & inexplicable ſyege of the Cytye, and mouing of warre againſt Italy, for the loue of a Tiraunt, who was abhorred of all men.
            Wherefore, taking corage vnto them, about nonetyde, thei wente to his Pauilion, the yeomen of hys Garde, cōſpiring together with them. And there, after thei hadde pulled downe hys Images, thei ſlewe hym, and hys Sonne, when they came furthe,The deth of Maximinus & his Son. to ſpeke vnto the Souldiours: and with them, the lord great Maiſter of his houſe, and all his deareſt frēdes. And then threw their bodies furth wt deſpite, leuyng them, to be deuoured of Dogges, and Byrdes: ſēding onely the two Emperours heades vnto Rome. This eande of lyfe, had Maximinus, with his Son, both receyuinge condigne punyſhmente, of their yll ordered gouernaunce. At the firſt tidinges, of the two Prynces death, the Army ſtode ſtyll, amaſed, & vncertayne what thei might doo. For it was not equally acceptable vnto them all, eſpeciallye not vnto the Panonians, and Barbarous Thracians, who hadde delyuered the Empyre, vnto Maximinus. But when they perceiued that the deade coulde not be vndone, they helde them ſelues contented althoughe vnwillingly, and fayned to reioyce with the reſte. Then, layeng a ſyde their weapons, thei went to the walles of Aquileye, lyke peaceable mē, and there declaring the death of Maximyne, deſyred that the Gates might be ſet opē vnto them, beyng nowe of their mortall enemyes, become their louing frendes. But the Capitaynes of Aquileia, would not permyt it, but ſhewed furth vppon the walles, the Images of Maximus, Albinus, and Gordian, Emperours, crowned with Garlandes of Lawrell. Vnto the which Images, them ſelues fyrſte making ioyful acclamacions, exorted the Army alſo, to acknowledge, and reuerence them, whome the Senate, and people of Rome, hadde choſen to be Emperours.
            For, ſaid thei, the other Gordians before paſſed, are amonges

the Goddes. They did ſet furth alſo vpon the walles, a market of all neceſſaries, with greate abundaunce of meate, wyne, garmētes, and all other thinges, which that riche, and floriſhing Cytie, could miniſter vnto them. That thing, did meruelouſly abaſhe the Souldiours: who perceyued, that the Cytezins, had ſtore ynoughe of vitayll, to abyde a farre longer ſeage. And on the other ſide, them ſelues, being afflicted with wante of foode, ſhould rather haue all peryſſhed, than conquered that Citie, abounding wyth all thinges expedient for mans relief. Whyles the Souldiours thus aboade vnder the walles, and tooke ſuch thinges, as their neceſſitie required, in companye of the Citezins, their countenaunce was of peace, and frendſhip, a forme of ſiege, as yet remaining, for that the Romayne Souldiours, laye aboute the walles whiche were encloſed, and ſhut. In the meane while, that theiſe thinges were in doing at Aquileya, ye horſe men, which caried the Emperours heades to Rome, making great haſte, with ſpedy diligence, were receiued into euery Citie, and Town, with the gates opē, and the multitude of Citezins, and enhabitauntes, berynge Lawrell in their handes. And then hauinge paſſed ye Mariſhes, & Lakes, whiche are betwene Altinum,Altinum. Rauenna Maximꝰ. & Rauenna, thei founde Maximus in Rauenna, leuieng, & waging Souldiours out of the Citye, and Italy, and calling a great number of Germains vnto his ayde, the which were ſent him, by the cōmon people of Germany, whō he before in his Proconſulſhip amonges them, had prudentely gouerned.
            Whiles he was thus muſtering his power againſt Maximine, ye horſemē arriued ther ſodēli, bringing wt thē ye Princes heades, & declared ye victory, wt the proſperouſe ſucceſſe of their affaires, & ye good wil, & cōſet, of ye people, & Army, to ye obediece of thoſe Emperors, whō ye Senate had elected. Whē thieſe thīges were ſo ſodēly wt out expectaciō reported, furthwt, the people ran vnto the Aulters to ſacrifice, euery man ſingyng, and reioyſynge at the victory, whiche wythoute any troubleſome buſynes, they had obtayned.
            
               Then Maximus after the ſacryfyce eanded, diſmiſſed, the horſmen to Rome, to cary thither, the ſayd heades, and declare the whole circumſtaūce, vnto the people. When they were ariued at the Cytye, and hauynge putte the heades vpon twoo Speares, caried the ſame throughe ye ſtreates, to be ſeane of the people, no tonge can tell, the ioye, and myrth was there that daye. For there was no perſon, eyther yonge, or olde, but ranne vnto the Temples, and Aulters.
            No man abode within hys owne houſe, but ranne lyke madde men, ſhoutynge, and reioyſynge one with an other, and gatherynge theym ſelues together, in a circle, as thoughe ſome manne woulde make an Oration vnto them. Albinus hym ſelfe offered an hundreth beaſtes, and all the Magiſtrates, reioyſed aboue meaſure, as though they had eſcaped ye axe, whych before henge ouer theyr neckes. Purſeuaūtes, & Poſtes, were ſente beſydes, wyth Laurell in theyr handes, to beare thoſe newes vnto all the Prouinces.
            Whyle thys ſo great ioye, and myrthe, continued amonges the Romaynes, Maximus remoued frō Rauenna, and went vnto Aquileia: hauyng paſſed al the Maryſhes, in the whyche the Ryuer Eridanus, and the nyghe Lakes, doth ouerflowe, ſo that they runne into the Sea, by .vii. armes, and therefore, the nyghe enhabitauntes, cal the ſame Lake, in theyr tonge .vii. Seas. Furthwith the Aquileiens opened their gates, and receaued Maximus. And verye manye Cytyes of Italye, ſente theyr chiefe Magiſtrates, as Ambaſſadors vnto him, clothed in white garmētes, & crowned wyth Laurell, bringinge with theym, the Images of theyr Countrey Goddes, and Crownes of Golde, yf there were any, amonges their chiefeſt Iewels: wher withall, they gratified Maximus, and ſtrowed bowes to him in his paſſage. The armye which had beſieged Aquileia, mette hym alſo, in peaceable apparell, wyth Laurell in their handes: but not with ſo trewe and louyng affection, as with a fayned good wyll, and reuerence, for the tyme onelye, applyed vnto the preſente ſtate, of the Prince. Yea, many of them morned priuelye,

that he whom they had choſen was ſlayne: & thoſe whyche the Senate had created, poſſeſſed the Principalytie.
            After Maximus had ſpente the firſt, & ſecond daye, in offering of ſacrifice, the thyrd day he aſſembled al ye army, together in the playne, & there ſitting in ye Tribunal ſeate, made thys Oration vnto them.
            Howe profitable your penitence, and fauour reconciled wyth the Romayne people, hathe been vnto you, your ſelues haue by experience throughlye learned, in acceptyng peace for warre, and obſeruyng the othe of true warriours, which is one the moſt holy, & ſacred, myſterie of the Romaine Empyre. Wherefore, you ought hereafter, to enioye the ſame cōmoditie, in gardyng your loyaltye, and faythe, towardes the people, and Senate of Rome, & to vs your Emperours, whō, through our nobilitie, bothe of byrth, & in actes done, as it were by certayne degrees aſcended, the Senate, and people of Rome, haue elected. Neyther is the poſſeſſion of principalitie peculier vnto one man, but of olde antiquitie, common vnto all the Romayn people. For in the Cytye ſelfe, is eſtablyſhed the Fortune of Thempyre, and to vs wyth you, is commytted the adminiſtration of the ſame. If you wyl therfore, retaine wyth you, that order, and modeſtye, that becommeth you, and geue due honour, and reuerence, vnto your Prynces, ye ſhall not onely obtayne vnto your ſelues a bleſſed lyfe, flowyng, and aboundyng with all goodnes, but alſo all Nacions, and Cytyes, lyuynge in reſte, wyll contynewe in theyr duetye of allegyaunce. Ye ſhall lyue, as youre owne heartes deſyre: euerye man at home in hys owne houſe, not troubled wyth warres in forreyne Countreyes (that beynge oure charge, to ſee the Barbarous people, remayne in peace, and defende the ſame) For whyles there are two Emperours, bothe the Citye, and forreyne affaires, ſhalbe adminiſtred more eaſlye: one of theym beynge alwayes readye, to go whyther neceſſitye ſhall call hym. Neyther nede ye to doubte, that any memorye ſhall remayne, of that is tofore done, eyther in vs

(for whatſoeuer ye dyd, was by commaundement) or in the Romayne people, or elles in anye other Nacion, whyche for iniurie done vnto theym, haue rebelled. Let all be forgotten, let there be a perfecte bonde of conſtante frendſhyppe, and a perpetuall faythe of loue, and modeſtie.
            After Maximus had ſpoken theſe wordes, and promyſed to diſtribute muche money amonges theym, he ſoiourned a lytle whyle at Aquil
                  •
               ia, and then determined to retourne to Rome.
            Wherfore, hauing diſmiſ
                  •
               ed the reſt the Armie into the Prouinces, and theyr owne Stations, him ſelf retourned to Rome, wych the Yeomen of hys Garde, (who hauynge the chyefeſt charge of the Emperours perſonne, were choſen by Albynus) and manye Germaynes hys frendes, in whome he had moſte affyaunce, as in thoſe, whome before he was Emperour, he had gouerned. When he entered into the Cytye, Albinus mette hym, wyth yonge Gordian in his companye. The Senate, and all the people receyued them wyth Ioyful Cries, & Shoutes, as if they triumphed.
            But notwithſtanding that the Empire were gouerned bothe openly and priuely, with much modeſt grauitie, euerye man ſpake well of it, and all the people were gladde wyth the Prynces, for that they were noble men borne, & worthye Thempyre, yet the ſpytful, and crabbed ſtomackes of the Pretorian Souldyours, could not wel abide, to heare thoſe ioyfull prayſes of the people, but grudged, & murmured agaynſte that nobilitye: beynge ſore greued, that the Prynces were created by the Senate. Theyr grudge was augmented, by reaſon of the Germaynes, whome Maximus retayned wyth hym in the Cytye.
            For they thoughte, that the Germaynes woulde worke theym myſchiefe, yf they attempted any great enterpryſe.
            They feared alſo treaſon, leſt perhaps they ſhoulde be put out of ſeruice, for their ſakes: beinge mindfull of Seuerus the Emperour, who diſcharged frō theyr lyuynges, all the Slears of Pertynax.
            
               Wherfore, one daye, when playes were celebrated in the Capitole, and mens mindes addicted vnto reuels, and paſtyme, ſodeynly the Souldiours did manifeſtly ſhewe furthe, theyr longe diſſimuled rancour. For beinge enflamed with yr
                  •
               , they ranne all together, in a franticke moode, vnto Themperyall Palayce: requirynge the twoo olde Emperours to deathe.
            It happened then (as the Diuell woulde haue it) that them ſelues agreed not very wel togethers. But, as the deſyre to raygne, is vnſaciable, and the power of gouernaunce indiuiſible) eyther of theym, coueyted to be the chiefe Ruler. For Albinus was ſtomacked thereunto, wyth the nobilitie of hys byrthe, and hys twyſe beynge Conſull. And Maximus was encouraged, with hys Gouernaunce of the Citye, and becauſe he was the more ſkylfull in all affayres. But in deade, theyr bothe dignities of Senatours, and theyr ſufficient nobilitie of byrthe, dyd prycke them bothe forwardes, eyther to coueyte the ſole Regiment, whiche was the cauſe of theyr owne deſtruction.
            For when Maximus, hearynge that the Pretorian Souldyours were comme to ſlea hym, determyned to cal for the ayde of the Germayns, whyche were in the Citie, & ſeamed able ynoughe, to withſtande the Pretorians, Albinus, ſuſpecting ſome deceyte to be forged againſt hym (becauſe he knewe that the Germaynes fauoured Maximus) prohybyted them to be ſent for: deniynge, that they were called to reſyſte the Pretorians, but onely to the entent Maximus might obtayne the rule him ſelfe alone.
            Whyles they thus contended wythin them ſelues, 
                  •
               oo, ſodeynlye wyth one aſſente, the Souldyours were vyolentlye entered into the Palayce, hauynge beaten downe the Porters. There toke they bothe the olde men, rente the garmentes they had on (beynge in deade ſymple, for that they abode wythin the dores) and drewe them dothe naked, out of the Palayce, beatynge and ſkornynge theym, as Emperours choſen oute of the order of Senatours. And pullynge theym by theyr Beardes, and eye lyddes, ſparynge no

parte of their body, with all the ſhame thei coulde deuyſe, thei caried them throughe the myddes of the Citie, vnto their Campe: determining, not to murdre them in the Palaice, but rather, to tormēt them with a ſlowe kynde of death, that thei might feale the more payne.
            But when thei harde that the Germayns knewe the matter, and were therefore fallen to harneſſe, and comming againſt theim, furthwith,Maximꝰ, and Albinus ſlain thei put the two olde men to death, after thei had moſte vylaynouſlye ordered theim. And hauing left their bodyes, in the myddes of the waye, thei lyfted vp yonge Gordianus in their Armes (when nothing elles was nere hande) and proclaymed him Emperour.Gordianus ſole Emperour. And then thei called often vnto the people, ſayinge, that thei hadde ſlayne wyth their owne handes, thoſe, whome the people reiected at the fyrſte: and choſen Gordian, the nenewe of that Gordian, whiche the Romayne people, had compelled to be Emperour.
            This yonge Gordian therfore, thei ledde into theyr Campe, ſhut their Gates, and there abode in quiete. And the Germaynes, hearing that thoſe were ſlaine, and throwen oute, for whome them ſelues made that haſt, determined not to fight for them, which were already deade, but returned to Innes agayne.
            This vnworthy, and vylaynouſe ende of lyfe, had the two graue, and modeſte, olde men: exalted to the Type, & Diademe, of the Empyre, thrugh the nobilytie of theyr byrthe, and ſynguler deſertes. After whome, Gordian beynge almoſte .xiii. yeres olde, and of all the people proclaymed Prynce, tooke vppon hym Thempyre.
            ¶The eande of the eyghte, and laſte Booke of Herodian.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶The Annotacions in forme of a Table after the order of the Alphabete, contaynynge the expoſytion of many woordes, Hiſtories, Fables, ſytuacions of places, and deſcription of Countreyes, ſeruynge to the more eaſye vnderſtandynge of the preſente Hyſtorye.
            
               A.
               
                  AChilles, was one of the moſt valyaūt Capitaynes of the Greakes, againſte Troy, Sone of Peleus King of Thrace, & Thetis the Doughter of Chirō, by whō he was enſtructed, in the feates of Armes. He was ſlayne by Paris, the Sone of Priamus, and Hecuba, at Troy ye Grete, in ye Tēple of Apollo: into yt whiche, he was come, during the truce betwene the Grekes, & Troians, vnder aſſuraūce, to marye Polixena the Doughter of Priamꝰ. In al partes of his body, he was wtout daūger of wounding, ſauing in the ſole of ye foote. By yt which, his mother Thetis held him, whē ſhe plonged him, for ye ſame purpoſe, wtin Stix, one of thinfernal floodes. In ye ſame part of his foote, not plō
                  ged, did Paris woūde him, whereof he died. And was buried in a litle hil called Sigeū, hard by Troy, wher, during the ſiege, the Greekes, encāped. In the warre betwene the Greekes, and the Troyans, he ſlew Hector, & Troilus, the Sones of Priamus, and Hecuba, & Bretherne of the ſaeid Paris. He was in heighte (as Licophron wryteth.) vii. cubites.
               Adoleſcencie is the age betwene Childehood, and m
                     •
                  ns age: that is betwene .xiiii. and .xxi. yeres. Seruius ye Gramariē, & Varro, hath deuided the Ages, in to Infācie, Boies age, Adoleſcēcie, Youth, & olde age, without any menciō of the perfect age of mās eſtate. The whiche, after the ſame diuiſion, is conteyned betwene youthe, and olde age. Infancie endureth vnto vii. yeres. Boyes age vnto .xiiii. complete.
               
                  But Seruius Tullius, a King of the Romaynes, reckened all thoſe which were vnder the age of .xvii. yeares to be Boyes, and after .xvii. yeres, vntyll .xlvi. to be yonge men, and them he called olde men, whyche were aboue .xlvi. yeres of age. Beyonde that is the age decrepite, vncertayne, and doubtfull.
               Aethiope: loke on this worde Libye.
               Alexander the grete, was the Sone of Philyp, king of Macedonye, and Olympias. In his tender age, he was enſtructed in learning. And after that, by ye ſpace of .x. yeres, brought vp in Philoſophy, vnder Ariſtotle, the moſt excellent Philoſopher of all his time. After the death of hys Father, coueting to be Lord of all the worlde, he apparayled his Armye, againſt Darius the Kinge of Perſia: who wyth his predeceſſours, had bene the auncient enemyes of Grece. Hym dyd Alexander vanquiſhe in ſundry batayles, and depryued of the Perſian Kyngdome. But after he had obtained many notable victories, in the .xxx. yere of hys age, he dyed by poyſon, at Babylō, as Iuſtin writeth. Neuertheleſſe, Plutarche affirmeth the cōtrary, ſay enge that he died of an Ague, very vehement, wherin was no ſuſpicion of Poyſon. The Prouinces, and Countreyes, by him Conquered, did Perdicas, (vnto whome at his deathe withoute any more wordes, he delyuered hys Rynge) diſtribute amonges many Gouernours: who altered their offices of gouernaūce, in to Royaulnes, and made them ſelues Kynges. And ſo was Thempyre of Alexander broughte into manye Kyngedomes. The reſydue of hys lyfe, ye maye rede in Plutarche, and Quintus Curtius.
               Alexandrye, whereof Herodian ſpeaketh in the thirde Booke, is a Citye of Siria, hard by a reflexiō of the Sea, called Sinus Iſſicus, wherefore loke vpō thieſe wordes, Iſſicus Sinus. There is an other Citye called Alexandrye, in the Region of Troas, where Troye the greate ſtode, as Plinie writeth, in the .xxx. Chapiter of hys .v. Booke.
               
                  Anonter Cytye, named Alerandrie, is in Egypte, ſcituate vpon the Sea ſide, oueraneanſte the Iſle Pharus, as ſayth Plinie in the .xxxi. Chapiter of the ſame boke. Thys Cytye is the principall of all Egypte, as London is of England. Into the whiche Ptolomeus the kyng of Egypte, deſyred to be remitted by the Romaines, as it appeareth by many Epiſtles, of Cicero, vnto Lentulus, in the fyrſte booke of hys familiar Epiſtles. Of thys Cytye, doth Herodian make mencion in the .iiii. booke of his Hiſtorye, and of the Treaſon wrought agaynſt the Citezins thereof, by Antonyne. There is another Cytye named Alexandrie, by the mountaynes of Caſxij, in the Realme of Sogdia, nygh vnto the Bactrians, whych hath on the South the mountaigne Cacauſus. Another Alexādrie, buylded lykewyſe by Alexander the great, ſtandeth in the Region called Margiana, of a Ryuers name, whiche is Margus. The ſame hathe on the Weſt ſide Hircania, on the Eaſt the Bactrians, and on the South, the Realmes of Parthia, and Aria. Thys Citie was deſtroyed by the Barbarous people, and in the ſame place was a new buylded, by Seleucus the Sonne of Antiochus, who named it Seleucia, as recordeth Plinie, in the xvi. Chapyter of his .vi. boke. Another citie called Alexandrie, in the Countreye of Carmania in Inde, boundynge vpon Perſia. Of theiſe Cityes and countreyes loke Ptolomeus and Plinie.
               Altinum loke thys worde Aquileia.
               Amphitheater, is a place made to behold plaies in, the which is in fourme round, as yf it were buylded of .ii. Theaters, and therfore is called Amphitheater. A Theater is made halfe in compaſſe, betwene the ij. corners wherof, is played that whiche men behold, called of the Latinyſtes Scena. The nexte place vnto it, is called Orcheſtra, where the Senatours & ſtaūge Ambaſſadours do ſit. In the middes of the Theater, are the Seates for Knightes, and that place, is named Canea. Rounde aboute the Theater withinfurth are degrees, and ſteppes, ſo made, that the hygher they aſcend, the longer, and larger they are. Vpon the which

ye people do ſit, as euery man can get him place. Marcꝰ Scaurus (as witneſſeth Plinie in the .xxxiii. boke, the xv. chap.) for one Playe, which endured .xxx. dayes only, dyd buylde a Theater, the greateſt of all other, that were euer made by mans handes. The Scene whereof, was of thre ſtages, & had .iii.C.lx. Pyllers of marble of Affrique: of the whiche, the higher were of one piece, and xxxviii. fote in height. The lower parte of ye Scene was of Marble, and the ſtage in the myddes of Glaſſe, which neuer man heard of before. There was beſydes, for ye more gorgious beautyfyeng of it .iii.M. Images of Copper, with ſo much rycheſſe, Tapiſtrie of golde, and Tables of auncient & notable pictures, yt it is almoſte incredible to beleue, as wryteth Plinie. The greeces wheron men ſate in the ſame, did receiue lxxx.M. perſons. Caius Iulius Ceſar, fyrſt of all, builded an Amphitheater, in the fyelde called Campus Martius: whyche Auguſtus pulled downe, and in the ſame place, made a Tombe.
               Antioche, is a parte of Siria, boundynge vpon the Royalme of Cilicia, as ſayeth Plinie, in the xii. chap. of hys fyfth boke. In thys part, is a Cytye of the ſame name, as wryteth Ptolomeus, in the fourth Table of Aſya. Thys is the Cytye, to the whyche Antonyne went, and from thence, to Alexandrie in Egypt. Ther is another Antyoche in the coūtrey of Aſſyrya, where Alexander vanquyſhed Darius: the whych is next vnto Syrya (as wytneſſeth Plinye, in the .xiij. chapyter of hys .vi. boke. Amonges the Iſles of the Aſyan Sea, Plynye in hys .v. booke, the .xxi. Chapyter, ſayeth, there is one called Antyoche, whyche ſtandeth in the Sea of Pamphilia.
               Apoplexie, as ſayeth Galien in the .v. chapyter of hys thyrde booke of the places affected, is a diſeaſe, by the whych, all a mans ſynewes, and vaynes, do loſe theyr force, of fealynge, and mouynge. Thys dyſeaſe commeth ſodeynlye, and by the ſame, a man ſhall vnethes fetche brethe.
               
                  Affryke. The Coſmographers do deuide ye Earth into thre partes. That is to wete, Europe, Aſie, & Affryke. Europe is ſeperated from Aſia, by the Ryuer Tanais and the Lakes called Meotides, wythin yt whiche Tanais doeth fall. And it is deſſeuered from Aſie, by the Sea Mediterrane, ſo named, for that it is in the myddes of the earthe, or elles, becauſe it is encloſed wyth earth on euery ſyde, ſauynge where he hath his yſſue, betwene the pyllers of Hercules: wherof, the one is in Mauritania, the other in Spayne. Betwene the whiche, Hercules made waie, and paſſage for the Mediterrane Sea, to ioyne with Thocean. And it hathe none other yſſue, then betwene thoſe two pyllers. It extendeth towardes the Eaſte, as farre as Siria, whiche is in Aſia. Towardes the Northe, vnto the lakes Meotides. On the Southe parte, it hath alwaies Aphrique, which is ſequeſtred from Aſie, by an arme of ye Sea, called Sinus Arabicus. That is the Redde Sea, wherby the chyldren of Iſraell, paſſed out of Egypte, into the Deſertes of Arabie. Europe is muche Northe, and ſo is it Weſt in reſpecte of Aſie. And it is the leaſt of the thre partes: conteynynge the Iſles of England, and Scotlande, and the nexte Iſles thervnto, Spaine, Fraunce, Almayne, Italye, & Grece, wyth the Iſles theyr neyghbours.
               Aſie conteyneth Aſie the leſſe, Lydia, Caria, Bythynia, Galatia, Capadocia, Armenia, Cilicia, Sarmatia, Aſſiria, Arabia, Perſia, Hircania, Media, Iudea, the two Yndes, and all the other countreyes, whych Ptolome deſcribeth in hys twelue Tables. Aphrique which is South, conteyneth, Mauritanya, Numidia, the countrey of Carthage (whyche ſo longe tyme, helde warre wyth the Romaynes) Libia, Ethiope, and Egypt. The Sea, called the great Ocean, enuironeth all theſe thre partes rounde aboute.
               Aquileia is a Cytye ſcituate in ye tenth part of Italye, after the deuiſion, whyche Plinie maketh thereof, in the xviij. Chapyter of the thyrde booke of hys natural Hyſtorye, ſayinge thus.
               
                  Here foloweth tenth region of Italie, named Veniſe, adiacent vnto the Sea Hadriatyque. In this Region, there is a Ryuer called Silix, commynge oute of the Tauriſane mountaignes, a Towne called Altinum, with a Riuer called Liquentia, deſcendyng out of the mountaygnes Opit
                     •
                  rgines, and a Hauen of the ſame name. A towne called Cōcordia wyth a Ryuer, & a Hauen named Romatinum. The greate and lytle Tillauentum. Anaſſum another towne, whereby paſſeth ye Ryuer Varannus. And the Ryuers Alſa, Natiſon, and Turrus, do paſſe by Aquileia, whiche Citie is diſtaunt from the Sea .xij. miles. For the reſte, haue recourſe to the Text.
               Arabie. There are .iij. Arabies. Thone called fertile, or happye. Another called Rockye. And the thyrd, named Deſert. All thre verye nygh togethers, as ſayeth Ptolomee. And they are in Aſia, nygh vnto the redde Sea, through the which the chyldren of Iſraell departynge oute of Egypte paſſed, and immedyatlye entered into the Derſertes of Arabie.
               Armenie is a Realme of Aſia. The leſſe Armenie ioyneth wyth Capadocia, on the Weſte parte. And there is nothyng betwene them, ſauyng the mountaignes. On the Eaſt part, it is ioyned with Armenie ye great: hauynge no more, but the Ryuer of Euphrates betwene them.
               Towardes the Southe, is the mountaygne Taurus: whych maketh ſeparation of Armenia and Cilicia. Towards the North, is the Sea Mediterrane, which in the ſtreyte there, is called Pontus Euxinus. The great Armeny is beyond Euphrates. And hath on the Eaſt part the Hircanian Sea, & the mountaygne called Caſpius. On the Northe aboue it, the Realmes of Colchis, Iberie, and Albanie. And towards ye South, Meſapotamia, as Ptolome hathe deſcribed it, in ye .iij. Table of Aſia.
               Aſia. Loke on thys word Aphrique.
               Atreniens, are people of Arabie, as ſayeth Plinie in the .xxiiij. chap. of the .vi. boke of hys natural hiſtorye.
            
            
               B.
               
                  BIthinie is a Royalme of Aſia, nigh vnto Thrace betwene whome, & it, ther is nothīg, but a ſtreite goulfe of ye Sea. In this Royaulme, are many goodly Cities, as Chalcedō, Nicomedia, Apamea, Heraclea, Nicea, & other, as ſayen Plyen, & Ptolomee.
               Bizantium, as it appeareth by the Texte, in the beginning of Herodians thyrde Booke, is a Cytye of Thrace, of the whiche, the ſcituacion, and commodities, are ſufficiently deſcribed in the ſayde Booke It is the ſame, which we at this day, call Cōſtātinople.
            
            
               C.
               CCapitol is a Hill in Rome, yt which in olde time was called ye Moūte of Tarpeyns, wherin when thei dygged, to laye the fundacion of Iupiters Temple (which was there buylded fowre ſquare on euery ſyde a hundreth foote in heighte, in the tyme of Tarquinius the proude, laſte Kynge of the Romaynes) thei founde a mans heade wyth the face hole vnperyſſhed. The Latius call a head, Caput, whereof ye place is called Capitole. The Moūte called Tarpeius, had two lytle Hylles. On the one ſtode the Temple of Iupiter, & on the other, the Fortreſſe, or Palaice of Rome, whiche thei called A
                     •
                  x Capitolina.
               Cappadoce is a Royaulme of Aſie, adiacēt on ye weſt part to ye Regiō called Galatia. And on ye Eaſt, to Armenie, thus dooth Ptolomee deſcribe it in ye firſt Table of Aſye.
               Carie. Looke on this worde Ionie.
               Carre is a Citye of Meſopotamia, as ſayeth the Text, which is renowned, & ſpokē of, thrugh the ouerthrow of Marcus Craſſus, who was ſlaine, & his Army vāquiſhed by the Parthians, nigh vnto ye ſaid Citie, as writeth Plutarch in ye life of Marcus Craſius.
               Carting was an vnde
                     •
                  ēt exerciſe, wherin voluptuouſe Emperours gretely delited. The forme thereof, was to ryde in a Chariot, & with whipping, cauſe the horſes which drew ye ſame, to run very faſt to and fro as it liked thē. We may call it Chariottīg alſo: other name haue I not for the laten worde of it, whiche is Aurigatio.
               
                  Chalcedon is a City of Bithynia, vpō the Sea ſide, righte ouer aneanſt Thrace, and the Citye of Conſtantinople. There is no more betwene them, as ſayeth the Authoure, but a ſtrait of the Sea, called Boſphorus Thracius, or Propontius, or Heleſpontus, which are all one, makīg ſeperatiō of Europe, & Aſie,
               Circenſes were certaine exerciſes, plaied, and ſhewed in a place called Circus, whiche was compaſſed rounde about with a ſtone wall. In thieſe plaies thei vſed to runne wt horſes, & to wraſtle. Thei were called Circenſes, as it were circum enſes, yt is to ſaye enuironned on euery ſyde wt Swordes. For in olde tyme, al the Running, Iuſting, Wraſtling, and Combates of the Romaynes were in places encloſed, on the one ſide with Riuers, & on the other ſyde with Swordes, Glayus, and Hallebardes, to the ende that Cowardes, & Daſtardes ſhuld not flea away wtout daūger.
               Cohorte Pretor
                     •
                  ane, are ſuche men at Armes, as garde the perſon of any Capitayne, Duke, Conſull, King, or Emperour. For this name Pretor, is oftē times taken for a King, Emperour, or Conſull.
               Coloſſus. The Latins called euery greate, and huge Image, Colloſſus. This Coloſſus, whereof Herodian ſpeaketh in his firſte Booke, was made by a notable workemā named Zenodorus, at the cōmaū
                  demēt of Nero Emperour of Rome. And it was his Image, beynge a hundreth and ten foote in heighte. The ſame Image was dedicated to the honour of the Sonne, after that the actes of Nero were condēpned, and infringed for his cruell Tirrany, as ſaieth Plynie in ye .xxxiii. booke the .vii. Chapiter. Ther was an other Coloſſus at Rome, which Domitian cauſed to be made, ſtanding vpon great pillers of Marble.
               In the Capitole there was an other Coloſſus, repreſentinge the Image of Apollo, whiche was .xxxi. cubytes of height, trāſported thither, by Marcus Lucullus, from a Citie called Apollonia in the Royalme of Pōtus. Amonges all ſuch huge Images, Plinye,

in the laſt cited Booke, and Chapiter, ſaieth yt in Rhodes, there was the Image of the Sone, paſſed al other in greatnes, made by Chares of Lidia, diſciple vnto Liſippus. The ſame was .lxx. cubites in heighte. And fell downe by a meruailouſe erthquake .lvi. yeres, after it was made. And althoughe it be broken, yet is it at this preſēt, a thīg wōderful to beh
                     •
                  ld. The Thombe therof, a man can vnethe fadome. And his ſingers are as bigge as great Images. In ye ſame city of Rhodes, there are an .C. more Coloſſi. But not ſo bygge as this, although the leſte of them, were ſufficiēt, to win fame, and renowne to the City. For thoſe, & more deſcripciō of the other, haue recourſe to the aforenamed Booke, and Chapiter of Plynie.
               Conſtantinople. Loke on this worde Bizantium.
               Cyrus, King of Perſia, was the Sone of one Cambiſes, of an obſcure familie in Perſia, & Mandane the doughter of Aſtiages Kīg of Media. Who after ther poſition of his dreame (by the whiche he vnderſtode yt his doughters Sone ſhuld be King of all Aſye, & that him ſelf ſhuld loſe his Royalme) cauſed Cirus, immediatly after he was borne, to be put furth, & lefte alone in a Foreſt, to ye ende, he might be deuoured of wylde beaſtes. But there a Bitche gaue him ſucke, & defended hym from Beaſtes, and Byrdes, vntyll that the Kynges Sheperde founde hym, caryed hym home to hys wyfe, and gaue her the charge to nouryſhe hym. The woman was afterwardes called Spa
                     •
                  on, becauſe amonges the Perſyans, a Dogge is ſo named. After that he waxed greate, he was called Cyrus, by the Sheperdes his Companions, knowen to be Aſtiages doughters Sone, and ſente into Perſia: where he obtained much credite, and aucthority. Finally, he aſſembled an Armye, to make warre vpon Aſtyages, his Grandefather, from whom he berefte ye Royalme of Media, vnto the which the Perſians were ſubiect. And by thys meanes Cyrus became Kynge of Perſe, and Media. Before hys tyme the Perſians

had no Kinges, but were ſubiecte vnto other Royaulmes. After his victorie againſt Aſtiages, he vanquiſſhed, & toke priſoner, Croeſus the King Lidia, which was ſo riche. But in concluſion him ſelfe, was ouercomen, and ſlayne, by Thomyris Quene of Scithia, w
                     •
                  en he had reigned .xxx. yeres. Vnto hym, ſucceded Cambiſes, his Sone, as Iuſtin, in his firſt booke mē
                  cioneth. Euſebius ſayeth, that Cābiſes reygned .viii. yeres. Vnder Cirus Kynge of Perſia, by hys owne permiſſiō, begā the reparaciō of ye Tēple of Hieruſalē: which notwtſtādig was diſcōtinued many yeres after. And at ye laſt finiſhed the .vi. yeare of Darius Reigne Kinge likewiſe of Perſya, as witneſſeth the .vi. & .vii. Chapiters of Eſdras in the Bible, and Sabellyque in the .vii. Booke of his ſecōde Enneade. After Cambyſes, two Brethern called Magi, vſurped ye kingdō .vii. Monethes. After whō Darius raigned .xxxvi. yeres. And in the ſeconde yere of his Reigne, Zorobabell, by his permiſſiō, renewed the reparacion of the Tēple of Hieruſalē. This Darius, was nat he, yt Alexāder the great vanquiſhed: but that was the .x. king after him, called Dariꝰ alſo. In whom the Royaulme of Perſia toke hys eande.
               Cyzicum is a Citye of Aſye, vpon the Sea ſyde, in a Royaulme called Miſia the leſſe, as witneſſeth Ptolomee in the fyrſt Table of Aſie. And ſo ſayeth Plinie in the .xxxii. Chapiter of his .vi. Booke.
            
            
               D.
               DAnubie, or Danowe. Loke on Iſter.
               Darius loke on theſe wordes, Alexāder, & Cirꝰ.
               Dioniſus the Elder, was a Tirant of Sicile, & Son of Hermocrates, as ſaieth Sabellique. He was verye well learned, as writeth Plinie: who preferreth none before him, ſauīg Plato in Philoſophye, & Philopenꝰ in Poetrie, two ye notableſt men of learning in all his time. In ye ſame yere yt the Kingdō of Athenes ended, and Darius Kynge of Perſe dyed, Dioniſus loſte his Royalme, as ſayeth Sabellique, in the nynthe Booke of hys fyrſte Enneade. Wherein he agreeth not

wyth Euſebius. Dyoniſius Sonne was likewyſe named Dyoniſius the yonger, who was alſo a Tirante of Sicile, and raygned in a citye called Siracuſes: out of the whiche he was expulſed twyſe, ones by Dion: And the ſecond tyme by Timoleon, ſent agaynſt hym by the Corynthians. After thys ſeconde expulſion, he kept a ſchole, and taught yonge chyldren at Corynthe, as wryteth Valerius Maximus.
            
            
               E.
               Eridanus is a Ryuer of Italye, otherwyſe called Padus, whych cōmeth (as ſayth Plinie in ye .xvi. chap. the .iij. boke of his natural Hiſtory) out of a mountaigne called Veſulus. After that, he hideth him ſelfe in the grounde, and iſſueth out againe in the confynes of the Foruibienſes. Of all Ryuers ther is none more renowned. The Grekes cal it Eridanus. There is no Riuer beſydes, that encreaſeth greater, wythin ſo lytle ſpace. For it hathe a merueylous abundaunce of water, falling into ye Sea Adriaitque. Betwene the cytyes of Rauenna, and Altinum, it is verye domageable vnto the Countrey. For by the ſpace of .vi. ſkore myles (as ſayeth Plinie) it doeth ſeperate it ſelfe, into many Riuers, & Lakes. And becauſe that euerye Ryuer is large, and great, they call the ſame ſeuen Seas, as witneſſeth Herodyan, in hys eyght boke.
               Euphrates. Loke on thys worde Syrye.
               Europe. Loke on thys worde Aphryque.
            
            
               G.
               Galatians, are thoſe whiche enhabit the realme of Galatia, which is in Aſya, betwene Bithinia & Capadocia, as ſayen Plinye in the laſte chap. of hys fyfth boke, and Ptolome in ye fyrſt Table of Aſye. The ſame Realme is called alſo Gallogretia, and the people Gallogreci: becauſe, that when the Gaules came

to the ayde, and ſuccour of the kyng of Bythynie, they helde and poſſeſſed that part of the Royalme. Wherefore it is ſo named, as wryteth Sabellique.
               Gallus a Ryuer. Looke on theyſe wordes Goddeſſe Peſynuntyne.
               Ganymedes was Son of Tros king of Phrigia, who had Iſſue, Ilus, Aſſacus, and Ganimedes. The Fables ſurmiſe (which is the moſt cōmon opinion) ye Iupiter rauiſhed Ganimedes for his beauty, by an Egle. But Sabellique in the .x. boke of hys fyrſte Enneade, ſayth, yt Ganymedes the Son of Tros, was rauiſhed by Tantalus kynge of Paphlagenie, to abuſe hym. Whereby there aroſe great warre, betwene the two kynges. And it is moſt lyke, that being very yonge, he was iniuriouſly rauiſhed by Tantalus, vnder ye ſigne of the Egle, were the battayles fought vpon the land, or Sea. Whych hath bene cauſe of the inuentiō of the Fable, that ſayeth that the Egle, by ordynaunce of Iupiter, rauyſhed hym.
               Gaule or Fraunce. Ceſar in his commentaries ſaith, that Gaule is deuided into thre partes, wherof ye Belges helde the one, the Celtes another, and the Aquitans inhabited the thyrd. The Aquitans are ſeperated frō the Celtes, by the Ryuer of Garumna. The Celtes are ſequeſtred from the Belges, by the Ryuers of Marne and Seyn. And the Belges are ſundred frome the Almaignes by the Rheyn. In the which diuiſion, Gaule Narbonique is not compriſed. Ptolomee in hys fourth Table of Europe, and in the chapyters of the ſame, dothe deuyde Gaule into foure partes: appoyntynge Gaule Aquitanyque, to extende as farre as the Ryuer of Loyre. And from Loyre, to the Ryuers of Seyn, and Marne, is Gaule named Lugdunenſis. And from Seyn, vnto Rheyn, Gaule Narbonique extendeth it ſelfe, vnto the Sea Mediterranean, beyonde the Alpes, and the Ryuer Varus, vnto the Pyrrhenyan Mountaignes. Gaule the rounded,

or otherwyſe called Lumberdye, is in the Lymytes of Italye, and is the ſame countreye, whyche is named Liguria, nexte vnto the Alpes, and the Sea. All the other Gaule, or Fraunce, is called Gaule bering buſhe. Gaule Narbonique, was before tyme named Brachata, as ſayeth Pliniie, in the thyrde boke, and the fourth chapyter.
               Goddeſſe Peſynuntyne, is ye ſame that Cicero in hys bokes of the lawes, calleth the Moother Idea, whyche is the ſelfe ſame, that the Romaynes name the Moother of the Goddes, and doo greatlye reuerence.
               Liuie in the .ix. booke of hys ſeconde warre Punique, ſayth that they founde in the Sybyline bokes, (whyche were peruſed and redde ouer, becauſe of the often raynynge of ſtones the ſame yeare) that when ſo euer anye ſtraunger, and forreyne enemye, ſhoulde moue warre agaynſte Italye, he myghte be vanquyſſhed, and expelled thence, yf the Moother Idea were tranſported to Rome, from a fyelde of Phrigia named Peſinus. The whyche to do, the Romaynes ſent fiue Ambaſſadours, wyth fyue greate ſhyppes, called Cynqueremes, to Atalus king of Aſie. Who led them to the place called Peſynus, delyuered them the holye ſtone, whych the inhabitauntes there, called ye Moother of the Goddes, and appoynted theym to carye it vnto Rome. It was receyued at the Hauen of Hoſtia, by Publius Scipio, beynge iudged at that tyme, the worthyeſt manne in all the Cytye, to do the ſame, caryed vnto Rome, and ſette in the Temple of Victorye, wythin the Palayce, the .xiij. daye of Apryll, whyche was celebrated, and ſolempnyzed wyth feaſtes, and gyftes, that the people in greate aboundance offered vnto the Goddeſſe. Whych playes the Romaynes called Megaleſia.
               The ſame Goddeſſe is called Ops, whome they ſuppoſe to be ye wyfe of Saturne, called Rhea, by the whyche they vnderſtande the earth, that geueth affluence and abundaunce of all thynge.
               
                  She is otherwiſe named Cybele, of the name of a Hyl and cytye, of Phrigia where her ſacrifyces were fyrſt inſtituted. Or ſhe is called Cybele, of Cimbals, which ſignifyeth the Inſtrumentes, and Soundes, they vſed in the ſacryfyces. The Poetes ſayen, that ſhe roade in a Chariot, and had a crown of Towers: wherby they ſygnyfye, that the earthe hangeth in the ayre, and the world tourneth alwayes rounde aboute and that the earth hathe vpon it Cytyes, and Townes, wherein be Towers.
               She is called Moother of the Goddes, becauſe ſhe engendreth all thyng. She is alſo called Pales, for yt ſhe is ye Goddeſſe of ſheperdes, & her feaſtes are called Palilia. And ſhe is alſo ſurnamed Berecinthia, of a moū
                  taygne of Phrigie called Berecynthes. Accordyng to the diuerſytye of her names, ſhe hath dyuers powers, dyuers ſacryfyces, and dyuers miniſters.
               Vnder theyſe names, Cybele, Berecynthia, Goddeſſe Peſynuntyne, & Moother Idea, becauſe they came of names of places in Phrigia, from whence thys Goddeſſe was broughte to Rome, is no diuerſitie of puyſſaunce ſygnified.
               Thys Goddeſſe hathe Prieſtes, and Miniſters, called Galli, by the name of a Riuer, named Gallus in Phrigia. The water wherof, cauſeth theym to be mad that drynke it. Thoſe Prieſtes be gelded, who beyng ſturred wyth madneſſe, noddynge theyr heades, vp and downe, wyth great noyſe of ſmall Belles, whych they caryed, did propheſye, and tell of thynges to come, in that madneſſe. They were otherwyſe called Corybantes.
            
            
               I.
               ILium is the ſame Cytye, that we call Troye the great. Ilus ſon of Tros, in ye coūtrey called Troas dyd buylde thys ritye Iliū, ſo called of his name. And of the countrey wherin it ſtode, it was named Troye, as wytneſſeth Sabellique, in the fyfth booke of hys fyrſt Enneade. The Countrey is ioynyng vnto Phrigia

on the Eaſt, and towardes the weſt it hath the Sea Helleſpontique, as Ptolomee hathe deſcribed it, in hys firſt Table of Aſie.
               Illiria. The Royalme of Illiria, deſcribed by Ptolomee in his .v. Table of Europe, hath on ye North Coſte, ye .ii. Pannonies: on ye weſt, ye coūtry called Iſtria. Towards the Eaſt, it hath ye high Miſia. And towards ye South, a part of Macedonia. This Roialme is alſo named Liburnia, & ye part which extēdeth towards ye high Miſia, is called Dalinatia. At this preſēt, the Illiriā Regiō is called Sclauonia. Loke Ptolome in ye ſaid .v. cable of Europe. India. There are .ii. Indes, both in Aſia, & ioyning togithers, wherof thone maketh an ende of Aſie, towards thoriēt, & is called Inde, beyonde the Riuer of Ganges. On this ſide the Riuer, is Inde, called Inde on this ſide Ganges, which hath on the Eaſt ſyde, the ſame Riuer. On the weſt, the Royalmes of Paropaniſades Arachoſia, & Gedroſia. On ye North, ye moūtaine Imaus. And on the Southe the Indian Sea, as ſayeth Ptolome in the fyrſte Chapiter of the .x. Table of Aſye.
               ¶Iocaſta was ye wife of Laius King of Thebes. After whoſe deceaſſe, ſhe maried her own Sone Oedipus, vnwares. And had by him .ii. childrē, Etheocles, & Polinices: who fought togithers, after Dedipus death, for the Royalme of Thebes. And in ye ſame cōbate, both ye Bretherne ſlew one an other, as ſaieth Sabellique, in ye .vij. Booke of his firſt Emeade. For this cauſe, did ye Alexā
                  driens, in mocquerie, call Antonines Mother Iocaſta: becauſe Antonyne, for to obtayne Thempyre alone, had ſlayne hys Brother Geta, as the .ij. Sones of Iocaſta, ſlewe one an other, for the Royalme of Thebes.
               Ionie. Plyne in the .v. Booke, the .xxix. Chapi. ſayeth, that the Countrey of Lydia, watered ouer wyth the Riuer of Meander, very croked, and full of tourninges, both extende aboue Ionie: hauing on ye Eaſt ſyde Phrigia, on the North Miſia, and on the Southe Caria. The which Countrey of Lidia, was before called Meonie. By ye deſcriptiō, yt Ptolomee maketh in ye firſte Table of A
                     •
                  , Ionie is ye ſelf ſame Regiō, yt is called Lidye, or Meonye. At the leſt wiſe, it is a parte therof: boſiding

vpon the Sea, whiche for that cauſe is called Ionyan. The ſame Ionian Sea, dothe extende frō the Bankes of Ionie, vnto the bankes of thyſle of Sicile. Plinye in the iiii. booke, the .xi. Chap. ſayeth, that the Greekes deuyded the Ionian Sea, into the Sea of Sicile, and the Sea of Crete, ſo called, bicauſe of the nigh Iſles. Ptolome in the .v. boke, the ſeconde Capiter, ſayeth, that the Regiō proprelie called Aſia, hath on the North ſyde Bithinia. On the Weſt, a part of Propontis, the Sea Helleſpontique, the Sea Ieariā, & the Sea Myrtoique. On ye Eaſt, the Regiōs of Licia, Pamphilia, & Galatia. And on the Southe, the Sea of the Rhodes. In this Region, are cō
                  priſed. Lidia, & Caria, & other ſmall Royalmes. In Lidia is Ionia, as it is before ſaied. And Ionie is ryght ouer aneanſt an Iſle, called Icarie: whereof, the Sea there, is named Icariā. And it is the ſame, which is called Ionian. Caria is betwene Lidie, & the Sea of ye Rhodes. On the Weſt it hath the Sea Icarian, or Myrtoique. And on ye Eaſt is Licia, ioyned to Pamphilia.
               ¶ Iſſicus Sinus, is a reflexion, & bendinge of the Sea, which hath on the Weſt, thyſte of Cipres. And on the Eaſt, Siria, ioyned vnto the Bankes of Siria. And on the Northe ſyde, is the Countrey of Cilicia. In ye plaine by the ſame tourning of the Sea, is the Citye of Alexā
                  drie, builded by Alexāder ye grete, in memorie of ye batail by him wonne, againſt Darius King of Perſia. In this place alſo, was the battayle betwene Seuerus, & Niger.
               ¶Iſter is a great, and meruaylouſe Ryuer, otherwyſe called Danubie, or Danowe: comming oute of a mountayne of Almayne, named Arnoba. Beyonde the Alpes, it paſſeth by Innumerable Countreis. The further it runneth, the more it encreaſeth, reteining the name of Danow, vntyll it commeth by the Countrey of Illiria, nowe called Sclauonie, where he chaungeth hys name, and is called Iſter. And receyuinge hys encreaſe, of .lx. Riuers, which fall into hym, he departeth from ye earth, and entreth into the Sea Pontique, by .vi. grete armes, as ſayeth Plynye, in the .iiii. booke, the .xi. Chapiter, of his Hiſtorie naturall.
            
            
               L.
               
                  LAodicea, is a Cytye of Siria, nighe vnto the Sea, and not very farre diſtant from Antioche: whyche is alſo in Siria, but further from the Sea, as wytneſſeth Ptolomee, in the .iiii. Table of Aſye.
               ¶Latium, is a parte of Italye, in the whyche ſtanden Rome, Tuſculum, Preneſ
                     •
                  e, Ardea, Tibur, and many other Cities, as writeth Ptolomee, in the fyrſte Chapiter, of the ſyxte Table of Europe. Thoſe that enhabyte this parte of Italy, are by the Romaynes called Latini.
               ¶ Laurentum is a Cytye of Italye, in the ſame parte that is called Latium, nighe vnto Hoſtia. By Laurentum, there is a foreſt, ſacred vnto the Sonne, as ſayeth Plynye, in the .v. Chapiter of his thyrde booke.
               ¶ Liber Pater, in Englyſſhe Free father, is the ſelfe ſame God, that we call Apollo, as ſaieth Macrobius, in his Saturnales, after Ariſtotle, for diuerſe cauſes: and amonges other, bicauſe that in Thrace, there is a Temple, and Oratory, dedicated vnto Liber: wherin anſweres, and Propheſyes are rendered. But in the ſame Temple, thoſe whyche oughte to Prophecie, do drinke wyne exceſſiuely, as they whyche render oracles in the Cytye of Clarium, after thei haue dronke muche water. The Lacedemonyens, in the ſacryfyces whyche they made to Apollo, ware Garlandes of Iuye, as yf they dyd ſacrifyce to Bacchus. The Boetians, affyrmynge that the Hyll Parnaſſus was ſacred vnto Apollo, dyd alwayes there kepe the Oracle of Delphus, and the Caues of Bacchus, dedicated vnto the ſame GOD. For thys cauſe, in that Hyll, were the ſacryfyces made vnto Apollo, and Liber Pater.
               ¶ In thys Hyll alſo, where the Bacchanales celebrated, ones in two yeare: whyche ſhewed, that Apollo, Lyber, and Bacchus, were but one GOD. And he was called Lyber, that is to ſaye Frea, bycauſe the Sonne, whyche we call Apollo, dothe

frealy, and without ſubiection, tourne, & compaſſe the worlde: beynge ſometimes highe, and ſometymes lowe, and kepynge his courſe diuerſe wayes.
               ¶Lybie is a Region of Aphrique: And it is expedient to know, that there are .ii. Libies. For Ptolomee in the .v. Chapitre of his .iiii. Table of Aphrique, ſetteth one Libye, ioyned with Egipte, & the Marmarike Region. And ſaieth ye Egipt, & the Marmarike Region, haue on the Weſt part, the Royalme of Cirenia: folowynge the continuation of one Lyne, whiche draweth by a Citye called Darius, that ſtandeth vpon the Egiptian Sea. And in the .vi. Chapi. of the .iiii. Table of Aphrique, he ſetteth an other Libye, called Libye the Inner, whiche hath on the North, the ſeconde Mauritanie, Aphrique ye leſſe, & the Cirenayake Region. On the Eaſte, a parte of the Marmarike Region, & Ethiope, whiche is vnder Egipt. Towardes the South, it hath Ethiope ye Inner. And towardes ye weſt, it hath ye weſt Sea. For more deſcriptiō hereof. looke Ptolome ī ye forſaid Chap. & tables. ¶Lydie is a Countrie of Aſia, vpon the Egean Sea, betwene Phrigia, & Caria. This Contrey hath .ii. Riuers of great ſame. The one of them, is on the Northe coſte, & called Pactolus, wherin are founde many vaynes of Golde. And thother is in the South ſyde, & called Mean
                  
                     •
                  er, which is very eroked, & bēding in & oute. Loke Ptolome, in the fyrſte Table of Aſye.
            
            
               M.
               MAuritanie. Ptolome in his firſt Table of Affrike appointeth .ii. Mauritanies. Thone whereof, is more Weſt, right ouer aneanſt Spaine Betique, and called Mauritania Triganica. Thother beinge more nere Thorient, is named Mauritania Ceſarienſis, and on the Eaſte parte ioyned vnto Numidia.
               ¶Medes, be the people of the Royaulme called Media. Ptolomee in his .vi. booke, the ſecōde Chap. ſayeth that this Regiō hath on ye North coſt, a part of the Hircaniā Sea. On the Weſt, ye grete Armenie, and Aſſirie. On

On the Eaſte Hircanie, & Parthie. And towardes the Southe, it hath the region called Corinthena. Thus is this regiō deſcribed in the .v. table of Aſie. Plinie in the vi. booke, the .xxvij. chap. ſayeth that Marcus Agrippa ſayd, ye Media, Parthia, & the coūtrey of Perſ
                     •
                  e, had on the Eaſt the riuer Indus. On the Weſt the ryuer Tygris. On the Northe Taurus, & Cacauſus. And on the South the redde Sea.
               Media. Looke on the worde Medes.
               Meſapotamie, is a royalme of Aſ
                     •
                  e, betwene the riuers of Euphrates, & Tigris, as ſayth Plinie, in ye .xii. chap. of the .v. boke. And in the .vi. boke, the .xxv. chap. he ſayeth, that all the countreye of Meſapotam
                     •
                  e was ſubiect vnto the Affricans. Looke more on thys worde Syrye. Miſiens. The hygh Miſie, as Ptolomee hath deſcribed it, in the ninth table of Europe, is boūding vpō Thrace on the Eaſt part. On the South vnto a lytle Royalme named Dardania, which is aboue Macedonia. And on North vnto the Ryuer of Danowe. The lowe Miſ
                     •
                  e is nygh vnto ye falling of Danowe, in the ſea called Pontus Euxinus. ¶Loke on this word Propontys. The Miſiens are thoſe, which inhabit theſe .ii. regions. Plinie in the .xxvi. chap. the thyrde boke, called theſe royalmes Miſia. Ther are .ij. other in Aſie, after the deſcription that Ptolomee maketh in the fyrſte Table of Aſie. Thone called Miſia the more, & thother Miſia the leſſe both ioyning to Phrigia, vpō the Helleſpontian Sea.
            
            
               N.
               NIcea is a cytye of Bithynie, as ſayen Ptolomee, and Plinie.
               Nicomedia is a Cytye nygh vnto the Sea, in the Royalme of Bithynye.
               Numidia is a countrey in Affrike, betwene Mauritanie, & the countrey of Carthage, after the deſcriptiō of Ptolome, in the .ii. table of Affryke. Thys coūtrey was very much renowned, through the vertue of Maſiniſſa who was king ſometyme therof. Thinhabitauntes are called Numidians, or Nomades, becauſe ye often tymes they chaūge theyr habitations, & cary theyr houſholdes frō one place to another in wagōs, as ſaith Plinie in ye
                  
thyrd chap. the .v. boke of hys naturall Hyſtorye, & Sabellique in the fyrſt boke of hys .v. Enneade.
            
            
               O.
               ORgia be ſacrifices, made aſwell vnto the Moother of the Goddes, as vnto Bacchus, & other Goddes, by the pryeſtes called Galli, that are madde.
               ¶Ocean is the great Sea, that enuironeth al ye earthe, and ioyneth hym ſelf wt the Mediterrane Sea, betwene the pyllers of Hercules. Thone wherof is in Mauritania, & called Abilla. And thother in Spayne named Calpe. The Mediterrane Sea, is encloſed wt earth on euery ſyde: that is to ſay, on the right ſide wyth Affryke, and on the lefte ſyde, wyth Europe and Aſie.
            
            
               P.
               PAnuonie. Ptolome in ye .v. table of Europe, doth deſcribe .ij. Pannonies, ioyning one to another. Thone of thē called the high Pannonie, boūdeth on the Weſt, vpō a royalme of olde time called Noricū, & at this preſent Bauiers. Thother called ye low Pannenie, nigh ioyninge vnto the higher, ſtretcheth to the ryuer of Danow. Of yt which riuer, declinyng towards the South, that part which receaueth the ryuer Saus, doth eand the lower Pannonie on the Eaſt. And on the South, drawyng towardes ye Hadriatique Sea, are the roialmes of Illiria, or Sclauonie, & Dalmatio. In theſe regions, there be .ij. ryuers, Drauus, & Saus. Drauus, which is the more ſwyft, cōmeth out of the countrey of Bauiers. And Saus which runneth more ſlowely, out of ye Alpes Carnicyan, as ſaith Plinie, in the thyrd boke the .xxv. chap. of hys naturall Hyſtorye.
               ¶Panthers are beaſtes very cruel, as ye cōiunctiō of the word doth ſufficiently ſhew: which ſignifieth all cruel. The ſkyns of theſe beaſtes are ſpotted ouer, wt rounde white ſpots. And there is no beaſt ſo notably ſpotted, as ye Pāther, & ye Tigre. Theſe Pāthers do ſauour wōderful ſwete. And for their ſauoure, other beaſtes, reſorte vnto thē. But yet they are afeard of ye Panthers fyerce loke. Wherfore ye Panther hideth his head, & ſuffreth al ye reſt of his bodie to be loked on, yt he mai the better take his pray of the other beaſtes being amaſed. There is no great difference betwene ye Panther, & the Leopard, ſauyng yt the Panther is more white. And Plinie in hys

viij. boke, the .xvi. chap. ſayth that he coulde neuer fynde other difference. In the ſame chap. he telleth a meruaylous tale of a Panther, which remēbred the good turne that a man had before done vnto him. In Siri
                     •
                  , and in Affryke there be many of theſe beaſtes.
               ¶Parthians. The royalme of Parthia, as Ptolomee deſcribeth it, in his .v. Table of Aſie, ſtretcheth on the North vnto Hircanie, & to ye moūtaignes betwene thē. On ye South it hath Carmanie On ye Eaſt the Ariens. On ye Weſt the Medes. And this regiō is enuironed wt hils on al partes. So ſaith Plinie, in the .vi. boke ye .xxv. chap. Who ſaith alſo, yt the Parthiās haue .xviij. kyngdoms. And their Prouinces are betwene the red ſea, on ye South, & the Hircaniā ſea on ye North .Xi. of thē be beyond Armenie, & the moūtaignes called Caſpij, & do extend along by the Caſpian ſea, vnto the Se
                     •
                  thians: drawing towardes ye ſea. And theſe realmes be called ye high realmes. Thother ye low realmes. The Parthiās, whiche are not in ye firſte deſcription, are called Nomades. ¶Patroclus the frend of Achylles, was in the warres betwene the Grekes, & the Troyans, & there ſlayne by Hector the ſonne of Priamus kynge of Troy.
               ¶Perynthiens are a people of Thrace, wherin ſtādeth a citie called Perinthus, wt in yt which ther is a fortreſſe called Bizia, ſome time belōging to ye kings of Thrace. In this royalme, there are no Swalowes, for ye offence of Tereus kyng of Thrace, as ſaith Plinie, in ye .xi. cap. the .iiij. boke of his naturall hiſtory. Thoffēce was this. His wife named Progne, ye king of Athenes doughter, had a ſiſter which hight Philomela: whom ſhe greatly deſired to ſee. And Tereus to pleaſe her wt all, promyſed to fetthe her ſiſter. In bringing of her, he defloured her. And to ye end, ſhe ſhuld not diſcloſe it to any perſō, he cut out her tōge, ſhut her vp in a ſecret place, & told Progue yt ſhe died by ye way. But Philomela wrote wt blode in a kerchief all the matter, & ſent it vnto Progne her ſiſter. Who being chaufed wt ire for ye ſame, ſlew a litle childe called Itis, which ſhe had by Tereus, & preſented it him to eate. Tereus perceauing yt matter, purſued her. And ſhe fleing away was turned into a Swalowe, Tereus him ſelfe into a Lapwinge, and Itis into a Feſaunte.

Peſynus. Loke on theſe wordes Goddeſſe Peſinūtine. Phari. Pharus is an Iſle in the ſea of Egypt, wherein ſtandeth a cytye buylded by Alexander the great, ouer aneanſt Alexandrie, which was lykewyſe buylded by ye ſame Alexander. The Iſle Pharus is ſo nyghe vnto Egypt & Alexandrie, that at thys day, there is no more betwene thē, but a bridge to paſſe frō thone to thother, as ſayth Plinie, in the .xi. chap. of hys thyrde boke. In the cytye of Pharus, Ptolomeus Philadelphus the kyng, made a meruaylous hygh Tower, whyche is numbred amonges the meruayles of the world: vpon the whyche there is alwayes a great burnyng light, to ſhew the hauen vnto them that ſaile by night on the Seas. And becauſe that thys lyght is ſo renowned, many doo call all other Towers, whiche haue fyre and lyght in thē after that ſort, Phari, as our preſent Authour doth him ſelfe. Phenices. Looke on thys worde Syrye.
               Phrig
                     •
                  e is a countrey of Aſie, whyche boundeth on the Weſt vpō the countrey of Troye ye great. And as ſayth Plinie, in the .v. boke, the .xxxii. chap. Thys coūtrey is ioynynge to Galatia on the Northe. On the Southe it hath Lyc
                     •
                  onie, Pyſidie, and Mygdonie. And on ye Eaſt it toucheth the countrey of Cappadoce. Ptolome deſcribeth thys countrey in the fyrſt Table of Aſie, and dothe not alot vnto it ſo great a compaſſe.
               Pitanite is as muche to ſaye, as Laconique, or Lacedemonien: becauſe Pytanas was the father of Thraſibulus the Lacedemonien, who was ſlayne in fyghting valiauntlye in the warre. After hys deceaſe, Pytanas ſhewed hym ſelfe very graue, and prudent, ſaying that it was a rare thyng to dye ſo well. Wherfore he wylled hys countrey men, not to weepe for hys death, becauſe he dyed valyauntlye as it became a Lacedemonian. So ſayth Auſonius the Poete in an Epigrame. Ther was another Thraſybulus of Athenes, whyche had a voyce very loude, and bygge, of whome Plutarque ſpeaketh in the lyfe of Alcybyades.
               Pontus. Loke on thys worde Propontis.
               Proconſull. In the tyme that Poſthumus Albus, and Spurius Fulſius, were Conſulles, and warre was

made againſt the people called Equi dwelling in Italy, which warre was vnfortunate to the Romaines, Titus Quintus, was fyrſt created Proconſal, to goo and ayde one of the Conſulles, whiche was beſieged: to the ende, that the other Conſull mighte remayne at Rome, & leuy more mē. And this Proconſull, had .vi. Sergeāts goeng before him, with maſes. His owne ornamētes were like vnto the Conſulles. Frō that tyme forwardes, it was ordeined, that thoſe which had bene Conſulles one yere, ſhuld the next yere foloweng be Proconſulles, for to go into the Prouinces. And euery of them had hys Liuetenaunt, which was called Legatus, to aſſiſte him in hys affaires. The Proconſull had iuriſdiction onely in the Prouince giuen vnto him, but that was nat voluntary, as to infranchyſe a bondeman. The fyrſt day of Ianuary yerely, did ye Romaines choſe two Counſulles, which during thole yere folowing, had aſmuche authoritee, as Themperour. And becauſe thei coulde not be in all places, when neade requyred, thei ſent their Proconſulles into the Prouinces, which had there as greate authoritee, as if ye Conſulles had bene preſent. This word Proconſull alſo ſygnifyeth hym, whyche is in ſteade of the Conſull, and dothe that, that the Conſull ſhoulde doo, as ſayeth Feneſtella, and Pomponius Letus, of the Romayne Magiſtrates.
               ¶Prodigiouſe tokes, were ſignes, which oftē times happened naturally. Neuertheleſſe thei betokened one myſhap, or other. Wherfore ſome do ſaye ye prodigiouſe is deryued of that whyche oughte to be feared, as the ſōge of the Harpie called Celeno, whereof Virgile ſpeaketh. Duch are the ſinginge of a Rauen, & the meetinge of a weeſel, when a mā goeth forth of his houſe. Thieſe, and ſuche other lyke, did men in olde time, accōpte monſtruouſe, and ſignifieng ſome calamytie to enſue.
               ¶Propontis is a part of the Mediterrane Sea, whiche is deuided into diuerſe partes. For Pontus is a parte of the ſame Sea, & Propontis is a part of Pōtus. Pliniein the .iiij. boke. ye .xij. Chapiter, ſaieth yt the firſte ſtraite of the Sea, which is betwene Thrace, & Aſie, (where Xerxes made a Bridge to paſſeouer his Army) is called Helleſpontus.

And that is, a ſmall arme of ye Sea, very ſtrayte. After yt it is ſomewhat brode, & then retourneth into a narowe ſtrayte again. This Sea, yt is the broder parte, is called Propōtis, and the ſtreite is named Boſphorus Thracius: beynge in bredthe .v. paces onely. Ouer thys ſtreite, Darius king of Serſe, & father of Xerxes, paſſed his army vpon a Brydge. In extēding further towards the North, beyōde Boſphorus Thracius, the Sea doth enlarge him ſelfe wonderfully, & is called Pontus Euxinus. And after yt it retourneth to a ſtrait again, & is called Boſphorus Cimmerius, whiche is thiſſue of one of the Lakes Meotides, yt is the laſt part of ye Mediterrane Sea, towardes the Northe. All thieſe Seas aboue ſpecifyed, are partes of the Sea Pontus.
               ¶Ptolomeus, after he had expelled Antigonus ye Sone of Demetrius, helde the Royalme of Macedonie, as ſaieth Sabbelique, in the .viij. booke of his .iiij. Emeade. He fayned him ſelfe to be amorouſe of hys owne Siſter Arſinde, and that he deſyred to haue her to wyfe. But when ſhe had condiſcended to the ſame, he ſhewed apparauntly, after his receite into the City of Caſſandra, that his purpoſe was, to bereue his ſyſter of the Citye, and to ſlea the chyldren that ſhe hadde by Lyſymachus her fyrſte huſbande: whome he ſlewe in their Mothers armes. At the laſte, he was vanquiſhed by the Gaules, vnder the leading of Belgius theyr Capitaine, takē priſoner, and beheaded, and his heade pitched vpon a polle, to feare the Macedones withall.
               ¶Pyrrhichius is a foote, or meaſure, compoſed of two ſhorte ſillables, ſo called, by the name of Pirrhus, king of the Royaulme called Epyrus, whiche is nyghe vnto Theſſalie, and beneth Macedonie. For that by him was inuented a kynde of daunſynge, called Pyrrichius, as ſayeth Plinye in, the .vj. Chap. of the .vij. Booke. The which leaping, or daunſing, was by mouyng, and meaſure of two ſhort ſyllables, whereof Herodian in hys fourthe Booke, maketh mencion.
            
            
               R.
               Rhenus. Looke on this woorde. The Rheyn.
            
            
               S.
               
                  SArmates are the people, and enhabitauntes of the Regions, Sarmatiques. Plinye, and Ptolome ſayen there are two Sarmaties, one in Europe, an other in Aſie. And bothe nighe vnto the Ryuer Tanais whych diuideth Europe, and Aſye, and nyghe vnto the Lakes Meotides, whereinto Tanais dothe fall. Ptolomee in the .v. Chapiter of hys .iiij. Booke ſayeth, that Sarmatie of Europe, extēdeth towards ye North, as farre as the great Ocean, which in that part is called the Sarmatique Ocean. Towards the Weſt, vnto the Riuer named Viſtula. Towardes the Southe, vnto the mountaynes Sarmatiques, which make ſeparaciō of Sarmatie, and the countrey of Dace, and the lower Miſye. Towards the Eaſt, vnto a ſtreite plot of yearth, named Iſthmꝰ of ye Lake, or Riuer, Bicis. And it hath on the one ſyde, the lakes Meotides, and the Ryuer of Tanais. And in the .v. Booke, the .ix. Chapiter Ptolomee ſaieth that Sarmatie which is in Aſie, hathe on the Northe, a Lande vnknowē. On the Weſt it hath Sarmatie of Europe, vnto the heade, and the Ryuer ſelfe of Tanais. On the Eaſte the Lakes Meotides, vnto the ſtreyte of the Sea, called Cimmerius. On the Southe, it hathe a parte of the Mediterrane Sea, called Eurinus Pontus, which is verye nygh vnto ye Lakes Meotides, and it ſtretcheth from thence, vnto the Riuer Corax. And from the Riuer Corax, aboue the Regions of Colchis, Iberie, & Albanie, vnto ye Hircanien Sea, whiche is otherwyſe named the Caſpian Sea. And on the Eaſt it hath a part of the ſame Hircanyen Sea, and the Riuer of Rha, vntyll that it entreth into Sarmatye, where Sarmatie ſtretcheth vnto the Scithians. Plynye, in the .iiii. booke the .xii. Chapiter ſayeth that the Greekes dothe call them Saromates, that we name Sarmates, and that the name of Scithians, paſſeth vnto the Sarmates, and to the Almaynes.
               ¶Saturnales were feaſtes, and ſacrifices of Saturne inſtituted, and ordeined fyrſte by Ianus, to the honour of Saturne, who taughte hym to tyll the earthe. And after Saturnes decenſe, he dedycated an aultare, and ſacrifices vnto hym, which are called Saturnales.

The auncient fathers did ſolempnize thieſe feaſtes one day only in the yere, that is to weete, in December, the xiiij. Calendes of Ianuary. But after yt Ceaſar had added .ij. dayes more vnto that moneth, the feaſtes were celebrated, the .xxvi. Calēdes of Ianuary. Which cauſed, that the common people, beyng ignoraunt of thoſe daies, did celebrate the feaſtes many tymes in the yere. Many Authours do affirme, that in olde tyme, the Paturnales endured .vij. dayes, during the which feaſtes, the Seruauntes, & Bondemen, had as grete aucthoritie as their Maiſters, and had lycence, to doo what lyked them ſelues beſte. So ſaieth Macrobius, in the firſte Booke, the .vi. Chap. of hys Saturnales.
               ¶Peculer playes were celebrated ones in three ages, whyche was thre hundred yeres.
               ¶Septentrion. It is certayne, as ſayeth Aulus Gellius in the ſeconde Booke, the .xxij. Chapiter of his Attique nyghtes, that the heauen hathe foure Regions. That is to ſaye the Oriente, Occidente, Meridionall, and Septentriō. The Meridionall, or South, & Septē
                  trion, or Northe, are alwayes remayning in their own places. And the Northe, is in that place of the Heauen, which is ryght oppoſite to the South, whiche is in the middes betwene the Oriente, and the Occident where the Sonne neuer cōmeth. The Orient is very variable. For in the Somer the Sonne ryſeth in that place, from whence commeth the wynde Bize, whyche is ſomewhat towardes the Northe. In the myddle, or meane dayes, the Sonne ryſeth where the wynde Eurus is, And in the ſhorteſt daies, it ryſeth towards the South, in the ſame part, yt the winde called Vulturnus, or other wyſe Euronotus is. And as there are .iii. riſīges, eue ſo are there thre ſettinges, or deſcendinges, likewyſe mencioned, and thre windes cumming frō the ſame thre ſettinges. That is to weete Caurus, named by ye Greekes Argeſtes, blowing righte againſte the wynde Bize. Fauonius, or Zephirus, againſte Eurus. And Africus, named by the Greekes Libs, againſt Vulturnus.

The wynde which cōmeth frō the South, becauſe yt the South chaūgeth not, is one, & in Latin called Auſter, in Greeke Notus, bicauſe it is moyſte. The Northe parte, by like reaſon, hath one onely wynde, which bloweth againſt Auſter. This name Septetrion, as ſaieth Aulus Gellius, in the Chapiter laſt cited, commeth of that, that .vii. ſtarres doo make a ſigne in the heauē in forme of a wayne, & oxen yoked to labour, or elles bicauſe the iii. next ſtarres, that a man may ſe, in the Northe, nigh one vnto an other, do make as it were a triangle, and thys ſygne is ryght oppoſite vnto the Southe.
               ¶Sirmium is a Cytye of the lower Pannonie towardes the hygh Miſye, drawinge to the Eaſt. It is beyonde ye Ryuer of Danowe, as ſaieth Ptolomee in the. xvi. Chap. of his thyrd boke Plynie, in the .xxv. chap. of his thyrde boke, ſaieth yt a Riuer called Bacuntius entereth into ye Ryuer, Paus, nygh vnto the City Sirmiū.
               ¶Syrie, as Ptolome deſcrybeth it in the .iiii. Table of Aſye is ſeperated from Armenye on the Northe, by the moūtaigne Taurus. On the South is Arabie: on ye Weſt ſtretchyng towardes ye Iſle of Cypre, is ye Sea of Sirie, which is now called ye Sea of Phoenicia. And on the Eaſt is Meſapotamye, Plynie in ye .v. booke the .xii. Chapiter ſayeth that Syrie was the greateſt of all the Prouīces, & therfore had ye name of al Royalmes, which wer ſubiect vnto it. For towards Arabi it was called Iudea, or Iury Paleſtine, Phoenice: & more inwarde Damaſcene. In ſtretchīg towards ye South, it is called Babilone. And betwene ye Riuers of Tigris, & Euphrates, it is named Meſapotamie. Beyōd ye Moūtain Taurꝰ, it is called Sophene, where Euphrates is deuided into .ij. partes. And beyond Armenie it is called Aſſyrye. On ye part where it boūdeth vpō Cilicia, it is called Antioche. The part of Syrya, which lyeth along the ſea coaſt, are the countreyes of Idumea, & Iudea. And in ſtretchinge more hygher towardes the Northe, is the countrey of Phoenice. And after it is more nere Euphrates, it is called Sirie, as ſaith Plinie, in deuiding Sirie more exquiſitely. All the Sea which is nygh thys part, is called the Phenician Sea. The people of Phoenicia, hathe bene

meruaylouſlye renowned, for that they were the fyrſte Inuenters of letters, of Aſtrologie, & of making ſhyps, and all engens of warre.
            
            
               T.
               TAurus is a Mountaygne in Aſie, meruaylouſe huge, & great, as ſayeth Plinie, in the .xxvij. chap. the .v. boke, of hys natural hiſtorye. For he ſaith, that hys begynnynge is vpon the bancke of the Oriental Sea, and paſſeth from thence by many peoples, and Countreys: makyng ſeparation betwene them. At his begynnyng, which is at the Indian Sea, he hath on the ryght ſyde the North, and on the lefte ſyde the Southe, ſtretchynge towards to ye Weſt, by the middes of Aſie, ſauynge where he encountreth the Sea. After that, he bendeth towardes the North, and fetcheth a great compaſſe, on thone ſyde. Then he ſtretcheth towardes the Phoenician Sea. On thother ſide, towards ye Pontian Sea, and on another parte, to the Hircanian Sea. And he goeth verye nygh vnto the Lake Meotide. And after he hathe verye muche bowed, and tourned hym ſelfe, he ioyneth wyth the Mountaygnes Riphees, whyche are in the North. And all the way as he paſſeth, he hath diuers names. For in India, where he begynneth, he is named Imaus, after that, Paropaniſus, Circius, Chanibades, and manye other names. Where he is moſte hygheſt, he is called Cacauſus, which is aboue ye royalmes of Colchis, Iberie, & Albanie. And where he ſtretcheth out hys armes, as yf he woulde embrace the Sea, he is named Sarpedō, Coraceſius, & Cragus. Wher he hath portes for ſeparation, and paſſage, albeit the ſame be trenched, & naturally opened, yet is it all one Mountaygne. Thoſe portes are called in one place Armenien, which is Armenie. In another parte they are called Caſpien, nighe vnto the people called Caſpij, who are betwene Armenie the great, & the Medes. And they are in another place called the Portes of Cylycye. And although it hath in diuers places dyuers names, yet is it in Greke called by one name, the moūtaygnes Ceranques. Thus ſayeth Plinye, in the place afore alledged. Lyuie, & thother Hiſtoryens, ſayen yt thys mountaigne

doeth appoynte the lymyttes, and bonndes of the Romayne Empyre.
               ¶Theater. Loke on thys worde Amphitheater.
               ¶The Aegean ſea, parte of the Mediterrane ſea, is betwene Aſie, & Macedonie, and is called Aegean, becauſe that in the ſame Sea are manye Iſles, ſo nygh one another, that a farre of, they ſeame to be Goates, which the Grekes call Egas, or becauſe that Aegea Queene of the Amazones was therein drowned, or elles for that Aegeus the father of Theſeus, threwe hym ſelfe headlonge into it, as ſayth Sextus Pompeius.
               ¶The Ionian ſea. Loke on thys worde Ionie.
               ¶The Rhein. Ceſar in hys commentaryes ſayth, that Gaule Belgique extendeth on the Eaſt, vnto the Rhein. And beyonde it, are the Almaygnes, and thereby the Rhein doeth deuyde Gaule Belgique, from the Almaygnes. In Gaule Belgique are compriſed the coū
                  treyes of Lorrayne, Luxenbourg, Guelders, & Flaunders. Thys Ryuer commeth out of the Alpes, and falleth into the Sea of Flaunders. Before his entery into the Sea, he maketh an Iſle, whyche is the countrey of Hollande, nyghe vnto the whyche, is the countrey of Guelders, bendyng towardes the head of the ſame Ryuer. Beyonde it is Luxenbourg, and Lorrayne, whych is ſeperated from Luxenbourg, by ye Riuer of Meſelle whych cōmeth out of ye mountaygne Vogeſus, and falleth into the Rhein. Out of the ſame mountaygne commeth the Meuſe, whyche runneth lykewyſe into the Flemyſhe ſea. Betwene the Meuſe, and the Ryuer of Somme towardes the Sea, is the countreye of Flaunders, whyche is ſeperated from Fraunce, by the ſayde Ryuer of Somme, as it is apparauntlye deſcribed, and fygured, in the newe Table adioyned vnto the Tables of Ptolomee.
               ¶The men at armes Pretorian. Loke on theſe wordes Cohorte Pretoryan.
               ¶The ſeuen Seas. Looke on thys worde Eridanus.
               ¶The Tygre. Loke on thys worde Tygris.
               ¶The Tirrhenian Sea, is ye low Sea, which extēdeth

alonge by Italie nigh vnto the coſte of Hoffie. And is ſo called by the name of Tyrrhenus, ſonne of Atys, and brother of Lidus, kyng of Lydie, who came into Italy: and with his people inhabited that part of Italy, which is vpon the lowe ſea, whereby the Region is alſo called Tyrrhenie. After, it was called Tuſcie, and Hetrurie, as ſayeth Sabellique.
               ¶Thrace is Royalme of Europe, in the furtheſt part therof, towardes the Orient. The which Realme, hath on the North the lower Miſie. On the Weſt the higher Myſie, and a part of Macedonie. On the Eaſt, the ſea named Propontis, and the ſtreyte of the ſea called Boſphorus Thracius, whiche maketh ſeperation betwne Europe, and Aſie, as ſayth Ptolomee in the .xi. chapter of the nynth Table of Europe.
               ¶Tribune is aſmuch to ſaye, as Maiſter, Gouernour, or Capitayne. And it commeth of this word Tribus, for that the people of Rome, was fyrſt deuyded into partes, which they called Tribus. And the chiefe Gouernours and Capitaines of the men at armes, elected out of thoſe partes, were called Tribuni, as ſaith Varro treatinge of the Latyn tonge ſaith. Vegecius in the .iij. boke, & the vij. chap. of the feates of warre. A Tribune of mē at armes, had the charge of a band in an armie, wherin were as many horſmen as fote men. As of the fyrſt Cohort of a Legion: which Cohorte, was the greateſt, the principal, and the beſt fylled wyth ſage, diſcret, valyaunt, and experte warryous. In the ſame were .xi.C. fote men, and .C.xxxij. men at armes on horſebacke.
               The Capytayne of thys Cohorte, was called the Tribune of the men at armes: who had vnder hym other Capytaynes, and Centuryons, as well of fotemen, as of horſemen. The other Cohortes of a Legion, whyche were nyne, leſte then the fyrſte, were conducted eyther by the Trybunes, or by the Prouoſtes. Budeus in hys commentarye vpon the Pandectes, or Digeſtes, ſayeth that we maye call a Trybune of men at armes, a Marſhall. Vegecius in the ſeconde booke, the twelueth chapyter, ſayeth, that the honour of the Trybune of men at armes, was when the men at armes were honeſtly, and

cleanelye apparelled, well armed, and theyr harnes wel fourbyſhed, and ſhynynge bryghte, and when they were well enſtructed, & exerciſed in the feates of warre. The aucthorytye and power of thys Magyſtrate, was for a whyle ſo greate, that the Trybunes of the men at armes, had ones the gouernaūce, and adminiſtration, of the Romayne common wealthe. And there was no Magyſtrate, or Dygnytye more hygher then thys. When there were no Conſulles, whyche was aboute thre ſcore and ten yeres, after the kynges were expelled oute of Rome, the Common weale was ruled fiue yeares by the Trybunes. After the fyue yeares were expyred, Conſulles were agayne created, as ſayeth Pomponyus Letus. Dyuers tymes the Trybunes were reſtored vnto dygnytye agayne, as ſayth Tytus Liuius, and they had the aucthorytye of the Conſulles.
               Fyrſte they were thre, then foure, then tenne, and then twentye, ſome tyme leſſe, ſome tyme more. In Rome there were other Trybunes, whiche were named Tribunes of the people, who were created the yeare, that Aul is Virginus, & Titus Vetuſius Geminius, were Conſulles, whyche was the .xvi. yeare after the expulſion of ye kinges. At which time the common people, beynge ouercharged, and vexed wyth debtes (after that the Senatours and noble men of Rome, had often tymes promyſed to releaſe, and diſcharge theym thereof, and then deceyued theym) ſeperated them ſelues from the Senatours. But Menenius Agrippa, one of the tenne Ambaſſadours ſente vnto the people, whyche were aſſembled in the fielde, reduced them by an oraciō into amitye, created ye Tribunes of ye people, who were choſen out of the common people them ſelues. This dignite was ſacred, & inuiolable, not ſubiect vnto the Conſulles, as other officers were. The Tribunes of the people ſate in the Senate houſe, at the very entry thereof. And that, that the Conſulles decreed, their ſometyme alowed, and ſometime reiected. And bicauſe thei vpheld, and mayntained the people, and ſtyrred them oftentymes againſte the Senatours, and noble men of Rome, there raſe many Ciuyle batayles betwene them. In the

tyme of the Kinges, there were Tribunes whiche were Captaines of a hundred horſemen, and were called Tribuni Celerum. Ther were alſo other Tribunes which had the Charge of the Receit, & Cuſtody, of all Trybute money, and were called Tribuni Aerarij, as muche to ſaye, as the Tribunes of the Treſoure.
               ¶Tigris is a Riuer, which hath his beginnyng in the Royalme of Armenie the great. At the firſt he runneth ſlowly, and where he beginneth to be ſwifte, he is called Tigris, for ſo do the Medes call an Arowe. He falleth in to a Lake, called Arethuſa, but yet it medleth nat wt the courſe of this Riuer, neither do the fyſhe of them bothe come togithers. But the Riuer paſſeth throughe, clene vnlyke the Lake, either in courſe, or coloure. At his meting wt the Mountaine Taurus, he hydeth hym ſelfe wt
                  in the earth, and runneth vnder the Mountayne, & then apeareth agayne on the other Syde. The place is called Zoroanda. And that it is the ſame Riuer, whiche hydde hym ſelfe in the grounde, it doth manifeſtly apeare. For when he commeth furth agayne, he bringeth any thing with hym, that was caſt into hym, on the other ſyde the Hyll. He paſſeth afterwardes, by an other Lake named Theſbidis, and then hideth him ſelf in the earth again. After his next comming furthe, he is deuided into two partes, wherof thone runneth into Euphrates, and ſo into the Perſian Sea. This Riuer maketh manye tornynges, and reſ
                     •
                  eryons, and ſeparateth Meſapotannye frō Aſſirie. Loke Plinie, the .vi. Boke, the .xxvii. Chap.
               ¶Tyrus is a Cytie of Phoenice, vppon the ſame Sea, that Laodicea is. All the ſame Sea, is attributed vnto the Phoenicians, as it is ſayd in this word Syrie.
            
            
               V.
               VEſta is a Goddeſſe, which was doughter of Saturne, vnto whō the Virgines veſtalles were cō
                  ſecrated. Numa Pompilius did firſte inſtitute in Rome thoſe Virgins, neuertheles the ſame Relygion was ſo auncient, that it came from the Troyans, to the Albaynes, and from them to the Romaynes.

Theyr office, & profeſſion, was to make ſacrifice for the Romayne people, vnto ye Goddeſſe Veſta. And to garde the eternall & inextinguible fyre. Ther were .ij. Goddeſſes of thys name Veſta. The one was Moether of Saturne, by the which we vnderſtand the earth. Thother was doughter of Saturne, which is the, that thei name the Vyrgyn, by whome we vnderſtande the fyre, as ſayth Ouide. Vnderſtand nothinge by Veſta ſayth he
                     •
                   but the liuely, & burning fyre, whereof thou ſeeſt no body to be engendred. She is therfore accōpted a Virgin, becauſe ſhe doth not engender. The Romaines ſent as far as Phrigia, for the Image of this Goddeſſe Veſta, the which was brought, & ſet in ye Temple of Victorye, which is in the Palaice, vnto whō thoſe vyrgyns were ſacred, that had theyr houſe harde by the Temple. And were .xx. in numbre. Aulus Gellius in the .xij. chap. the fyrſt boke of his Attique nightes ſayeth, yt the high Biſhop toke that Vyrgyn whiche ſhould be ſacred, by the hand, called her Amata (becauſe the fyrſt virgyn, inſtituted by Numa Pompilius, was ſo named) and did ſet her into ye College of the Veſtall vyrgyns: where, from thence forwarde, ſhe was wtout emancipation, exempts from her fathers rule, & had power to make her Teſtament. Yf ye wil know, of what age, of what parentes, & of what ſtature, wt the qualitie of her perſon, and vnder what wordes, the highe Biſhoppe dyd admitte a Veſtale Vyrgyn into the order, Looke Aulus Gellius, in the ſayde Booke and Chapyter.
            
            ¶The ende of the Annotations.
         
         
            ¶Imprynted at London, in Flete ſtrete, by Wyllyam Coplande, at the Sygne of the Roſe Garlande.
            ¶Cum gratia et priuilegio regali ad imprimendum ſolum.
         
         
            
            ¶Faultes eſeaped in the Pryntinge.
            
               
                  
                     Fol.
                     Pagina.
                     Linea.
                     Errata.
                     Reade.
                  
                  
                     ii.
                     i.
                     xxxiij.
                     Marternus.
                     Maternus.
                  
                  
                     viij.
                     ii.
                     xxxvij.
                     facyon
                     factyon.
                  
                  
                     xij.
                     ij.
                     in the Margent,
                     dexteritee
                     agylytee.
                  
                  
                     lxvi.
                     i.
                     xvi.
                     vnto Counſayll,
                     Counſell vnto.
                  
                  
                     lxxxiiij.
                     i.
                     i.
                     diſmay you not,
                     dyſmay you.
                  
                  
                     lxxxvij.
                     ij.
                     x.
                     repuſynge,
                     repulſynge.
                  
                  
                     c.
                     i.
                     i.
                     ſylence, dyd attentifely.
                     ſylence, attentyfely.
                  
               
            
            
         
      
   