
      
         
            
            
            THE
RIDDLES OF
HERACLITVS AND
Democritus.
            
            Printed at London by Arn. Hatfield,
for Iohn Norton.
1598
         
         
            
            PRopheſies, predictions,
            Stories and fictions,
            Allegories, rimes,
            And ſerious paſtimes
            For all manner men,
            Without regarde when,
            Or where they abide,
            On this or that ſide,
            Or vnder the mid line
            Of the Holland ſheetes fine,
            Or in the Tropicks faire
            Of ſunſhine and cleere aire,
            Or vnder the pole
            Of chimney and ſeacole:
            Reade they that liſt, vnderſtand they that can,
            
               Verbum ſatis est to a wiſe man.
         
      
      
         
            
            The Riddles of Heraclitus
and Democritus.
            
               1
               
                  IT ſeemes that Tunis is an auncient towne
                  Neere to the ruines of Carthage once ſo prowde,
                  Whoſe ſtately buildings now are cleane pulled downe,
                  And calmde her bruit, that ſounded ſometime lowde:
                  But roome, that is their auncient far away
                  Doth holde, and ſhall, though cities all decay.
               
               
                  Roome is more large, then ſpacious Millaine faire,
                  Or Venice or the Tartars great Camball,
                  Boeams three Prages, or Egypts rich Alcaire,
                  Or Quinſei in Cataie, biggeſt of them all,
                  And more I ſay, after the day of doome
                  Hell ſhall be no where, vnles it be in roome.
               
            
            
               2
               ROome is a taker, Poets ſay,
               And lawyers are ſo too, you ſee
               Roome is a taker by my faie,
               No learned man can diſagree,
               And roome ſhall take, beleeue well me,
               At least till ſomething, no where be.
            
            
               3
               MAny a man doth ſpeake of mee,
               But no man euer ſhall me ſee,
               For all in one, doe full agree
               That no where muſt my dwelling bee.
            
            
               4
               NOt Marke, but Mercurie keepes her warme,
               And Neptune hugs her in his arme
               Infertill, fertile of all good things,
               Her Lord her ſeruant her children kings.
            
            
               
               5
               SAy what it is and if you can,
               That neither was by God create,
               Nor framed by the hand of man,
               Nor by the fiend that doth him hate;
               But cauſed it was for tyrants ſtrong,
               As things are many of great woorth,
               Which made it ſtraight and woondrous long
               When at the firſt, they brought it foorth:
               And good it doth, and none ill deedes,
               Feeding vpon greene graſſe and weedes.
            
            
               6
               
                  A Prince, for his delight, erected a ſpacious forreſt, which beareth
euen in the coldeſt monthes of the yeeres, ſtore of ſweet flowers,
holſome herbs, and faire trees, ſome bloſſoming, & ſome bearing fruit.
The forrest is diuided into fiue partes, euery one of them containing
birdes, beaſts, and fiſhes of diuers kindes and qualities.
               A keeper hath this forreſt in charge, that in a woonderfull ſort
attendeth ouer it, to the preſeruing, refection, creating and recreating
of euery thing vegetant or ſenſitiue. A wife or ſister he hath that
is as diligem as himſelfe, who with a ſconce in the one hand, and a watering
pot in the other, goeth about continually watering the herbes.
The keeper hath no reſidence or abode, but taking with him his footeman,
and the blackeſmithes wife, they croſſe the forreſt continually,
trauelling from one Inne vnto another. And when he comes once to
the ſigne of the Dolphine, the Phenix beginneth to die, which first begun
to liue, when he entred, at the ſigne of the Ramme. The true Phenix,
of which we haue neuer but one at once, and in euery of her wings
are 182 feathers at the leaſt, ſo that ſhe flieth faſt, and dieth quickly.
            
            
               7
               BEleeue me now I tell it for notale,
               There is a Queene, or elſe a Goddeſſe t'one,
               That without helpe of man, or any male
               Conceaueth daughters by her ſelfe alone:
               But at their birth, be it by night or day,
               Some skilfull man, the midwiues part doth play.
               
                  
When they be borne, and perfectly brought foorth,
               Both olde and yong doe greatly them deſire;
               Their beautie and their power is of ſuch woorth,
               That all mens harts, therewith are ſet on fire:
               And in all times, they beare as great a ſway
               As if on earth, there were no queenes but they.
            
            
               8
               
                  A Creature is that humane fleſh deuoures,
               From out whoſe howels fatneſſe may be taken,
               That being dried by fire, a certaine houres
               Will waxe as hard, as cruſt of bread well baken,
               Which fat diſſolued, and with the leane confuſed
               Of that bodie, from whom you muſt it take,
               May be with skill and induſtrie ſo vſed,
               That a confection thereof we doe make
               Greatly helping, though it be held no woonder
               Against all tempeſt, lightning and thunder.
            
            
               9
               HAndſome ſhe was, and well beſeene,
               As freſh as any of them all,
               Her raiment for the moſt part greene,
               Her ſtature good and meetely tall.
               Mounſier did take her by the arme
               And friendly entertained her,
               His countenance ſaid he meant no harme,
               But well I wot he ſtrained her,
               That (as lamenting her miſhap)
               She cried, perhaps ſhe cracked too,
               Yet Mounſier would not leaue her lap
               For any thing that ſhe could doo,
               This was a ſcholler by S. Anne,
               A ciuill, ſober, honeſt manne.
            
            
               10
               I Wrinkled am and paſsing olde
               But gallant is my motion,
               
                  
Abhorring aie to be controulde
               By any ones deuotion.
               Come all that list on me to mount,
               Sure I will not forſake them,
               But let them make their iust account,
               That finely I ſhall ſhake them.
               Ne doe I aske men ought for hoſe,
               For ſhooes, for drinke, or meating,
               Come all that list with me to cloſe
               Sans paying or intreating.
               And they may chaunce finde in my wombe
               To make them wiſh they were at home.
            
            
               11
               WHilst Phebus lodgeth in his ſoutherne Inne,
               His auncient Inne, at ſigne of Capricorne,
               His northren laſſe, her raiment waxeth thinne,
               And for her Lord ſhe ſeemes to pine and morne,
               I meane the laſſe that many brings to ſcorne,
               And makes men oft reueale their proper ſhame,
               Her maker once, tooke to himſelfe her name.
            
            
               12
               
                  A Female, produced first in a rude lumpe, as they ſay a yong beare
is, not by licking, but by preſsing, became beautifull. For ſhe
hath as many friendes as the Queene of England, As many ſubiectes
as the King of Spaine, As many rulers as Athens euer had, or Venice
hath. And though ſhee can neither write nor reade, yet is ſhe lettered,
a Phiſition, a Rhetorician, and a Chronicler.
            
            
               13
               AS Pallas was ingendred from her fathers braine,
               So was one other gueſt, that I ſee men doe entertaine,
               She ſprang from neither grift, nor plant, nor egge nor ſeede,
               Ne is ſhe fiſh, or fleſh, or graine, or pulſe or herbe or weede,
               With Ladies and great Lordes, ſhe is both day and night,
               And clergie men, and prelats graue, ſometime in her delight.
               
                  
Some thinke that the deuill, begat her on his dame,
               Becauſe that he much euill doth, and miſchiefe by her frame:
               I thinke not ſo, but wiſh, ſhe ſoberly were vſed,
               That neither ſhe nor men by her, might hencefoorth be abuſed.
            
            
               14
               
                  A Virgine faire, betwixt whoſe milke white
               Paps I ſometime lay,
               When I was borne, the midwiues part
               And nurſes too did play,
               To whom I ſpent, my formoſt age
               Working both day and night,
               And recompenſed her taken care
               With profit and delight,
               Vntill by fate, without my fault
               In priſon I was caſt,
               And held in giues, which I had made,
               From which breaking at laſt:
               Such change and chaunces hath the world,
               A dotage made me blinde,
               In amorous ſportes I kild my ſelfe
               Foole: propagating kinde.
            
            
               15
               VPon ſome pale, or pearch,
               Or ſtond, or rotten tree,
               In watrie lowes and fennie grounds
               Where ſtore of fiſhes bee:
               There will he gazing ſtand,
               And fiſh be faine would eate,
               Bur he diſdaines to touch a fiſh
               If that it be not great.
               Right good ones he lets goe,
               For better ſtill to ſtay,
               Till that the ſunne is welnigh ſet,
               
                  
And gone almost the day:
               Then downe vnto the ground
               In ſtately ſort he hies,
               Where he a hungrie ſupper makes
               On wormes and butterflies.
            
            
               16
               THe welkin is welnigh, out of our ſeeing,
               Our eies and thoughts are on the ground remaining,
               On th' earth or no, where is our happie being,
               Yet there we euer grudge, and are complayning,
               But turne vs ſo, that heauen hang in our ſpying,
               And ſtraight we leaue, our murmur, and our crying.
            
            
               17
               ONe rips the earth, another cuts the ſeas,
               And runs the world in circuite round about,
               All for my ſake, I doe all men ſo pleaſe,
               That all doe ſeeke, which way to finde me out.
               In Diadems in ſcepters, and in Crownes,
               In robes, in rotchets, in a Cardnals hat,
               In ſcarlet, ſilkes, in costly furred gownes,
               In ſtones and pearles, and in I wot not what,
               In horſes, haukes, bounds, harlots, and in bookes,
               One flieth for me, vp into the skies,
               Another downe to Plutoes raigne he tookes,
               Where all this glistering Or and argent lies.
               This ſearch declares, how greatly men doe leeke me,
               But they are mad ſo far from home to ſeeke me.
            
            
               18
               
                  A Neuer wearied, but euer bearing mother, was deliuered of children,
all (in a maner) of ſtature equall: which though they were
(being yong) very like one vnto another, yet by diuer ſitte of bringing
vp, they were tranſmuted ſo, that vnneath they might be diſcerned to
be of one linage Some of them were made carters & plowmen, ſome
ſerued in cities, as porters, ſergeants, and hangmen: ſome became mariners,
and ſerued at ſea. Some were fine lier trained vp, and for their

delicacie, waxed in fauour with faire virgins great matrones, gentlewomen
and great Ladies. To all which they were ſo inwarde and
neerely conioyned, that ſcarcely brother or husband was permitted to
be with them of equall trust. Many of theſe waxed ſo skilfull, and ſtored
with all manner of learning, that more of them became diuines,
lawiers and ſtates-men, then are to be found in Paris, Padua, Bononia,
Venice or Vienna. Of this laſt ſort, ſundry which grew to be embaſſadours,
ſecretaries, and intelligencers, were finally brought to violent
death by fire, or interred in ſo fowle a faſhion, that not knowing with
what termes to expreſſe it, I must of force leaue it, to be deuined at.
            
            
               19
               AFter midnight, ere it was day
               His eies he did vncloſe,
               And ſtriuing for to get away
               From priſon he aroſe,
               With bodies two as colde as Leade
               He wrought ſo fine a feate,
               That other two which ſeemed dead
               Receiued life and heate.
               Then dead men came about him round,
               I wot not who they were,
               But of much thing deepe and profound
               With them he did confer.
            
            
               20
               WE are in number not fiue times fiue,
               No one of vs two handfull long,
               Nor any of vs takes care to thriue,
               Yet all together we doe ſo throng,
               That if a man would liſt to ſtriue
               T'extinguiſh or to doe vs wrong,
               Were he the greatest prince aliue,
               We ſhould be found for him too ſtrong,
               And could make him infamous in time to come,
               Though most of vs beene deafe and dombe.
            
            
               
               21
               
                  BY helpe of fiue, and ſixe, and ſeuen
                  And lines and diſtances betweene,
                  A ſcale is made that brings from heauen
                  A virgine ſweete that nere was ſeene,
                  Nor any man euer ſee her ſhall,
                  Though heauen and earth together fall.
               
               
                  Vnſeene, of louers ſhe hath choice,
                  That are not led by wanton eies,
                  But they doe loue her Angels voice,
                  And he that rules aboue the skies
                  Doth daine a liſtening eare to lend,
                  Her earneſt praiers to attend.
               
            
            
               22
               
                  I Am not, but am ſaid to bee,
               And many things are told of mee,
               As firſt for ſooth that I am blinde,
               And buſhed before, and balde behinde:
               And that I halting come to one,
               And flie when as I will be gone:
               With fooles my godhead is not ſmall,
               With wiſe men it is none at all.
            
            
               23
               SVch as the companie is, ſuch am I,
               And I thinke ſome other folke are ſo too,
               To two Ladies great I euer am nie,
               And we with the world haue much to doo:
               Tis hard for a lowte to tell ye my name,
               And ſhame for a clerke if he hit not the ſame.
            
            
               24
               IT is not more fabulous what Prometheus did, then ridiculous what
Paracelſus promiſeth: yet there is one (to no man of great vnderſtanding
vnknowen) that not onely maketh perſons at her pleaſure,
but alſo bringeth them from hell or heauen to life againe when they

be dead. Yea ſhe maketh pillers, wals, or any thing to ſpeake, not by
ſorcerie, witcherie, or imprecation of deuils, but by fine arte to the
face of iudges, for iuſtice, ſhe hath heretofore practiſed her skill, and of
her propertie, a long time borne ſpeciall denomination.
            
            
               25
               THis is the age that I would haue,
               Theſe times for me are woondrous fit,
               Each Ladie that is fine and braue,
               With me delights to goe and ſit.
               My liuing lieth not in my lands,
               Yet I am daintie, fine and ſweete.
               The Ladies take me in their hands,
               Their lips and mine full often meete.
               Their paps, their cheekes I well may touch,
               In ſmiling ſort with me they play,
               Their husbands thereat thinke not much,
               No: though I downe with them doe lay:
               In ſooth it is a fooliſh ſin,
               When fooliſh husbands iealous bin.
            
            
               26
               TWo forward went, and one did ſeeme to ſtay them:
               Foure after ran, and fiue did ouerlay them,
               Of which one dead, foure quicke was comprehending:
               And all theſe twelue vnto one marke were tending.
            
            
               27
               FIrſt I was ſmall, and round like a pearle,
               Then long and ſlender, as braue as an Earle,
               Since, like an hermit, I liude in a cell,
               And now like a rogue, in the wide world I dwell.
            
            
               28
               THere is a bodie without a hart,
               That hath a toong, and yet no head,
               Buried it was, ere it was made,
               And lowde it ſpeakes, and yet is dead.
            
            
               
               29
               FArre in the weſt I wot not wheare
               Are trees men ſay which oiſters beare,
               I woonder how that comes about
               Thoſe oiſters ſhe not, out of doubt
               And fall ſtraight like a ſwarme of bees
               At home here on our apple trees.
               Growe they on trees, thoſe oiſters? fie:
               Me thinkes it ſoundeth like a lie,
               A kinde of trees, I know tis true,
               In purpoole lane beare oiſters new
               And fiſh and fleſh, and now and then
               They beare (I tell you) honest men.
            
            
               30
               THe new world, is enuironed with a deepe ditch, whereinto many
riuers do fall continually: in ſo much that it would ouerflow the
whole world, were it not that from the water of this ditch, there riſeth
and is ingendred great ſtore of barnacles and other ſea fowle of
diuers colours and proportions, ſome of them being bigger by great
ods, then is any crane, buſtard, ſwan, camell, elephant, whale, or whirlepoole.
And euen as flies will ſticker in the night ſeaſon, about a torch or
great light, till ſometimes their ſtreamers be ſindged: ſo aſſuredly
theſe which I tell of▪ and which neuer fall to the ground, till their death,
or diſſolution, euen from their firſt naiſance, making towards the ſunne
and ſtarres, are inforced to ſhed their feathers in ſuch abundance, that
thereof are yeerely made beds, a hundred times as big againe, as the
great bed in Ware. If I ſaide a thouſand times, it were no more then a
thouſand, which haue ſeene them as well as I, might maintaine and verifie.
            
            
               31
               
                  I Sawe one ſtately ſtalking like a crane
               Strike at a ſtripling, ſomething like a man,
               At the first ſtroke, he gaue the wretch his bane,
               Threw him in the dirt, and with him ran
               Vnto the water, where he waſht and beate him,
               And at a mouthfull at the laſt he eate him.
            
            
               
               32
               
                  
                     A Murtherer, a priſoner, barelyfed
                  Was firſt of all depriued of the light,
                  And then ſtraightwaies vnto the gallowes led,
                  Which did belong to him of very right:
                  Where hanged he was ſomething againſt my will,
                  Though ſome good folke could wiſh him hanged ſtill.
               
               
                  But one of power, the power of law to ſtay,
                  That ere this time, did a companion make him:
                  The prince himſelfe came paſsing by that way,
                  And from the gallowes graciouſly did take him:
                  The beſt is though he did enjoy this fauour,
                  He ſtandeth bound vnto the good behauiour.
               
            
            
               33
               
                  WHen one by one, men fearefull are
                  They quickly are affrighted,
                  And wanting weapons fit for warre,
                  Not daring be vnited:
                  Whether it be in towne or field
                  To th' enimies forces ſoone they yeeld.
               
               
                  A ſimple ſouldier God doth knowe,
                  In Norfolke bloudie warres doth make,
                  And heapes of foes, doth ouerthrowe
                  Alone: and oft doth priſoners take:
                  Yet they haue fortes, ſo hath not hee,
                  Marry fearefull, and ill armed they be.
               
            
            
               34
               
                  ALowe bred ſquire
                  Borne in the mire,
                  That neuer knew who was his ſire,
               
               
                  Being armed light
                  After midnight,
                  (No remedie) would needes go fight.
               
               
                  
                  In corſlet bad
                  The youth was clad,
                  And ſarcenet ſleeues for ſooth he had.
               
               
                  But at a word
                  He had no ſword,
                  Nor other weapon woorth a &c.
               
               
                  Newas he ſtrong,
                  Nor large nor long,
                  But foorth he came with a hideous ſong.
               
               
                  And Tartar leeke
                  He me did ſeeke,
                  Lighting at firſt full on my cheeke.
               
               
                  This thing of naught,
                  At face ſtill raught,
                  As Ceſar once his ſouldiours taught
               
               
                  When they ſhould fight,
                  Againſt that knight,
                  Pompey defending countries right:
               
               
                  So in like caſe,
                  This varlet baſe
                  Was euer poring at my face.
               
               
                  I could not reſt
                  Within my neſt,
                  The raſcall did me ſo molest.
               
               
                  I had the Iacke,
                  Soone brought to wracke,
                  Had he not euer retired backe.
               
               
                  But he comes, he goes,
                  He fell, he roſe,
                  He bit me by the very noſe.
               
               
                  
                  It made me ſweare,
                  And God to teare,
                  I could not for my life forbeare.
               
               
                  That ſuch a knaue
                  Should be ſo braue,
                  Would make (I trowe) a Saint to raue.
               
               
                  But clod or ſtone,
                  Or ſticke or bone,
                  Or gunne or crosbowe had I none.
               
               
                  That truth to ſhowe,
                  I did not knowe,
                  Which way I might him ouerthrowe.
               
               
                  So that at laſt
                  I waxt agaſt,
                  And longing t'haue the combate paſt.
               
               
                  I hid my head
                  Within a bed
                  And ſlept like one that had been dead.
               
            
            
               35
               
                  
                     A Target bearer to a gallant man of warre
                  Was bidden by his Lord, t'attend him at a doore,
                  Whilst he ſhould get him in, about t'appeaſe a iarre,
                  That lately riſen was, betwixt him and his whoore:
                  And heare ye (ſaide he) Sirra: if any body come,
                  Or ſtirring be this way, alowde ſee ye crie hum.
               
               
                  The ſcutiger had tarried but a little while,
                  Ere Morpheus gan vpon his forehead for to creepe,
                  His ſtomacke vapours ſent, which did his braines beguile,
                  And ere he was aware, he falleth fast aſleepe:
                  The Maſter hoping well, that well his man did watch,
                  Accorded with the girle, her husbands coate to patch.
               
               
                  
                  To kiſsing firſt they fell, and after that to play,
                  Souldiers fight ſometimes, ye wot it well in ſport,
                  And I can tell no more, what they did doe or ſay,
                  God knowes I haue no skill of warring in this ſort:
                  But as the neighbours tolde, ſuch warre the ſouldier maked,
                  That at the locke they lay, and both of them were naked.
               
               
                  
                     Tacitum petiuit, my captaine falles aſleepe,
                  One in at window lookes, where cloſe he them eſpied,
                  And tarrying not a whit, either to laugh or weepe,
                  He backward with the newes, vnto the husband hied,
                  Which calde his friends vnto him, theſe pigeons for to get,
                  And ſoone he had them both, caught faſt within his net.
               
               
                  The lookers on did laugh, the captaine was aſhamed,
                  The husband was as angrie, as any man could be,
                  And though the wife by friends, and by her man were blamed,
                  Yet made ſhe her defence, and chid as faſt as he:
                  Thou haſt (ſaid ſhe) ere this, thy ſlouens armefull borne,
                  By ſtealth as we did now, of many a neighbours corne.
               
               
                  She praies to be diuorced, but he would not agree
                  To heare that motion made, it made his hart full ſore
                  To ſet them in a ſheete, alas why ſhould it bee,
                  They had been ſheeted now three howers and ſomwhat more.
                  Forgiueneſſe, that was beſt, the ſoulder him reueſted,
                  The goodman kiſſed his wife, all quarrels were digested.
               
               
                  His ſquire ſtill at the doore, this while lay faſt aſleepe,
                  His helmet clapped cloſe vnto his drowſie head,
                  He dreamed that he ſawe, a louely laſſe to weepe,
                  Inchained with his Lord vpon a feather bed:
                  And in this dreame he lay ſtill in a miſchiefes name,
                  Vntill his captaine came, and found him in the ſame.
               
               
                  By ſhoulders he him tooke, he quickly made him wake,
                  What was to him befalne, he did deſcribe and tell,
                  
                     
His angrie looke and noiſe, did make the wretch to ſhake,
                  Villaine he cried, how ſaieſt, haſt thou not ſerude me well,
                  Thou varlet baſe, thou aſſe, thou drunken headed ape,
                  I thee coniure ſtraight way, leaue of thy ſouldiers ſhape.
               
               
                  His ſpurres to bodkins turned, his lips conuert to horne,
                  His beard turned all to fleſh, gone was his manly face,
                  His ſhirt of maile and helmet, that he long had worne,
                  To plumes and cockſcombe turned, this was a foule diſgrace:
                  Behold and ſee, what tis, an angrie one to ſerue,
                  That for a toy forgets, what ſeruing did deſerue.
               
               
                  He liueth ſtill, and ſtill retaines a ſouldiers minde,
                  With Switzers he will go, when they are waged to fight,
                  Vnto a laſſe he is, more then his captaine kinde,
                  And fiue or ſixe at once, doe lodge with him all night:
                  Remembring ſtill the fault, that did him ouerthrowe,
                  He cries at peepe of ſunne, Looke to your windowes hooe.
               
            
            
               36
               SInce the rebellion in the North, an hoſt of light horſemen, iſſued,
as from Scotlande and inuading England, came as farre as Northampton
ſhire, where they hurt and killed many, ſparing neither
age nor ſexe. At laſt they enuironed a worſhipfull knights houſe, and
had aſſuredly won entrance into it, had not his ſeruants beene, who
with ſuch woonderfull reſiſtance, ſtopped their paſſage; that no one of
them, were he much leſſe then a Pigmei, could make any irruption, yet
left they way for a friend, which got in, of ſtature greater than euer
was Atlas, or the goodly ſonne of Grandgoſier.
            
            
               37
               
                  WIth cordes they haled her from the ground,
                  And did about them lay,
                  Like luſtie ringers of the bels,
                  Vpon ſome holiday.
               
               
                  Her legs and armes cloſe to a tree,
                  She tottered vp and downe,
                  
                     
Cla
                        ••••
                     g her iron lined breech
                  Cloſe to a lubbers crowne:
               
               
                  Whome ſhe ſtrooke downe into the ground,
                  Full twenty foote and more,
                  And yet he neuer did complaine,
                  Or felt that he was ſore.
               
            
            
               38
               
                  WHilſt I was yong, I dare well ſay,
                  I was as freſh as faireſt May,
                  And like a malapert yong elfe,
                  As proudly did I beare my ſelfe.
               
               
                  But pride men ſay, will haue a fall,
                  Euen ſo had I, and therewithall
                  To ſeruants ſeruant I became,
                  And euery puzzell is my dame.
               
               
                  When that I once haue done my worke,
                  I am inforced in hurnes to lurke,
                  Expecting when for want of meate,
                  My fellow ſeruant ſhould me eate.
               
            
            
               39
               
                  I Louers had, had words been true,
               As many as faire Corinna had,
               Yet when my foes me ouerthrew,
               My friends looked on, and were right glad.
               When he that earſt did me defend
               Vntill the day of dreadfull death
               Did haſten moſt vnto mine end,
               Striking the ſtroke which reft my breath,
               And from my graue men me remoue,
               Pretending ſtill they doe me loue.
            
            
               40
               
                  
                     A Coniurer was circling in the aire,
                  With nimble eies attentiue on the ground,
                  
                     
Where walking ſpirits, nouſled many a paire,
                  Making a ſearch the harmeleſſe to confound,
                  They wrought to reaue poore wretches of their breath,
                  Which neuer in life did ought deſeruing death.
               
               
                  I ſaide to an abettor looking on,
                  Thoſe innocents were woorthie of ſome pittie,
                  He anſwere made, and ſware by ſweete S. Iohn,
                  In pitying them, I ſhewed my ſelfe not wittie:
                  What skils (ſaide he) the ſhedding of their blood,
                  They doe me harme: but doe they any good?
               
            
            
               41
               MOunſier Monoculus, with that one eie,
               Its not for his perſonage or his ſweete face,
               That whereſoere I goe, I doe him eſpie,
               With maidens and wiues in ſpeciall grace,
               He is a ſurgeon, he can let blood,
               His pricke is a thing that doth them good.
            
            
               42
               BEfore many monethes be expired, there ſhall be borne of parents
baſe and ſimple, a more ſilly ofspring, blinde, deafe and dumbe:
which after inciſion in the head, and drinking a certaine liquour, ſhall
become great tellers of mens thoughts. Not onely reuealing the deceits
of loue, ſtratagems of warre, and policies of ſtates: but they ſhall
haue alſo power of vniting or ſetting at variance: maintaining in
England a warre, which ſhall coſt many their liuings, and ſome their
liues; without ceaſing, vnleſſe all things growe ſo common, that ioyners
and lockſmithes giue ouer their occupations.
            
            
               43
               
                  I Doe agree with ſiſter and brother,
               But I loue neither father nor mother,
               If ſhe imbrace me, ſhe makes me die,
               If he doe but touch me I cracke and crie,
               And ſurely it is a preatie thing,
               
                  
                  
                     •
                  o ſee how he makes me fart and fling:
               Maruell you ſirs, who I ſhould bee,
               On ſunday before noone you may me ſee.
            
            
               44
               
                  I Haue in the countrie ſeene at a faire,
               Of brethren and ſiſters many a paire,
               That being coupled like man and wife,
               Went yet to ſeruice for terme of life,
               But they could neither waſh nor wring,
               Nor brue, nor bake, nor play, nor ſing,
               Nor pipe, nor daunce, nor any ſuch thing:
               All that they can, is well to keepe
               All things, except great flocks of ſheepe.
            
            
               45
               OVr parents are euer beſmeared with dust,
               Our ſiſters and brethren in very good truſt:
               Our chaps euer gaping, or if they meete iuſt,
               Some one thing or other in ſunder must.
            
            
               46
               LEt neuer woonder fill your head,
               For ſure the caſe is plaine and cleere,
               By ſluggiſh keeping of my bed,
               I lost a thouſand pound a yeere:
               My brother roſe, and did it get,
               And I am to his keeping ſet.
            
            
               47
               THe Miller, and the Millers wife,
               That they might merrie make,
               Were ſet downe with a diſh of fruite,
               A cake, and halfe a cake,
               The parſon of the towne with them,
               His ſiſter and no more:
               Now haue you heard of all the gueſts,
               And of their bread the ſtore,
               
                  
Yet did they vſe the matter with
               Such cunning, skill, and art,
               That euerie one eate halfe a cake,
               Before they did depart.
            
            
               48
               THere are two ſiſters, one faire and cheerefull, the other blacke or
browne. The firſt for her beautie, is of all deſired, loued and longed
for: The ſecond (with good reaſon) is to be liked for her humilitie.
Supping all winter with the pooreſt, and making beggers (during
her reigne) more happie oftentimes then mightie monarches. Before
Phebus ſhined, or Cinthia borrowed light, they were and euer ſince,
ſtriuing for the worldes gouernance (of which either of them hath
euer one halfe vnder her) they haue chaſed continually one another,
more ſwiftly than any ſhip ſadeth on the ſea. Long hath this contention
laſted, and ceaſe it ſhall neuer, till the Turke be ouerthrowne, the
Pope haue reſigned his triple crowne, and all be brought to one ſheepefolde,
vnder one ſhepherd.
            
            
               49
               THat which a ſheepe did inward hide,
               I vſe to weare on my out ſide,
               And that which a tree did outward weare,
               Within me alwaies I doe beare:
               By drowning first I tooke eſſence,
               And hanged was ſince for none offence:
               Still ready by a blaſt of breath,
               To finde a life cauſing my death.
            
            
               50
               AL day leeke one thats in diſgrace,
               He reſteth in ſome ſecret place,
               And ſeldome putteth foorth the head,
               Vntill day light be fully fled,
               Then in the maides, or goodwiues hand,
               The gallant ginnes firſt vp to ſtand:
               Whom to a hole, they doe apply,
               Wherein he will both liue and die.
            
            
               
               51
               ON an euening as colde, as colde might bee,
               With froſt and haile, and pinching weather,
               Companions about three times three,
               Lay cloſe all in a pound together:
               Yet one after one, they tooke a heate,
               And died that night, all in a ſweate.
            
            
               52
               
                  A Remnant of a ſoule, the water did incloſe,
               That ſtaide by one, from fire, which did repaire,
               That fenced by one, which from the earth aroſe,
               And all kept warme by one, which grew vp in the aire:
               The goodwife out of theſe, did deale about her dole,
               Till one did put his noſe, euen right into her hole.
            
            
               53
               IF Lords of the land eſteeme me not a flie,
               If daintie noſed doctors, crie fie on me fie,
               If Ladies at Court, none account on me make,
               If citizens wiues, doe me all forſake,
               Then Ioane in the countrie, for a friend I will take:
               What though from my youth, I haue had a white head,
               My taile will be greene, vntill I be dead.
            
            
               54
               
                  A Poore Alcumiſt, out of ſtreight priſon, accepted to ſeruice, fell
preſently on eating, and of a ſtarueling, in ſhort time, became
goodly. But ſuch was his gormandize, and quicke digestion, that had
he not been excellent, not onely in transformation of mettals, but alſo
in preſeruing, conſeruing, candying, distilling, extracting of oiles,
balmes, quinteſſences and ſpirites, with many other things, no man
would haue entertained him: for he could eate doing little worke, but
not worke, vnleſſe he were eating. Hauing deuoured to ſome ſcarcitie,
things growen and nouriſhed vpon the earth, he was brought to
feede on viler achates, taken from the bowels thereof. But ſtill he eateth,
bringing profit by his ſeruice, comfort by his preſence, and in his
chaps deſtruction. He hath therefore allowed him, roome from his

trade, and habitation by himſelfe, wherein he neuer reſteth, but when
he is wrapped vp in his owne excrements, and wert not that he is in
danger of death, by too much faſting, or too much drinking, ye might
iudge him to be immortall.
            
            
               55
               AN idle braine, and wanton eie,
               Breedes in the hart, ſometime a gooſe,
               Thats often kept full hungrily,
               Whilſt lecherie, iugling faſt and looſe,
               Doth gaine his buſhell for each oate,
               That comes into the gozlings throate.
            
            
               56
               ENuie and loue, together hatcht a beaſt,
               Or hag of hell it rather ſeemes to mee,
               That pines if other comes but neere her feaſt,
               And willingly would euer watching bee,
               Things that are not, this enuies bird would ſee:
               This parricide, this errour whelping ſprite,
               This Sibill falſe, ſeldome diuining right.
            
            
               57
               THere is a thing, ſome call it ſport,
               (That yong and olde, and all will prooue)
               Tis muſicke in a kind conſort,
               On tuned inſtruments of loue,
               The faſhion ſomething bagpipe like,
               With poke and pipe the minſtrels plaie,
               And if the bommes iuſt meaſure ſtrike,
               Tis paſtime for a wedding day:
               Maides that to this their mindes applie,
               For Lute and harpe care not a flie.
            
            
               58
               
                  A Tree, a beaſt, an angell, all in one
               Liues, and hath rule ouer both beaſt and tree,
               That oft, is after goatiſhneſſe ſo gone,
               That there is no beaſt, beaſtlier than hee.
               
                  
Bridle the beaſt, monſter, miſhapen thing,
               Leaſt tree, beaſt, angell, to the deuill fling.
            
            
               59
               
                  TO th'earth from higheſt heauen,
                  Foure virgins were deſcended,
                  Sent downe from him that vnto men
                  All goodneſſe hath intended.
               
               
                  And here they ſtaide a while,
                  And many things amended,
                  But they were forced backe by thoſe,
                  That ſhould haue them defended.
               
               
                  Since then the golden age,
                  The happie daies were ended,
                  And vice hath raigned moſt in them,
                  That vertue moſt pretended.
               
            
            
               60
               IN a towne, where the Praetor is wiſe, the Counſell wittie, is a ſlouenly
citizen, to whom many are ſo indebted, that they haue much
to doe, to pay for the forbearance, and no man can get a generall quietus
eſt at his hand till he be dead; which yet is longed for of very few.
For both the principall agents in the corporation, receiue maintenance
from him: and the Maioreſſe, with the other good wiues, doe ſo fanſie
him, and the fore man of his ſhop, Bawdie Brian, that there is many
times much miſgouernance thereby in the whole towne:
notwithſtanding any edict, proclamation,
or reclamation that the magiſtrate
can make.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            The ſolutions.
            
                IT importeth that all things are contained in ſome place:
and that hell it ſelfe muſt needes be locall.
            
                A variation of the firſt riddle. So that here is not meant, any
thing of the citie Rome. But onely roome or place, viz. the
hollow capacitie of one bodie conteining or comprehending
another.
            
                It may perhaps be vnderſtood of the winde: but rightlier
I thinke, of that which we call vacuitie or emptineſſe. Which
is a name, and none eſſence. For the penetrant ſubtilitie of
aire, ſuffereth nothing to be emptie, as ſay the philoſophers.
            
               
               Mercurie is fained to be god of merchandizing, which is
the trade that beautifieth the glorious citie of Venice. Neptune
inuironeth her, and her Duke is ſeruile or of very ſmall
authoritie. For the maieſtie and ſupreme commandement, is
in the ſenate and magnificoes.
            
                The high way, whereſoeuer it go, eateth vp the veſture of
the earth. It was not created at the firſt, but is rather a priuation,
then a thing made. And if men were makers of it, it was
for the more part, rather with feete then with hands. By the
Tyrants are meant, vſe and neceſſitie: great rulers in the life
of man.
            
                The ſoueraigne, and dread prince of princes, hath the
great earth, a little forreſt of his pleaſure. The fiue partes of
it are the fiue Zones, or otherwiſe the fiue great continents
Aſia, Africa, Europa, America and Magellanica. The keeper
is the Sunne: his wife or ſiſter the Moone, that bringeth alwaies
with her light and moiſture. The footeman is the planet
Mercurie: the Smithes wife Venus. They croſſe the Zodiacke

continually attending on the Sunne. The Phoenix is our
yeere, which beginneth when Sol entreth into Aries, and endeth
when he goeth out of Piſces.
            
            
                It is meant, by the faire Ladie Tellus, which conceiueth in
her wombe, the reſplendent mettals of golde and ſiluer, the
vnwoorthie burniſhed regents of the earth.
            
                The earth that beares vs ſhall deuoure vs. And of chalke
which is accounted adeps terrae, the fatneſſe of the earth, mixed
with ſand (the leaneſt earth) is made morter, for buildings to
defend vs againſt all winde and weather.
            
                A deſcription of a ſtudent ſitting at his booke in a greene
chaire, wherein he leand and lolled till it cracked.
            
                A deſcription of the indomable wilde ſea, whoſe waues are
her wrincles: ſhe is as wanton as any Weſtminſter wagtaile,
and for the bodie as perilous.
            
                The laſſe is the vine, a true louer of the Sunne, for whome
ſhe mourneth, when he is run far ſouthward. Her iuice hath
compelled many to reueale their owne ſecrets, and not a few
to lay open their owne ſhame. Chriſt called himſelfe the vine.
            
                Stamped coyne is ruled, and it cureth: alſo what diſeaſes it
cureth, and what great things it perſwadeth, the world knoweth
but too well. It containeth a kinde of chronologie.
            
                It may well be vnderſtood by cardplay.
            
                In the ſpring time, a yoong damſell putteth in her boſome,
the egs of a ſilke worme: which being diſcloſed, the yoong
worme, ere it be long, will fall to his naturall taske, till he hath
incloſed himſelfe in his huske. From which when he is broken
out, he ioineth with the female, for preſeruation of his kinde,
and then voluntarily dieth.
            
                There is a bird, called in Italian, Perdigiornata, the daywaſter:
of this qualitie. And ſome men are of the like, that let go,

all ſmall offers, to expect better imployments.
            
                Swine ſaith Plutarch, to whome nature hath not giuen a
looke, vp to the skies, are the moſt crying beaſts in the world,
euer grunting and complaining. But tie them by the heeles,
and carrie them on a ſtaffe whither ye will: ſo long as they ſee
the cloudes, they are quiet and ſilent. And if men could learne
to leaue wrooting in the earth, and place their cogitations in
heauen, their tranquillitie ſhould be the greater.
            
                But men hunt after felicitie, prepoſterouſly, with too much
circuition: for it is beſt ſought at home, in a quiet ſoule, and
cleane conſcience.
            
                The infatigable earth beareth hempe, which is brought to
diuers trades, myſteries, formes and faſhions. There of is made
linnen cloth, for ſheetes, ſhirts and ſmocks. And if they go
not neerer my Ladies taile, then my Lords lips I haue maruell.
Then, of linnen cloth is made paper: of paper, bookes and
intelligencers, id est, letters of loue and other miſſiues. They
come very often to the fire, or elſe to wipe where it is ſeldome
cleanly, and neuer ſweete. But ſee you not, how many tranſmutations
here are, before we can haue paper? Well fare he
that taught vs the gooſe necke. But a quicke ducke had no
fellow: for he could waſh himſelfe cleane for a new peece of
ſeruice.
            
                A ſtudent, riſing from bed, with his flint and ſteele, giueth
fire to the match and candle. The dead men which came
about him, were S. Ambroſe, S. Augustine &c. or if ye will
Plowden and my Lord Dyer.
            
            
                They are the leters of the alphabet: whereof onely fiue are
vocall, and the reſt dumbe.
            
                The ſcale of muſicke, is made with lines and ſpaces. Fiue
ſigned cliffes 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                odd. Six voices, vt, re, my, fa, ſol, la,
and the ſeuen diapaſons, a. b. c. d. e. f. g.
            
                It is vnderſtood of fortune.
            
               
                An excellent expoſitour of heauenly myſteries, tooke this
to be a looking glaſſe which receiueth the ſimilitude of any
thing, that commeth trauerſe. The two great Ladies, he tooke
to be pride and lecherie. But the propounder vnderſtandeth
this riddle, by the planet Mercurie, placed meane betwixt
Venus and Luna: being (ſay the Aſtronomers) eiuſdem naturae,
cum planeta cui coniungitur.
            
            
               
               Paracelſus, in his booke de natura rerum teacheth an artificiall
generation of an homunculus, or little man. Prometheus,
the ſonne of Iapetus, was the firſt maker of images, and thereupon,
was fained to make men. This riddle is ment by Rhetorike,
or the figure Proſopopeia, that to ſtirre and mooue affection,
attributeth ſpeech to dead men, or to wals & ſuch like.
            
                A fan of feathers.
            
                Viz. two cochehorſes, one cocheman, fower wheeles, the
bodie of the coche, and fower paſſengers.
            
                Firſt an egge, then a worme or canker: then incloſed in a
huske, and laſt of all a butterflie.
            
                A bell, when it is caſt, is buried in the ground.
            
                If euery man and woman be an arbor reuerſa, then the ſhril
oiſter queanes in Graies Inne lane, are trees and plants:
though not ſo ſweete to plant vpon, as be in other groues
about London.
            
                The new world America, is compaſſed in with the ſea. And
were not the multitude of barnacles, viz. cloudes, which are
drawen out of it, (ſaith one author) the ſea muſt needes
drowne all the earth. It is the ſunne and ſtars, that draweth vp
thoſe cloudes and vapours. Which when (by coldneſſe of the
aire in his midde region) they conuert to ſnowe, fall downe
againe and make feather beds bigger then any which be in
Ware, though not altogither ſo holſome, to lie long in.
            
                It was, if Aeſope be a ſtorie, the blocks ſucceſſour, the woorthie

king of frogs. Viz. a ſtorke, deuouring one of his ſubiects,
in Claxton garden.
            
                A hauke, firſt fed, then hooded, then ſet on a pearch: was
ſoone after hanged by the heeles, and reſcued by the maſter
of the houſe, at Stokesbie.
            
                The ſoldier, is our Norfolke tumbler which ouerthroweth
multitudes of conies: that want both armour and courage to
hold together.
            
                He that hath laien one whole autumne at Stokesbie, ſhall
vnderſtand this aenigma well inough. A gnat is an ill chamber-fellow.
            
                In Lucians dialog, betwixt the ſhoomaker and his cocke,
ye ſhall finde that Mars, when he went to lie with Venus, left
his man captaine Gallous or Gallus, to attend at the doore.
Maſter Cocke fell in a nap, Phaebus looked in at the windowe,
and diſcried the adulterie &c. Euer ſince that day, euery cock
at peepe of ſunne (thinking Mars to be at his old occupation,
or martialiſtes to be at their venerious exerciſe) croweth to
giue them warning.
            
                A great ſnowe, brought with a Northren winde, killed manie
birds and beaſts. The ſeruants at the Knights houſe, were
the glaſſe windowes, which kept out the ſnowe, and let the
light in.
            
                It deſcribeth, the manner of driuing piles into the ground,
wherewith are made firme, the foundations of buildings, ſet
in meadowes, marſhes and lowe places.
            
                A broome, when it is well worne, and none other thing at
hand, ſerueth to feede the fire withall.
            
                Veniſon hath many louers. The hunters reioice when the
dogs kill it, and commonly the foſter or keeper is the chiefe
murderer. The graue is made of paſticruſt: and for ſheere
loue we take out the corſe and eate it.
            
               
                A lanner or falcon, lying in for her game, whileſt the dogs
hunted to ſpring it.
            
                A needle.
            
                Gooſe quils, when they be cut to pennes, are inſtruments
in great occurrences and affaires. Maintainers of war againſt
vniuſt profeſſours, and all manner of offenders againſt the
Queenes peace, crowne and dignitie. This war ſhall laſt, till
meum and tuum be ouerthrowen, and coffers and lockes be
out of vſe. For vntill then ſhall the common lawe laſt, as propheſied
old Maſter Barton.
            
            
                Salt, receiueth forme by fire, the ſubſtance of it is water:
and yet fire or water will deſtroy it.
            
                Moſt of our things, are kept vnder locke and key: except
ſheepe here in England.
            
                It may be vnderſtood, of a paire of ſheares.
            
                I knew a gentleman, that would ſay he loſt, a thouſande
pounds a yeere, by lying but one hower too long in bed. For
his eldeſt brother was borne, not paſt one hower before him.
            
                The milners wife, was the parſons ſiſter: and ſo the diuiſion
not hard to make.
            
                Day and night, were before the ſunne and moone. And
though they ſeeme to ſtay with vs, yet in truth they doe not
ſo: but are in continuall motion, euer ſlipping from vs. A
yeere runneth away and makes no noiſe.
            
                A candle.
            
                A candle.
            
                A pound of candles.
            
                Plants haue a ſweete vegetancie. The riddle is vnderſtood
of a glaſſe with ſweet water, incloſed with bents, or ſome ſuch
matter, and alſo wrapt vp in wooll. Now if the glaſſe were the

goodwiues glaſſe, then poſſeſſorily though not naturally the
glaſſes mouth, whereunto one ſmelled, was the goodwiues
hole.
            
                Garlicke &c.
            
                The great chymick, that hath eaten ſo many houſes, blocks
and trees, that poore folke are glad to ſtop his mouth with ſea
coles, flags, turfes, and cowſhardes.
            
                Loue is a foole.
            
                Ielouſie is a feend.
            
                Lecherie is made a ſolace.
            
                Thoſe women and men are happie, whoſe rationall and
intellectuall part, hath her iuſt and full dominion, ouer the
materiall and ſenſuall.
            
                Amitie, peace, iuſtice and ſhamefaſtnes, are gifts and great
bleſſings of God. Of which the two firſt (as I haue red) a great
while ſince, were chaſed from earth by princes: the third by
lawyers, and the fourth by women. I had the ſubſtance of this
riddle from Italie. Let it therefore tax and reprehend, roitelets,
dukes and potentates, for their diuiſions: aduocates for
their iniuſtice: and women for their impudence, onely in
Italie. We hold it in England, that a ſhameleſſe woman, wanteth
the propereſt ornament of her ſex.
            
                The corporation or towne, is the perfect frame of a man.
In whom reaſon is placed, as the Praetor or Maior. The fiue
ſenſes are of counſell, and the ſlouenly citizen is the bellie.
            The Maioreſſe is miſtreſſe Libido: and the good wiues,
the fooliſh affections of man: which will fauour
the belly and Brian, let reaſon
ſay what he can.
            Oremus.
         
      
   