
      
         
            
            
            
               
            
            
               
               
            
         
         
            
            LONDONS LOVE, TO THE ROYAL PRINCE HENRIE, MEETING HIM ON THE RIVER OF THAMES, at his returne from Richmonde, WITH A WORTHIE FLEETE OF HER CITTIZENS, ON Thurſday the laſt of May, 1610.
            WITH A BREIFE REPORTE OF THE water Fight, and Fire workes.
            LONDON, Printed by EDW. ALLDE, for NATHANIELL FOSBROOKE, and are to be ſolde at the Weſt-end of Paules, neere to the Biſhop of Londons gate, 1610.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Sr. THOMAS CAMBELL, KNIGHT, LORD Major of this famous Cittie of London: And to all the Aldermen his worthie Bretheren, &c.
            
               I Holde it but right & iuſtice (Honorable Lord, and you the reſt of this Pollitique bodie) to giue you that which you haue beſt deſerued: to wit, a true taſte of that dayes ſollemne Triumphe (in honor of ſo hopefull a Prince) and wherein your

great loue appeared not a little. Your time for preparation was verie ſhort, and mine, for your ſeruice, much ſhorter: yet (of mine owne knowledge) bothe of them were verie Royally and gratefully accepted, which J am ſure was all your chiefeſt expectation, and, then which, nothing could be more deſired by my ſelfe. Accepte then your owne, and me at your continuall ſeruice.
         
      
      
         
            
            LONDONS LOVE, TO THE ROYALL PRINCE HENRIE, meeting him on the Riuer of Thames (at his returne from Richmonde) with a worthie Fleet of her Cittizens, on Turſday the laſt of May. 1610. &c.
            
               IT hath euer bin the nature of this honorable & famous Cittie (matchleſſe for her loue and loyaltie in all ages paſt and preſent) to come behinde none other of the worlde whatſoeuer, in dutie to her Soueraigne, and care, not only of common good, but alſo of vertuous and neuer-dying credit. And ſuch hath alwayes bin the indulgent endeuour of her worthie Magiſtrates, from time to time, that they would neuer let ſlip any good occaſion,

whereby ſo maine & eſpecial reſpect might be duely and ſucceſſiuely preſerued. And ſo much the rather, becauſe Plato termeth Magiſtracy, to be the Anchor, Head, and Soule of any Citty: & holdeth it for the ſame thing in any commonwealth, as the Heart is in the body of a liuing creature, or as Reaſon in the Soule: which being the chiefe and eſſentiall parts of either, the life and exiſtence of the whole, is in that power, & their cheerful motion, giues courage and alacritie to all the other partes of the bodie.
            Whereof no better exemplarie rule can be made, then the late apparant teſtimonie of Londons Loue to Royall Prince Henrie, appointed by our dread Soueraigne his Father, to be created Prince of Wales, and Earle of Cheſter, euen now in the aſſembly of the high Court of Parliament: that he might be the twelfte Prince in that Royall creation, ſucceeding thoſe eleuen ſo long ſince paſſed.
            
               For our Chronicles and Recordes doe name but eleuen, that (ſince the Conqueſt) were Princes of Wales. Whereof the firſt was Edward, Sonne to King Henrie the third, who afterward was King Edward the firſt, he was created Prince at London.
            The ſecond was Edward his Sonne, called alſo afterward King Edward the ſecond, and he had his creation at London likewiſe.
            Thirdly, Edward his Sonne being after that King Edward the third: but he had his creation at Yorke.
            
            Fourthly, Edward, ſurnamed the Blacke Prince, who was Sonne to King Edward the third, that conquered France, and quartered their Armes with ours: he alſo was created at London.
            The fift was King Richard the ſecond

Sonne to that worthie warriour the Black Prince, who liued not to enioy the Crowne: he had his creation at Hauering.
            
            The ſixt was Henrie the fift, eldeſt Sonne to King Henrie the fourth, and he had his creation at London.
            The ſeauenth, was Edward the Sonne of King Henrie the ſixt, whoſe creation I read to be at Reading.
            
            The eight was Edward, the Sonne of King Edward the fourth, afterward called Edward the fift, neuer crowned, but made away by his cruell vnckle Richard the third: he was alſo created at London.
            The ninth, was Edward, Sonne to King Richard the third, created at London alſo,.
            The tenth was Prince Arthur, Sonne to

King Henrie the ſeauenth, who deceaſsing, his brother Henrie (afterward King Henrie the eight) who was made the eleuenth, was alſo created Prince of Wales, and bothe of them at London.
            All theſe fore-named Princes of Wales, were created ſollemnely, by and in the Court of Parliament; except three, which were Richard the ſecond, Edward the fift, & Edward the Sōne of Richard the third. And thoſe that were created out of Parliament, were Princes of hard and diſaſter fortune: For Richard the ſecond was depoſed: Edward the fifte murdered, and Richard the third, his Sonne dyed with in three moneths after, as a iuſt iudgement of God for his Fathers wickednes.
            But now our Royall Henrie comming to be the twelfth Prince in this great dignitie, and Londons cheefe Magiſtrate the Lord

Maior, with his worthie Bretheren the Aldermen, hauing very ſhorte and ſudden intelligence thereof: after ſome ſmall conſultation, vnderſtanding that the Prince was to come from Richmonde, by water; they determined to meete him in ſuch good manner, as the breuitie of time would then permit them.
            Wherfore, vpon Thurſday, being the laſt day of May, about eight of the clocke in the morning, all the worſhipfull Companies of the Cittie, were readie in their Bardges vpon the water, with their Streamers and Enſignes gloriouſly diſplayed, Drommes, Trumpets, Fifes and other Muſickes attending on them, to awaite the Lord Maior and Aldermens comming.
            No ſooner had his Honor and the reſt taken Bardge, but on they rowed, with ſuch a chearefull noyſe of Hermonie, and ſo

goodlie a ſhewe in order and equipage; as made the beholders and hearers not meanely delighted; beſide a peale of Ordenance, that welcomde them as they entred on the water.
            To beautifie ſo ſumptuous a ſhewe, and to grace the day with more matter of Triumphe, it ſeemd that Neptune ſmyled theron auſpitiouſlie, and would not ſuffer ſo famous a Citties affection, to goe vnfurniſhed of ſome fauour from him: eſpecially, becauſe it is the Metropolis and cheife honor of the Iſland, whereunto him ſelfe euer bare ſuch endeared affection.
            For, according to the affirmation of Annius de Viterbo, Diodorus Siculus, Higginus, and Pictonius, Neptune being called King, or God of the Seas, had by his Queene Amphitrita diuers Children,Script. Bri. cent. 2.
                and as Bale ſetteth downe, each one of them he made King of a

ſeuerall Iſland. Britayne, which himſelfe tearmed to be Inſula beata, he beſtowed vpon his fourth, but beſt affected ſonne Albion, who ſubduing the Samotheans, became ſole ruler thereof, according to the teſtimonie of Nicholaus Perottus, R
                     •
                  gmanus Phileſius, Ariſtotle, and Humphrey Lloyd, and after his owne name, called it Albion.
            
            Now it is not without good reaſon to be imagined, that in meere loue to his ſonnes memorie, and for his auncient affection to this Iſland; no bleſſednes at any time can befall it, but it ſhall receiue ſome eſpeciall and regardful noate of his fauour. But more eſpecially at this time, when Heauen, Earth, Sea, and all had enterlaced loue together, to honor the generall reioycing, for ſo fayre a fortune, ſo royall a hope, and a Prince of ſo vnuſuall ſtraine or expectation.
            For where mortalles doe conſent together

and ſing as in a Quire of ſetled ioy; the ſupremer powers can neuer ſit as ydle ſpectatours: but ſeeing how weaker ſtrength expreſſeth it ſelfe; they, in great bountie, muſt needs add applauſe vnto it, and out of their riche aboundance, enable their meaner power, by their helpe, and expreſſe alſo their owne lyking thereof, by ſome familiar addition or other.
            Wherfore let vs thus thinke of Neptune, that out of his ſpacious watrie wildernes, he then ſuddenly ſent a huge Whale and a Dolphin, and by the power of his commanding Trident, had ſeated two of his choyceſt Trytons on them, altring their deformed Sea-ſhapes, beſtowing on them the borrowed bodies of two abſolute Actors, euen the verie beſt our inſtāt time can yeeld; & perſonating in them, the ſeuerall Genii of Corinea, the beautifull Queene of Cornewall, and Amphion the Father of hermonie or Muſick.
            
               In theſe two well-ſeeming and richelye appointed perſons, the Dukedome of Cornewall, and the Principalitie of Wales, (by order of Neptunes Prophet, or Poet, call him whether ye will) caried ſome tipe or figure, and not improperly to them ſo applyed.
            For ſuch repreſentations and miſticall vnderſtandings, haue alwayes bin reputed lawfull, and are euermore allowed to holde and carrie correſpondencie, with ſuch ſolemne ſhewes and Triumphes; as before in Elder Antiquitie, ſo likewiſe in Moderne and later vſe.
            Let it ſuffiſe then, that thus was this goodly Fleete of Cittizens accompanied, and vſhered the way ſo farre as Chelſeye, where houering on the water vntill the Prince came: all pleaſures that the times interim could afforde, were plētifully entercourſed, and no diſorder or breache of arraye in the

whole Nauie.
            Vpon the Princes neere approche, way was made for his beſt and apteſt entertainement, which by multitude of Boates and Bardges (of no vſe, but only for deſire of ſight) was much impeached for a while, Till order being taken for the contrarie, the Princes Bardge accoſted the Lord Maiors, where dutie entertayning on the one ſide, & Princely Grace moſt affably accepting on the other: Corinea mounted on her Whale, preſented herſelfe in this manner to his Highneſſe.
            
               
               CORINEA, a very fayre and beautifull Nimphe, repreſenting the Genius of olde Corineus Queene, and the Prouince of Cornewall, ſuited in her watrie habit yet riche and coſtly, with a Coronet of Pearles and Cockle ſhelles on her head, ſaluteth the PRINCE.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           THE SPEECHE, SPOKEN BY CORINEA, riding on a Whale.
                           
                              GRacious Prince, and great Duke of Cornewall, I, the good Angell or Genius of Corinea, Queene to Brutes noble Companion Corineus, the firſt of fayre Britaynes Regions, and your owne worthie Dukedome; in honor of this generall reioycing day, and to expreſſe the endeared affections of Londons Lord Maior, his Bretheren the Aldermen, and all theſe worthie Cittizens, Merchants that holde Commerce with me and the wide worlde, in our very beſt and richeſt commodities: doe thus vſher them the way, to applaude in this Triumphe, and

to let you knowe their willing readines, by all meanes poſsible to loue and honor you.
                           The ſhortnes of time, hath bin no meane bridle to their zealous forwardnes, which (elſe) would haue appeared in more flowing and aboundant manner. Neuertheleſſe, out of this little limitation, let me humbly entreate you to accept their boundleſſe loue, which is like to Iaacobs Ladder, reaching from Earth to Heauen. Whereon, their hourelie, holie and deuoute deſires (like to ſo many bleſſed Angelles) are continually aſcending and deſcending: For their Royall Soueraigne your Father, his Queene your peerleſſe Mother, your ſacred ſelfe, and the reſt of their illuſtrous race. That vnpolluted ſoules may be euer about yee, falſe harts or foule hands neuer to come neere yee; but the Hoaſte of Heauē, alwayes to defend yee.
                        
                     
                  
               
               Heere could I wiſhe for ſuch a copious

braine, and liberall plentie of Arte, as might ſuffiſe to declare the Royall reſpect and affabilitie of the Prince, not only to my Lord Maior and his Bretheren, but to all the Companies in generall, ſpreading his gracious acceptaunce of their loue and kindnes, like to the large extended winges of Ioues Birde the Eagle, euen ouer them all, and ſtanding in the dore of his Bardge, he ſuffered no occaſion to paſſe him, but ſtill it tooke holde of his grace and liking.
               And thus they ſet on towards White Hall, in ſo ſoft, milde and gentle a pace, as the very Thames appeared proude of this gallant burden, ſwelling her breaſt to beare them with pompe and Majeſtie: and not one wrinckle appeared in her brow, but as plaine and euen, as the ſmootheſt yuorie. Nor durſt any rude ſtorme peepe foorth his head, or the leaſte noyſe of an vngentle winde ſtirre: but all were whiſt and ſtill, as

forgetfull of thoſe vnciuill offices, and ouercome with admiration of the dayes delight.
               Beeing come neere White Hall, the Bardges (according to their qualitie and degree in order & dignitie) deuided themſelues on either ſide, to make a ſpacious paſſage for the Prince and his traine betweene them, euen vntill they came neere to the Courte Bridge, the Lord Majors Bardge being then the formoſte and neereſt. Now the Prince being readie to land, Amphion on his Dolphin ſaluteth him.
            
            
               
               AMPION, a graue and iudicious Prophet-like perſonage, attyred in his apte habits, euery way anſwerable to his ſtate and profeſsion, with his wreathe of Sea-ſhelles on his head, and his harpe hanging in fayre twine before him: perſonating the Genius of Wales, giueth the Prince this Farewell.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           THE SPEECHE, OF AMPHION ON a Dolphin.
                           
                              ROyall PRINCE of Wales, in this figure of Muſicall Amphion vpon his Dolphin, we perſonate the Carracter of Wales your Principalitie. Who hauing with my faire Siſter Corinea thus farre attended you, on behalfe of Londons Lord Major, his worthie Bretheren, and this goodly Fleete of well affected Cittizens; we are all now forced to an vnwilling departure.
                           See how our Streamers hang the head, as lothe to leaue you: Our Bardges lagge and

ſeeme lumpiſhe, as greeuing to forgoe you: Our Trompets and other Muſicks appeare tongue-leſſe, the worde of farewell is ſo offenſiue to them. And except you put ſpirit into them all, with a gracious acceptaunce of this their loue and loyaltie: the boſome of fayre Thames ſhrinkes, and they feare ſwallowing.
                           But the Sunne of true-borne Majeſtie ſhines in your bright eye, and your more ſerious affaires calling you hence, ſpeakes bothe your loue to them, and liking of their humble dutie at their diſmiſsion.
                           Home againe then fayre Fleete, you haue brought a Royall freight to landing, ſuch a burdē as hath made the Riuer not meanely proude to beare. And ſince we muſt needs parte, in our lowdeſt voyce of Drommes, Trompets and Ordenaunce, be this our laſt accent: Long liue our Prince of Wales, the Royall Henrie.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  At which very inſtant, off went the Chambers, and ſuch a triumphall noyſe of Drommes and Trompets, as made the very Ayre to Ecchoe: which done, they returned back to London agayne, wherwith we conclude this ſollemne dayes Triumphe.
               Vpon the Sunday following, fiue and twentie Knights of the Bathe were made by his Maieſtie, in honor of the Prince his Sonne, and they all rode in their apte habits, with their Squires and Pages, from Durham houſe to White Hall, to their no little praiſe and commendation.
               On the Monday, the King and all the Nobilitie, going by water from the Courte to Weſtminſter; in the Courte of Requeſts (which then was reputed as the Parliament houſe) the Prince had his creation of Prince of VVales, Duke of Rotchſaye, Earle of Cheſter, and Knight of the moſte noble Order of the

                  Garter, with all the due ceremonies and veſtures therto belonging, his Maieſtie himſelfe girding on his Sworde. Which being ended they returned in the like manner to the Courte againe.
               In the euening of the ſame day, it was expected that the water Fight & Fire workes ſhould haue bin perfourmed, no meane multitude of people attending to ſee it· But whether by the violent ſtorme of rayne, or other appointment of his maieſtie, I knowe not (albeit Protheus mounted on a Sea Monſter, had deliuered the intent of the deuiſe to his Highneſſe) yet was it deferred till the Wedneſday following.
               Vpon which day, after a moſte Royall and ſumptuous Tilting, the water fight was worthilie perfourmed, and by ſuch reporte as was thereof made to me, thus it was ordered:
               
                  A Turkiſhe Pirate prowling on the Seas, to maintaine a Turkiſhe Caſtle (for ſo their Armes and Streamers deſcribed them both to be) by his ſpoyle & rapine, of Merchants, and other Paſſengers; ſculking abroade to finde a bootie: he deſcried two Merchants Shippes, the one whereof bearing to winde ſomewhat before her fellowe, made the Pirate wafte her to ſtrike ſayle and come in, which the Merchant either not regarding, or no way fearing, rode ſtill boldely on. The Pirate with drawen weapons and other menaces, wafts her againe to vayle her bonnet, but the Merchant ſtill refuſing: the Pirate ſends a commanding ſhott, which the Merchant anſwered againe, encouraged therto by her fellowe Merchant, who by this time was come neere her, and ſpake in like language with her to the Pirate. When he perceiued his hope defeated, and this bolde reſiſtance returned; he ſent ſhot vpon ſhot very fiercely, wherto they replyed as reſoluedly:

ſo that betweene them grewe a verie fierce & dangerous fight. Wherein the Merchāts wexing to be ſomewhat diſtreſſed (by reaſon that the Caſtle likewiſe often played vpon them) two men of warre happening then to be neere, made in to helpe and releeue their hard detriment.
               And now the fighte grewe on all ſides to be fierce indeed, the Caſtle aſsiſting the Pirate very hotly, and the other withſtanding brauely and couragiouſly: diuers men appearing on either ſide to be ſlayne, and hurlled ouer into the Sea, as in ſuch aduentures it often comes to paſſe, where ſuch ſharpe aſſaultes are vſed indeed.
               In concluſion, the Merchants and men of warre, after a long and well fought skirmiſh, prooued too ſtrong for the Pirate, they ſpoylde bothe him, and blewe vp the Caſtle, ending the whole batterie with verie rare and admirable Fire-workes, as alſo a worthie peale of Chambers.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   