
      
         
            
            
               ❧A breefe balet touching the traytorous takynge of Scarborow Castell.
            
               
                  OH valiaunt inuaders gallantꝭ gaie.
               Who, with your compeeres conqueringe the route,
               Castels or towrs: all standynge in your waie,
               Ye take, controlling all estates most stoute.
               Yet had it now bene good to looke aboute.
               
                  
                     〈◊◊◊〉
                  : 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  aue let alone,
               And take scarborow warnynge euerichone.
            
            
               By Scarborow castell, not Scarborow:
               I onely meane: but further vnderstande,
               Eche Hauene, eche hold, or other harborow,
               That our good Kyng and Queene do holde in hande:
               As dewe obedience bindth vs in bande.
               Their Scarborow castels to let a lone,
               And take Scarborow warningꝭ euerychone.
            
            
               The s
                     •
                  alers of which castells euermore,
               In bookes of olde, and in our eyes of new:
               Haue alway lost them selues and theirs therfore.
               All this ye did forget: in time to vew.
               Which myght haue wrought both you and yours teschew:
               Lettyng Scarborow castel now alone,
               Takyng Scarborow warnyng euerychone.
            
            
               This Scarborow castell, symplie standyng:
               Yet could that castell slyly you begyle,
               Ye thought ye tooke the castell: at your landyng:
               The castell takyng you: in the selfe whyle.
               Eche stone within the castell wall did smyle,
               That Scarborow castell ye let not alone,
               And tooke Scarborow warnyng euerychone.
            
            
               Your puttyng now in vre your dyuylishe dreame,
               Hath made you see (and lyke enough to feele)
               A fewe false traytours can not wynne a reame,
               Good subiectes be (and will be) trew as steele.
               To stand with you, the ende they lyke no deele.
               Scarborow castels they can lette alone,
               And take Scarborow warnyngꝭ euerychone.
            
            
               They know godꝭ law: tobey their Kyng and Queene.
               Not take from them: but kepe for them their owne.
               And geue to them: when such traytours are seene
               As ye are now: to brynge all ouerthrowne:
               They woorke your ouerthrow, by godꝭ power growne.
               God saith: let Scarborow castell alone,
               Take Scarborow warnyng euerychone.
            
            
               To late for you, and in time for the rest
               Of your most traytorous sect (if any bee)
               You all are spectacles at full witnest:
               As other weare to you: treason to flee.
               Which in you past, yet may the rest of yee:
               The saide Scarborow castells let alone,
               And take Scarborow warnyngꝭ euerychone.
            
            
               This terme Scarborow warnyng, grew (some say)▪
               
               By hasty hangyng, for rank robbry theare.
               Who that was met, but suspect in that way,
               Streight was he trust vp: what euer he weare.
               Wherupon theeues thynkyng good to forbeare,
               Scarborow Robbyng they let that alone,
               And tooke Scarborow warnyng euerychone.
            
            
               If Robbyng in that way, bred hangyng so,
               By theft to take, way, towne, castell and all,
               What Scarborow hangyng craueth this 
                     •
                  o?
               Weare your selues herein Iudges capitall:
               I thinke your Iudgementes on these woordꝭ must fall.
               Scarborow Robbyng who letth not alone,
               Scarborow hangyng deserue euerychone.
            
            
               We wold to god that you (and al of yow)
               Had but considered: as wel as ye knew:
               The end of all traytorie, as you see it now,
               Long to haue liued, louyng subiectes trew.
               Alas: your losse we not reioyse, but rew.
               That Scarborow castell ye leete not alone,
               And tooke Scarborow warnyng euerychone.
            
            
               To craftꝭ that euer thryue, wyse men euer cleaue.
               To crafts that seeld when thryue, wyse men seeld when flee.
               The crafts that neuer thryue, a foole can learne to leaue.
               This thriftles crafty crafte then clere leaue we.
               One God, one Kynge, one Queene, serue franke and free.
               Their Scarborow castell let it alone,
               Take we Scarborow warning euerichone.
            
            
               Our soueraigne lord: and soueraigne lady both.
               Lawde we our lorde, for their prosperitee.
               Beseching him for it: as it now goth,
               And to this daie hath gone, that it may bee:
               Continued so, in perpetuitee.
               We lettyng theyr Scarborow castells alone,
               Takyng Scarborow warnings euerychone,
            
            Finis
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               
            
            
               I. Heywood.
            
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London in fleetestrete by Tho. Powell. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.
            
         
      
   