
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧A dialogue conteinyng the nomber in effect of all the prouerbes in the engliſhe tongue, compacte in a matter concernyng two maner of mariages, made and ſet foorth by Iohn̄ Heywood.
            Londini. AN. M.D.XLVI.
         
         
            
            The preface.
            AMong other thyngs profityng in our tong
            Thoſe whiche much may profit both old & yong
            Suche as on their fruite will feede or take holde
            Are our cōmon playne pithy prouerbes olde.
            Some ſence of ſome of whiche beyng bare and rude
            Yet to fyne and fruitefull effect they allude.
            And theyr ſentences include ſo large a reache
            That almoſt in all thinges good leſſons they teache.
            This write I not to teache, but to touche. for why,
            Men knowe this as well or better than I.
            But this and this reſt, I write for this.
            Remembryng and conſyderyng what the pith is
            That by remembrance of theſe prouerbes may grow
            In this tale, erſt talked with a frende, I ſhowe
            As many of theim as we coulde fytly fynde,
            Fallyng to purpoſe, that might fall in mynde.
            To thentent the reader redyly may
            Fynde theim and mynde theim, when he will alway.
         
      
      
         
            
            The fyrſte parte.
            
               ¶The fyrſt chapiter.
               OF myne acquayntaunce a certayne yong man
               (Beyng a reſorter to me nowe and than)
               Reſorted lately, ſhowyng hym ſelfe to be
               Deſyrous, to talke at length alone with me.
               And as we for this a mete place had woon,
               With this olde prouerbe, this yong man begoon.
               who ſo that knewe, what wolde be dere,
               Shulde nede be marchaunt but one yere.
               Though it (quoth he) thyng impoſſible be
               The full ſequele of preſent thynges to fore ſe:
               Yet doth this prouerbe prouoke euery man
               Politikely (as man poſſibly can)
               In thyngs to come after, to caſt iye before
               To caſt out or kepe in, thyngs for fore ſtore.
               As the prouiſion maie ſeme moſt profitable,
               And the commoditee moſte commendable.
               Into this conſideracion I am wrought
               By two thyngs, which fortune to hāds hath brought.
               Two women I know, of which twayne the tone
               Is a mayde of flowryng age, a goodly one.
               Thother a wydowe, who ſo many yeres beares,
               That all her whiteneſſe lythe in her white heares.
               This mayde hath frēds riche, but riches hath ſhe non
               Nor none can hir hands get to lyue vpon.
               This wydow is very riche, and hir frends bare.
               And both theſe, for loue to wed with me fonde are.
               And both wolde I wed, the better and the wurs.
               The tone for her perſon, the tother for her purs.
               
                  They woo not my ſubſtance, but my ſelfe they wooe.
               Goodes haue I none, and ſmall good can I dooe.
               On this poore mayd hir riche frends I clerely know
               (So ſhe wed where thei will) great gifts will beſtow.
               But with theim all I am ſo farre from fauer,
               That ſhe ſhall ſure haue no grote, if I haue her.
               And I ſhall haue as littell, all my frends ſwere,
               Except I folowe theim, to wedde els where.
               The poore frends of this riche widow bere no ſway,
               But wed hir and wyn welth, whan I will I may.
               Now whiche of theſe twayne is like to be dereſt
               In peyne or pleaſure to ſtycke to me nereſt,
               The depth of all doubts with you to conſyder,
               The ſence of the ſaied prouerbe ſendth me hither.
               The beſt bargain of both quickely to haue ſkande:
               For one of them thynke I to make out of hande.
            
            
               ¶The ſeconde chapiter.
               FRende (quoth I) welcome, & with right good will,
               I will as I can your will herein fulfyll.
               And two thyngs I ſee in you, that ſhewe you wiſe.
               Fyrſt in weddyng or ye wed, to aſke aduiſe.
               The ſeconde, your yeres beyng yong it apperes,
               Ye regarde yet good prouerbs of olde ferne yeres.
               And as ye grounde your tale vpon one of theim
               Furniſhe we this tale with euerychone of theim.
               Suche as may fitly fall in mynde to diſpoſe,
               Agreed (quoth he.) Then (quoth I) firſt this diſcloſe.
               Haue you to this olde wydowe, or this yong mayde,
               Any wordes of aſſurance or this tyme ſayde?
               
                  Nay in good faithe ſayd he. Well than (ſayd I)
               I will be playne with you, and may honeſtly.
               And plainly to ſpeake, I lyke you (as I ſayde)
               In two fore tolde things, but a thyrd haue I wayde,
               Not ſo muche to be lyked, as I can deme,
               Whiche is in your weddyng your haſte ſo extreme.
               The beſt or wurſt thyng to man for this lyfe
               Is good or yll chooſyng his good or yll wyfe.
               I meane not onely of body good or bad,
               But of all thyngs meete or vnmeete to be had
               Suche as at any tyme by any meane maie
               Betwene man and wyfe, loue encreaſe or decaie.
               Where this grounde in any hed, grauely grateth
               All fyry haſte to wed, it ſoone rebateth.
               Som thyngs that prouoke yong men to wed in haſte
               Show after weddyng that haſte maketh waſte.
               Whan tyme hath tourned white ſuger to white ſalte,
               Than ſuche folke ſe, ſofte fyre maketh ſwete malte.
               And that deliberacion dothe men aſſyſt
               Before they wed, to beware of had I wyſt.
               And than theyr tymely weddyng doth clere appere,
               That they were early vp, and neuer the nere.
               And ones theyr haſty heate a lyttell controlde,
               Than perceyue they well, hotte loue ſone colde.
               And whan haſty witleſſe myrth is mated weele,
               Good to be mery and wyſe, they thynke and feele.
               Haſte in weddyng ſom man thynkth his owne auaile
               Whan haſte proueth a rod made for his owne taile.
               And whan he is well beaten with his owne rodde,
               Than ſeeth he haſte and wiſedom, thyngs far odde.
               
                  And that in all, or moſte thyngs, wiſht at nede,
               Moſte tymes he ſeeth, the more haſte the leſſe ſpede.
               In les thīgs thē wedding, haſte ſhowth haſte mās fo
               So that the haſty man neuer wanteth wo.
               Theſe ſage ſayd ſawes yf ye take ſo profounde,
               As ye take that, by whiche ye toke your grounde,
               Than fynd ye groūded cauſe by theſe now here tolde▪
               
               In haſte to weddyng your haſte to withholde.
               And though they ſeme wyues for you neuer ſo fyt,
               Yet let not harmfull haſte ſo far out ren your wyt,
               But that ye harke to here all the holle ſome,
               That maie pleaſe or diſpleaſe you in tyme to come.
               Thus by theſe leſſons ye may learne good cheape
               In weddyng and all thyng, to loke or ye leape.
               Ye haue euen nowe well ouerlookt me (quoth he)
               And lepte very nye me to. For I agree.
               That theſe ſage ſayinges dooe weightily waie
               Agaynſt haſte in all thyng: but I am at baye.
               By other parables of lyke weighty weyght,
               Which haſte me to weddyng as ye ſhal here ſtreyght.
            
            
               ¶The thyrde chapiter.
               HE that will not whan he maie,
               Whan he woulde, he ſhall haue naie.
               Beautie or ryches the tone of the tweyne
               Nowe maie I choſe, and whiche me lyſt obteyne.
               And if we determyne me, this mayde to take,
               And than tract of tyme trayne her me to forſaek:
               Than my beautyfull mariage lythe in the dyke,
               And neuer for beautie, ſhall I wedde the lyke.
               
                  Nowe if we awarde me this wydowe to wedde,
               And that I dryue of tyme, tyll tyme ſhe be dedde:
               Than farewell ryches, the fat is in the fyre.
               And neuer ſhall I to lyke riches aſpire.
               And a thouſande folde wolde it greue me more,
               That ſhe in my faute ſhulde dye one houre before,
               Than one minute after. Than haſte muſt prouoke,
               Whan the pygge is proferd to holde vp the poke.
               Whan the ſonne ſhynth make hey. whiche is to ſaie,
               Take tyme whan tyme cōmth, leſt tyme ſtele awaie.
               And one good leſſon to this purpoſe I pyke
               From the ſmiths forge, whan thyron is hote ſtryke.
               The ſure ſea man ſeeth, the tyde tarieth no man.
               And longe delaies or abſence ſomewhat to ſkan.
               Sens that that one wyll not an other wyll,
               Delays in wooers muſt nedes theyr ſpede ſpyll.
               And touchyng abſence, the full accompt who ſomthe
               Shall ſe, as faſte as one gothe an nother comthe.
               Tyme is tyckell. and out of ſyght out of mynde.
               Than catche & hold while I may faſt bind faſt fynde.
               Blame me not to haſte, for feare myne eie be blerde.
               And therby the fat cleane flyt fro my berde.
               Where wooers hoppe in & out, long tyme may bryng
               Hym that hoppeth beſt, at laſt to haue the ryng.
               I hoppyng without, for a ryng of a ruſhe.
               And whyle I at length debate and beate the buſhe,
               There ſhall ſteppe in other men, & catche the burdes.
               And by longe tyme loſt in many vayne wurdes
               Betwene theſe two wiuis, make ſlouth ſpede confoūd
               While betwene two ſtoles, my taile go to grounde.
               
                  By this, ſens we ſe ſlouth muſte brede a ſkab,
               Beſt ſticke to the tone out of hande, hab or nab.
               Thus all your prouerbs inuehyng agaynſt haſte,
               Be anſwerd with prouerbs plaine & promptly plaſte.
               Wherby, to purpoſe all this no further fits,
               But to ſhew, ſo many hedds ſo many wits.
               Whiche ſhewe as ſurely in all that they all tell,
               That in my weddyng I may euen as well
               Tary to longe, and therby come to late,
               As come to ſoone by haſte in any rate.
               And proue this prouerbe, as the words thereof go,
               Haſte or ſlouth herein worke noth
                     ••
                   welth nor wo.
               Be it far or ny, weddyng is deſteny,
               And hangyng lykewiſe, ſayth that prouerbe, ſayd I.
               Than wed or hang (quoth he) what helpth in ye whole
               To haſte or hang a loofe, happy man, happy dole.
               Ye deale this dole (quoth I) out at a wrong dur:
               For deſteny in this caſe doth not ſo ſtur
               Agaynſt mans indeuour, but man may direct
               His will, fore prouiſion to worke or neglect.
               But to ſhew yt quick wedding may bryng good ſpede
               Somwhat to purpoſe, your prouerbs proue in dede.
               Howbeit, whether they counterpayſe or out way
               The prouerbes, whiche I before them dyd lay,
               The triall therof we wyll lay a water,
               Tyll we trie more. For trying of whiche mater
               Declare all commoditees ye can deuyſe,
               That by thoſe two weddyngs to you can ryſe.
            
            
               
               ¶The fourth chapiter.
               
                  I Will (quoth he) in bothe theſe caſes ſtreight ſhow,
               What things as (I think) to me by them wil grow.
               And where my loue began there begyn will I.
               With this mayde, the peece peereleſſe in myn eie.
               Whom I ſo fauour, and ſhe ſo fauourth me,
               That halfe a death to vs a ſonder to be.
               Affection eche to other dothe vs ſo moue,
               That well ny without foode we coulde liue by loue.
               For be I right ſad, or right ſicke, from her ſyght,
               Her preſence abſenteth all maladies quyght.
               Whiche ſeen, and that the great ground in mariage
               Standth vpon lykyng the parties perſonage,
               And than of olde prouerbs in openyng the packe,
               One ſhewth me openly in loue is no lacke.
               No lacke of lykyng, but lacke of lyuyng,
               Maie lacke in loue (quoth I) and brede yll cheuyng.
               Well as to that (ſaied he) harke this o thyng,
               What tyme I lacke not her, I lacke nothyng.
               But though we haue nought) nor nought we cā geat
               God neuer ſendeth mouthe, but he ſendeth meat.
               And a harde begynnyng maketh a good endyng.
               In ſpace comth grace, and this further amendyng.
               Seldom comth the better, and lyke will to like.
               God ſendth colde after clothes. And this I pike.
               She, by lacke of ſubſtance ſemyng but a ſparke,
               Steynth yet the ſtouteſt. For a leg of a larke
               Is better than is the body of a kyght.
               And home is homely, though it be poore in ſyght.
               Theſe prouerbs for this parte ſhew ſuch a flouriſhe,
               And then this partie dothe delite ſo nouriſhe,
               
                  That much is my bow bent to ſhoote at theſe marks,
               And kyl feare. when the ſky falth we ſhal haue larks.
               All perils that fall may, who feareth they fall ſhall,
               Shall ſo feare all thyng, that he ſhall let fall all,
               And be more frayd thā hurt, if the thyngs wer doone.
               Feare may force a man to caſt beyonde the moone.
               Who hopeth in gods helpe, his helpe can not ſterte.
               Nothyng is impoſſible to a willyng herte.
               And will may wyn my herte, herein to conſent,
               To take all thyng as it comthe, and be content.
               And here is (quoth he) in mariyng of this mayde,
               For courage and commoditee all myne ayde.
               Well ſaied (ſaied I) but a while kepe we in quenche
               All this caſe, as touchyng this poore yong wenche.
               And nowe declare your whole conſideracion,
               What maner thyngs draw your imaginacion,
               Toward your weddyng of this widow ryche & olde.
               That ſhall ye (quoth he) out of hande haue tolde.
            
            
               ¶The fyfte chapiter.
               THis wydowe beyng foule, and of fauour yll,
               In good behauour can veraie good ſkyll.
               Pleaſauntly ſpoken, and a veraie good wyt,
               And at her table, whan we togither ſyt,
               I am well ſerued, we fare of the beſt.
               The meate good and holſome, and holſomly dreſt.
               Swete and ſofte lodgyng, and thereof great ſhyft.
               This felte and ſene, with all implementes of thrift,
               Of plate and money ſuche cupbordes and cofers,
               And that without peyne I may wyn theſe profers,
               
                  Than couetyſe bearyng Venus bargayn backe,
               Praiſyng this bargain, ſaith, better leaue than lacke.
               And gredyneſſe, to drawe deſire to this lore,
               Saieth, that the wiſe man ſaieth, ſtore is no ſore.
               Who hath many peaſe maie put the mo in the pot.
               Of two yls, choſe the leaſt while choyſe lyth in lot.
               Sens lacke is an yll, as yll as man may haue,
               To prouide for the worſt, while the beſt it ſelfe ſaue.
               Reſty welth wylth me this wydow to wyn,
               To let the worlde wag, & take myne eaſe in myne yn.
               He muſt nedes ſwym, that is holde vp by the chyn.
               He laugth that wynth. And this threde finer to ſpyn,
               Maiſter promocion ſaieth, make this ſubſtance ſure,
               If ryches bryng ones portly countenaunce in vre,
               Than ſhalt thou rule the roſt all rounde about.
               And better to rule, than be ruled by the rout.
               It is ſaied: be it better be it wurs,
               Doo ye after hym that beareth the purs.
               Thus be I by this, ones le ſenior de graunde,
               Many that commaunded me, I ſhall commaunde.
               And alſo I ſhall to reuenge former hurts,
               Hold their noſes to grinſtone, and ſit on their ſkurts,
               That erſt ſat on myne. And ryches may make
               Frends many ways. Thus better to gyue than take.
               And to make carnall appetite content
               Reaſon laboreth wyll to wyn wyls conſent,
               To take lacke of beautie but as an eye ſore.
               The faire and the foule, by darke are lyke ſtore.
               As this prouerbe ſaieth, for quenchyng hot deſyre,
               Foule water as ſoone as fayre, wyl quenche hot fire.
               
                  Where gyfts be gyuen freely, eſt weſt north or ſouth,
               No man ought to loke a geuen hors in the mouth.
               And though hir mouth be foule, ſhe hath a faire taile,
               I conſtre this text, as is moſte myne auaile.
               In want of white teeth and yelow heares to behold,
               She flouriſheth in white ſyluer and yelow gold.
               What though ſhe be toothleſſe and balde as a coote?
               Hir ſubſtance is ſhootanker, wherat I ſhoote.
               Take a peyne for a pleaſure all wiſe men can.
               What, hungry doggs will eat d
                     •
                  rty puddyngs man.
               And here I conclude (quoth he) all that I knowe
               By this olde wydow, what good to me may grow.
            
            
               ¶The ſixt chapiter.
               YE haue (quoth I) in theſe concluſions founde
               Sundry thyngs, that veraie ſauerly ſounde.
               And bothe theſe long caſes, being well vewde
               In one ſhort queſtion, we maie well inclewde
               Whiche is, whether beſt or wurſt be to be ledde
               With ryches, without loue or beautie, to wedde:
               Or with beautee without rycheſſe for loue.
               This queſtion (quoth he) inquerth all that I moue.
               It doth ſo (ſayd I) and is nerely couched.
               But thanſwere wil not ſo breuely be touched.
               And your ſelfe, to length it, taketh direct trade.
               For to all reaſons, that I haue yet made,
               Ye ſeme more to ſeke reaſons howe to contende,
               Than to the counſell of myne to condiſcende.
               And to be playne, as I muſt with my freende,
               I perfitly feele euen at my fyngers eende.
               
                  So hard is your hand ſet on your halpeny:
               That my reaſonyng your reaſon ſetteth nought by.
               But reaſon for reaſon, ye ſo ſtyffely ley
               By prouerbe for prouerbe, that with you do wey,
               That reaſon onely ſhall herein nought moue you
               To here more than ſpeake. wherfore I wil proue you
               With reaſon, aſſiſted by experience.
               Whiche my ſelfe ſawe, not long ſens nor far hence.
               In a matter ſo like this faſhond in frame,
               That none can be liker, it ſemthe euen the ſame.
               And in the ſame, as your ſelfe ſhall eſpy
               Eche ſentence ſoothed with a prouerbe. welny,
               And at ende of the ſame, ye ſhall cleerely ſee
               Howe this ſhort queſtion ſhortly anſwerd maie bee.
               Ye mary (quoth he) now ye ſhoote ny the pricke.
               Practiſe in all, aboue all toucheth the quicke.
               Profe vpon practiſe, muſt take holde more ſure,
               Than any reaſonyng by geſſe can procure.
               If ye bryng practiſe in place, without fablyng,
               I will baniſhe bothe haſte and buſy bablyng.
               And yet that promiſe to performe is mickell.
               For in this caſe my tong muſt oft tickell.
               Ye knowe well it is, as telth vs this olde tale,
               Meete, that a man be at his owne bridale.
               If he wyue well (quoth I) meete and good it were.
               Or els as good for hym an other were there.
               But for this your bridale I meane not in it,
               That ſilence ſhall ſuſpend your ſpeche euery whit,
               But in theſe mariages, whiche ye here meue,
               Sens this tale conteinth the counſell I can geue,
               
                  I wold ſe your eares attende with your tong,
               For aduiſe in bothe theſe weddyngs olde and yong.
               In whiche heryng, tyme ſeene when & what to talke,
               When your tong tyckleth, at will let it walke.
               And in theſe brydales, to the reaſons of ours,
               Marke myne experyence in this caſe of yours.
            
            
               ¶The .vii. chapiter.
               VVithin few yeres paſt, from Lōdon no far waie,
               Where I & my wife, wt our poore houſhold laie,
               Two yong men were abydyng, whom to diſcriue
               were I, in portraying perſons dead or aliue,
               As counnyng and as quicke, to touche theim at full,
               As in that feate I am ignorant and dull,
               Neuer coulde I paynte, their pictures to allow,
               More lyuely, than to paynt the picture of yow.
               And as your thre perſons ſhew one ſimilitewd,
               So ſhew you thre one, in all thyngs to be vewd.
               Lyke wiſe a widowe and a mayd there did dwell,
               Alyke lyke the wydow and mayde ye of tell.
               The frends of theim foure in euery degree,
               Standyng in ſtate as the frendes of you three.
               Thoſe two men, eche other ſo haſted or taried,
               That thoſe two women on one daie they maried.
               Into two houſes, whiche next my houſe dyd ſtande,
               The one on the right, thother on the left hande.
               Both brydegromes bad me, I coulde do none other,
               But dyne with the tone, and ſup with the tother.
               He that wedded this widow riche and olde,
               And alſo ſhe, fauourd me ſo, that they wolde
               
                  Make me dine or ſup ones or twiſe in a weke.
               This poore yong man and his make beyng to ſeke
               As oft, where they might eate or drinke, I them bad,
               Were I at home, to ſuche pittaunce as I had.
               Whiche cōmen conference ſuche confidence wrought
               In theim to me, that dede, worde, ne welny thought
               Chaunced among theim, what euer it weare,
               But one of the foure brought it ſtreight to myn care.
               Wherby betwene theſe twayne, and their two wiues,
               Bothe for welthe and wo, I knew al theyr four liues.
               And ſens the matter is muche intricate,
               Betwene ſyde and ſyde, I ſhall here ſeparate
               All matters on bothe ſydes, and than ſequeſtrate,
               Thone ſyde, while thother be full reherſte, in rate,
               As for your vnderſtandyng maie beſt ſtande.
               And this yong poore couple ſhal come fyrſt in hande.
               Who, the daie of weddyng and after, a while,
               Could not loke eche on other, but they muſt ſmile.
               As a whelpe for wantonnes in and out whipps,
               So plaied theſe tweyne, as mery as thre chipps.
               Ye there was god (quoth he) whan all is doone.
               Abyde (quoth I) it was yet but hony moone.
               The blacke oxe had not trode on his nor her foote.
               But er this branche of blys coulde reache any roote,
               The floures ſo faded, that in fiftene weekes,
               A man myght eſpie the chaunge in the cheekes,
               Both of this pore wretch, & his wife this pore wenche.
               Their faces told toies, ye Totnam was turnd frenche
               And all their light laughyng turnd and tranſlated
               Into ſad ſyghyng, all myrth was amated.
               
                  And one mornyng tymely he tooke in hande,
               To make to my houſe, a fleeueleſſe errande.
               Haukyng vpon me, his mynde herein to breake.
               Whiche I would not ſee, tyll he began to ſpeake.
               Praying me to here hym. And I ſaied, I wolde.
               Wherwith this that foloweth forthwith he tolde.
            
            
               ¶The .viii. chapter.
               
                  I Am now driuen (quoth he) for eaſe of my herte,
               To you, to vtter part of myne inward ſmerte.
               And the matter concerneth my wife and me.
               Whoſe fathers and mothers long ſens dead be.
               But vncles, with auntes and coſyns, haue wee
               Diuers riche on bothe ſides, ſo that we dyd ſee,
               If we had wedded, eche, where eche kynred wolde,
               Neither of vs had lackt, either ſiluer or golde.
               But neuer coulde ſuite, on either ſyde obtayne
               One peny, to the one weddyng of vs twayne.
               And ſens our one mariyng or marryng daie,
               Where any of theim ſe vs, they ſhrinke awaie,
               Solemnly ſwearyng, ſuche as maie geue ought,
               While they & we lyue, of theim we get right nought.
               Nor nought haue we, nor no waie ought can we get,
               Sauyng by borowyng, tyll we be in det
               So far, that no man any more will vs lende.
               Wherby, for lacke we bothe be at our witts ende.
               Wherof no wonder, ſens the ende of our good,
               And begynnyng of our charge, to gither ſtood.
               But wyt is neuer good tyll it be bought.
               Howbeit whan bought wits to beſt price be brought:
               
                  Yet is one good forewyt worth two after wits.
               This payth me home lo, and full my foly hyts.
               For had I lookt afore, with indifferent eye,
               Though haſte had made my thurſt neuer ſo drye:
               Yet to drown this drought, this muſt I nedes thynk,
               As I wolde nedes brewe, ſo muſt I nedes drynk.
               The drynke of my bride cup I ſhulde haue forborne,
               Tyll temperance had tempred the taſte beforne.
               I ſe nowe, and ſhall ſee whyle I am alyue,
               Who wedth or he be wiſe, ſhall dye er he thryue.
               He that will ſelle lawne, er he can folde it,
               He ſhall repent hym er he haue ſolde it.
               I reckned my weddyng a ſuger ſweete ſpice,
               But reckners without their hoſt muſt recken twice.
               And all though it were ſweete for a weeke or twayne,
               Swete meate wil haue ſowre ſauce, I ſe now playne.
               Continuall penurie, whyche I muſt take,
               Telth me, better eye out than alwaie ake.
               Boldly and blyndly I ventred on this,
               How be it, who ſo bolde as blynde bayard is?
               And herein to blame any man, than ſhulde I raue.
               For I dyd it my ſelfe: and ſelfe do, ſelfe haue.
               But a daie after the fayre, comth this remors,
               For relefe: for though it be a good hors
               That neuer ſtumbleth, what praiſe can that auouche
               To iades, ye breke their necks at firſt tryp or touche.
               And before this my firſt foile or breakneck fall,
               Subtilly lyke a ſhepe thought I, I ſhall
               Cut my cote after my cloth. Whan I haue her.
               But now I can ſmell, nothyng hath no ſauer.
               
                  I am taught to know, in more haſte thā good ſpeede,
               How iudicare came into the Creede.
               My carefull wife in one corner wepeth in care,
               And I in an other, the purſe is threde bare.
               This corner of our care (quoth he) I you tell,
               To craue therin your comfortable counſell.
            
            
               ¶The nynthe chapiter.
               
                  I Am ſory (quoth I) of your pouertee,
               And more ſory that I can nat ſuccourye.
               If ye ſtur your nede myne almeſſe to ſtur,
               Than of trouth ye beg at a wrong mans dur.
               There is nothyng more vayne, as your ſelfe tell can,
               Than to beg a breeche of a bare arſt man.
               I come to beg nothyng of you, quoth he,
               Saue your aduiſe, whiche maie my beſt waie be.
               How to wyn preſent ſalue, for this preſent ſore.
               I am like thyll ſurgeon (ſaied I) without 
                     ••
                  ore
               Of good plaſters. Howbeit ſuche as they are,
               Ye ſhall haue the beſt I haue. But fyrſt declare,
               Where your & your wiues riche kynsfolke do dwell.
               Enuyronned about vs (quoth he) which ſhewth well,
               The nere to the churche, the ferther from god.
               Moſt parte of theim dwell within a thouſand rod.
               And yet ſhall we catche a hare with a taber,
               As ſoone as catche ought of them, and rather.
               Ye plaie coleprophet (quoth I) who takth in hande,
               To knowe his anſwere before he doo his errande.
               What ſhulde I to them (quoth he) flyng or flyt,
               An vnbidden geaſt knoweth not where to ſyt.
               
                  Shame drawth me backe, beyng thus forſaken.
               Tuſhe man (quoth I) ſhame is as it is taken.
               And ſhame take him ye ſhame thinkth, ye thinke none.
               Vnmynded, vnmoned, go make your mone.
               Well (quoth he) if I ſhall nede this viage make,
               With as good will as a beare goth to the ſtake,
               I will ſtreight waie anker and hoiſe vp ſaile.
               And thitherward hie me in haſte like a ſnaile.
               And home agayne hitherward quicke as a bee.
               Nowe for good lucke, caſt an olde ſhoe after mee.
               And fyrſt to myne vncle, brother to my father.
               By ſuite, I will aſſaie to wyn ſome fauer.
               Who brought me vp, and tyll my weddyng was don
               Loued me, not as his nephew, but as his ſon.
               And his heyre had I been, had not this chaunced,
               Of lādes & gooddes, which ſhuld me much auanced.
               Trudge (quoth I) to hym, and on your marybones,
               Crouche to the grounde, and not ſo ofte as ones,
               Speake any one worde hym to contrary.
               I can not tell that (quoth he) by ſeynt Mary.
               I knowe not howe I ſhall be pryckt to ſpeake.
               Well (quoth I) better is to bowe than breake.
               Sens ye can nought wyn, yf ye can not pleaſe,
               Beſt is to ſuffer. For of ſuffrance comth eaſe.
               Cauſe cauſeth (quoth he) and as cauſe cauſeth me,
               So will I doo. And with this awaie went he.
               Yet whether his wyfe ſhould go with hym or no,
               He ſent hir to me to knowe er he wolde go.
               Wherto I ſaied, I thought beſt he went alone.
               And you (quoth I) to go ſtreight as he is gone,
               
                  Among your kynsfolke likewiſe, if they dwell ny.
               Yes (quoth ſhe) all round about euen here by.
               Namely an aunte, my mothers ſyſter, who well
               (Sens my mother died) brought me vp frō the ſhell.
               And much wold haue giuē me, had mi weddīg grown
               Vpon hir fanſy, as it grewe vpon myne own.
               And in likewiſe myne vncle her huſband, was
               A father to me. Well (quoth I) let pas.
               And if your huſband will his aſſent graunte,
               Go, he to his vncle, and you to your aunte.
               Yes this aſſent he graunteth before (quoth ſhe)
               For he or this thought this the beſt waie to be.
               But of theſe two thynges he wolde determyne none
               Without aide. For two hedds are better than one.
               With this we departed, ſhe to her huſband,
               And I to dyner to theim on thother hande.
            
            
               ¶The tenth chapiter.
               VVhan dyner was doon, I cam home agayne,
               To attende on the returne of theſe twayne.
               And er three houres to ende were fully tryde,
               Home came ſhe fyrſt, welcom (quoth I) and wel hyde.
               Ye a ſhorte horſe is ſoone corryd (quoth ſhee)
               But the weaker hath the worſe we all daie ſee.
               After our laſt partyng, my huſband and I
               Departed, eche to place agreed formerly.
               Myne vncle and aunte on me dyd loure and glome.
               Bothe bad me god ſpede, but none bad me welcome.
               Their folkes glomd on me to, by whiche it appereth,
               The yong cocke croweth, as he the olde hereth.
               
                  At dyner they were, and made (for maners ſake)
               A kynſwoman of ours, me to table take.
               A falſe flattryng fylth, and if that be good,
               None better to beare two faces in a hood.
               She ſpeaketh as ſhe wolde crepe into your boſome.
               And whan the meale mouth hath won the bottome
               Of your ſtomake, than will the pikthanke it tell
               To your moſte enmies, you to bie and ſell.
               There is no mo ſuche tytifils in Englands grounde,
               To holde with the hare, and run with the hounde.
               Fyre in the tone hande, and water in the tother,
               The makebate bereth betwene brother and brother.
               She can wynk on the yew, and wery the lam,
               She maketh erneſt matters of euery flymflam.
               She muſt haue an ore in euery mans barge.
               And no man chat ought in ought of her charge.
               Colle vnder canſtyk ſhe can plaie on both hands,
               Diſſimulacion well ſhe vnderſtands.
               She is loſt with an appull, and woon with a nut.
               Her tong is no edge toole, but yet it will cut.
               Hir chekes are purple ruddy like a horſe plumme.
               And the bygge part of hir body is hir bumme.
               But littell tit all tayle, I haue herde er this,
               As high as two horſeloues hir perſone is.
               For priuy nyps or caſts ouerthwart the ſhyns,
               He ſhall leſe the mayſtry that with her begyns,
               She is, to turne loue to hate, or ioye to grefe
               A paterne, as mete as a rope for a thefe.
               Hir promiſe of frendſhyp, for any auayle,
               Is as ſure to holde, as an eele by the tayle.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  She is nother fiſhe nor fleſhe nor good red hearyng.
               She maie doo muche there, and I therby fearyng
               She wolde ſpit her venym, thought it not euyll
               To ſet vp a candell before the deuyll.
               I clawd her by the backe in waie of a charme,
               To do me, not the more good, but the leſſe harme.
               All that dyner tyme we ſyttyng to gether,
               Aboue all, with her I made fayre wether.
               Praying her in her eare, on my ſyde to holde,
               She therto ſwearyng by her falſe faith, ſhe wolde.
               Streight after dyner myne aunte had no choyce,
               But other burſt, or burſt out in pylats voyce.
               Ye huſwife, what wind blowth ye hyther thus right?
               Ye might haue knokt or ye came in, leaue is lyght.
               Better vnborne then vntaught, I haue herde ſaie,
               But ye be better fed than taught far awaie.
               Not veraie fat fed, ſaied this flebergebet,
               But nede hath no lawe, nede maketh her hither iet.
               She comth nece Ales (quoth ſhe) for that is her name
               More for nede, then for kyndnes, payne of ſhame.
               Howbeit ſhe can not lacke, for he fyndth that ſeekes,
               Louers lyue by loue, ye as larks lyue by leekes.
               Saied this Ales, muche more than half in mockage.
               Tuſhe (quoth myne aunte) theſe louers in dotage
               Think the groūd beares them not, but wed of corage
               They muſt in all haſte, though a leafe of borage
               Myght bye all the ſubſtaunce that they can ſell.
               Well aunt (quoth Ales) all is well that ends well.
               Ye Ales, of a good begynnyng comth a good ende.
               Not ſo good to borow, as be able to lende.
               
                  Nay in dede aunt (quoth ſhe) it is ſure ſo,
               She muſt nedes grāt, ſhe hath wrought hir own wo.
               She thought Ales, ſhe had ſene far in a mylſtone,
               Whan ſhe gat a huſband, and namely ſuch one,
               As they by weddyng coulde not onely nought wyn,
               But loſe both lyuyng and loue of all theyr kyn.
               Good aunt (quoth I) humbly I beſeche ye,
               My treſpaſe done to you forgyue it me.
               I know & knowlage, I haue wrought myn own pein
               But things paſt my hāds, I can not call agein.
               True (quoth Ales) things done, can not be vndoone,
               Be they done in due tyme, to late, or to ſoone.
               But better late then neuer to repent this.
               To late (quoth myne aunt) this repentance ſhewd is.
               Whan the ſtede is ſtolne, ſhut the ſtable durre.
               I tooke her for a roſe, but ſhe bredeth a burre.
               She comth to ſtycke to me now in her lacke,
               Rather to rent of my clothes fro my backe,
               Then to doo me one ferthyng wurth of good.
               I ſee daie at this little hole. For this bood
               Shewth what fruit wil folow. In good faith I ſaide
               In waie of peticion I ſue for your aide.
               A well (quoth ſhe) nowe I well vnderſtande
               The walking ſtaffe hath caught warmth in your hād
               A cleane fyngerd huſwyfe and an ydel, folke ſaie,
               And will be lyme fyngerd I feare by my faie.
               It is as tender as a perſons lemman.
               Nought can ſhe doo, and what can ſhe haue than?
               She maie not beare a fether, but ſhe muſt brethe,
               She maketh ſo muche of her paynted ſhethe.
               
                  She thynkth her ferthyng good ſiluer I tell you.
               But for a ferthyng who euer dyd ſell you
               Myght boſt you to be better ſolde than bought.
               And yet thogh ſhe be worth nought, nor haue nought
               Her gowne is gaier and better than myne.
               At her gaie gowne (quoth Ales) ye maie repyne.
               Howe be it as we maie we loue to go gaie all.
               Well well (quoth myne aunte) pride will haue a fall.
               For pride goeth before, and ſhame cometh after.
               Sure (ſaied Ales) in maner of mockyng laughter,
               There is nothyng in this worlde that agreeth wurs,
               Than dothe a ladies hert, and a beggers purs.
               But pride ſhe ſhewth none, her looke reaſon alowth
               She lookth as butter wolde not melt in her mouth.
               Well the ſtyll ſow eats vp all the draffe Ales.
               All is not golde that gliſtreth by olde tolde tales.
               In youth ſhe was towarde and without euyll,
               But ſoone ripe ſone rotten, yong ſeynt olde deuill.
               How be it lo god ſendth the ſhrewd cow ſhort hornes.
               While ſhe was in this houſe ſhe ſat vpon thornes.
               Eche one daie was three, tyll libertee was borow
               For one months ioy to bryng her holle lyues ſorow.
               It were pitee (quoth Ales) ſhe ſhulde myſcary.
               For ſhe is growne a goodly damſell mary.
               Ill weed growth faſt Ales. wherby the corne is lorne.
               For ſurely the weed ouergroweth the corne.
               If I maie (as they ſaie) tell trouth without ſyn,
               Of trouthe ſhe is a wolfe in a lambes ſkyn.
               Her herte is full hye, whan her eie is full lowe.
               A geaſt as good loſt as founde, for all this ſhowe.
               
                  But many a good cowe hath an euyll calfe.
               I ſpeake this doughter in thy mothers behalfe.
               My ſyſter (god reſt her ſoule) whom though I boſt,
               Was cald the floure of honeſtee in this coſte.
               Aunt (quoth I) I take for father and mother
               Myne vncle and you aboue all other.
               When we wold, ye wold not be our chyld (quoth ſhe.)
               Wherfore now whan ye wold, now will not we.
               Sens thou woldſt nedes caſt a waie thy ſelfe thus,
               Thou ſhalte ſure ſynke in thyne owne ſyn for vs.
               Thou arte in dede borne veraie ny of my ſtocke,
               And ny is my kyrtell, but nere is my ſmocke.
               I haue one of myne owne, whom I muſt loke to.
               Ye aunte (quoth Ales) that thyng muſt ye nedes do.
               Nature compellth you to ſet your owne fyrſt vp.
               For I haue heard ſaie, it is a deere colup,
               That is cut out of thowne fleſhe. But yet aunte,
               So ſmal maie hir requeſt be, that ye maie graunt
               To ſatiſfie the ſame, whiche maie doo her good,
               And you no harme in thauancyng your owne blood.
               And coſyn (quoth ſhe to me) what ye wold craue,
               Declare, that our aūt may know what ye wold haue.
               Nay (quoth I) be they wynners or looſers,
               Folke ſay alwaie, beggers ſhulde be no chooſers.
               With thanks I ſhal take what euer myn aunt pleaſe,
               Where nothyng is, a little thyng doth eaſe.
               And by this prouerbe appereth this o thyng,
               That alwaie ſomewhat is better than nothyng.
               Hold faſt whan ye haue it (quoth ſhe) by my lyfe.
               The boy thy huſbande, and thou the gyrle his wyfe,
               
                  Shall not conſume that I haue laboured fore.
               Thou art yong inough, and I can worke no more.
               Kyt calot my coſyn ſawe this thus far on
               And in myne aunts eare ſhe whiſpreth anon
               Roundly theſe words, to make this matter whole.
               Aunt, leat theim that be a colde blowe at the cole.
               They ſhall for me Ales (quoth ſhe) by gods blyſt.
               She and I haue ſhaken handes. farewell vnkyſt.
               And thus with a becke as good as a dieu gard,
               She flang fro me, and I from her hitherward.
               Beggyng of her booteth not the worth of a beane,
               Litle knoweth the fat ſow, what the lean doth meane.
               Forſoth (quoth I) ye haue beſtyrd ye well.
               But where was your vncle while all this fray fell?
               A ſleepe by (quoth ſhe) routyng like a hog.
               And it is euill wakyng of a ſlepyng dog.
               The bitche and her whelp might haue been a ſleep to.
               For ought they in wakyng to me would do.
               Fare ye well (quoth ſhe) I will now home ſtreyte.
               And at my huſbands hands for better news weyte.
            
            
               ¶The leuenth chapiter.
               HE came home to me the next daie before noone.
               What tidīgs now (quoth I) how haue ye doone?
               Vpon our departyng (quoth he) yeſterdaie
               Toward myn vncles, ſomwhat more than mydway,
               I ouertoke a man, a ſeruaunt of his,
               And a frende of myne. who geſſed ſtreight with this,
               What myne errand was, offeryng in the ſame,
               To do his beſt for me, and ſo in gods name.
               
                  Thyther we went, no body beyng within,
               But myne vncle, myne aunte, and one of our kyn.
               A madde knaue, as it were a raylyng geſter,
               Not a more gagglyng gander henſe to Cheſter.
               At ſyght of me he aſked, who haue we there?
               I haue ſeen this gentylman, yf I wyſt where.
               Howe be it lo, ſeldome ſene, ſoone forgotten.
               He was (as he will be) ſomwhat cupſhotten.
               Sixe daies in a weeke, beſide the market daie,
               Malt is aboue wheate with hym, market men ſaie.
               But for as muche as I ſawe, the ſame taunt
               Contented well myne vncle and myne aunt,
               And that I came to fall in, and not fall out,
               I forbare. or els his dronken red ſnout
               I wold haue made as oft chaunge from hew to hew,
               As doth the cocks of Inde. For this is trew.
               It is a ſmall hop on my thomb. And Chriſt wot,
               It is wood at a woorde. little pot ſoone whot.
               Now mery as a cricket, and by and by,
               Angry as a waſpe, though in bothe no cauſe why.
               But he was at home there, he myght ſpeake his will.
               Euery cocke is proude on his owne dunghill.
               I ſhall be euen with hym herein whan I can.
               But he hauyng done, thus myne vncle began.
               Ye marchant, what attempth you, to attempt vs,
               To come on vs before the meſſanger thus.
               Romyng in and out, I here tell how ye toſſe.
               But ſonne, the rollyng ſtone neuer gatherth moſſe.
               Lyke a pickpurs pilgrym, ye prie and ye proule
               At rouers, to robbe Peter and paie Poule.
               
                  I wys I knowe, er any more be tolde,
               That draff is your errand, but drynke ye wolde.
               Vncle (quoth I) of the cauſe, for whiche I com,
               I pray you paciently here the hole ſom.
               In feyth (quoth he) without any more ſūmyng
               I know to beg of me is thy cūmyng.
               For ſooth (quoth his man) it is ſo in deede.
               And I dare boldly boſt, yf ye knew his neede,
               ye wold of pytee yet ſet hym in ſome ſtey.
               Sonne, better be enuied then pitied, folke ſey.
               And for his cauſe of pitee (had he had grace)
               He myght this daie haue been clere out of the caſe.
               But now he hath well fiſht and caught a frog.
               Where nought is to wed with, wiſe men flee the clog.
               Where I (quoth I) dyd not as ye wyld or bad,
               That repent I oft, and as oft wyſhe I had.
               Sonne (quoth he) as I haue herde of myn olders,
               Wiſhers and wolders be no good houſeholders.
               This prouerbe for a leſſon, with ſuche other,
               Not lyke (as who ſeyth) the ſonne of my brother,
               But lyke myne owne ſonne, I ofte before ſhewd the,
               To caſt her quyte of, but it wolde not be.
               Whan I wyld the any other where to go,
               Tuſhe, there were no mo maydens but malkyn tho.
               Ye had been loſt to lacke your luſt, whan ye lyſt,
               By two miles trudgyng twiſe a weke to be kyſt.
               I would ye had kyſt, well I will no more ſturre,
               It is good to haue a hatche before the durre.
               But how is my ſaying come to paſſe now?
               How oft dyd I prophecie this betwene you,
               
                  And your gynyfinee nycebycetur,
               Whan ſwete ſugar ſhulde turne to ſoure ſalt petur?
               Wherby ye ſhulde in ſeyng, that ye neuer ſawe.
               Thynke that you neuer thought. your ſelfe a dawe.
               But that tyme ye thought me a dawe. ſo that I
               Dyd no good in all my wordes than, ſaue onely
               Approued this prouerbe playn and true mater,
               A man may well bryng a horſe to the water.
               But he can not make hym drynke without he will.
               Colts (quoth his man) may proue wel, with tatchis yl
               For of a ragged colt there comthe a good horſe.
               If he be good now, of his yll paſt no forſe.
               Well he that hangth hym ſelfe a ſondaie (ſaied he)
               Shall hang ſtyll vncut downe a mondaie for me.
               I haue hangd vp my hatchet, god ſpede hym well.
               A wonder thyng what thyngs theſe old thyngs tell.
               Cat after kynd good mouſe hunt. And alſo
               Men ſey, kynde wyll crepe where it can not go.
               Theſe ſentences to the I maie aſſyne
               By thy father, the ſaid brother of myne.
               Thou folowiſt his ſtepps as ryght as a lyne.
               For when prouander pryckt him a lytle tyne,
               He dyd as thou didſt. One, on whom he dyd dote,
               He wedded in haſte, with whome he had no grote.
               And ſhe as lytle with hym. wherby at laſt
               They bothe went a beggyng. And euen the like caſte
               Haſte thou. thou wilte beg or ſteale, or thou die,
               Take hede frende, I haue ſene as far come as me.
               If ye ſeke to fynde thynges er they be loſt,
               Ye ſhall fynde one daie you come to your coſt.
               
                  This doo I but repete, for this I tolde the,
               And more I ſay. but I coulde not than holde the.
               Nor wyll not holde the now: nor ſuche foly feele,
               To ſet at my herte, that thou ſetteſt at thy heele.
               And as of my good, er I one grote gyue,
               I wyll ſe how my wyfe, and my ſelfe ſhall lyue.
               Shall I make the laugh now, & my ſelfe wepe then?
               Nay good childe, better childern wepe than old men.
               It is harde to wiue and thriue both in a yere.
               But by thy wyuyng, thryuyng doth ſo appere,
               That thou art paſt thryft, before thrifte begyn.
               But lo, will will haue will, though will wo wyn.
               Will is a good ſonne, and will is a ſhrewde boy.
               And wilfull ſhrewde will hath wrought the this toy.
               A gentill white ſpurre, and at nede a ſure ſpeare.
               He ſtandth now as he had a flea in his eare.
               How be it for any great courteſy he doth make,
               It ſemth the gentyll man hath eaten a ſtake.
               He beareth a dagger in his ſleue, truſte me,
               To kyll all that he meteth, prouder than he.
               Sir (quoth his man) he will no faute defende,
               But harde is for any man all fautes to mende.
               He is lyueles, that is fautles, olde folkes thought,
               He hath (quoth he) but one faute, he is nought.
               Helpe hym ſyr (quoth his man) ſens ye eaſily maie.
               Two fals knaues nede no broker (quoth he) mē ſaie,
               The one knaue now crouchith, while thother crauith
               But to ſhewe what ſhall be his releuauith,
               Either after my deathe, yf my will be kept,
               Or duryng my lyfe, had I this halle hept
               
                  With golde, he maie his parte on good fryday eate,
               And faſt neuer the wurs, for ought he ſhall geate.
               Nowe here is the doore, and there is the wey.
               And ſo (quoth he) farewell gentill Geffrey.
               Thus parted I from hym, beyng muche diſmaied,
               Whiche his man ſaw, and (to comfort me) ſaied.
               What man, plucke vp your herte, be of good chere.
               After clouds blacke, we ſhall haue wether clere.
               What ſhuld your face thus agayn the woll be ſhorne
               For one fall? What mā al this wynd ſhakes no corne.
               Let this wynde ouerblow. a tyme I will ſpy,
               To take wynde and tyde with me, and ſpede therby.
               I thanke you (quoth I) but great boſte & ſmal roſte,
               Maketh vnſauery mouthes, where euer men oſte.
               And this boſte veraie vnſauourly ſerueth.
               For while the graſſe groweth, the horſe ſterueth.
               Better one byrde in hande than ten in the wood.
               Rome was not bylt on a daie (quoth he) & yet ſtood
               Tyll it was fynyſht, as ſome ſaie, full fayre.
               Your hert is in your hoſe all in diſpayre.
               But as euery man ſaieth, a dog hath a daie.
               Shuld you a man, diſpayre than any daie? nay.
               Ye haue many ſtryngs to the bowe. for ye know,
               Though I, hauyng the bent of your vncles bow,
               Can no waie bryng your bolt in the butte to ſtande,
               Yet haue ye other marks to roue at, at hande.
               The kays hang not all by one mans girdill man.
               Though nought wilbe woon here, I ſey, yet ye can
               Taſte other kynſmen, of whom ye maie geat,
               Here ſome and there ſome, many ſmall make a great.
               
                  For come lyght wynnyngs with bleſſyngs or curſes,
               Euermore light gaynes make heuy purſes.
               Children lerne to crepe er they can lerne to go.
               And little and little, ye muſt lerne euen ſo.
               Throwe no gyft agayne at the giuers head,
               For better is halfe a lofe then no bread.
               I maie beg my bread (quoth I) for my kyn all,
               That dwelth ny, Well, yet (quoth he) & the worſt fall,
               Ye maie to your kynſman, hens nine or ten mile,
               Rich without charge, whom ye ſaw not of long while
               That bench whiſtler (quoth I) is a pinchepeny.
               As fre of gyft, as a poore man of his eye.
               I ſhall get a fart of a dead man as ſoone,
               As a farthyng of hym, his dole is ſoone doone.
               He is ſo hye in thynſtep, and ſo ſtreight laſte,
               That pryde and couetiſe withdrawth al repaſte.
               Ye knowe what he hath been (quoth he) but ywis,
               Abſence ſaieth playnely, ye knowe not what he is.
               Men know (quoth I) I haue herde nowe and then,
               Howe the market gothe by the market men.
               Further it is ſaied, who that ſaying weyth,
               It muſt nedes be true, that euery man ſeyth.
               Men ſaie alſo, childerne and fooles can not ly.
               And both man and chylde ſaieth, he is a heynſby.
               And my ſelfe knowth hym, I dare boldly brag,
               Euen as well as the begger knowth his bag.
               And I knew hym, not worth a good grey grote.
               He was at an ebbe. though he be nowe a flote,
               Poore as the pooreſt. And now nought he ſetteth
               By poore folke. For the paryſhe prieſte forgetteth,
               
                  That euer he hath been holy water clerke.
               By ought I can now here, or euer coulde marke,
               Of no man hath he pitee, or compaſſion.
               Well (quoth he) euery man after his faſſion.
               He maie yet pitee you, for ought doth appere.
               It hapth in one houre, that hapth not in. vii. yere.
               Forſpeake not your fortune, nor hyde not your nede.
               Noght vēter noght haue ſpare to ſpeke ſpare to ſpede
               Vnknowne vnkyſt. it is loſt that is vnſought.
               As good ſeke nought (quoth I) as ſeke & find nought
               It is (quoth he) yll fyſhyng before the net.
               But though we get litle, dere bought and far fet
               Are deinties for ladies. Go we both too.
               I haue for my maiſter thereby to doo.
               I maie breake a diſhe there, and ſure I ſhall
               Set all at ſixe and ſeuen, to wyn ſome wyndfall.
               And I will hang the bell about the cats necke.
               For I will fyrſt breake, and ieobard the fyrſt checke.
               And for to wyn this praie, though the coſt be myne,
               Leat vs preſent hym with a bottell of wyne.
               That were (quoth I) as muche almes or nede,
               As caſte water in Thems. or as good a dede,
               As it is to helpe a dogge ouer a ſtyle.
               Than go we (quoth he) we leſe tyme all this while.
               To folowe his fanſy, we went togither.
               And toward nyght yeſternight when we cam thither,
               She was within, but he was yet abrode.
               And ſtreight as ſhe ſawe me, ſhe ſwelde like a tode.
               Pattryng the diuels pater noſter to her ſelfe.
               God neuer made a more croked crabbed elfe.
               
                  She bad hym welcome, but the wors for me.
               This knaue comth a beggyng, by me thought ſhe.
               I ſmelde hir out, and had her ſtreight in the wynde.
               She maie abyde no beggers of any kynde.
               They be bothe gredy gutts. all gyuen to get,
               They care not how. all is fyſhe that comth to net.
               They know no ende of theyr good, nor begynnyng
               Of any goodneſſe. ſuche is wretched wynnyng.
               Hunger droppeth euen out of bothe theyr noſes.
               She gothe with broken ſhone and torne hoſes.
               But who is wurs ſhod, than the ſhoemakers wyfe,
               With ſhops full of newe ſhapen ſhoes all her lyfe.
               Or who will doo leſſe, than they that may doo moſte.
               And namely of hir I can no waie make boſte.
               She is one of theim, to whom god bad who.
               She will all haue, and will right nought forgo.
               She will not part with the paryng of hir nayles.
               She toyleth continually for auayles.
               Whiche lyfe ſhe hath ſo long now kept in vre,
               That for no lyfe ſhe wolde make chaunge, be ſure.
               But this leſſon lernde I, er I was yeres ſeuen,
               They that be in hell, wene there is none other heuen.
               She is nothyng fayre, but ſhe is yll fauourd.
               And no more vnklenly, than vnſwete ſauourd.
               But hakney men ſaie, at mangy hakneys hyer
               A ſcalde hors is good ynough for a ſcabde ſquier.
               He is a knuckylbonyard veraie meete
               To matche a mynion nother fayre nor ſweete.
               But a vengeable wyt, and all his delyte,
               To geue tauntes and checkes of moſt ſpitefull ſpite.
               
                  In that houſe commonly ſuche is the caſt,
               A man ſhall as ſoone breake his neck as his faſt.
               And yet nowe ſuche a gyd dyd her head take,
               That more for my mates than for maner ſake,
               We had bread and drynke, and a cheſe very greate.
               But the greatteſt crabs be not all the beſt meate,
               For her crabbed cheſe, with all the gretneſſe,
               Myght well abyde the fyneneſſe or ſwetneſſe.
               Anon he cam in. and whan he vs ſaw,
               To my companyon kyndly he dyd draw.
               And a welfauourd welcom to hym he yeelds,
               Byddyng me welcom ſtraungely ouer the feelds.
               With theſe wordes. ah yong mā I know your mater,
               By my faith you come to loke in my water.
               And for my comfort to your conſolacion,
               Ye would, by my purs, gyue me a purgacion.
               But I am laxatiue ynough there otherwyſe.
               This caſe (quoth this yonge man) contrary doth riſe.
               For he is purs ſycke. and lackth a phiſicion.
               And hopeth vpon you in ſome condicion.
               Not by purgacion, but by reſtoratiue.
               To ſtrength his weakeneſſe to kepe hym alyue.
               I can not (quoth he) for though it be my lot
               To haue ſpeculacion, yet I practiſe not.
               I ſee muche, but I ſaie littell, and doo leſſe.
               In this kynd of phiſike. and what wolde ye geſſe.
               Shall I conſume my ſelfe, to reſtore hym now?
               Nay, backare (quoth Mortymer to his ſow)
               He can before this tyme, no tyme aſſyne,
               In whiche he hath laied downe one peny by myne.
               
                  That euer might either make me bite or ſup.
               And byr lady frēd. nought ley down nought take vp.
               To put me to coſte, thou canſt halfe a ſcore myles.
               Out of thyne owne neſt, ſeke me in theſe out yles.
               Where thou wilt not ſtep ouer a ſtrawe, I thynke,
               To wyn me the worth of one draught of drynke.
               No more than I haue wonne of all thy holle ſtocke.
               I haue been common Iacke to all that hole flocke.
               Whan ought was to do, I was common hackney.
               Folke call on the hors that will cary alwey.
               But euermore the common hors is worſte ſhod.
               Deſert and reward be oft tymes thyngs far od.
               At ende I myght put wy wynnyng in myne iye,
               And ſee neuer the wors. for ought I wan theim by.
               And now without theim, I lyue here at ſtaues ende.
               Where I nede not borow, nor I will not lende.
               I praie you (quoth he) pitee me a poore man
               With ſomwhat, tyll I maie worke as I can.
               Toward your work (quoth he) ye make ſuch taſtings
               As approue you to be none of the haſtyngs,
               Ye ren to worke in haſte as nyne men helde ye.
               But whan ſo euer ye to worke muſt yelde ye.
               If your meete mate and you meete together.
               Than ſhall we ſee two men beare a fether.
               Recompenſyng former loytryng lyfe looſe,
               As did the pure penitent that ſtale a gooſe,
               And ſtak downe a fether. And where olde folke tell.
               That euill gotten good neuer proueth well,
               Ye will truely get. and true gettyng well kepe,
               Tyll tyme ye be as riche as a newe ſhorne ſhepe.
               
                  Howe be it whan thrift and you fell fyrſt at a fray,
               You plaied the man, for ye made thrift ren away.
               So helpe me god, in my poore opynion,
               A man might make a plaie of this minyon.
               And fayn no groūd, but take tales of his own frēds,
               I ſuck not this out of myne owne fyngers ends.
               And ſens ye wer wed, although I nought gaue you,
               Yet praie I for you, god and ſaint Luke ſaue you.
               And here is all. For what ſhulde I further wade?
               I was nother of court nor of counſaile made.
               And it is as I haue lerned in lyſtnyng,
               A poore dogge. that is not worth the whiſtlyng.
               A daie er I was wedde, I badde you (quoth I)
               Scarbrough warnyng I had (quoth he) wherby,
               I kept me thens, to ſerue the accordyng.
               And nowe, if this nyghtes lodgyng and bordyng
               Maie eaſe the, and ryd me from any more charge,
               Than welcome. or els get the ſtreyght at large.
               For of further rewarde, marke how I boſt me.
               In caſe as ye ſhall yelde me as ye coſt me,
               So ſhall ye coſt me as ye yelde me lykewyſe.
               Whiche is, a thyng of nought rightly to ſurmyſe.
               Here withall his wyfe to make vp my mouthe,
               Not onely her huſbands tauntyng tale auouthe,
               But therto deuiſeth to caſt in my teeth,
               Checks and chokyng oyſters. And whan ſhe ſeeth
               Hir tyme to take vp, to ſhew my fare at beſt,
               Ye ſe your fare (ſaied ſhe) ſet your hert at reſt.
               Fare ye well (quoth I) how euer I fare now.
               And wel mote ye fare bothe whan I dyne with yow.
               
                  Come, go we hens frend (quoth I to my mate)
               And now will I make a croſſe on this gate.
               For comyng here agayn. Haue we not well wrought?
               Mē ſay, as good plai for nought as work for nought
               Well well (quoth he) we be but where we were.
               Come what come wold, I thought er we came there.
               That yf the worſt fell. we coulde haue but a naie,
               There is no harme doone man in all this fray.
               Neither pot broken, nor yet water ſpylt.
               Farewell he (quoth I) I wyll as ſone be hylt,
               As wayte agayne for the moneſhyne in the water.
               But is not this a praty pyked mater?
               To diſdeigne me, who muck of the world hordth not.
               As he doth, it may ryme but it accordth not.
               She fometh lyke a bore, the beaſt ſhuld ſeme bolde.
               For ſhe is as fiers, as a lyon of cotſolde.
               She fryeth in her owne greaſe, but as for my parte,
               If ſhe be angry, beſhrew her angry harte.
               Let paſſe (quoth he) and let vs be trudgyng.
               Where ſome noppy ale is, and ſofte ſwete ludgyng.
               Be it (quoth I) but I wolde very fayne eate.
               At breakefaſt and dyner I eete lyttle meate.
               And two hungry meales make the thyrde a glutton.
               We went where we had boylde beefe & bake mutton.
               Wherof I fed me as full as a tunne.
               And a bed were we er the clocke had nyne runne.
               Early we roſe, in haſte to get awaie.
               And to the hoſtler this mornyng by daie
               This felow calde, what how felow, thou knaue,
               I praie the leat me and my felowe haue
               
                  A heare of the dog that bote vs laſt nyght.
               And bytten were we both to the brayne aryght,
               We ſawe eche other drunke in the good ale glas,
               And ſo dyd eche one eche other, that there was.
               Saue one, but olde men ſaie that are ſkyld,
               A hard foughten feeld, where no mā ſcapeth vnkyld.
               The recknyng reckned, he needs wold pay the ſhot,
               And needs he muſt for me, for I had it not.
               This doone we ſhoke hands. and parted in fyne,
               He into his waie, and I into myne.
               But this iorney was quite out of my waie.
               Many kynsfolke and fewe frends, ſome folke ſaie.
               But I fynde many kynsfolke, and frende not one.
               Folke ſaie, it hath been ſaied many yeres ſens gone.
               Proue thy frend er thou haue nede. but in dede,
               A freende is neuer knowne tyll a man haue nede.
               Before I had nede, my moſt preſent foes
               Semed my moſt frends. but thus the worlde goes,
               Euery man baſteth the fat hog we ſee,
               But the leane ſhall burne er he baſted be.
               As ſeyth this ſentence, ofte and long ſaied before.
               He that hath plenty of goodes ſhall haue more.
               He that hath but a lytle, he ſhall haue leſſe.
               He yt hath ryght nought, ryght nought ſhall poſſeſſe.
               Thus hauīg right nought. & wold ſomwhat obtayn,
               With ryght nought (quoth he) I am retornd agayne.
            
            
               ¶The .xii. Chapiter.
               VVel (quoth I) comfort your ſelfe wt this old text.
               That telth vs, when bale is hekſt, boote is next.
               
                  Though euery man maie not ſyt in the chayre.
               Yet alway the grace of god is woorth a fayre.
               Take no thought in no caſe, god is where he was.
               But put caſe in pouertee all your lyfe pas.
               Yet pouertee and poore degree, taken well,
               Feedth on this. he that neuer clymbde, neuer fell.
               And ſom caſe at ſome tyme ſhewth preefe ſomwheare,
               That riches bryngth ofte harme. and euer feare,
               Where pouertee paſſeth without grudge of greefe,
               What, man the begger may ſyng before the theefe.
               And who can ſyng ſo mery a note,
               As maie he, that can not chaunge a grote.
               Ye (quoth he) beggers may ſyng before theeues,
               And wepe before true men, lamentyng their greeues.
               Some ſaie, and I feele hungre perſeth ſtone wall.
               Meate nor yet money, to bye meate withall,
               Haue I not ſo muche as maie hungar defende
               Fro my wyfe and me. Well (quoth I) god will ſende
               Tyme to prouide for tyme, right well ye ſhall ſe
               God ſende that prouiſion in tyme, ſaied he.
               And thus ſemyng welny wery of his lyfe,
               The pore wretche went to his like pore wretchid wife.
               And after this a monthe, or ſomwhat leſſe,
               Theyr landlorde came to theyr howſe to take a ſtreſſe
               For rent. to haue kept bayard in the ſtable.
               But that to wyn any power was vnable.
               For though it be yll playing with ſhort daggers,
               Which meaneth, that euery wiſe man ſtaggers,
               In earneſt or boorde to be buſy or bolde
               With his biggers or betters, yet this is tolde.
               
                  Where as nothyng is, the kyng muſt loſe his ryght.
               And thus, kyng or keyſer muſt haue ſet them quyght.
               But warnyng to departe thens they nedyd none.
               For er the next day the byrds were flowne eche one,
               To ſeke ſeruyce. of which where the man was ſped,
               The wyfe could not ſpede, but maugre her hed,
               She muſt ſeke els where. for either there, or ny
               Seruice for any ſuite ſhe none could eſpy.
               All folk thought them not onely to lyther,
               To lynger both in one houſe to gyther,
               But alſo dwellyng ny vnder theyr wyngs,
               Vnder theyr noſes, they myght conuey thyngs.
               Suche as were nother to heuy nor to whot,
               More in a month then they theyr maſter got
               In a whole yere. Wherto folke further weying,
               Receite eche of other in their conueying,
               Myght be worſt of all. For this prouerbe preeues,
               Where be no receyuers, there be no theeues.
               Such hap here hapt, that cōmon drede of ſuch gyles,
               Droue them and kepeth them aſonder many myles.
               Thus though loue decree, departure death to be,
               Yet pouertee parteth felowſhyp we ſee.
               And dothe thoſe two trewe louers ſo diſſeuer,
               That meete ſhall they ſeldwhan, or haply neuer.
               And thus by loue, without regarde of lyuyng,
               Theſe twayn haue wrought eche others yll cheuyng.
               And loue hath ſo loſt them the loue of theyr freends,
               That I thinke theim loſt, and thus this tale eends.
            
            
               
               The .xiii. chapiter.
               AH ſir (ſaid my frēd) whan men will needs mary,
               I ſee nowe, howe wiſedom and haſte may vary.
               Namely where they wed for loue all togyther,
               I wold for no good, but I had come hyther.
               Swete beautee with ſoure beggery, naye I am gon,
               To the welthy wythred wydow, by ſeynt Iohn.
               What yet in all haſte (quoth I) ye (quoth he)
               For ſhe hath ſubſtaunce ynough. and ye ſe,
               That lack is the loſſe of theſe two yong fooles.
               Know ye not (quoth I) that after wyſe mēs ſchooles,
               A man ſhold here all parts, er he iudge any,
               Why axe ye that (quoth he) for this (quoth I.)
               I tolde you, when I this began, that I wolde,
               Tell you of two couples. and I hauyng tolde
               But of the tone, ye be ſtreyght ſtartyng awey,
               As I of the tother had ryght nought to ſey.
               Or as your ſelfe of them ryght nought wold here,
               Nay not all ſo (quoth he) but ſyns I thynk clere,
               There can no way appere ſo paynfull a lyfe,
               Betwene your yong neybour & his olde ryche wyfe,
               As this tale in this yong poore couple doth ſhowe,
               And that the moſte good or leſte yll ye knowe.
               To take at end, I was at begynnyng bent,
               With thanks for this, & your more payne to preuent,
               Without any more matter now reuolued,
               I take this matter here clerely reſolued.
               And that ye herein awarde me to forſake,
               Beggerly beautee, & riuyld ryches take.
               
                  Thats iuſt. if the half ſhall iudge the whole (quoth I)
               But yet here the whole, the whole wholly to try.
               To it (quoth he) than I praie you by and by.
               We will dine fyrſt (quoth I) for it is noone hy.
               We maie as wel (quoth he) dine whan this is doone.
               The longer forenoone the ſhorter after noone.
               All comth to one, and therby men haue geſt,
               Alwaie the longer eaſt the ſhorter weſt.
               We haue had (quoth I) before ye cam, and ſyn,
               Weather, meete to ſette paddocks abroode in.
               Rayn, more thā enough. & whā al ſhrews haue dynd,
               Chaunge from foule wether to faire is oft inclind.
               And all the ſhrews in this parte, ſauyng one wife,
               That muſt dine with vs, haue dind peyn of my life.
               Now if good chaunge of yll wether be dependyng,
               Vpon her diet, what wer myne offendyng,
               To kepe the woman any longer faſtyng.
               If ye (quoth he) ſet all this farre caſtyng.
               For common wealth▪ as it appereth a clere caſe,
               Reaſon wold your will ſhuld, and ſhall take place.
            
            ¶Thus endeth the fyrſt parte.
         
         
            The ſeconde parte.
            
               The fyrſt chapiter.
               DIners can not be long, where deyntees want,
               Where coin is not cōmon, cōmons muſt be ſcant.
               In poſte pace we paſt from potage to cheeſe,
               And yet this man cryde, alas what tyme we leeſe.
               
                  He wolde not leat vs pauſe after our repaſte,
               But aparte he pluckt me ſtreight, and in all haſte,
               As I of this poore yong man, and poore yong mayd,
               Or more poore yong wife, the forſaid words had ſaid,
               So praieth he me now the proceſſe maie be tolde,
               Betwene the other yong man, and riche widow olde.
               If ye lacke that (quoth I) awaie ye muſt wynde,
               With your holle errand, and half thanſwer behynde.
               Which thing to do, ſens haſte therto ſhewth you loth,
               And to haſte your goyng, the daie awaie goth,
               And that tyme loſte, agayne we can not wyn,
               Without more loſſe of tyme this tale I begyn.
               In this late old wydow, and than old new wyfe,
               Age and appetite fell at a ſtrong ſtryfe.
               Hir luſt was as yong, as hir lyms were olde.
               The daie of hir weddyng, lyke one to be ſolde.
               She ſet out her ſelfe in fine aparell.
               She was made like a beere pot, or a barell.
               A croked hoked noſe, beetyll browde, bleare eyde.
               Many men wiſhte, for beautifying that bryde,
               Hir waſte to be gyrd in, and for a boone grace,
               Some well fauourd viſor, on hir yll fauourd face.
               But with viſorlike viſage, ſuche as it was,
               She ſmyrkd, and ſhe ſmylde, but ſo liſped this las,
               That folke might haue thought it done onely alone,
               Of wantonneſſe. had not her teeth been gone.
               Vpryght as a candell ſtandeth in a ſoket,
               Stoode ſhe that daie, ſo ſympre de coket,
               Of auncient fathers ſhe toke no cure nor care.
               She was to theim, as koy as a crokers mare.
               
                  She toke thentertaynment of the yong men
               All in dalyance, as nyce as a nuns hen.
               I ſuppoſe that daie hir eares might well glow.
               For all the towne talkt of hir, hye and low.
               One ſayde, a well fauourd olde woman ſhe is.
               The deuyll ſhe is, ſaid an other, and to this,
               In came the thyrde, with his. v. egges, and ſayde,
               Fyfty yere ago I knewe hir a trym mayde.
               What euer ſhe were than (ſayd one) ſhe is now,
               To become a bryde, as meete as a ſow
               To beare a ſaddle. She is in this mariage
               As comely as is a cowe in a cage.
               Gup with a galde backe gill, come vp to ſouper.
               What myne olde mare wolde haue a newe crouper.
               And nowe myne olde hat muſt haue a new band.
               Well (quoth one) glad is he that hath hir in hand.
               A goodly mariage ſhe is, I here ſaie.
               She is ſo (quoth one) were the woman away.
               Well (quoth an other) fortune this moueth.
               And in this caſe euery man as he loueth.
               Quoth the good man, whan that he kyſt his cowe.
               That kys (quoth one) doth wel here, by god a vowe.
               But how can ſhe gyue a kyſſe ſowre or ſweete?
               Hir chyn and hir noſe, within halfe an ynche meete.
               God is no botcher ſyr, ſaied an other.
               He ſhapeth all partes, as eche parte maie fitte other.
               Well (quoth one) wyſely, let vs leaue this ſkannyng.
               God ſpede theim. be as be maie is no bannyng.
               That ſhalbe, ſhalbe. and with gods grace they ſhall
               Doo well. And that they ſo maie, wyſhe we all.
               
                  This wonder (as wōders laſt) laſted nine daies.
               Which done, & all geſts of this feaſt gon theyr waies,
               Ordinary houſeholde this man began
               Very ſumptuouſely, whiche he might well doo than,
               What he wold haue, he might haue. his wife was ſet,
               In ſuche dotage of hym, that fayre wordes dyd fet,
               Gromelſede plentee. and pleaſure to prefer,
               She made muche of hym, & he mockt muche of her.
               I was as (I ſaied) muche there, and moſte of all
               The fyrſt month. in which time ſuch kindnes did fall,
               Betwene theſe .ii. counterfaite turtle burds.
               To ſee his ſweete looks, and here her ſwete wurds,
               And to thynke wherfore they bothe, put bothe in vre,
               It wolde haue made a hors breake his halter ſure.
               Al the fyrſt fortnight theyr tickīg might haue tought,
               Any yong couple, their loue ticks to haue wrought.
               Some laught. & ſeyd, al thyng is gay that is greene.
               Som therto ſaid, the grene new brome ſwepith cleene
               But ſens al thyng is the wors for the wearyng,
               Decay of clene ſweepyng folke had in fearyng.
               And in dede, er .ii. monthes awaie were crept,
               And her byggeſt baggs into his boſome ſwept,
               Where loue had appeerd in hym to her alwaie
               Hotte as a toſte, it grew cold as a kaie.
               He, at meate caruyng hir, and none els before,
               Now carued he to all but hir, & hir no more.
               Where hir words ſeemd hony, by his ſmylyng chere,
               Now are they muſtard. he frowneth them to here.
               And whan ſhe ſawe ſwete ſauce begyn to waxe ſowre,
               She waxt as ſowre as he, and as well coulde lowre.
               
                  So turned they theyr tippets by waie of exchaunge,
               From laughyng to louryng, & taunts did ſo raunge,
               That in playne terms, playne truth to you to vtter,
               They two agreed, lyke two catts in a gutter.
               Mary ſir (quoth he) by ſcratchyng and bytyng
               Catts and dogs come togither. by folks recityng,
               Togyther by the eares they come (quoth I) cherely.
               How be it thoſe words are not voyde here clerely,
               For in one ſtate they twayne could not yet ſettyll.
               But waueryng as the wynde. in docke out nettyll.
               Now in now out, now here now there, now ſad,
               Now mery, now hye now lowe, nowe good now bad.
               In whiche vnſtedy ſturdy ſtormes ſtreynable.
               To know how they bothe were irrefreynable,
               Marke how they fell out, and how they fell in.
               At thende of a ſupper ſhe dyd thus begyn.
            
            
               The ſeconde chapiter.
               HVſband (quoth ſhe) I wold we were in our neſt.
               Whan the bely is full, the bones wold be at reſt.
               So ſoone vpon ſupper (ſayd he) no queſtion,
               Slepe maketh yll and vnholſome digeſtion.
               By that diete a great diſeaſe ons I gat.
               And burnt chylde fyre dredth. I will beware of that.
               What a poſt of phyſyk (ſeyd ſhe) ye a poſt.
               And from poſt to piller wyfe, I haue been toſt
               By that ſurfet. And I feele a litle fit,
               Euen nowe. by former attemptyng of it.
               Wherby, except I ſhall ſeeme to leaue my wyt,
               Before it leaue me, I muſt nowe leaue it.
               
                  I thanke god (quoth ſhe) I neuer yet felte payne,
               To go to bed tymely. but ryſyng agayne
               To ſoone in the mornyng, hath me diſpleaſed.
               And I (quoth he) haue been more diſeaſed,
               By early lying downe, than by early ryſyng.
               But thus differ folke lo, in exercyſyng.
               That that one maie not, an other maie.
               Vſe maketh maſtry. and men many tymes ſaie,
               That one loueth not, an other doth, which hath ſped,
               All meates to be eaten, and all maydes to be wed.
               Haſte ye to bed now, and ryſe ye as ye rate.
               Whyle I ryſe early, and come to bedde late.
               Long lying warme in bed is holſome (quoth ſhe)
               While the leg warmeth, the boote harmeth (quoth he)
               Well (quoth ſhe) he that dooth as moſte men doo,
               Shalbe leſte wondred on. and take any twoo,
               That be man and wyfe in all this holle towne,
               And moſte parte togyther, they ryſe and lye downe.
               Whan byrds ſhall rouſt (quoth he) at .viii.ix. or ten,
               Who ſhall appoynt their houre. the cocke, or the hen.
               The hen (quoth ſhe) the cock quoth he) iuſt (quoth ſhe)
               As Iermans lips. It ſhal proue, more iuſt (quoth he)
               Than proue I (quoth ſhe) the more foole far awaie.
               But there is no foole to the olde foole, folke ſaie.
               Ye are wiſe enough (quoth he) yf ye kepe ye warme,
               To be kepte warme, and for none other harme.
               Nor for muche more good, I tooke you to wedde.
               I toke not you (quoth he) nyght and daie to bedde.
               Hir carreyne carkas (ſaied he) is ſo colde,
               Bycauſe ſhe is aged, and ſomwhat to olde,
               
                  That ſhe kylth me. I do but roſt a ſtone.
               In warmyng hir. And ſhall not I ſaue one,
               As ſhe wold ſaue an other? yes by ſeynt Iohne.
               A ſyr (quoth ſhe) mary this geare is alone.
               Who that worſt may ſhal holde the candyll, I ſe.
               I muſt warme bed for hym ſhuld warme it for me.
               This medicine, thus miniſtred is ſharpe and colde.
               But al thyng that is ſharpe is ſhort. folk haue tolde,
               This trade is nowe begun, but yf it holde on,
               Then farewell my good days. they will be ſone gone.
               Goſpell in thy mouth (quoth he) this ſtrife to breake.
               How be it, all is not goſpell that thou dooeſt ſpeake,
               But what nede we lumpe out loue at ones laſhyng,
               As we ſhuld now ſhake hāds. what ſoft for daſhyng.
               The fayre laſteth all the yere. we be new kneet.
               And ſo late met, that I feare, we parte not yeet,
               Quoth the baker to the pillory. Whiche thyng
               From diſtemperate fonding temperance maie bryng.
               And this reaſon to ayde, and make it more ſtrong,
               Olde wiſe folke ſaie, loue me lyttle loue me long.
               I ſaie little (ſaied ſhe) but I thynke more.
               Thought is fre. Ye lean (quoth he) to the wrōg ſhore.
               Braulyng booted not, he was not that night bent.
               To plaie the bridegrome, Alone to bed ſhe went.
               This was their begynnyng of iar. How be it,
               For a begynnyng, this was a feate fyt,
               And but a fleabytyng to that dyd enſew.
               The worſt is behynde. we com not where it grew.
               Howe ſaie you (ſaied he to me) by my wyfe.
               The diuell hath caſte a bone (ſayd I) to ſet ſtrife
               
                  Betwene you, but it were a foly for me,
               To put my hande betweene the barke and the tre.
               Or to put my fynger to far in the fyre.
               Betwene you, and lay my credence in the myre.
               To medyll lytle for me it is beſt.
               For of lytle medlyng there comth great reſt.
               Yes ye may medyll (quoth he) to make hir wiſe,
               Wythout takyng harme, in gyuyng your aduiſe.
               She knowth me not yet, but yf ſhe wax to wylde,
               I ſhall make her know, an olde knaue is no chylde.
               Sluggyng in bed with hir is wors then watchyng,
               I promyſe you, an old ſack aſketh muche paſchyng.
               Well (quoth I) to morow I will to my beades,
               To pray, that as ye both wyll, ſo ake your heades.
               And in meane tyme my akyng hed to eaſe,
               I wyll couch a hogs hed. Quoth he when ye pleaſe.
               We parted, and this within a daie or twayne,
               Was raakt vp in thaſhes, and couerd agayne.
            
            
               ¶The thyrde chapiter.
               THeſe .ii. daies paſt, he ſayd to me, whan ye will
               Com chat at home. al is wel. Iak ſhal haue gill.
               Who had the wors ende of the ſtaffe (quoth I now?)
               Shall the maiſter weare a breeche, or none. ſey you.
               I truſte the ſow will no more ſo deepe wroote.
               But if ſhe do (quoth he) you muſt ſet in foote.
               And whome ye ſee out of the waie, or ſhoote wyde,
               Ouerſhoote not your ſelfe any ſyde to hyde.
               But ſhoote out ſome wordes, yf ſhe be to whot.
               She maie ſaie (quoth I) a fooles bolte is ſoone ſhot.
               
                  Ye will me to a thankleſſe office here.
               And a buſy officer I maie appere.
               And Iak out of office ſhe maie byd me walke.
               And thynke me as wiſe as Waltams calfe, to talke,
               Or chat of hir charge, hauyng therin nought to doo.
               How be it, if I ſe nede, as my parte comth to,
               Gladly betwene you I will doo my beſte.
               I byd you to dyner (quoth he) as no geſte,
               And bryng your pore neighbors on your other ſyde.
               I dyd ſo. And ſtreight as tholde wife vs eſpide,
               She bad vs welcome. and merily toward me,
               Grene ruſhes for this ſtrāger, ſtrewe here (quoth ſhe)
               With this a parte ſhe pulde me by the ſleue.
               Saying in few words, my mynde to you to meue,
               So it is, that all our great fraie the laſt nyght,
               Is forgeuen and forgotten betwene vs quight.
               And all fraies by this I truſt haue taken ende.
               For I fully hope my huſbande will amende.
               Well amended (thought I) whan ye bothe relent,
               Not to your owne, but eche to others mendment.
               Nowe if hope faile (quoth ſhe) & chance bryng about
               Any ſuche breache, wherby we fall agayne out,
               I praie you tell hym his pars vers now and than.
               And wynke on me alſo hardly, if ye can
               Take me in any tryp. Quoth I, I am lothe,
               To meddle commonly. For as this tale gothe,
               Who medleth in all thyng, maie ſhoe the goſlyng.
               Well (quoth ſhe) your medlyng herein maie bryng
               The wynd calme betwene vs, whā it els might rage.
               I will with good will (quoth I) yll wynds to ſwage,
               
                  Spēd ſom wīd at nede, though I waſt wind in vayn.
               To table we ſat, where fyne fare dyd remayn.
               Mery we were as cup and can coulde holde,
               Eche one with eche other homely and bolde.
               And ſhe for hir parte, made vs chere heauen hye.
               The fyrſt parte of diner mery as a pie.
               But a ſcalde head is ſoone broken. and ſo they,
               As ye ſhall ſtreight here, fell at a newe fraie.
            
            
               ¶The fourthe chapiter.
               HVſband (quoth ſhe) ye ſtudy. be mery now.
               And euen as ye thynke now, ſo come to you.
               Nay not ſo (quoth he) for my thought to tell ryght,
               I thynke how ye lay gronyng wyfe, all laſt nyght.
               Huſbande, a gronyng hors, and a gronyng wyfe,
               Neuer fayle theyr maiſter (quoth ſhe) for my lyfe.
               No wyfe. a woman hath nyne lyues lyke a cat.
               Well my lambe (quoth ſhe) ye may picke out of that,
               As ſoone gothe the yong lambſkyn to the market,
               As tholde yews. God forbyd wyfe, ye ſhall fyrſt iet.
               I will not iet yet (quoth ſhe) put no doubtyng.
               It is a bad ſacke that will abide no cloutyng.
               And as we ofte ſee, the lothe ſtake ſtandeth longe,
               So is it an yll ſtake (I haue herde amonge)
               That can not ſtande one yere in a hedge.
               I drynke (quoth ſhe) Quoth he, I will not pledge.
               What nede all this. a man may loue his houſe well,
               Though he ryde not on the ridge, I haue herde tell.
               What, I wene (quoth ſhe) proferd ſeruice ſtynkth.
               But ſomwhat it is, I ſe, whan the cat wynkth,
               
                  And bothe her eyen out, but further ſtryfe to ſhonne,
               Let the cat wynke, and leat the mous ronne.
               This paſt, and he chered vs all. but moſte chere,
               On his part, to this fayre yong wyfe dyd appere.
               And as he to her caſte ofte a louyng iye,
               So caſte hir huſbande lyke iye, to his plate by.
               Wherwith in a great muſyng he was brought.
               Frend (quoth the good man) a peny for your thought.
               For my thought (quoth he) that is a goodly diſhe.
               But of trouth I thought, better to haue than wiſhe.
               What. a goodly yong wyfe, as you haue (quoth he)
               Nay (quoth he) goodly gylt gobblets, as here be.
               Byr lady freends (quoth I) this maketh a ſhow,
               To ſhewe you more vnnaturall than the crow.
               The crow thynkth her own byrds faireſt in the wood.
               But by your woords (except I wrong vnderſtood)
               Eche others byrds or iewels, ye doo weie
               Aboue your owne. True (quoth the old wyfe) ye ſey.
               But my neighbours deſyre rightly to meaſure,
               Comth of neede. and not of corrupte pleaſure,
               And my huſbands more of pleaſure, than of nede.
               Olde fiſhe & yong fleſh (quoth he) doth men beſt fede.
               And ſome ſey, chaunge of paſture makth fat calues.
               As for that reaſon (quoth ſhe) ronth to halues.
               As well for the cowe calfe as for the bull.
               And though your paſture looke bareynly and dull,
               Yet loke not on the meate, but loke on the man.
               And who ſo looketh on you, ſhall ſhortly ſkan,
               Ye may write to your frends, that ye are in helth.
               But all thyng maie be ſuffred ſauyng welthe.
               
                  An olde ſaied ſawe, itche and eaſe, can no man pleaſe.
               Plentie is no deyntie. ye ſee not your owne eaſe.
               I ſee, ye can not ſee the wood for trees.
               Your lyps hang in your light. but this poore mā ſees
               Bothe howe blyndly ye ſtande in your owne lyght,
               And that you roſe on your right ſyde here ryght.
               And might haue gon further, and haue faren wurs.
               I wote well I might (quoth he) for the purs,
               But ye be a baby of Belſabubs bowre.
               Content ye (quoth ſhe) take the ſwete with the ſowre.
               Fancy may boult bran, and make ye take it flowre.
               It will not be (quoth he) ſhulde I dy this houre,
               While this fayre flowre flouriſheth thus in myne iye.
               Yes, it might (quoth ſhe, and here this reaſon why.
               Snowe is white and euery man lets it lye.
               And lieth in the dike and euery man lets it lye.
               Pepper is blacke And euery man doth it bye.
               And hath a good ſmacke And euery man doth it bye.
               Mylke (quoth he) is white but all men know it good meate.
               And lyeth not in the dyke but all men know it good meate.
               Inke is all blacke No man will it drynke nor eate.
               And hath an yll ſmacke No man will it drynke nor eate.
               Thy ryme (quoth he) is muche elder than myne,
               But myne beyng newer, is trewer than thyne.
               Thou likeneſt now, for a vayne auauntage,
               White ſnow to fayre youth, black pepper to foule age
               Whiche are placed out of place here by rood.
               Black ynke is as yl meate, as black pepper is good.
               And white mylke as good meat, as white ſnow is yll.
               But a milk ſnow whit ſmoth yōg ſkin, who chāge wil
               
                  For a pepper ynke blacke rough olde riueld face?
               Though chaunge be no robbry for the changed caſe,
               Yet ſhall that chaunge rob the changer of his wyt,
               For who this caſe ſercheth, ſhall ſoone ſee in yt,
               That as well agreeth thy compariſon in theſe,
               As a lyke to compare in taſte, chalke and cheſe.
               Or a like in colour to deme ynke and chalke.
               Walk drab walke. Nay (quoth ſhe) walk knaue walk
               Saieth that terme, How be it ſyr, I, ſaie not ſo.
               And beſt we laie a ſtrawe here, and euen there who.
               Orels this geare wyll brede a pad in the ſtrawe.
               If ye hale this waie, I will an other waie drawe.
               Here is god in thambry (quoth I) Quoth he, naie,
               Here is the deuill in thorologe, ye maie ſaie.
               Sens this (quoth I) rather brīgeth bale than boote,
               Wrap it in the clothe, and treade it vnder foote.
               Ye harpe on the ſtryng, that giueth no melody.
               Your tongs ron before your wits, by ſeynt Antony.
               Mark ye, how ſhe hitteth me on the thūbs (quoth he)
               And ye taunt me tyt ouer thumb (quoth ſhe)
               Sens tyt for tat (quoth I) on euen hand is ſet,
               Set the hares head agaynſt the gooſe ieblet.
               She is (quoth he) bent to fors you perfors
               To know, that the grey mare is the better hors.
               She chopth logyk. to put me to my clargy.
               She hath one poynte of a good hauke, ſhe is hardy.
               But wyfe, the firſt poynte of hawkyng is holde faſt.
               And holde ye faſt, I red you, leſt ye be caſt,
               In your own tourne. Nay ſhe will tourne the leafe.
               And rather (quoth I) take as falth in the ſheafe,
               
                  At your hands. and let fall her hold. than be to bold,
               Nay, I will ſpit in my hands, and take better hold.
               He (quoth ſhe) that will be angry without cauſe,
               Muſte be at one, without amends. by ſage ſawes.
               Treade a worme on the tayle, & it muſt turne agayne.
               He taketh pepper in the noſe, that I complayne
               Vpon his fautes, my ſelfe beyng fautleſſe.
               But that ſhall not ſtop my mouth, ye maie well geſſe.
               Well (quoth I) to muche of one thyng is not good.
               Leaue of this. Be it (quoth he) falle we to our food.
               But ſuffrance is no quittance in this dayment.
               No (quoth ſhe) nor myſrecknyng is no paiement.
               But euen recknyng maketh long freends. my freend.
               For alwaie owne is owne, at the recknyngs eend.
               This recknyng thus reckned. and dyner ons doone,
               We three from theim twayn, departed very ſoone.
            
            
               ¶ The fyfte chapiter.
               THis olde woman, the next daie after this nyght,
               Stale home to me ſecretely as ſhe myght.
               To talke with me, in ſecret counſell (ſhe ſayed)
               Of thyngs, whiche in no wyſe myght be bewrayed.
               We twayne are one to many (quoth I) for men ſaie,
               Three maie keepe a counſell, if two be awaie.
               But all that ye ſpeake, vnmete agayne to tell,
               I will ſaie nought but mum, and mum is counſell.
               Well than (quoth ſhe) herein auoydyng all feares,
               Auoyd your children. ſmal pitchers haue wide eares.
               Whiche done (ſhe ſaied) I haue a huſband, ye know,
               Whom I made of nought, as the thīg ſelf doth ſhow
               
                  And for theſe two cauſes onely hym I tooke.
               Fyrſt, that he for my loue, ſhulde louyngly looke,
               In all kyndes of cauſe, that loue ingender myght,
               To loue and cheryſhe me by daie and by nyght.
               Secondly, the ſubſtance, whiche I to hym brought,
               He rather ſhould augment than bryng to nought.
               But now my good ſhall bothe be ſpent, ye ſhall ſee,
               And it in ſpendyng ſoole inſtrument ſhall bee
               Of my diſtruction. by ſpendyng it on ſuche
               As ſhall make hym diſtroie me. I feare this muche.
               He maketh hauok. and ſetteth cocke on the hoope.
               He is ſo laueis, the ſtocke begynneth to droope.
               And as for gayne is deade, and laied in tumbe.
               Whan he ſhould get ought, eche fynger is a thumbe.
               Eche of his ioyntes agaynſt other iuſtles,
               As handſomly as a beare picketh muſcles.
               He maketh his martes with marchantes lykely,
               To bryng a ſhillyng to nyne pence quickely.
               Flattryng knaues & queans a ſort, beyond the mark.
               Hang on his ſleue, & many hands make light wark.
               If he holde on a whyle, as he begyns,
               We ſhall ſe hym proue a marchant of eele ſkyns.
               A marchaunt, without either money or ware.
               But all be bugs words, that I ſpeake to ſpare.
               Better ſpare at brym than at bottom, ſaie I,
               Euer ſpare and euer bare, ſaieth he, by and by.
               Spend, & god ſhall ſende (ſaith he) ſaith thold balet.
               What ſendth he (ſaie I) a ſtaffe and a wallet.
               Than vp goth his ſtaffe, to ſende me a loufe.
               He is at thre words vp in the houſe roufe.
               
                  He hath a neſt of chekyns, whiche he dothe brood,
               That wil ſure make his heare grow thorow his hood.
               And herein to grow (quoth ſhe) to concluſyon,
               I pray your ayde, to auoyd this confuſion.
               And for counſell herein, I thought to haue gon,
               To that cunnyng man, our curate ſir Iohn̄.
               But this kept me back. I haue herd now and then,
               The greatteſt clerks be not all the wiſeſt men.
               I thynk (quoth I) who euer that terme began,
               Was neither great clerke, nor the greateſt wiſe man.
               In your rennyng from hym to me, ye roon
               Out of gods bliſſyng, in to the warme ſoon.
               Where the blind ledth the blinde, both fall in the dike.
               And blinde be we both, if we thynke vs his lyke.
               Folke ſhow muche foly, whan thyngs ſhuld be ſped.
               To ren to the foote, that may go to the hed,
               Syns he beſt can, and moſt ought to do it,
               I feare not, but he will, if ye will woo it.
               There is one let (quoth ſhe) mo then I ſpake on,
               My huſband and he be ſo great, that the ton
               Can not piſſe, but the tother muſt let a fart.
               Chooſe we hym a party, then farwell my part.
               We ſhall ſo parte ſtake, that I ſhall leſe the hole.
               Folk ſay of olde, the ſhooe wyll holde with the ſole.
               Shall I truſt hym then? nay in truſt is treaſon.
               But I truſt you, and come to you this ſeaſon,
               To here me, and tell me, what way ye thynk beſt,
               To hem in my huſband, and ſet me in reſt.
               If ye mynde (quoth I) a conqueſt to make
               Ouer your huſband, no man maie vndertake
               
                  To bryng you to eaſe, nor the matter amende.
               Except ye bryng him to weare a cocks combe at ende.
               For take that your huſband were, as ye take hym.
               As I take hym not, as your tale wolde make hym,
               Yet were contencion lyke to doo nought in this,
               But kepe hym nought, & make hym wors than he is.
               But in this complaynt, for counſel quicke and clere,
               A few prouerbs for principuls, leat vs here.
               Who that maie not as they wolde, will as they maie.
               And this to this, they that are bounde muſt obaie.
               Foly it is to ſpurne againſt a pricke,
               To ſtriue agaynſt the ſtreme, to winche or kicke
               Agaynſt the hard wall. By this ye maie ſee,
               Being bounde to obedience, as ye bee,
               And alſo ouermatcht, ſuffraunce is your daunce.
               He maie ouermatche me (quoth ſhe) perchaunce
               In ſtrength of bodie, but my tung is a lym,
               To matche and to vexe euery veine of hym.
               Tong breaketh bone, it ſelfe hauyng none (quoth I)
               If the wynde ſtande in that doore, it ſtandth a wry,
               The perill of pratyng out of tune by note,
               Telth vs, that a good be ſtill is woorth a grote.
               In beyng your owne foe, you ſpyn a fayre threede.
               Aduiſe ye well, for here doeth all lye and bleede.
               Flee thattemptyng of extremitees all.
               Folke ſaie, better ſyt ſtill, than riſe and fall.
               And where the ſmalle with the great, can not agree,
               The weaker goth to the potte, we all daie ſee.
               So that alwaie the bygger eateth the beane.
               Ye can nought wyn, by any wayward meane.
               
                  Where the hedge is loweſt, men maie ſooneſt ouer.
               Be ſilent. Leat not your tong ron at rouer.
               Sens by ſtryfe, ye maie loſe, and can not wyn,
               Suffer. It is good ſlepyng in a whole ſkyn.
               If he chide, kepe you bill vnder wyng muet.
               Chattyng to chydyng is not worth a chuet.
               We ſe many tymes myght ouercomth ryght.
               Were not you as good thā to ſay, the crow is whight.
               And ſo rather let fayre woords make fooles fayn.
               Thā be plain without plites, & plant your own payn,
               For were ye as playne as Dunſtable hye waie.
               Yet ſhulde ye that waie rather breake a loue daie,
               Than make one. thus though ye perfitly knew,
               All that ye coniecture to be proued trew.
               Yet better diſſemble it, and ſhake it of.
               Than to broyd hym with it in earneſt or ſcof.
               If he plaie falſehed in felowſhyp, plaie ye,
               Se me, and ſe me not. the worſt part to fle.
               Why thynke ye me ſo white lyuerd (quoth ſhe?)
               That I will be tong tied? Nay I warrant ye.
               They that will be afrayde of euery farte,
               Muſt go farre to piſſe. Well quoth I, your parte
               Is to ſuffre (I ſaie.) For ye ſhall preeue,
               Taunts appeaſe not thyngs, they rather agreeue.
               But for yll company, or expence extreeme,
               I here no man doubte, ſo far as ye deeme.
               And there is no fyre without ſome ſmoke, we ſee.
               Well well, make no fyre, reyſe no ſmoke (ſaid ſhee)
               What cloke for the rayne ſo euer ye bryng me,
               My ſelfe can tell beſt, where my ſhoe doth wryng me,
               
                  But as ye ſaie, where fyre is, ſmoke will appere.
               And ſo hath it doone. For I dyd lately here,
               How flek and his make, vſe theyr ſecrete hauntyng,
               By one byrd, that in myne eare was late chauntyng.
               One ſwalow maketh not ſommer (ſaied I) men ſaie,
               I haue (quoth ſhe) mo blocks in his waie to laie.
               For further encreaſe of ſuſpicion of yls,
               Beſyde his iettyng in to the towne, to his gils.
               With caletts he conſumeth hym ſelfe and my goods,
               Somtyme in the feelds, ſometyme in the woods.
               Some here and ſe him, whom he hereth nor ſeeth not.
               But feelds haue eies, and woods haue eares. ye wot.
               And alſo on my maydes he is euer tootyng.
               Can ye iudge a man (quoth I) by his lookyng?
               What, a cat maie looke on a kyng. ye know,
               My cats leeryng loke (quoth ſhe) at fyrſt ſhow,
               Shewth me, that my cat gothe a catterwawyng.
               And ſpecially by his maner of drawyng,
               To Madge my fayre mayde. for maie he come ny hir,
               He muſt nedes baſſe hir, as he comth by hir.
               He loueth wel ſheeps fleſh, that wets his bred in wul.
               If he leaue it not, we haue a crow to pull.
               He loueth hir better at the ſole of the foote,
               Than euer he loued me at the herte roote.
               It is a foule byrd, that fyleth his owne neſt.
               I wolde haue hym lyue as gods lawe hath expreſt.
               And leaue leude tyckyng. he that will none yll do,
               Muſt do nothyng, that belongeth therto.
               To ticke and laugh with me, he hath laufull leeue.
               To that I ſaied nought, but laught in my ſleeue.
               
                  But whan ſhe ſemed to me fixed in mynde,
               Rather to ſeke for that ſhe was lothe to fynde,
               Then leue that ſekyng, by which ſhe might fynd eaſe.
               I fainde this fancy to feele how it wolde pleaſe.
               Wyll ye do well (quoth I) take peyne to watche hym.
               And if ye chance in aduoutry to catche hym,
               Then haue ye hym on the hyp, or on the hyrdell.
               Then haue ye his head faſt vnder your gyrdell.
               Where your words now do but rub hym on the gall.
               That dede without words ſhal dryue him to the wal.
               And further than the wall, he can not go.
               But muſt ſubmyt hym ſelfe. and if it hap ſo,
               That at ende of your watche, he gyltles appere,
               Thā al grudge, growne by ielouſy, taketh end clere.
               Of all folks I maie worſt watche hym (ſaieth ſhe)
               For of all folks him ſelfe moſt watcheth me.
               I ſhall as ſoone trie hym or take hym this waie,
               As dryue a top ouer a tyeld houſe, no naie.
               I maie kepe corners or holow trees with thowle,
               This ſeuen yeres, daie and night to watche a bowle,
               Before I ſhall catche hym with vndoubted euyll.
               He muſt haue a long ſpoone, ſhal eate with the deuyl.
               And the deuyll is no falſer then is he.
               I haue ofte herde tell, it had nede to be
               A wyly mouſe, that ſhuld breede in the cats eare.
               Shall I get within hym than? naie ware that geare.
               It is harde haltyng before a cripple, ye wot.
               A falſer water drynker there lyueth not.
               Whan he hunteth a doe, that he can not auow,
               All dogs barke not at hym, I warrant you.
               
                  Namely not I, I ſaie, though, as I ſayed,
               He ſomtyme, though ſeldome, by ſome be bewrayed.
               Cloſe huntyng (quoth I) the good hunter alowth.
               But be your huſband neuer ſo ſtill of mowth,
               If ye can hunte, and will ſtande at receyte,
               Your mayde examinde, maketh hym open ſtreyte.
               That wer (quoth ſhe) as of my truth to make preefe,
               To axe my fellow, whether I be a theefe.
               They cleaue togither like burs. that waie I ſhall
               Pike out no more, than out of the ſtone wall.
               Then lyke ye not to watche hym for wyfe nor mayde.
               No (quoth ſhe.) Nor I (quoth I) what euer I ſayde.
               And I myſlyke not onely your watche in vayne,
               But alſo yf ye tooke hym. what coulde ye gayne?
               From ſuſpicion to knowlege of yll. for ſothe
               Coulde make ye do, but as the flounder dothe,
               Leape out of the frying pan into the fyre.
               And change from yl pein to wurs is worth ſmal hyre.
               Let tyme trie. tyme trieth trouth in euery dout.
               And deme the beſt, til tyme hath tried the trouth out.
               And reaſon ſaieth, make not two ſorows of one.
               But ye make ten ſorows, where reaſon maketh none.
               For where reaſon (as I ſaied) wylth you to wynke,
               (Although all were proued, as yll as ye thynke)
               Contrary to reaſon ye ſtampe and ye ſtare.
               Ye frete and ye fume, as mad as a marche hare.
               Without profe to his reprofe preſent or paſte.
               But by ſuche reporte, as moſte proue lies at laſte.
               And here goth the hare awaie, for ye iudge all,
               And iudge the worſt in all, or profe in ought fall.
               
                  But blind men ſhold iudge no colours. by old ſawes,
               And folk ofttimes are moſt blind in their own cauſe.
               The blynde eate many flyes. how be it the fanſy,
               Of your blyndneſſe comth not of ignorancy,
               Ye could tell a nother herein, the beſt way.
               But it is as folke dooe. and not as folke ſay,
               As ye can ſeeme wiſe in words, be wiſe in dede.
               That is (quoth ſhe) ſooner ſayd than done, I drede▪
               
               But me thynkth your councell weyth in the whole,
               To make me put my fynger in a hole.
               And ſo by ſufferaunce to be ſo lyther,
               In my howſe, to ley fyre and tow togyther.
               But if they fyre me, ſome of them ſhall wyn
               More tow on their diſtaues, then they can well ſpyn.
               And the beſt of them ſhall haue both their hands full,
               Bolſter or pyllow for me, be whoſe wull.
               I wyll not beare the deuyls ſack, by ſaint Audry.
               For concelyng ſuſpycyon of their bawdry.
               I feare falſe meaſures, or els I were a childe.
               For they that thynk none yll, ar ſoneſt begylde.
               And thus though much water go by the myll,
               That the myller knoweth not of, yet I wyll
               Caſt what maie ſcape. and as though I dyd fynde it,
               With the clak of my myll, to fyne meale grynd it.
               And ſure or I take any reſt in effect,
               I muſt banyſh my maydes, ſuch as I ſuſpect.
               Better it be done than wyſh it had bene doone.
               As good vndone (quoth I) as dooe it to ſoone.
               Well (quoth ſhe) tyll ſone, fare ye well, and this
               Kepe now as ſecret, as ye thynk meete is.
               
                  Out at doors went ſhe herewith. and herevpon
               In at dors cam he forthwith as ſhe was gon.
               And, without any temprate proteſtacyon,
               Thus he began, in way of exclamacion.
            
            
               The .vi. chapiter.
               OH what choyſe may compare, to the deuyls lyfe,
               Lyke his, that hath choſen a deuyll to his wife.
               Namely ſuche an olde wytche, ſuche a mackabroyne,
               As euermore lyke a hog hangeth the groyne,
               On her huſband. except he be hir ſlaue,
               And folow all fancyes, that ſhe wold haue.
               This prouerbe proueth, there is no good accorde,
               Where euery man woulde be a lorde.
               Wherfore my wyfe wilbe no lord, but lady.
               To make me, that ſhulde be hir lorde, a baby.
               Before I was wedded, and ſens. I made recknyng▪
               
               To make my wyfe boow at euery becknyng.
               Bachelers boſt, how they wil teche their wiues good,
               But many a man ſpeaketh of Robyn hood,
               That neuer ſhotte in his bowe. Whan all is ſought,
               Bachelers wiues, & maides children be well tought.
               And this with this, I alſo begyn to gather,
               Euery man can rule a ſhrewe ſaue he that hath her.
               At my wil I wend ſhe wolde haue wrought, like wax.
               But I fynde and feele, ſhe hath founde ſuche knakx.
               In hir bouget, and ſuche toies in hir hed,
               That to daunce after her pipe I am ny led.
               It is ſaied of olde, an olde dog byteth ſore.
               But by god, tholde bitche byteth ſorer and more.
               
                  And not with teeth (ſhe hath none) but with hir tong.
               If all tales be true (quoth I) though ſhe be ſtong,
               And therby ſtyng you, ſhe is not muche to blame.
               For what euer you ſaie, thus goeth the fame,
               Whan folke fyrſt ſaw your ſubſtāce layd in your lap,
               Without your pein, wt your wife broght by good hap
               Oft in remembrance of haps happy deuiſe,
               They wold ſaie, better to be happy than wyſe.
               Not myndyng therby than, to depraue your wyt,
               For they had good hope, to ſee good profe of yt.
               But ſens their good opinion therin ſo cooles,
               That they ſaie as ofte, god ſendeth fortune to fooles.
               In that as fortune without your wyt gaue it,
               So can your wyt not kepe it whan ye haue it.
               Saieth one, this geare was gotten on a holy daie.
               Saieth an other, who maie holde that will awaie.
               This game frō beginning, ſhewth what end is ment.
               Soone gotten ſoone ſpent, yll gotten yll ſpent.
               Ye are calde not onely to great a ſpender,
               To franke a gyuer, and as free a lender,
               But alſo ye ſpende gyue and lende, among ſuche,
               Whoſe lightneſſe miniſheth your honeſtee as muche,
               As your money, and muche they diſalow,
               That ye bribe all from hir, that brought all to yow.
               And ſpende it out at doors, in ſpite of hir,
               Bycauſe ye wolde kill hir, to be quite of hir.
               For all kyndneſſe of hir parte, that maie ryſe,
               Ye ſhewe all thunkyndneſſe ye can deuyſe.
               And where reaſon and cuſtome (they ſaie) afoords
               Alwaie to let the looſers haue theyr woords,
               
                  You make hir a cookqueyn, and conſume hir good.
               And ſhe muſt ſyt lyke a beane in a monks hood.
               Bearyng no more rule, than a gooſe turd in tems.
               But at hir owne maydens becks, wynks, or hems.
               She muſt obeie thoſe lambs, or els a lambs ſkyn,
               Ye will prouide for hir, to lap her in.
               This byteth the mare by the thumbe, as they ſey.
               For were ye, touchyng condicion (ſaie they)
               The caſtell of honeſtee in all thyngs els.
               Yet ſhoulde this one thyng as their holle tale tels,
               Defoyle and deface that caſtell to a cotage.
               One crop of a tourde marrth a pot of potage.
               And ſome to this, crye, let hym pas, for we thynke,
               The more we ſtur a tourde, the wours it will ſtynke.
               With many condicions good, one that is yll,
               Defaceth the floure of all, and dothe all ſpyll.
               Nowe (quoth I) if you thynke they truely clatter,
               Let your amendement amende the matter.
               Half warnd half armd. this warnīg for this I ſhow,
               He that hath an yll name, is halfe hangd. ye know.
            
            
               ¶The .vii chapiter.
               VVell ſaied (ſaied he) mary ſyr here is a tale,
               For honeſtee, meete to ſet the dyuell on ſale.
               But nowe am I forſt, a bead roll to vnfolde,
               To tell ſomwhat more to the tale I erſt tolde.
               Grow this, as moſt part doth, I durſt holde my lyfe,
               Of the ielouſy of dame Iulok my wyfe,
               Than ſhall ye wonder, whan truth dothe define,
               Howe ſhe can, and dothe here, bothe bite and whine.
               
                  Franſy, hereſy, and ielouſy are three,
               That men ſaie hardly or neuer cured be.
               And all though ielouſy nede not or boote not,
               What helpeth that counſell, if reaſon roote not.
               And in madde ielouſy ſhe is ſo farre gon,
               She thynkth I roon ouer all, that I looke on.
               Take good hede of that (quoth I) for at a worde,
               The prouerbe ſaieth, he that ſtriketh with the ſworde,
               Shalbe ſtriken with the ſcaberde. Tuſhe (quoth he)
               The diuell with my ſcaberde will not ſtrike me,
               But my dame takyng ſuſpicion for full preefe,
               Reporteth it for trouth, to the moſte miſcheefe.
               In words gold and hole, as men by wyt could wiſhe.
               She will lye as faſt as a dogge will lycke a diſhe.
               She is of trouth as fals, as god is trew.
               And if ſhe chaunce to ſee me at a vew
               Kyſſe any of my maides alone, but in ſporte,
               That taketh ſhe in erneſt▪ after Bedleem ſorte.
               The cow is wood. Hir tong ronth on patens.
               If it be morne, we haue a payre of matens.
               If it be euen, euenſong. not latyn nor greeke,
               But englyſhe, and lyke thutas in eaſter weeke.
               She beginneth, fyrſt with a cry a leyſone.
               To whiche ſhe ringth a peale, a larom. ſuche one,
               As folk ring bees wt baſōs. ye world ronth on wheles.
               But except her mayde ſhewe a fayre payre of heles,
               She haleth hir by the booy rope, tyll her brayns ake.
               And bring I home a good diſhe, good chere to make,
               What is this (ſaith ſhe) Good meat (ſaie I) for yow.
               God a mercy hors, a pyg of myne owne ſowe.
               
                  Thus whan I ſe, by kyndneſſe eaſe renewth not,
               And than, that the eie ſeeth not, the herte rewth not,
               And that he muſt nedes go, whō the diuel doth driue,
               Hir fors forſyng me, for myne eaſe to contriue,
               To leat her faſte and freate alone for me,
               I go where mery chat, and good chere maie be.
               Much ſpend I abrode, which at home ſhuld be ſpent,
               If ſhe wolde leaue controllyng, and be content.
               There lepte a whityng (quoth ſhe) and lept in ſtreite.
               Ye ſhall ſtreight here (quoth ſhe) a prety conceite.
               He maketh you beleue, by lyes leyde on by lode,
               My braulyng at home, maketh hym banket abrode.
               Where his bankets abrode, make me braule at home,
               For as in a froſt, a mud wall made of lome
               Cracketh and crummeth in peeces a ſonder,
               So melteth his money, to the worldes wonder.
               Thus maie ye ſe, to tourne the cat in the pan,
               Or ſet the cart before the hors, well he can.
               He is but little at home, the trewth is ſo.
               And forth with hym he will not let me go.
               And if I come to be mery where he is,
               Than is he mad. as ye ſhall here by this.
               Where he with goſſeps at a banket late was,
               At whiche as vſe is, he payde all. but let pas.
               I came to be mery. wherwith meryly,
               Proface. Haue among you blynde harpers (ſayd I.)
               The mo the merier, we all daie here and ſe.
               Ye but the fewer the better fare (ſaied he)
               Then here were, er I came (quoth I) to many.
               Here is littell meate lefte, if there be any.
               
                  And it is yll commyng, I haue harde ſay,
               To thend of a ſhot, and begynnyng of a fray.
               Put vp thy purs (quoth he) thou ſhalt none pay.
               And fray here ſhuld be none, were thou gon thy way.
               Here is, ſyns thou camſt, to many feet a bed.
               Welcom when thou goeſt. thus is thyne errand ſped.
               I come (quoth I) to be one here, if I ſhall,
               It is mery in halle, when berds wag all.
               What byd me welcom pyg. I pray the kys me.
               Nay farewell ſow (quoth he) our lorde blys me
               From baſſyng of beaſts of beare bynder lane,
               I haue (quoth I) for fyne ſuger, fayre rats bane.
               Many yeres ſens, my mother ſeyd to me,
               Hyr elders wold ſaie, it ys better to be
               An olde mans derlyng, then a yong mans werlyng.
               And god knowth, I knew none of this ſnerlyng.
               In my olde huſbands days. for as tenderly,
               He loued me, as ye loue me ſlenderly.
               We drew both by one line. Quoth he, wold to our lord
               Ye had in that drawyng, hangd both in one corde.
               For I neuer meete the at fleſhe nor at fyſhe,
               But I haue ſure a dead mans head in my dyſhe.
               Whoſe beſt and my worſt day, that wiſht myght be,
               Was when thou dydſt bury him, and mary me.
               If you (quoth I) long for chaunge in thoſe caſes,
               Wold to god he and you had chaunged places.
               But beſt I chaunge place. for here I may be ſparde.
               And for my kynde comyng, this is my rewarde.
               Claw a chorle by thars, and he ſhiteth in my hande.
               Knak me that nut. much good doyt you al this band.
               
                  Muſte ſhe not (quoth he) be welcome to vs all,
               Amonge vs all, lettyng ſuche a farewell fall?
               But ſuch carpēters, ſuch chips. Quoth ſhe folke tell,
               Suche lips, ſuch letiſe. ſuche welcom, ſuche farwell.
               Thine own words (quoth he) thyn own welcom mard
               Well (ſaied ſhe) whan ſo euer we twayn haue iard,
               My woords be pryed at narowly, I eſpye.
               Ye can ſee a mote in an other mans iye,
               But ye can not ſee a balke in your owne.
               Ye marke my woords, but not that they be growne.
               By reuellous rydyng on euery royle.
               Well ny euery daie a newe mare or a moyle.
               As muche vnhoneſt. as vnprofitable,
               Whiche ſhall bryng vs ſhortly to be vnable,
               To gyue a dog a lofe. as I haue oft ſayde.
               Howe be it your pleaſure maie no tyme bee denayde.
               But ſtyll you muſt haue, both the fyneſt meate,
               Apparell, and all thyng that money maie geate,
               Lyke one of fonde fancy ſo fyne and ſo neate,
               That wold haue better bread thā is made of wheate.
               The beſt is beſt cheape (quoth he) men ſaie clere.
               Well (quoth ſhe) a man maie bie golde to dere,
               Ye nother care, nor welny caſte what ye paie,
               To bye the dereſt for the beſt alwaie.
               But wyſe men can ſaie, agaynſt hewyng to hye,
               Hewe not to hye, leſt the chyps fall in thyne iye.
               Meaſure is a mery meane, as this dothe ſhow.
               Not to hy for the pye, nor to lowe for the crow.
               The difference betweene ſtaryng, and ſtarke blynde,
               The wyſe man at all tymes to folowe can fynde.
               
                  And ywis an auditour of a meane wyt,
               Maie ſoone accompt, though hereafter come not yet.
               Yet is he ſure be the daie neuer ſo longe,
               Euermore at laſte they ryng to euenſonge.
               And where ye ſpēd much, though ye ſpent but lickell,
               Yet littell and littell the cat eateth the flickell.
               Littell loſſe by length maie growe importable.
               A mouſe in tyme, maie bite a two, a gable.
               Thus to ende of all thyngs, be we leefe or lothe,
               Yet lo the pot ſo longe to the water gothe,
               Tyll at the laſte it comth home broken.
               Fewe woords to the wiſe ſuffiſe to be ſpoken.
               If ye were wiſe, here were ynough (quoth ſhe)
               Here is ynough, and to muche, dame (quoth he)
               For though this appere a propre pulpet peeſe,
               Yet whan the foxe preacheth, than beware our geeſe.
               Thou woldeſt haue me hynch & pynch, like a ſnudge,
               Euery daie to be thy driuell, or thy drudge.
               Not ſo (quoth ſhe) but I wold haue ye ſtur
               Honeſtly, to kepe the wulfe from the dur.
               Ofte ſaied the wiſe man, whom I erſt dyd very,
               Better are meales many, than one to mery.
               Well (quoth he) that is anſwered with this. wyfe.
               Better is one monthes chere, than a churles hole life.
               I thynke it learnyng of a wyſer lectour,
               To lerne to make my ſelfe myne owne exectour.
               Than ſpare for an other, that might wed the,
               As the foole, thy fyrſt huſbande. ſpared for me,
               And as for yll places, thou ſekeſt me in mo,
               And in wors to. than I into any go.
               
                  Wherby this prouerbe ſhewth the in by the weeke.
               No man wyll an other in the ouen ſeeke,
               Except that hym ſelfe haue been there before,
               God gyue grace thou haſt been good. I ſaie no more.
               And wold haue the ſai leſſe. except thou couldſt proue
               Suche proceſſe, as thou ſlaunderouſly doeſt moue.
               For ſclaunder perchaunce (quoth ſhe) I not denye.
               It maie be a ſclaunder, but it is no lye.
               It is a lye (quoth he) and thou a lyer.
               Wyll ye (quoth ſhe) dryue me to touche ye nyer?
               I rub the gald hors back till he winche, and yit.
               He wold make it ſeme, that I touche hym no whit.
               But I wot what I wot, though I few words make,
               Many kyſſe the childe for the nurces ſake.
               Ye haue many godchyldren to looke vpone,
               And ye bleſſe theim all, but ye baſſe but one.
               This half ſhewth, what the holle meanth, yt I meeue.
               Ye fet circumquaques to make me beleeue
               Or thynke, that the moone is made of a grene cheſe.
               And whan ye haue made me a loute in all theſe,
               It ſemeth ye wolde make me go to bed at noone.
               Naie (quoth he) the daie of dome ſhall be doone
               Er thou go to bed at noone, or nyght, for me,
               Thou art, to be playn and not to flatter the,
               As holſome a morſell for my comly cors,
               As a ſhoulder of mutton for a ſycke hors.
               Thou makeſt me claw where it itcheth not. I wold
               Thy toung were coolde to make thy tales more cold.
               That aſpine leafe, ſuch ſpitefull clappyng hath bred,
               That my cap is better at eaſe than my hed.
               
                  God ſende that hed (ſaied ſhe) a better nurs.
               For whan the hed aketh, all the body is the wurs.
               God graunt (quoth I) the hed and body bothe too,
               To nurs eche other, better than they doo,
               Or euer haue doone for the moſte tymes paſte,
               I brought to nurs both (quoth ſhe) had not bē waſte,
               Margery good cowe (quoth he) gaue a good meele,
               But than ſhe caſt it downe agayne with hir heele.
               Howe can her purs for profyte bee delitefull?
               Whoſe perſone and propretees be ſo ſpitefull
               As are thyne. Sure a man were better begge,
               Or ſyt with a roſted appull, or an egge,
               Where his appetite ſerueth hym to bee,
               Than euery daie to fare lyke a duke with the.
               Lyke a duke, lyke a duck (quoth ſhe) thou ſhalt fare,
               Except thou wilt ſpare, more thā thou doſt yet ſpare.
               Thou fareſt to well (quoth he) but thou art ſo wood,
               Thou knowſt not who doth ye harm, who doth ye good
               Yes yes (quoth ſhe) for all thoſe wyſe words vttred,
               I knowe on whiche ſyde my breade is buttred,
               But there will no butter cleaue on my breade.
               And on my breade any butter to be ſpreade,
               Euery promyſe that thou therin doeſt vtter,
               Is as ſure, as it were ſealed with butter.
               Or a mouſe tyed with a threede. Euery good thyng,
               Thou letteſt euen ſlyp, like a wag halter ſlypſtryng.
               But take vp in tyme, or els I proteſt,
               All be not abedde, that ſhall haue yll reſt.
               Nowe go to thy derlyngs, and declare thy greefe.
               Where all thy pleſure is. hop hoore, pype theefe?
            
            
               
               ¶The eyght chapiter.
               VVith this thēs hopt ſhe, wherwith o lord he cride
               What wretch but I, this wretchednes coud bide
               Howe be it in all this wo, I haue no wronge,
               For it onely is all on my ſelfe alonge.
               Where I ſhuld haue bridled hir fyrſt with rough byt,
               To haue made hir chowe on the brydell one fyt,
               For likorous lucre of a little winnyng,
               I gaue hir the bridell at begynnyng.
               And nowe ſhe taketh the brydle in the teeth,
               And runth awaie with it, wherby eche man ſeeth,
               It is (as olde men right well vnderſtande)
               Ill puttyng a naakt ſworde in a mad mans hande.
               She taketh ſuch hert of gras, yt though I maym hir,
               Or kill hir, yet ſhall I neuer reclaym hir,
               She hath (they ſay) been ſtyffe necked euermore.
               And it is yll healyng of an olde ſore.
               This prouerbe prophecied many yeres agone,
               It will not out of the fleſhe, thats bred in the bone.
               What chaunce haue I, to haue a wyfe of ſuche ſorte,
               That will no faute amende, in earneſt nor ſporte,
               A ſmall thyng amyſſe late I dyd eſpy.
               Whiche to make her mende, by a ieſte meryly,
               I ſayde but this, taunt tyuet wyfe, your noſe drops.
               So it maie fall, I wil eate no broweſſe ſops
               This daie. But two daies after this came in vre,
               I had ſorowe to my ſops ynough be ſure.
               Well (quoth I) it is yll ieſtyng on the ſoothe.
               Soth bourd is no bourd, in ought that myrth dooth.
               
                  Suche ieſts could not iuggle hir, were ought amys.
               Nor turne melancoly to myrth. for it is
               No playing with a ſtrawe before an olde cat,
               Euery tryflyng toie age can not laugh at.
               Ye maie walke this waie, but ſure ye ſhall fynde,
               The further ye go, the further behynde.
               Ye ſhoulde conſyder, the woman is olde.
               And what for a whot worde. Sone whot, ſone colde.
               Beare with them, that beare with you. & ſhe is ſcand,
               Not onely the fayreſt floure of your garlande,
               But alſo ſhe is all the fayre floures therof.
               Will ye requite hir than with a tauntyng ſcof?
               Or with any other kynde of vnkyndneſſe?
               Take hede is a fayre thyng. Beware this blyndneſſe.
               Why will ye (quoth he) I ſhall folowe hir will?
               To make me Iohn̄ drawlache, or ſuche a ſnekebill.
               To bryng her ſolas, that bryngth me ſorowe,
               Byr lady, than we ſhall catche byrds to morow.
               A good wife makth a good huſbande (they ſaie)
               That (quoth I) ye maie tourne an other waie.
               To make a good huſbande, make a good wyfe.
               I can no more herein, but god ſtynt all ſtryfe.
               Amen (quoth he) and god a mercy brother,
               I will nowe mende this houſe, and payre an other.
               And that he ment of lykelyhod by his owne.
               For ſo apairde he that, er three yeres were growne,
               That little and little he decayde ſo long,
               Tyll he at length came to buckle and bare thong.
               To diſcharge charge, that neceſſarily grewe,
               There was no more water than the ſhyp drew.
               
                  Suche dryfts draue he, from yll to wars and wars,
               Tyll he was as bare as a byrds ars.
               Money, and money worth, dyd ſo myſſe hym,
               That he had not nowe, one peny to blyſſe hym.
               Whiche foreſeene in this woman wiſely waying,
               That meete was to ſtaie ſomewhat for hir ſtaying,
               To kepe yet one meſſe for Alyſon in ſtore.
               She kepte one bag, that he had not ſene before.
               A poore cooke that maie not licke his owne fyngers.
               But about hir at home now ſtill he lyngers.
               Not checker a boord, all was not clere in the coſte,
               He lookt lyke one, that had beſhyt the roſte.
               But whether any ſecrete tales were ſprynklyng,
               Or that he by geſſe had got an ynklyng
               Of hir hoord. or that he thought to amende,
               And tourne his yll begynnyng to a good ende.
               In ſhewyng hym ſelfe a newe man, as was feet,
               That appered ſhortly after, but not yeet.
            
            
               ¶The nynthe chapiter.
               ONe daie in their arbour, which ſtode ſo to myne,
               That I might, and did cloſely myn eare inclyne,
               And likewiſe caſt myne eie to here and ſee,
               What they ſaied and dyd, where they could not ſe me.
               He vnto hir a goodly tale began,
               More lyke a wooer, than a weddyd man,
               As farre as matter therof therin ſerued,
               But the fyrſt part from wordes of wooyng ſwerued.
               And ſtode vpon repentance, with ſubmiſſion,
               Of his former croked vnkynde condicion.
               
                  Pray
                     ••
                  g hir, to forgeue and forget all free,
               And he forgaue hir, as he forgeuen wold bee.
               Louyng hir now, as he full depely ſwore,
               As whotly, as euer he loued hir before.
               Well well (quoth ſhe) what euer ye now ſaie,
               It is to late to call agayne yeſterdaie.
               Wyfe (quoth he) ſuche maie my diligence ſeeme.
               That thoffence of yeſterdaie I mai redeeme.
               God taketh me as I am, and not as I was.
               Take you me ſo to, and let all thyngs paſt pas.
               I praie the good wife, thynk I ſpeke & thynk playne.
               What, he ronth far, that neuer turnth agayne.
               Ye be yong ynough to mende, I agree it.
               But I am (quoth ſhe) to olde to ſee it.
               And mende ye or not, I am to olde a yeere.
               What is lyfe? where lyuyng is extincte cleere.
               Namely at olde yeres of leaſt helpe and moſte nede.
               But no tale coulde tune you, in tyme to take hede.
               If I tune my ſelfe now (quoth he) it is fayre.
               And hope of true tune, ſhall tune me from diſpaire.
               Beleue well and haue well. men ſaie. Ye. ſaied ſhee,
               Doo well and haue well. men ſaie alſo, we ſee.
               But what man can beleue, that man can doo well.
               Who of no man will counſell take or here tell.
               Whiche to you, whan any man any waie tryde,
               Than were ye deafe. ye coulde not here on that ſyde.
               Who euer with you any tyme therin weares,
               He muſt bothe tell you a tale and fynde you eares.
               You had on your harueſt eares, thycke of heryng.
               But this is a queſtion of olde enqueryng,
               
                  Who is ſo deafe, or ſo blynde, as is hee,
               That wilfully will nother here nor ſee.
               Whan ye ſawe your maner, my harte for wo, molte,
               Than wold ye mende, as the fletcher mends his bolt.
               Or as ſowre ale mendthe in ſommer, I know,
               And knew, whiche waie the wynde blew, & will blow.
               Though not to my profite, a prophete was I.
               I prophecied this, to true a prophecy.
               Whan I was right yll beleued, and worſe harde.
               By flynging frō your folkes at home, which al mard▪
               
               Whan I ſaied in ſemblaunce either colde or warme,
               A man far from his good, is nye his harme.
               Or wylde ye to looke, that ye loſte no more,
               On ſuche as ſhew, that hungry flyes byte ſore,
               Than wold ye loke ouer me, with ſtomake ſwolne,
               Lyke as the deuill lookt ouer Lyncolne.
               The deuill is deade wife (quoth he) for ye ſee.
               I loke lyke a lambe, in all your words to mee.
               Looke as ye lyſt now (quoth ſhe) thus lookt ye than,
               And for thoſe lookes I ſhewe this, to ſhewe ech man,
               Suche profe of this prouerbe, as none is gretter,
               Which ſaith, that ſome man maie ſteale a hors better,
               Than ſome other maie ſtande and loke vpone.
               Leude huſwiues might haue words. but I not one
               That might be alowde. But nowe if ye looke,
               In myſtakyng me, ye maie ſee, ye tooke
               The wrong waie to wood, & the wrong ſow by theare
               And therby in the wronge boxe to thriue ye weare.
               I haue herde ſome, to ſome tell this tale not feelde,
               Whan thr
                     •
                  ft is in the towne, ye be in the feelde.
               But contrary, you made that ſence to ſowne,
               Whan thryfte was in the feelde, ye were in the towne.
               
                  Feelde ware might ſynke or ſwym, while ye had eny,
               Towne ware was your ware, to tourne the peny.
               But towne or feelde, where moſt thryfte dyd appere.
               What ye wan in thundred, ye loſt in the ſhere.
               In all your good huſbandry, thus ryd the rocke,
               Ye ſtumbled at a ſtrawe, and lept ouer a blocke.
               So many kynds of encreaſe you had in choyce,
               And nought increaſe nor kepe, howe can I reioyce?
               For as folke haue a ſaying, both olde and trew,
               In that they ſaie, blacke will take none other hew,
               So maie I ſaie here, to my deepe dolour,
               It is a bad cloth, that will take no colour.
               This caſe is yours. For ye were neuer ſo wiſe,
               To take ſpecke of colour, of good aduiſe.
               Thaduiſe of all frends I ſaie, one and other
               Went in at the tone eare, and out at the tother.
               And as thoſe words went out, this prouerbe in came.
               He that will not be ruled by his owne dame,
               Shall be ruled by his ſtepdame, and ſo yow,
               Hauyng loſt our owne good, and owne frends now,
               Maie ſeke your foreyn frends. if you haue any,
               And ſure one of my great greefes, amonge many,
               Is, that ye haue been ſo veraie a hog,
               To my frends. What man, loue me, loue my dog.
               But you, to caſt precious ſtones before hogs,
               Caſt my good before a ſorte of curre dogs.
               And ſawte bitches. Whiche by whom now deuoured,
               And your honeſtee amonge theim defloured,
               And that ye maie no more expence afoorde,
               Nowe can they not afoorde you one good worde.
               
                  And you theim as fewe. And olde folke vnderſtood,
               Whan theues fall out, true men come to their good.
               Whiche is not alwaie true. For in all that bretche,
               I can no ferthyng of my good the more fetche.
               Nor I trow theim ſelfes neither. if they were ſworne.
               Lyght come lyght go. And ſure ſens we were borne,
               Ruine of one rauyn, was there none gretter.
               For by your gyfts, they be as little the better,
               As you be muche the worſe. and I caſt awaie.
               An yll wynde, that blowth no man to good, men ſaie.
               Wel (quoth he) euery wind blowth not down the corn
               I hope (I ſaie) good hap be not all out worn.
               I will nowe begyn thryft, whan thrifte ſemeth gone.
               What wyfe, there be mo waies to the wood than one.
               And I will aſſaie all the waies to the wood,
               Tyll I fynde one waie, to get agayne this good.
               Ye will get it agayn (quoth ſhe) I feare,
               As ſhortely as a hors will lycke his eare.
               The douche man ſaieth, that ſeggyng is good cope.
               Good words brīg not euer of good dedes good hope
               And theſe words ſhew your words ſpoken in ſcorne.
               It pricketh betymes that will be a good thorne.
               Tymely crookth the tree, that wil a good camok bee.
               And ſuche begynnyng ſuche ende. we all daie ſee.
               Now you by me at begynnyng beyng thriuen,
               And than to kepe thrift could not be prickt nor driuen
               Howe can ye now get thrifte, the ſtocke beyng gon?
               Whiche is thonely thyng to reyſe thryft vpon.
               Men ſaie, he maie yll renne, that can not go,
               And your gayn, without your ſtocke, renueth euen ſo.
               
                  For what is a workeman, without his tooles.
               Tales of Robyn hoode are good among fooles.
               He can yll pype, that lackth his ouer lyp.
               Who lackth a ſtocke, his gayne is not woorth a chyp.
               A tale of a tub, your tale no truthe auowth,
               Ye ſpeake nowe, as ye wolde creepe into my mowth.
               In pure peynted proceſſe, as falſe as fayre,
               Howe ye will amende, whan ye can not appayre.
               But agaynſt gaie gloſers this rude text recites,
               It is not all butter, that the cowe ſhites.
               Your tale hath lyke taſte, where temprance is taſter,
               To breake my head, and than gyue me a plaſter.
               Now thrifte is gone, now wold ye thryue in all haſte.
               And whan ye had thryfte, ye had lyke haſte to waſte.
               Ye lyked than better an ynche of your wyll,
               Than an ell of your thrifte. Wyfe (quoth he) be ſtyll.
               Maie I be holpe foorth one ynche at this pynche,
               I will yet thriue (I ſaie) As good is an ynche
               As an ell. Ye can (quoth ſhe) make it ſo, well.
               For whan I gaue you an ynche, ye tooke an ell.
               Tyll both ell and ynche be gone, and we in det.
               Nay (quoth he) with a wet fynger ye can fet,
               As muche as maie eaſily all this matter eaſe,
               And this debate alſo pleaſauntly appeaſe.
               I coulde doo as muche with an hundred poūde now,
               As with a thouſande afore, I aſſure yow.
               Ye (quoth ſhe) who had that he hath not, wolde
               Doo that he dooth not, as olde men haue tolde.
               Had I, as ye haue, I wolde doo more (quoth hee)
               Than the preeſt ſpake of on ſondaie, ye ſhulde ſee.
               
                  Ye doo, as I haue (quoth ſhe) for nought I haue,
               And nought ye do. What man, I trowe ye raue.
               Wolde ye bothe eate your cake, and haue your cake?
               Ye haue had of me all that I might make.
               And bee a man neuer ſo greedy to wyn,
               He can haue no more of the foxe but the ſkyn.
               Well (quoth he) if ye lyſt to bryng it out,
               Ye can geue me your bleſſyng in a clout.
               That were for my childe, (quoth ſhe) had I ony,
               But huſbande, I haue neither childe, nor mony.
               Ye caſt and coniecture this muche lyke in ſhow,
               As the blind man caſts his ſtaffe, or ſhootes the crow.
               Howbeit had I money right muche, and ye none,
               Yet to be playne, ye ſhulde haue none, for Ione.
               Naie, he that firſte flattreth me, as ye haue doone.
               And dooeth as ye dyd to me after, ſo ſoone,
               He maie be in my Pater noſter in dede.
               But be ſure, he ſhall neuer come in my Crede.
               Aue Maria (quoth he) howe muche mocion
               Here is to praiers, with howe little deuocion.
               But ſome men ſaie, no peny no Pater noſter.
               I ſaie to ſuche (ſaied ſhe) no longer foſter
               No longer lemman. But fayre and well than,
               Praie and ſhifte eche one for hym ſelfe, as he can.
               Euery man for hym ſelfe, and god for vs all.
               To thoſe words he ſaid nought, but forthwt dyd fall,
               From harpīg on that ſtryng, to fayre flattring ſpech.
               And as I erſt ſaied, he dyd her ſo beſech,
               That thyngs erſt ſo far of, were nowe ſo far on,
               That as ſhe maie walow, awaie ſhe is gon,
               
                  Where all that was lefte laie with a truſty frende,
               Dwellyng a good walke from hir at the towns ende.
               And backe agayn ſtreight a haltyng pace ſhe hobles.
               Bryngyng a bag of royals and nobles.
               All that ſhe had, without reſtraynt of one iote.
               She brought bullocks noble. for noble or grote,
               Had ſhe not one mo. Whiche I after well knew.
               And anon ſmylyng, towarde hym as ſhe drew,
               A ſyr, lyght burdeyn far heuy (quoth ſhe)
               This lyght burdeyn in long walke welny tierth me.
               God gyue grace, I playe not the foole this daie.
               For here I ſende thaxe after the helue awaie.
               But yf ye will ſtynt, and auoyde all ſtryfe,
               Loue and cheryſhe this as ye wolde my lyfe.
               I wyll (quoth he) wyfe, by god almyghty.
               This geare comth euen in puddyng tyme ryghtly.
               He ſnatcht at the bag. No haſt but good (quoth ſhee)
               Short ſhootyng leeſeth your game, ye maie ſee.
               Ye myſt the cuſhyn, for all your haſte to it.
               And I maie ſet you beſyde the cuſhyn yit,
               And make ye wype your noſe vpon your ſleeue,
               For ought ye ſhall wyn without ye axe me leeue.
               Haue ye not herde tell, all couet all leeſe?
               Ah ſyr, I ſe, ye maie ſee no greene cheſe,
               But your teeth muſte water. A good coknay coke.
               Though ye loue not to bye the pyg in the poke,
               Yet ſnatche ye at the poke, that the pyg is in,
               Not for the poke, but the pyg good chepe to wyn.
               Lyke one halfe loſt, tyll gredy graſpyng gat it,
               Ye wolde be ouer the ſtyle, or ye come at it.
               
                  But abyde frend, your mother byd tyll ye wer borne.
               Snatchyng wynth it not. if ye ſnatche tyll to morne.
               Men ſaie (ſaied he) long ſtandyng & ſmall offryng
               Maketh poore parſons. & in ſuch ſignes & proffryng
               Many praty tales, and mery toys had they,
               Before this bag came fully from hir awey.
               Howbeit, at laſte ſhe tooke it hym, and ſayde,
               He ſhulde beare it, for that it nowe heuy wayde.
               With good will wyfe. for it is (ſayde he to her)
               A proude hors that wil not beare his own prouāder.
               And ofte before ſeemed ſhe neuer ſo wyſe,
               Yet was ſhe nowe, ſodeynly waxen as nyſe
               As it had been a halporth of ſyluer ſpoones.
               Thus cloudy mornyngs turne to clere after noones.
               But ſo nye noone it was, that by and by,
               They roſe, and went to dyner louyngly.
            
            
               ¶The tenthe chapiter.
               THis diner thought he long. & ſtreight after that,
               To his accuſtomed cuſtomers he gat.
               With whome in what tyme he ſpent one grote before,
               In leſſe tyme he ſpendth now, ten grotes or more.
               And in ſmall tyme he brought the worlde ſo about,
               That he brought the bottom of the bag cleane out.
               His gaddyng thus agayne made hir yll content,
               But ſhe not ſo muche as dreamd that all was ſpent.
               Howe be it ſodeynly ſhe mynded on a daie,
               To picke the cheſt locke, wherin this bag laie.
               Determynyng this. if it laie whole ſtyll,
               So ſhall it lye, no myte ſhe minyſhe will.
               
                  And if the bag began to ſhrynke, ſhe thought beſt,
               To take for hir part, ſome parte of the reſt.
               But ſtreight as ſhe had forthwith opened the locke,
               And lookt in the bag, what it was a clocke,
               Than was it proued true, as this prouerbe gothe,
               He that cometh laſt to the pot, is ſooneſt wrothe.
               By hir comyng laſte, and to late to the pot.
               Wherby ſhe was potted, thus lyke a ſot,
               To ſee the pot bothe ſkymd for rennyng ouer,
               And alſo all the lykour renne at rouer.
               At hir good huſbands and hir next meetyng,
               The diuels good grace might haue geuē a greetyng.
               Eyther for honour or honeſtee as good
               As ſhe gaue him: She was (as they ſai) horne wood.
               In no place coulde ſhe ſitte, hir ſelfe to ſettyll.
               It ſeemd to hym, ſhe had pyſt on a nettyll.
               She nettlyd hym, and he rattled hir ſo,
               That at ende of that fraie, a ſunder they go.
               And neuer after came togyther agayne.
               He turnde hir out at durs, to graſe on the playne.
               And hym ſelf went after. For within fortnyght,
               All that was lefte, was launched out quight.
               And thus had he brought haddock to paddock,
               Tyll they bothe were not now worth a haddock.
               It hath been ſayde, nede maketh the olde wyfe trot.
               Other folke ſayde it, but ſhe dyd it. god wot.
               Fyrſt from frende to frende, & than from dur to dur,
               A beggyng to ſome that had begged of hur.
               But as men ſaie, miſery maie be mother,
               Where one begger is dryuen to beg of an other.
               
                  And thus ware, and waſted this moſt woful wretche.
               Tyll death from this lyfe, dyd her wretchedly fetche.
               Her late huſband, and now wydower, here and there
               Wandryng about few knowe, and fewer care where.
               Caſt out as an abiect, he leadeth his lyfe,
               Tyll famyne by lyke, fet hym after his wyfe.
               Nowe let vs note here. Fyrſt of the firſt twayne,
               Where they bothe wedded togyther, to remayne,
               Hopyng ioyfull preſence ſhulde weare out all wo.
               Yet pouertee brought that ioye to ieofayle, lo.
               But notably note theſe laſt twayne where as hee
               Tooke hir onely, for that he ryche would bee.
               And ſhe hym onely in hope of good happe,
               In hir dotyng daies to be daunſt on the lappe,
               In condicion they differd ſo many waies,
               That lyghtly he layde hir vp for holy daies.
               Hir good he layde vp ſo, leſt theues myght ſpie it,
               That nother ſhe coulde, nor he can come by it.
               Thus failed all foure of all thyngs leſſe and more,
               Whyche they all, or any of all, maryed fore.
            
            
               The leuenthe chapiter.
               FOrſothe (ſayd my frend) this matter maketh boſt,
               Of dimmucion. For here is a myll poſte
               Thwitten to a puddyng pricke ſo neerely,
               That I confeſſe me diſcouraged cleerely,
               In bothe my weddyngs, in all thyngs excepte one.
               This ſparke of hope haue I, to procede vpone.
               Though theſe, and ſome other ſped yll as ye tell,
               Yet other haue lyued and loued full well.
               
                  If I ſhuld deny that (quoth I) I ſhulde raue.
               For of bothe theſe ſorts, I grant, that my ſelfe haue
               Sene of the tone ſorte, and herde of the tother.
               That lyked and lyued right well, eche with other.
               But whether fortune will you, that man declare.
               That ſhall chooſe in this choice, your comfort or care
               Sens, before ye haue choſen, we can not know,
               I thought to laie the worſt, as ye the beſt ſhow.
               That ye myght, beyng yet at libertee,
               With all your ioye, ioyne all your ieoperdee.
               And nowe this herde, in theſe caſes on eche parte,
               I ſaie no more, but laie your hande on your harte.
               I hertily thanke you (quoth he) I am ſped
               Of myne errande. This hitteth the nayle on the hed.
               Who that leaueth ſuretee, and leaneth to chaunce,
               Whan fooles pipe, by auctoritee he maie daunce.
               And ſure am I, of thoſe twayne, if I none chooſe,
               Although I nought wyn, yet ſhall I nought looſe.
               And to wyn a woman here, and loſe a man,
               In all this great wynnyng, what gayn wyn I than?
               But marke how folly hath me awaie caried.
               Howe lyke a wethercock haue I here varied.
               Fyrſt theſe two women to looſe I was ſo lothe,
               That yf I myght, I wolde haue wedded them bothe.
               Than thought I ſens, to haue wedded one of theim.
               And nowe knowe I clere, I wyll wed none of theim.
               They bothe ſhall haue this one anſwere by letter,
               As good neuer a whit as neuer the better.
               Now let me axe (quoth I) and your ſelf anſwere
               The ſhorte queſtion, that I aſked whyle ere.
               
                  Afoule olde riche widowe, whether wed wold ye,
               Or a yonge fayre mayde, beyng poore as ye be.
               In neither barrell better hearryng (quoth hee)
               I lyke thus, ryches as yll as pouertee.
               Who that hath either of theſe pygs in vre,
               He hath a pygge of the worſe panier ſure.
               I was wedded vnto my will. howe be it,
               I will be deuorſt, and be wedde to my wit.
               Wherby with theſe examples paſte, I maie ſee,
               Fonde weddyng, for loue, or good onely, to flee.
               Onely for loue, or onely for good,
               Or onely for bothe. I wedde not, by my hood.
               Thus no one thyng onely, though one thyng chiefly
               Shall woo me to wed now, for now I eſpy,
               Although the chiefe one thyng in weddyng bee loue,
               Yet muſt mo thyngs ioyne, as all in one maie moue
               Suche kynde of lyuyng, for ſuche kynde of lyfe,
               As, lackyng the ſame, no lacke to lacke a wyfe.
               Here is enough, I am ſatisfied (ſayde he.)
               Sens enough is enough (ſayd I) here maie we,
               With that one word take end good, as maie be geaſt.
               For folke ſay, enough is as good as a feaſt.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            ¶IMPRINTED at London in Fleteſtrete by Thomas Berthelet prynter to the kynges hyghneſſe.
            
               Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum. ANNO. M.D.XLVI.
            
            
            
         
      
   