
      
         
            
            
            A
MOST STRANGE
and wonderfull Herring, taken on
the 26. day of Nouember 1597. neere vnto
Drenton ſometime the old and chiefe
Cittie of the kingdome of
Norway.
            
               Hauing on the one ſide the picture of two
armed men fighting, and on the other moſt
ſtrange Characters, as in the picture
is here expreſſed.
            
               Firſt printed in Dutch at Roterdam by Ian van
Doetecum. And now tranſlated into
Engliſh.
            ¶Repent, for the kingdome of God
is at hand.
            
               I W
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            LONDON
Imprinted by Iohn Wolfe.
1598.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A moſt ſtrange &
wonderfull Herring taken on the
26. day of Nouember 1597. neere vnto Drenton,
ſometime the old and chiefe Cittie of the
kingdome of Norway, hauing on the one
ſide the picture of two armed men
fighting, & on the other moſt
ſtrange characters: as in
the picture is
expreſſed.
Repent for the kingdome of God is at hand.
            
               THe Lord God of heauen, the moſt
righteous and mightie iudge of
the world, neuer intends to inflict
plagues or puniſhmentes on any
Countrey, Cittie, or nation, but
firſt it pleaſeth him of his vnſpeakeable
mercie, to forewarne
the ſame countrey, cittie, or nation
thereof, by the mouthes of his Prophets, and other miniſters
of his worde, or elſe by his wonderfull ſignes and
tokens ſhewed in the heauens, the earth, or other his
creatures, that thereby the people may be induced to forſake
their former wickedneſſe, and to learne amendment
and newneſſe of life. Examples hereof we haue in Geneſis,
how many tokens of his wrath did the Lord ſhew vnto
Pharao, before his deſtruction in the red ſea? Likewiſe
before Sodome was conſumde with fire from heauen, it
is written that Abraham had knowledge thereof, and
intreated the Lord to ſpare it: but ſuch were the ſinnes of
that curſed Cittie, that his prayers could not preuaile. Againe,
more then the ſpace of an hundred yeares before the

waters drownd the worlde, had Noah warning to build ye
Arke, and long it was ere hee finiſhed that worke, inſomuch
that the children of men made a ſcorne thereof, and
ſo farre were they from grace, that no warning at all they
tooke thereby. The Niniuites hauing warning repented
at the preaching of Ionas: but Ieruſalem was nothing
moued though Chriſt Ieſus himſelfe foretold their deſtruction:
for which cauſe ſorrow came vpon them as vpon a
woman when ſhe trauelleth. The ſigns and tokens which
the Lord ſent ouer that Cittie before their fall were many
and maruelleus, notwithſtanding they perſiſted in their
ſinnes, and flattering themſelues in their owne follies,
made falſe interpretations of thoſe prodigious wonders.
Séeing then that as the Apoſtle ſaith, that whatſoeuer is
written, is written for our learning, let all Chriſtians
take warning hereby, not ieſtingly to ioyne themſelues
together (as they did in the old world) to deride or falſely
to interpret the dreadfull tokens ſent among vs, leſt with
them of Ieruſalem deſtruction do ſuddenly come vpon vs.
I haue here to ſhew you a ſtrange and wonderfull token
of Gods wrath figured forth in a ſilly Herring, in which
ſmal fiſh he doth demonſtrate great and dreadfull matters
as by the picture you may perceiue: on the one ſide whereof
you may plainely behold the perfect ſhape of two armed
men, the one hauing in his hand a launce, the other a
ſword, cloſe buckled in their corſlets, with burgancts on
their heades, ſtanding as it were in their defence, threatning
and aſſayling one another. I know that many will
giue as ſmall credit hereunto, and as ſleightly eſteeme
thereof as Pharao did of the flies, & the Iewes of Chriſts
miracles: notwithſtanding the Lord hath choſen the fooliſh
thinges of this world to confound the wiſe, and the
weake to ouercome the mighty, as he himſelfe hath expreſſed
in his holy Goſpell. Moreouer there was toward
the taile of this Herring the right portraiture of two
rods, the one farre bigger then the other, ſeeming to bee

bound together with two ſtrong bandes apéece, which
euery man muſt confeſſe to bee the vndoubted ſigne of
dreadfull correction: according as the Pſalmiſt ſpeaketh,
ſaying: Thou ſhalt bruſe them with a rod of Iron, and
breake them in peeces like a Potters veſſell. In ſcripture
ſword and peſtilence is ſaid to be the ſcourges of the
Lord: and therefore that cruel and bloody tyrant Tamberlaine
did iuſtly call himſelfe the ſcourge of God, by whom
he corrected the proud, rebellious and wicked world: bringing
by bloody wars many kingdomes into his ſubiection.
If we enter then into due conſideration hereof, and with
the eyes of grace behold the ſame, we cannot but confeſſe,
that the righteous Lord hath ſent theſe ſignes vnto vs, to
forewarne vs of our wickedneſſe, leaſt by the ſharpe correcting
rods of Gods wrath wee be moſt iuſtly puniſhed
with ſword and famine. But now behold on the other ſide
of this Herring, were fiue Characters moſt perfectly ingrauen,
ſome of them vſual, and wel knowne among vs at
this day, others ſtrange and not vnderſtood: but what the
God of all power and might will giue hereby to be known
is left to better iudgement, notwithſtanding let vs remember,
that as it once pleaſed God by the finger of his
power to write on the wall a heauie ſentence againſt Balthaſar,
ſo hath it pleaſed him at this preſent to write
on this Herring vndoubtedly a heauie ſentence againſt
the ſinnes of this age, thereby to call this drowſie worlde
out of the damnable ſléepe of ſinne and wickednes, wherein
it hath ſlugged ſo long a time. Then what is he that
ſéeing the ſame, and dreading the hot vengeance of the
Lord, will not be inforced with Balthaſar to ſhake and
tremble at the grieuous iudgements which is therby likely
to bee threatned: if Balthaſar being a heathen King,
ſhooke ſo ſore at the handwriting on the wall, wel may all
Chriſtians harts ſhake to ſée, and there withall to conſider
what fearefull ſentence may vpon the Herring be engrauen.
When our Sauiour Chriſt did write vpon the

ground, before thoſe that accuſed the woman of adulterie,
her accuſers were therby ſo confounded in conſcience, that
for very ſhame they ſlipt away out of his ſight: how much
more then may we be confounded at the ſight & interpretation
of theſe ſtrange characters, which the Lord hath
not written on the ground in the duſt of the earth, but in
the very meat which we ſhould eat, thereby (as it were)
laying his indgements in our diſhes, at euery meale to be
remembred. For who is ignorant that among the fiſhes
of the ſea, there is none ſo common at our table as the
Herring, no fiſh more vſed in any land, nor better knowne
among all ſorts of people: whereby it is iuſtly to be gathered,
that the Lord hath ſent it for a generall warning vnto
his people: the Lord grant our heartes may be moued
thereby. Moreouer, this Herring was full fouretéene
inches in length: importing (as I coniecture) that this
iudgement threatned againſt the world for ſinne is an extraordinarie
and no vſuall iudgement, but ſuch as the eyes
of men haue ſeldome or neuer ſéene: beſides, the markes
were all of red and bloody colour. The Lord for Chriſtes
ſake be merciful vnto vs, & giue vs grace with ſuch repenting
harts to turne from our ſinnes, that he may turne his
iuſt wrath from vs. This Herring among a number of
others was taken on the 26. day of Nouemb. 1597. néer
vnto Drenton, ſometime the ancient and chiefe Cittie of
the kingdome of Norway. And after it was ſhewen to diuers
of the nobility, & magiſtrates of that countrey. The
portraiture thereof & admonition was firſt printed in Roterdam,
by Iohn van Doetec
                     •
                  m in the Dutch tongue, &
out of the ſame language tranſlated into Engliſh, for the
profite and inſtruction of our countrey people. The Lord
God Almighty giue vs grace to watch and waite for the
comming of the heauenly brydegroome, that being decked
and attired in the true wedding garment of Chriſtes righteouſnes,
we may enter with him to the heauenly banket,
there to raigne in his glorious kingdome for euermore,
Amen.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
            
               
            
            
         
      
   