
      
         
            
            
            
            
            
               ❧ An hundred Epigrammes. Inuented and made by John Heywood.
            
               Anno Chriſti. M. D. L.
         
         
            
            ¶ To the reader.
            
               RYme without reaſon, and reaſon without ryme
               In this conuercion depe diffrence dooeth fall.
               In firſt parte wherof where I am falne this tyme,
               The foly I graunt, whiche graunted (readers all)
               Your graunt, to grannt this requeſt require I ſhall,
               Ere ye full reiecte theſe trifl
                     •
                  s folowyng here
               Perceiue (I praie you) of the woordes thententes clere.
            
            
               ¶ In whiche (maie ye lyke to looke) ye ſhall eſ
                     •
                  ie
               Some woordes, ſhewe one ſenſe, another to diſcloſe,
               Some woordes them ſelues ſondrie ſenſes ſignifie:
               Some woordes, ſomwhat from common ſence, I diſpoſe,
               To ſeeme one ſenſe in text, another in gloſe.
               Theſe words in this work, thus wrought your workyng toole,
               Maie woorke me to ſeeme (at leaſt) the les a foole.
            
            
               ¶ Than in rough rude termes of homely honeſtee,
               (For vnhoneſt terme (I truſte) there non
                     •
                   here ſoundes)
               Wherin fine tender eares ſhall offended bee,
               Thoſe folies, beyng ſercht in reaſons boundes,
               Reaſon maie bee ſurgin in ſaluyng thoſe woundes,
               
                  
                     ••••
                  yng thoſe ſores to ſalues: for reaſon dooeth geſſe,
               Homly matters, homly termes dooe beſt expreſſe.
            
            
               ¶ But where all defence ſtandth in exempcion
               To defend me her in out of folies bandes,
               So that to redeeme me thers no redempcion.
               
                  
                     •
                  rauntyng and ſubmittyng foly, that ſo ſtandes,
               This laſt refuge I craue to haue, at your handes,
               Thoſe folies 
                     ••
                  an
                     •
                  yng clere from intent of yll.
               In lieu or lacke of good wit, accept good wyll,
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The table of this booke.
            
               ¶ The preface to the reder.
               An epigramme on this booke of epigrammes. i.
               Of three ſages. ii.
               Queſtions an
                     •
                  wered. iii.
               Of water wyne and ale. iiii.
               To muche or to littell. v.
               Of the ſenſes. vi.
               Of talkyng. vii.
               Of heares and wittes. viii.
               A dronkerd ix,
               The foxe and the mayde. x.
               Of an yll gouernour called Iude xi.
               Vpon geuyng an almes. xii.
               Of a ſurfet. xiii.
               Repugnancie in apparance. xiiii.
               The ape and the aſſe. xv.
               A foole and a wyſe man. xvi.
               Of ſight xvii.
               F
                     •
                  igned newes. xviii.
               Two arme in arme xix.
               Of heryng and ſpeakyng. xx.
               Of witte, will, and wiſedome xxi.
               The wrenne and hyr birdes. xxii.
               The maſter and his man xxiii.
               Vpon penance. xxiiii.
               Iacke and his father. xxv.
               Of a dawe. xxvi.
               Of aſkyng and ſhewyng the way. xxvii.
               
                  A quiet neighbour. xxviii.
               Of dogges and theues. xxix.
               A keper of the commaundementes. xxx.
               Of a noſe. xxxi.
               Lettyng of a ferme. xxxii.
               Age and youth. xxxiii.
               A roſe and a nettill. xxxiiii.
               Of the wifes and hir huſbandes waſt. xxxv.
               An old wyues boone. xxxvi.
               A talke of two conies. xxxvii.
               A priſoner. xxxviii.
               Two blynd men. xxxix
               Debilitee of ſenſes. xl.
               A fooliſhe huſband. xli.
               A witty wyfe. xlii.
               Hanſom handlyng. xliii.
               A ſaiyng of Patche, my lord Cardinals foole. xliiii.
               Certaine folies. xlv.
               Of two ſtudents. xlvi.
               A mery woman. xlvii.
               A lowſe and a flea. xlviii.
               Of him that forgat his Pater noſter in Latine. xlix.
               Of him that could not learne his Pater noſter in engliſhe. l.
               Of the fiſt and the hert. li.
               Of this word, enough, lii.
               Of table plaie. liii.
               The cock and the hen. liiii.
               Chepenyng a face of furre. lv.
               
                  Biyng of ſhooes. lvi.
               A ſuſpicion clered. lvii.
               Of ſpite. lviii.
               Of the letter H. lix.
               Ill fleeyng of Idilneſſe. lx.
               A toong and a clock. lxi.
               A herer of a ſermon. lxii.
               A man without witte, ſtrengh, and cunnyng. lxiii.
               How to wiſſhe. lxiiii.
               A doubtfull demaund of choyſe. lxv.
               An olde wydower, and a yong maide. lxvi.
               Gapyng oyſters. lxvii.
               The iudge and the iuggler. lxviii.
               Of lookyng. lxix.
               Of conſtancie. lxx.
               Of a face and a witte. lxxi.
               Of blowing. lxxii.
               To the flatterer. lxxiii.
               Of contentacion. lxxiiii.
               Of waityng. lxxv.
               Of foreknowlage. lxxvi.
               The ſame impugned without chaunge of woordes, except. iiii. or fiue.
               Miſtakyng an errand. lxxvii.
               Of kepyng an Inne. lxxviii.
               A wiues defence of hir betill brow. lxxix.
               The ſhrewde wyues toonge. lxxx.
               A fooles tonge. lxxxi.
               Of glaſſe and lattiſe. lxxxii.
               
                  Tow wiſſhes for two maner of mouthes. lxxxiii.
               Of diſprayſe. lxxxiiii.
               A diſcharge from hypocriſie. lxxxv.
               Of the foole and the gentilmans noſe. lxxxvi.
               A foole taken for wyſe. lxxxvii.
               Thinges to forbeare. lxxxviii.
               Of medlers. lxxxix.
               Of dwellyng. xc.
               Of the milner and the ſexten. xci.
               Of bookes and cheeſe. xcii.
               Of heades. xciii.
               The woodcock and the dawe. xciiii.
               Of fewe woordes. xcv.
               Wotyng and wening. xcvi.
               The ſame otherwyſe. 
               A muche lyke mattier. xcvii.
               Wyſedom and foly. xcviii.
               Of lacke. xcix.
               The whethercock, the reede, and the wynde. C.
            
            The ende of the table.
         
      
      
         
            
            An Epigramme on this boke
            of Epigrammes. I.
            
               THis booke maie ſeeme, as it ſorteth in ſute,
               A thin trym trencher to ſerue folke at frute:
               But caruer or reader can no waie wyn,
               To cut frute theron, or compt frute therin.
            
         
         
            Of three ſages. II.
            
            
               ¶ Three maner ſages nature doeth deuyſe,
               The ſage her
                     •
                  e, the ſage foole, and the ſage wyſe,
               And who for moſte wyle hym ſelfe doeth accept,
               Maie matche any ſage, the ſage wyſe except.
            
         
         
            Queſtions aunſwered. III.
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        ¶ Truſt thet any,
                        That truſte not many?
                     
                      ye.
                  
                  
                     
                        Pleaſe they any,
                        That ſerue many?
                     
                      Nay.
                  
                  
                     
                        Helpe they any,
                        That helpe not many?
                     
                      ye.
                  
                  
                     
                        Freende they any,
                        That flater many?
                     
                      Nay.
                  
                  
                     
                        Feare thei any,
                        That doe fraie many?
                     
                      ye.
                  
                  
                     
                        Kepe they any,
                        That kepe to many▪
                        
                     
                      Nay.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            Of water, wyne, and aſe. IIII.
            
            
               ¶ Water vnder a bote, wyne in a botell,
               The tone I can beare, thother bearth me well:
               And where as nother botes nor botels be,
               Nother can I beare wyne, nor water beare me.
               But aboue all licour welfare ale (I ſaie)
               For I with ale, and ale with me wag awaie.
            
         
         
            To muche or to littell. V.
            
            
               ¶ If that I drinke to muche, than am I drie,
               If I drinke to littell, more drie am I:
               If I drinke no whit, than am I drieſt,
               To muche, to littell, no whit, nought is the beſt.
               Thus drinke we no whit, or drinke till we burſt,
               Yet poore drie ſoules we be euer a thurſt,
            
         
         
            Of the ſenſes. VI.
            
            
               Speake not to muche, leſt ſpeche make the ſpechleſſe,
               Go not to muche, for feare thou go behynde,
               Here not to muche, leſt heryng bryng defneſſe.
               Loke not to muche, leſt lookyng make the blynde.
               Smell not to muche, leſt ſmellyng loſe his kynde.
               Taſt not to muche, leſte taſte miſtaſt thy chaps.
               Touche not to muche, for feare of after claps.
            
         
         
            Of talkyng VII
            
            
               ¶ Thy tayle can talke, and knowth no letter.
               Thy tongue can talke, and talkth muche ſweiter
               But except wiſdome were the gretter,
               Of tongue and tayle thy tayle talkth better.
            
         
         
            
            Of heares and wittes. VIII.
            
            
               ¶ Thynne heares and thicke wittes be deyntee.
               Thicke heares, and thynne wittes be plentee.
               Thicke heares and thicke wittes be ſcant,
               Thinne heares and thinne wittes none want.
            
         
         
            A dronkerd. IX.
            
               ¶ A gooſe is harneſt in hir white feathers,
               A drunkerd in drinke aganſt all weathers,
               A foole in his fooles hood, put all togeathers.
            
         
         
            The foxe and the maide. X.
            
            
               ¶ Althouh that foxes haue been ſeene there ſeelde,
               Yet was there lately in Fynſbery feelde
               A fox ſate in ſyght of certayne people
               Noddyng, and bliſſyng, ſtaryng on poulis ſteeple.
               A maide toward market with hens in a band
               Came by, and with the fox ſhe fell in hand.
            
            
               What thyng is it Rainard in your brayn ploddyng,
               That bringth this buiſie bliſſyng and noddyng?
               I nother nodde for ſleepe ſwete hert the fox ſayde,
               Nor bliſſe for ſpirite, except the diuel be a mayde.
               My noddyng and bliſſyng breedth of woonder
               Of the witte of Poules wethercock yonder.
               There is more witte in that cocks only head,
               Than hath been in all mens heades that be dead.
               As thus; by common report this we fynde,
               All that be dead, did die for lacke of wynde.
               
                  But that wethercocks witte is not ſo weake
               To lacke wynde: the wynde is euer in his beake.
               So that while any wynde blowth in the ſkye,
               For lacke of wynde that wethercock will not dye.
               She caſt downe hir hens, and now did ſhe blis.
               Ieſu (quoth ſhe) In nomine patris,
               
               Who hath euer heard at any ſeaſon
               Of a foxes forgeyng ſo 
                     •
                  eat a reaſon?
               And while ſhe preiſed the foxes wit ſo,
               He gat bir hens in his necke, and to go.
               Whither away with my hens fox (quoth ſhe?)
               To Poulis pig as faſt as I can (quoth he.)
               Betwene theſe hens, and yonder wethercock
               I will aſſaie to haue chekins a flock.
               Whiche if I maie get, this tale is made goode,
               In all Chriſtendome not ſo wiſe a broode.
               Maiden (quoth he) theſe hens be forboden
               Your ſight, tyll that wethercock hath troden.
               Wo woorth (quoth ſhe) all craftie inuencions,
               And all inuenters, that by falſe intencions,
               Inuent with intent to blynde or bleare blunt eies,
               In caſe as this fox to me doeth deuiſe.
            
         
         
            Of an yll gouernour called Iude. XI.
            
            
               ¶ A ruler there was in countreie a fer,
               And of the people a great extorcioner:
               Who by name (as I vnderſtand) was called Iude,
               One gaue him an as, whiche geft whan he had veude,
               He 
                     〈◊〉
                   geuer, for what intent
               He brought to him that as. For a preſent
               
                  I bryng maiſter Iude (quoth he) this as hither,
               To ioygne maiſter Iude and this as togither.
               Whiche two ioygned in one this is brought to pas,
               I may bidde you good euen maiſter Iudas.
               Macabe or Iſcariot thou knaue (quoth he?)
               Whom it pleaſe your maſter ſhip, hym let it be.
            
         
         
            Vpon geuyng an almes. XII
            
            
               ¶ Into a beggers hand, that almes did craue,
               In ſtede of one peny, two penſe one geue.
               Whiche done he ſaide beggar happie thou art,
               For to thee, my hand is better than my hart.
               That is (quoth the begger) as it chaunceth now,
               The better for me, and the woorſe for yow.
            
         
         
            Of a ſurfette. XIII.
            
            
               ¶ A man from a feuer recouered new,
               His greedy appetite would not eſchew.
               From meate contagious, wherto he had a luſt,
               But one morſell one euenyng, nedes eat he muſt.
               Which foorthwith after brought good approbacion,
               Of his returne into reſidiuacion.
               What cauſe cauſeth this (quoth the phiſicion?)
               I know (quoth he) no cauſe of ſuſpicion.
               How be it my wonder is great as can be,
               By what meane this feuer attacheth me
               More, for caryng a littell this night laſt,
               Than for caryng muche more the night before paſt.
               I did eate a capon me euery whit
               The laſt night: after whiche I felt no fit.
               
                  And this night I eete but one bit of freſh beefe,
               And yet am I ſhaken with the hourſon theefe.
            
            
               Nowe (quoth the phiſicion) aperth the cauſe why
               Capon is holſome, and the beefe contrary.
               And a litell yll meate geueth ſickeneſſe more foode,
               Than a littell to muche of meate that is goode.
            
            
               Sir, I thanke you muche (quoth the pacient)
               This leſſon ſhall hensfoorth make me to conſent,
               Whan I ſhall nedes ſurfet, by vnruly wyll,
               Rather to ſurfet on that is good, than yll.
            
         
         
            Repugnancie in apparance. XIIII
            
            
               ¶ Muche contrarietee maie ſeeme to ſtand
               Where none is. as by example, my ſon.
               In London is the beſt ale of all England:
               And yet as good ale in England as in London.
            
         
         
            The ape and the aſſe. XV.
            
            
               ¶ The ape and the aſſe ſtode, where they beheelde.
               A courſe with a greyhound at the hare in a feelde.
               Thei well perceiuing, the greihound great gron̄d wan
               As long as the hare and he foorthright ran.
               And lyke aduauntage they ſawe in the hare,
               Whan ſhe liſt lightly to turne here and thare.
               The ape to know whether the aſſis talkyng,
               Were any quicker than his aſſhis ſtalkyng,
               Aſked the aſſe: If thou ſhouldeſt chooſe one of bothe,
               To ren as ſwiftly as the greyhound yonder gothe,
               
                  Or turne as light as the hare: whiche one of twaine
               Wouldſt thou in thy chooſyng by choiſe obtayne?
            
            
               I (quoth the aſſe) beyng at libertee,
               Will chooſe none of bothe feates, I may ſaye to thee.
               What winneth the dog by his ſwift footemanſhip?
               Whan the bare at pinche turnth from him at a whip.
               And what wynth the hare in hir turns ſo lightly?
               The dog outrennyng hir agayne by and by?
               Rennyng or turnyng ſo, ren or turne who will.
               I will goe ſoftly, or els ſtand euen ſtill.
               Howbete to aſſoyle thy queſtion (quoth he)
               If I ſhould chooſe one, lyke the hare would I be.
               For where the dog renneth the hare for to kyll,
               She turnth for defence, offryng the dog none yll.
               And better is this part in this caſe brother,
               My ſelfe to defend, than offend an other.
            
         
         
            A foole and a wyſe man. XVI.
            
               ¶ A foole and a wyſe man ridyng one eſpyde.
               He aſked the horſe, that the wyſe man did ryde,
               Whither goſte thou horſe? whither goe I (quoth he?)
               Aſke hym that guideth the bridell, aſke not me.
               Whither rideſt thou foole (ꝙ he) with looke ſo fell?
               Aſke my horſe knaue (ſaid he) what can I tell.
               Whan fooles ride (ꝙ he) that can not rule the raine:
               Their horſes be their herbengers, I ſee plaine.
               And whan wiſe men ride, I right well eſpie,
               Them ſelf, not their horſe, apoynt where thei ſhal lie.
            
         
         
            
            Of ſight. XVII.
            
            
               ¶Who nedes will looke, and woulde not ſee,
               The ſyght once ſeen thou lokeſte fore,
               Cloſe vp thine eyes For truſte thou me,
               Muche lookyng ſo, breedth much 
                     •
                  ie ſore.
            
         
         
            Feigned newes. XVIII.
            
            
               ¶From a feelde fought, one of the beaten ſyde,
               Ran 
                     •
                  ome, and victorie on his parte he cryde.
               Whoſe prince by hym thus enfo
                     •
                  rmed of this,
               Made bonfiers and banertꝭ as the vſe is.
               In ſhorte tyme after all which ioye and coſte,
               The kynge was acert
                     •
                  ynde, the feeld was loſte.
               Wherwith he (in as great haſt as great greefe)
               Charged the firſt meſſenger to make preefe,
               Where he had this lie, that the feelde wss wonue.
               My ſelfe ſir (quoth he) this lie firſt b
                     •
                  gonne.
               Which for comm
                     •
                  dite
                     •
                   vnto your grace
               And all your ſubiectes. I brought it in place.
               Where ye truth ſhold haue broght waa
                     ••
                  hing & weping
               My lie brought two daies of laughing and ſleping.
               And if ye all this yere toke my lie for true,
               To kepe you merie, what harme could enſu
                     •
                  ?
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   is (quoth he) be it new or ſtale,
               A harmeleſſe lie. than a harmefull true tale.
               How his lie wa
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  laude I know none that knowth?
               But it was at leaſt winke at, I heard of trowth.
            
         
         
            Two arme in 
                  •
               rme. XIX
            
            
               ¶One ſaid to a nother taking his arme,
               By licence frend, and take this for no harme.
               
                  No ſir (ſaied the other) I geue you leue
               To hang on mine arme, but not on my ſleue.
            
         
         
            Of hearyng and ſpeakyng. XX.
            
            
               ¶Who hereth all
               And ſpeaketh nought,
               Chaunce maie ſo fall
               He is well tought.
            
            
               Who ſpeaketh all
               And hereth nought,
               Fall what ſhall fall,
               He is yll tought.
            
            
               Who hereth all,
               And all bableth,
               What euer fall
               He oft fableth.
            
            
               Who hereth nought,
               Nor nought can ſpeake,
               Maie ſoone be thought
               A hody peake.
            
            
               Saie nought, here all,
               Saie all, here nought,
               Bothe, none, theſe fall
               Extremely wrought.
            
            
               Who hereth ofte
               And ſpeaketh ſeeld,
               Be witte alofte
               He wynth the feeld.
            
         
         
            
            Of wit, will, and wiſdome. XXI.
            
            
               ¶Where will is good, and wit is yll,
               There wiſdome can no maner ſkyll.
               Where wit is good, and will is yll,
               There wiſdome ſitth all ſilent ſtyll
               Where wit and will are both two yll,
               There wiſdome no waie meddill wyll.
               Where wit and will well ordred be,
               There wiſdome makth a Trinitee.
            
         
         
            The wrenne and hir birdes. XXII.
            
            
               ¶Of a neſt of wrens late bred in a hedge,
               Whiche the dam forſakyng, when they were fledge,
               One ſaied: Alas mother, what is the why?
               That ye draw from vs vnnaturally.
            
            
               Childe (quoth the dam) I doe now vnto the,
               As my dam in my youth did vnto me,
               Wherby I am blameleſſe in that I do,
               Sens I do but as I haue been done to,
            
            
               Mother (quoth he) to deale as ye be delt with,
               Is not alwaie meete: but this is the pith:
               As ye would your dam ſhould haue delt with yow,
               So ſhould ye our dam deale with your birdes now.
               Why ſonne (quoth ſhe) thinkſt thou me ſuch a foole?
               That my chylde ſhal ſet his mother to ſchoole?
               Nay, adieu (quoth ſhe) and away ſhe is flowne:
               This childe for this checke refuſyng for hir owne.
               Whiche done, the wren calth his brothers & ſiſters,
               And vnto them this leſſon he whiſters.
               
                  I ſee and ye maie ſee (quoth he) by this caſe,
               The triall of tauntes out of tyme and place.
               Wher faire wordꝭ haply my mother might 
                     •
                   won,
               This taunt ma
                     ••…
                   hir refuſe me for hir ſon.
               Whiche maie teache vs all, where euer we cum
               Rather by ſilence alwaie to be mum,
               Than in ought at libertee, or forbidden,
               To taunt our betters, openly or hidden.
            
         
         
            The maiſter and the man. XXIII.
            
            
               ¶A man, and his man, chaunced late to bee
               Nie where a crowe ſtode criyng in a tree.
            
            
               Iames (ꝙ the maiſter) the crowe hath ſpide thee.
               Nay by God, he loketh on you maiſter (quoth he)
               Tauntꝭ (quoth the maiſter) rebound ſomtyme I ſee
               Where I thought to taunt the, thou doeſt taunt mee
            
         
         
            Vpon penaunce. XXIIII.
            
            
               ¶Two men of one man were confeſt but late,
               And both two had penance after one rate.
               Whiche was: eche of them a peny ſhould geue
               To a peniles man, him to releeue.
               Thone of theſe twayue had one peny and no more.
               Thother, no peny nor farthyng had in ſtore.
               Thei diſcloſyng ech to other this caſe.
               This peny father drew his purſe apaſe,
               Saiyng: ſens thou art penileſſe, I will
               Geue the this penye, my penance to fulfyll.
            
            
               God thanke the (quoth the tother) and ſens thow
               Art now peniles, as I was euen now,
               
                  For penaunce I geue this peny to the,
               As freely as euer thou gaueſt it to me.
               Well done (quoth the other) bere maie we boſt,
               Peny dole delt, without one peny coſte.
            
         
         
            Jacke and his father. XXV.
            
            
               ¶ Iacke (quoth his father) how ſhall I eaſe take?
               If I ſtand, my legges ake, and if I kneele,
               My knees ake, If I goe, then my feete ake,
               If I lie, my backe akthe, If I ſit, I feele
               My hyps ake: and leane I neuer ſo weele,
               Myne elbowes ake. Sir (quoth Iacke) pein to exile,
               Sens all theſe eaſe not, beſt ye hang a while.
            
         
         
            Of a daw. XXVI.
            
            
               ¶ With a croſſebow late in hand readie bent
               To ſhoote at a daw in a tree, I went.
               Saiyng to one by: I will aſſaie to hit
               Yonder I ſee a daw, if ſhe will ſit.
            
            
               She is, if ſhe ſit, a daw in deede (quoth he)
               But if ſhe ſit not, what is ſhe than ſaie ye?
            
            
               A daw alſo (ſaide I.) Than ſaid he, I ſee,
               Whether a daw ſit, or whether a dawe flee,
               Whether a daw ſtand, or whether a daw lie,
               Whether a daw croke, or whether a daw crie,
               In what caſe ſo euer a daw perſeuer,
               A daw is a daw, and a daw ſhall be euer.
            
         
         
            Of ſhe wyng the waie. XXVII.
            
            
               ¶ Twaine met in a high waie, what, time thei did go,
               Eche one toward the place the tother came fro.
               
                  What is my waye (ſaide the tone) I praie the?
               Foule (quoth thot
                     •
                  er.) That is il 
                     ••
                  oyngꝭ (quoth he.)
               I can t
                     •
                  ll thee better 
                     ••
                  dynges then this:
               Thy wa
                     ••
                  , both faire and ſmooth as a die is.
               My tidynges (quoth he) is be
                     •
                  ter than thine,
               But I thinke thy 
                     •
                  idynges truer then mine.
               This is (quoth the tother) ſo well brought about,
               That it brought and ſhall bryng me in dout▪
               
               Whiche one of theſe twayne is moſt ill at vew,
               Good tales that be falſe, or yll tales that be trew.
            
         
         
            A quiet neighbour. XXVIII.
            
            
               ¶ Accompted our commoditees,
               Few more commodious reaſon ſees,
               Than is this one commoditee,
               Quietly neighboured to bee.
               Whiche neighbourhood in thee aperes.
               For we two hauing ten whole yeres
               Dwelt wall to wall, ſo ioignynglie,
               That whiſperyng ſoundeth through well nie,
               I neuer heard thy ſeruauntes brall
               More than thou hadſt had none at all:
               Nor I can no waie make auaunt,
               That euer I heard the geue them taunt.
               Thou art to them, and thei to thee
               More mylde than muet. mum ye bee.
               I heare no noiſe mine eaſe to breake:
               Thy buterie doore I heare not creake.
               Thy 
                     〈◊…〉
                   cum
                     •••
                  th not by heate,
               Thy cookes choppe neither herbes nor meate.
               
                  I neuer heard thy fyre once ſparke,
               I neuer heard thy dog once barke,
               I neuer heard once in thy houſe.
               So muche as one peepe of one mouſe.
               I neuer herd thy catte once mew.
               Theſe preiſes are not ſmall nor few.
               I beare all water of thy ſoyle,
               Wherof I fele no fylthie foyle,
               Saue water, whiche dooeth waſhe thy handes:
               Wherin there none annoyaunce ſtandes.
               Of all thy gueſtes ſet at thy boorde
               I neuer heard one ſpeake one woorde,
               I neuer here them cough nor hem,
               I thynke henſe to Ieruſalem,
               For this neighbourlie quietneſſe
               Thou art the neighbour neighbourleſſe.
               For er thou wouldeſt neighbours annoy,
               Theſe kyndes of quiet to diſtroy,
               Thou rather wouldeſt to helpe that mater,
               At home alone faſt bread and water.
            
         
         
            Of dogges and theues. XXIX.
            
            
               ¶ To kepe theues by night out of my houſe,
               I kepe doggꝭ to aide me in my yarde,
               Whoſe barkyng at ſtur of euery mouſe.
               By lacke of ſlepe kilth me in regarde,
               Theues or dogs than, whiche maie beſt be ſparde?
               Murder is the moſt miſchiefe here to geſſe,
               Theues can doe no more, and dogs will do no leſſe.
            
         
         
            
            A keper of the commandementes. XXX.
            
            
               ¶ If it be (as it is) muche commendable
               To kepe Gods preceptes, geuen Moyſes in table:
               In kepyng the ſame (as thou haſt pretended)
               Thou maieſt well be marueilouſly commended.
            
            
               Firſt for thy hauyng any mo gods but one,
               Thou kepeſt within that bound, For god yu haſt noue.
               Hauyng or woorſhippyng of god falſe or true,
               Thou haſt nor worſhippeſt God old nor newe.
            
            
               And as for the committyng of Idolatrie
               By grauyng to thy ſelfe any Imagerie,
               This Twenty yeres daie, in weather hot or coole,
               Thou handledſt no caruyng nor workyng toole.
            
            
               The name of god in vayne thou conſentſt not till,
               Thou neuer ſwerſt but for ſome purpoſe good or ill,
            
            
               And as for the holy daie, thou doeſt breake none.
               For thou wilt rather make twentie, than breake one.
            
            
               Father and mother not diſhonourd by thee:
               For thou neuer comſt where any of them bee.
            
            
               And where thou ſhalt not kyll, to clere the of that,
               Thou neuer durſt abide to fight with a gnat.
            
            
               Than all adultrie or fornicacion
               Chaſtitee diſchargeth, by this approbacion.
               All women hardly can beare thee their fauour,
               To abide thy ſight: and in no wyſe thy ſauour.
            
            
               For ſtealyng or their, what euer thou haſt bene
               Thy handes at this daie are knowen to be clene.
               How cauſt thou ſtele ought in houſe, feeld, or ſtreete?
               Thou ſitteſt in Newgate faſt bound handꝭ and feete?
            
            
               
               By falſe witneſſe thou neuer hurteſt man for why,
               Eury woord thou ſpeakſt, eury man thinkth a lye.
            
            
               Now to couet in mynde thy neighbours aſſe,
               Or his houſe, when bondage will not let the paſſe
               To ride to the tone, or go to the tother,
               Or in conſented thought one waie or other.
               For to couet thy neighbours maide or his wife,
               Thou knowing▪ thei can not loue the for their life,
               Or of thy neighbours thinges to couet any thyng,
               Whan couetouſnes can no waie bring winnyng,
               But that lacke of credite, libertee, or loue,
               Kepth thee from that couetyng can moue,
               Thou haſt to ſhrewd a wit in deſire to dwell,
               To haue thyngꝭ, from which diſpeite doth the expell.
               Thus in Gods precepts, except thou clere appere,
               I know not who the diuell can ſaie he is clere.
            
         
         
            Of a noſe. XXXI.
            
            
               ¶ But for blemiſhe of a face to loke vpon,
               I doubt whiche were beſt, to haue a noſe or none.
               Moſt of our ſauours are more ſower than ſweete.
               A noſe or no noſe, whiche is now moſt meete?
            
         
         
            Lettyng of a ferme. XXXII.
            
            
               ¶ By word without writyng, one let out a farme,
               The couenauntꝭ wherin the leſſee brake a mayne:
               Wherby the leſſor, lackyng writyng, had harme.
               He ſaide and ſware, he would make promiſe playne,
               Without writyng, neuer to let thyng agayne.
               
                  Huſband, cried his wife, that othe agayne reuarte,
               Els, without writyng, ye can not let a farte.
            
         
         
            Age and youth. XXXIII.
            
            
               ¶ Though age and youth to gether can ſeeld agree,
               Yet once two yong and two olde folke did I ſee,
               Agr
                     •
                  de lyke lams togither diuers yeres.
               The ſtorie wherof foorthwith aperes
               A woman olde, and a man yong wer led,
               She him for loue, and he hir for good, to wed.
               A yong woman, and an old man, in like caſe,
               Were wed for like cauſe at the ſame tyme and place.
               Into one houſe theſe two couples wedded were,
               And duryng their liues, together muſt liue there.
               And thei once aquainted, and one month maried,
               All their liues after thei neuer varied.
               Company and condicion theſe foure folke hold,
               As nature naturally wylth yong and old:
               Couplyng them ſelues to gether thus eury daie
               Tholde fooles aldaie prate, ye yōg fooles aldaie plaie.
            
         
         
            A roſe and a nettill XXXIIII.
            
               What time herbs & wedes, & ſuch thingꝭ could talke,
               A man in his gardeyn one daie did walke
               Spiyng a nettill greene (as Themeraude) ſpred
               In a bed of roſes lyke the Rubie red.
               Betwene which two colours, be thought by his eie,
               The greene nettill did the red roſe beautifie.
               How be it he aſked the nettill, what thing
               Made hym ſo pert? ſo nie the roſe to ſpryng.
            
            
               
               I plant me with theſe roſes, ſaid the nettill:
               Their mylde propretees in me to ſettill.
               And you, in laiyng vnto me your noſe,
               Shall ſmell, how a nettill maie chaunge to a roſe.
            
            
               He did ſo: whiche done, his noſtrils ſo pritcht
               That raſhly he rubd, where it no whit itcht,
               To whiche ſmart mocke, and wily begylyng,
               He the ſame ſmellyng, ſaied ſmothely ſmylyng,
               Roſes conuert nettils? Nay, thei be to fell,
               Nettils will peruert roſes rather, I ſmell.
            
         
         
            Of the wifes and hir houſbandes waſte. XXXV.
            
            
               ¶ Where am I leaſt huſband? quoth he, in the waſte:
               Whiche comth of this, thou art vengeable ſtreit laſte.
               Where am I biggeſt wife? in the waſte (quoth ſhe)
               For all is waſt in you, as far as I ſee.
            
         
         
            An olde wiues boone. XXXVI.
            
            
               ¶ In olde world, when old wiues bitterly prayde,
               One deuoutely, as by waie of a boone,
               Axt vengeance on hir huſband, and to hym ſayde,
               Thou woldſt wed a yong wife er this weke wer doone
               Wer I dead, but thou ſhalt wed the diuell as ſoone.
            
            
               I can not wed the diuel (quoth he) why (quoth-ſhe?)
               For I haue wedded his dam before (quoth he.)
            
         
         
            A talke of two conies. XXXVII
            
               ¶ In tyme, whan dom beaſtꝭ, as wel as birdꝭ, ſpake?
               Two conies their myndes in this mater brake.
               
                  Were all conies in ſuch caſe (ſaid the tone)
               That of two wynters weathers we muſt chooſe one,
               Whiche were beſt choiſe, froſt neuer, & ſnowe euer?
               Or els to chooſe froſte euer, and ſnow neuer.
               Froſt (quoth the tother) maketh vs luſtie and fat,
               And ſnow lameth vs for leaue. What (ꝙ he) for that?
               Fortie fat conies be oft kild in one night,
               Whan leane conies with life ſcape awaie quight.
               Ye (quoth the tother) but where ſnow to long lieth,
               Conies by famin well nie euery one dieth.
               Better all be fatte, though ſome die, as lotts fall,
               Than lynger in leannes, and therby die all.
            
         
         
            A priſoner. XXXVIII.
            
               ¶ In priſon, a priſoner condemned to die,
               And for execucion waityng daylie,
               In his handes for wormes lookyng on a daie,
               Smilyng vnto him ſelfe theſe wordes did ſaie:
               Sens my foure quarters in foure quarters ſhall ſtand,
               Why harme I theſe ſeely worms eatyng my hand?
               Nought els in this deede do I, but my ſelfe ſhow,
               Enemy to the woorme and frend to the crow.
            
         
         
            Two blynde men. XXXIX.
            
            
               ¶ One blynde man to ſupper an other bad,
               Whiche twaine ſittyng at ſuch meate as thei had,
               Me thinkth (ꝙ this blind hoſt) this candel burnth dim.
               So thinketh me ſir, ſaide the blynde gueſt to him.
               Wife (ſaid the good man) with ſorow mend this light.
               She put out the candell, whiche burned very bright,
               
                  And chopt downe emptie candelſticks two or thre.
               So lo: now eate and welcome neighbour (quoth he)
            
         
         
            Debilitee of ſenſes. XL.
            
            
               ¶ Wyfe, my hands for feelyng are oft very yll.
               And as thone hand mendth, thother appeyrth ſtyl.
            
            
               Ye ſaie ſo the (ſaid ſhe) thone hand feelth euermore
               Woorſe the daie preſent, than the daie before.
               Thother hand feeleth by oynctmentes excellent
               Better the daie before, than the daie preſent.
               But how doth your eie ſight? worſe & worſe (ſaid he)
               For worſe this day than yeſterdaie, I ſee the.
               Though you wer blind (ꝙ ſhe) y• ſhold no loue breake,
               I would your eies were out, ſo you could not ſpeake.
            
            
               Take hearyng to (ꝙ he) thou makſt my eares ſuche,
               That thou haſt made thē here enough, and to muche.
               And goyng maie go to. For where euer I am,
               I go not an inche from the diuell or his dam.
            
            
               In feith if thou didſt (quoth ſhe) yet could I well
               Fynde meane, to fynde out a foole euen by the ſmell.
               And here may we here and ſee, how this tale fitts
               With my good mans goodly lyms, and good witts,
            
         
         
            A fooliſhe huſband. XLI.
            
            
               Huſband, two witts are better than one, clarks ſaie,
               To debate mattiers: whiche ſeemeth true this waie.
               Whan we two contend, whats my wit without thine,
               To conuince thy ſelfe, thy wyt conducth myne.
            
         
         
            
            A witty wife. XLII.
            
            
               ¶ Iane (quoth Iame) to one ſ
                     •
                  ort demand of myne
               Anſwere not with a lie, from that mouth of thyne,
               And take this nobill Which whan ſhe had tane,
               Is thy huſband (quoth he) a cockold Iane?
            
            
               She ſtode ſtill, and to this would no woord ſpeake.
               Frō which dum dump when he could hir not breake,
               He axt his nobill agayne. Why (quoth ſhe?)
               Made I any lie to thee? Nay (quoth he.)
            
            
               Than walke foole (ꝙ ſhe) this wager I wyn clere,
               And thou of my counſaile neuer the nere.
               Gogs ſoule (ſware he) and flang awaie amayne,
               I will neuer talke with that womon agayne.
               For as ſhe in ſpeche can reuile a man,
               So can ſhe in ſilence beguile a man.
            
         
         
            Hanſom handlyng. XLIII.
            
            
               ¶ Some wonder to ſee thy handlyng of thingꝭ neate,
               But it is no wunder as the caſe ſtands.
               The toes of thy feete in handlyng of things feate,
               Are as hanſom as the fingers of thy hands.
            
         
         
            A ſaiyng of Patche my lord cardinals foole. XLIIII.
            
            
               ¶ Maſter Sexten a parſon of knowne wit,
               As he at my lord Cardinals boord did ſit,
               Gredily caught at a goblet of wyne:
               Drinke none (ſaid my lord) for that ſore leg of thyne.
               I warrant your grace (quoth Sexten) I prouide
               For my leg: For I drinke on the tother ſide.
            
         
         
            
            Certayne folies. XLV.
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        ¶ To caſt faire white ſalte into wyſe mens meate,
                        
                        To make them count ſalt ſuger, whan they eate,
                     
                      a foly.
                  
                  
                     
                        To beare a man in hande he itchth in eche parte,
                        Whan the man feeleth an vniuerſall ſmarte,
                     
                      a foly.
                  
                  
                     
                        To ſpeake alwaies well, and dooe alwaie yll,
                        And tell men thoſe deedes be doone of good wyll,
                     
                      a foly.
                  
                  
                     
                        Thy luſtie limd horſe to leade in thy hand,
                        Whan on thy lame lyms thou canſt ſcantly ſtand,
                     
                      a foly.
                  
                  
                     
                        Of kyks for cage woorke to builde thy houſe hye,
                        And couer it with lead, to kepe thy houſe drye.
                     
                     a foly.
                  
               
            
         
         
            Of two ſtudentes. XLVI.
            
            
               ¶ Two ſcholars yonge in the vniuerſitee late
               Kept in thinne diet, after ſcholars rate,
               Thone beyng an eater greedy and greate,
               Thother a weake feeder, ſaid at his meate:
               Oh this ſmart ſmall pittans, and hungrie diet,
               Maketh vs to ſtudie aptly in quiet.
            
            
               Sure (ſaid the tother) ſmall meales are induction
               To thencreaſe of ſtudie, for deper inſtruction,
               This diner ſhall driue me to ſtudie anon,
               Where I maie get more meate, whan this is gon.
            
         
         
            A mery woman. XLVII.
            
            
               ¶ There came by chaunce to a good companie
               A lady, a wanton and a merie.
               
                  And though euery word of hir own ſhowde hir light,
               Yet no mans woords els to hir might that recite:
               She had all the woords, ſhe babled ſo faſt,
               That thei beyng weery, one ſaid at the laſt:
               Ma dame, ye make my hert light as a kix,
               To ſee you thus full of your meretrix.
            
            
               This tricke thus well tricked in the latine phraſe,
               Brought vnto this tricker nother muſe nor maſe,
               She nought perceiuyng, was no whit offended:
               Nor hir light demeanour no whit amended,
               But ſtill hir tongue was clappyng lyke a paten.
               Well, ſaid the ſaid man, in language of laten
               I neuer tolde woman any faute before,
               Nor neuer in laten will tell them faute more.
            
         
         
            A louſe and a flea. XLIII.
            
            
               ¶ A lowſe and a flea, ſet in a mans necke,
               Began eche other to taunt and to checke.
               Diſputyng at length all extremitees
               Of their pleaſures, o
                     •
                   diſcommoditees.
               Namely this I heard, and bare awaie well.
            
            
               If one (quoth the louſe) ſcrat within an ell
               Of thy tayle: than forthwith art thou ſkippyng,
               Lyke Iacke of bedlem in and out whippyng.
               Halfe an houre after thou darſt no where ſit,
               To abide the bityng of one good bit.
               And whan any man herein ſhall proue me,
               His nayles doe (as a writte dooeth) remoue me.
               Whiche nayles once remoued from the mans head,
               I am ſtreight at feedyng within a heare breade,
               
                  Where I fed before in my deintie diot.
            
            
               Ye be hardie (quoth the flea) I denie not,
               But how many liſe haue abiden by it?
               Whan thei woulde haue doone as fleas dooe, flie it.
               With this the man to his necke his hand caught,
               The flea ſkipt away, but the louſe he caught.
            
            
               How now (quoth the fl
                     •
                  a) Alas (quoth the louſe)
               My head is well ſerued to ſerue for ſowſe:
               That thus lyke a ſowſe head, for ſaw not this greefe,
               Tyll feelyng hath put peinfull practiſe in preefe.
            
         
         
            Of hym that forgat his Pater noſter in Latine. XLIX.
            
            
               ¶ An olde homely man at ſhrift commaundid
               By his Curate, his Pater noſter to bid
               After long ſtudie, he ſaide: Maſter vicker,
               By Iys cham a ſhamd, my wit is no quicker.
               Ich ſaid it within littell more then fortnight.
               And now, lyke a beaſt, cha forgote it quight.
               Fy on age. In youth Ich had euer ſuche wit,
               That what ſo euer Ich had had to dooe, yet
               At ſhrif
                     •
                   chad my Pater noſter euer more,
               Whan Ich ſaide it not twiſe in the yere before.
            
         
         
            Of him that could not learne his Pater noſter in engliſh. L.
            
            
               ¶ A man of the countreie ſhriuen in Lent late,
               (Accordyng to thiniunction) his curate
               Bad him, the Pater noſter in engli
                     ••
                  e ſaie,
               Ich can it not maiſter (quoth he) by my 
                     •
                  aie.
               
                  Saie a peece of it (quoth he) though ye the reſt mys,
               Ich can not one woord of it (quoth he) by Iys.
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   yet maſter vicar, by gods ſacrament,
               Cha 
                     〈◊〉
                   about it euer ſeus laſt lent.
               And ſome of it Ich had in the clenſyng weeke.
               But now whan Ich ſhould ſaee it, all is to ſeeke.
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   (quoth the prieſt) if your wit be ſo far decayde,
               Saie the Paternoſter, ye haue alwaie ſayde.
            
            
               Nay by the mas (ſware he) if you wil haue al told,
               Cha 
                     ••••
                  rated on the new, cha forgot thold.
            
         
         
            Of the fiſt and the hert. LI.
            
            
               ¶ One curſt an others hert for a blowe in a fume.
               Curſe not his hert (quoth one by) curſe his fyſt.
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   hert (quoth he) to mine eare did not preſume,
               But his hert to mine eare did his fiſt aſſyſt.
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   eche lym muſt frame in feate, as the hert liſt,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   the hert wilth any lym in any faute to fall.
               
                  
                     •
                  o man blame any man, to blame the hert for all.
            
         
         
            Of this woorde, enough. LII.
            
            
               
                  
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   mery man by his maiſter at mete ſet.
               Me thinkth (ꝙ the maiſter) thou canſt no drinke get.
               Here is enough, though there be none ſaid he.
               Than art thou not drie. Yes ſo more I thee,
               And fain wold drinke. How be thy words true than?
               Thus 
                     •
                  his word enough two waies we may ſcan.
               Thone muche enough, thother littell enough.
               And here is littel enough. His maiſter lough,
               
                  Callyng in his wife to diſcant vpon this.
               How ſaiſt thou wife? our man in this caſe is
               Drie, and wold drinke, and drinke nothing 
                     〈…〉
                  .
               And yet proueth he drinke enough by him.
               Sens he (quoth ſhe) proueth drinke enough in ſtore,
               More than enough were waſt. He getth no more.
            
         
         
            Of table plaie. LIII.
            
            
               ¶ Wife, I will no more plaie at tables with the:
               Whan we come to bearyng, thou begyleſt me,
               In bearyng of thy men, while thou haſt any,
               Eche other caſte thou bearſt one man to many.
            
         
         
            The cocke and the hen. LIIII,
            
            
               ¶ A cock and his hen perchyng in the night,
               The cock at his hour crode loude as he might.
               The hen heuy of ſlepe, prayde the cock that he
               Would leaue of his crowyng, but it would not be.
               The hen ſaw▪ the cock would ſticke to his tacklyng,
               In hir treble voyce, ſhe fel ſo to cacklyng,
               That the cock praide hir, hir cacklyng to ſeaſe,
               And he of his crowyng would hold his peaſe.
               Nay chorle (quoth ſhe) be ſure, that will I not.
               And for thy learnyng hencefoorth marke this knot.
               Whan euer thou wouldeſt ſeeme, to ouer crow me,
               Than will I ſurely ouer cakyll the.
            
         
         
            
            Chepenyng a face of furre. LV.
            
            
               Into a ſkinners ſhop, while his wife there wrought,
               In haſt ran a gentilman to eſpie
               A faire face of fur, whiche he would haue bought.
               What fur (quoth ſhe) would your maſterſhip bie?
               Harlots wombs (quoth he) know ye any nie?
               Harlots wombs (forſoth) I haue none (quoth ſhe)
               But ye ſhall haue knaues ſhankes mete as can be.
            
         
         
            Biyng of ſhooes. LVI.
            
            
               ¶ Whan I at the ſhoemakers ſhall ſhoes aſſaie,
               If thei be to littell, thei will ſtretche (ſaieth he)
               If thei be to muche, thei will ſhrinke ſtreight waie.
               To long, to ſhort, how narrow or wide thei be,
               All is one matter as he ſhapth them to me.
               For maie he once get his ſhooes on my feete,
               Without laſt or lingel his wordes make them meete,
            
         
         
            A ſuſpicion clered. LVII.
            
               ¶ One to his freend keendly,
               Gaue monicion freendly,
               That ill was reported
               By one, that reſorted
               To hym: whom (as thei thought)
               Entyſed him to nought.
            
            
               He thanked him, and ſaide:
               My freend, be not afraide.
               The heryng of that foole
               Setth me no whit to ſchoole.
               
                  I here him, whan he liſt,
               And folow him whan me liſt.
            
         
         
            Of ſpite. LVIII.
            
            
               ¶ If there be any, as I hope there be none,
               That would l
                     •
                  ſe both his eies▪ to leſe his foe one,
               Than feare I. there be many, as the world gothe,
               That would leſe one eie, to leſe their foes bothe.
            
         
         
            Of the letter H. LIX.
            
            
               ¶ H, is worſt among letters in the croſſe row,
               For if thou finde him other in thine elbow,
               In thine arme, or leg, in any degree,
               In thy head, or teeth, in thy toe or knee,
               Into what place ſo euer H, maie pyke him▪
               
               Where euer thou find ache, thou ſhalt not like hym.
            
         
         
            Jll fleyng of Jdelneſſe. LX.
            
            
               ¶ If flight from idilneſſe maie be deemed
               Mayn meane to vertue beyng fled warely:
               How maiſt thou than therby be eſteemed?
               Thou fleeſt that vice not meanly nor barely,
               But mainely: ſcrupulouſly, and ſo charely,
               That in then er idelneſſe ſhalbe ſpied,
               Thou wilt yet rather be ill occupied.
            
         
         
            A tong and a clocke. LXI.
            
               Thy tong ſhould be a clock wife, had I gods power,
               For than would it ſtrike but once in one hower.
               
                  Yet it might ren (quoth ſhe) and ſtrike er the tyme,
               And ſhold that clock haue (as my tong hath) a chyme?
               I beyng ſexten, might ſet the clock foorth ſoone,
               To ſtrike and chime. xii. two houres before noone.
            
         
         
            A herer of a ſermon. LXII.
            
               What bringſt thou frō the ſermon Iack? declare that.
               Forſoth maiſter (quoth he) your cloke and your hat.
               I can the good thanke Iacke: for thou art yet ſped,
               Of ſomwhat in thy hand, though nought in thy hed.
            
         
         
            A man without wit, ſtrength, and counnyng. LXIII.
            
               ¶ Thou art a wight to wonder at.
               Thy head, for wit, ſhewth the a wat.
               Thy bodie for ſtrength ſhewth the a gnat.
               Thy voice for tune ſheweth the a cat.
               Dooe, ſaie, or ſyng, in any what,
               Thou art a minion marm
                     •
                  ar.
            
         
         
            How to wiſſhe. LXIIII.
            
            
               ¶ How may I haue the Gill, whan I wiſſhe for the?
               Wiſhe not for me Iack, but when thou maiſt haue me.
            
            
               This is a leſſon Gill propre and pleaſaunt.
               For by theſe words this winnyng Iack maie auaunt,
               Though Iack be no nere Gill then Iack was before,
               Yet Iack is nere his wit, by gis, by ten ſcore.
            
         
         
            
            A doubtfull demaunde of choyſe. LXV.
            
               ¶ If thou muſt choſe Hodge, touchyng cockoldry,
               Whiche woldſt thou choſe, to know thy ſelf cōmonly
               To be taken for one, and take thy ſelfe none,
               Or, to be taken for none, and take thy ſelf one?
               The beſt or worſt of theſe twain (Hew) tel me whiche
               Claw wher it doth ſmart, or tikell, wher it doth iche?
            
            
               I know ſmall difference herein, Hodge brother,
               And I (Hugh) know as littel in the tother.
            
         
         
            An old widower and a yong mayde. LXVI.
            
            
               ¶ A widower riche, with riueld face old,
               Wooyng a faire youg woman, his mynde he told.
               Boſtyng what he had, as wowers doe, that can,
               Wherin he boſted of a goodly yong man,
               A ſoon of his owne, whom god had him ſent.
               Of condicions and qualitees excellent,
               In this what wooyng this old mans behauour
               So far foorth had won this yong womans fauour,
               That in ſhort tale, whan his long tale was doon,
               She praied hi
                     •
                   to goe home, and ſend hir his ſoon.
            
         
         
            Gapyng oyſters. LXVII.
            
            
               ¶ On whom gape thine oyſters ſo wyde, oyſterwife?
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   oyſters gape on you ſir, god ſaue your life.
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   gape th
                     •
                  ? Sir thei gape for promotion.
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   premote them) you haue deuocion.
               Nay 
                     〈…〉
                   pernicious,
               To promote Oyſters, that be ambicious.
            
         
         
            
            The iudge and the iuggler. LXVIII.
            
            
               ¶ To a iuſticer a iuggler did complayne
               Of one, that diſpraiſed his liger de mayne.
            
            
               Whats thy name (ſaid the iuſtice) Dauſon ſaid hee.
               Is thy father aliue? Nay, dead ſir perdee.
               Than thou ſhalt no more be Daus ſoon, a clere caſe,
               Thou art Daw thy ſelfe now, in thy fathers place.
            
         
         
            Of lokyng. LXIX.
            
            
               ¶ To ſaue mine head, whan I vpward caſt mine eie,
               And loke not to my feete: to the ground fal I.
               Whan I loke downeward to my feete, to take heede,
               A tyle falne from a houſe makth my head bleede.
               And loke I ryght foorth, betwene my feete and hed,
               Broken head, breke neekee falls, of both I am ſped.
               I thinke it as good, by ought I can deuiſe,
               To be ſtarke ſtaryng blinde, as thus to haue eies▪
               
            
         
         
            Of conſtancy. LXX.
            
            
               ¶ Some ſaie, thou art inconſtant, but I ſay naie.
               What though thy wit be wauryng euery waie?
               Whoſe wit like the winde hath been wauring euer,
               And in vnſtedy wauryng doothe perſeuer,
               A conſtant man I affirme him conſtantly,
               For he is conſtant in inconſtancy.
            
         
         
            Of a face and witte. LXXI.
            
            
               ¶ In thy youth and age theſe propretees are ſprong.
               In youth thy face was olde, in age thy wit is yong.
            
         
         
            
            Of blowyng. LXXII.
            
            
               What wind cā thire blow, yt doth not ſome mā pleaſe?
               A fart in the blowyng doth the blower eaſe.
            
         
         
            To the flatterer. LXXIII.
            
            
               ¶ Thy flattryng of me, this foloweth thervpon:
               Other thou art a foole, orels I am one.
               Where flattrie aperth, at leaſt: by wiſe mens ſchoole
               The flattrer, or the flattred, is a foole.
            
         
         
            Of contentacion. LXXIIII.
            
            
               ¶ Is not the poore man riche, that is contented?
               Yes, riche by his contentacion conſented.
               Is not the riche man poore, that is not content?
               Yes, poore by lacke of contentacion here ment.
               Than riches and pouertee in mens myndes lie.
               Ye, but we maie far ſoner learne (thynke I)
               To thinke our ſelfes riche, hauyng much riches by,
               Than make our ſelfes riche, hauyng no riches ny.
            
         
         
            Of waityng. LXXV.
            
            
               ¶ I would ſee a man waite to his maiſters mynde,
               As the weathercock wauth on the wynde.
               Blow it here or there, blow it low or hie,
               The wethercocks beke is ſtill in the wyndꝭ eie.
            
         
         
            Of fore knowlage. LXXVI.
            
            
               ¶ Foreknowlage of thyngs that muſt fall
               To man, I thinke it were not beſt.
               The fore knowne yll to man, would call
               Fore felt grefe, of fore knowne unreſt.
               By foreknowen good to man were ceſt
               
                  Swete ſodain ioye, whiche euer more
               Comth, whan ioyes come vnknowne before.
            
            
               The ſame im
                     •
                  ugned without change of woordes, except fovre or fiue.
               
                  ¶ Foreknowlage of thyngꝭ that muſt fall
                  To man▪ I thinke it were the b
                        •
                     ſt,
                  The fore knowen yll to man would call
                  Digeſtion, of fore knowen vnreſt
                  By fore knowen good to man, were ceſt
                  Diſtemperate ioye, whiche eu
                        •
                     rmore
                  Comth, whan ioyes come vnknowne before.
               
            
         
         
            Miſtakyng an errande. LXXVII.
            
            
               Feaſtyng a freend, the feaſter (whoſe man did weyte)
               Bad him er the laſt courſe, fetche the clouted cōceyte.
               What bringſt yu here knaue (ꝙ he) what haſt yu doone?
               I haue (ꝙ his mā) brought here your clouted ſhoone.
               Clouted ſhoone car
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  ly knaue, what doſt yu dreame?
               Eate yu the clouted ſhone, fetche vs ye clouted creame.
            
         
         
            Of holdyng an Jn. LXXVIII.
            
            
               ¶ Beyng holden in Newgate, thou ca
                     •
                  ſt not bee
               An Inholder, for thine Iune holdeth thee.
            
         
         
            A wiues defence of hir bettill brow. LXXIX.
            
            
               ¶ Were I to wed againe wife, I make a vow.
               I would not wed a wife with a beetill brow.
            
            
               
               And I (ꝙ ſhe) rather would a huſband wed
               With a beetill brow, than with a beetill hed.
            
         
         
            The ſhrewde wiues toonge. LXXX.
            
            
               ¶ A dog dame ruleth in degree
               Aboue a diuell with thee:
               At leſt ſower wynd a dog letth flee,
               Thy noſe will ſtopped bee:
               But no diuels woord maie make decree
               To ſtoppe thy toong I ſee.
            
            
               Seus thou aperſt to be (quoth ſhe)
               A dogged diuell to me,
               To tame thy diuilliſhe propertee
               My toong ſhall ſtill be free.
            
         
         
            A foolis toonge. LXXXI.
            
            
               ¶ Upon a fooles prouocacion
               A wyſe man will not talke:
               But euery light inſtigacion
               Maie make a foolis toong walke.
            
         
         
            Of glaſſe and lattiſe. LXXXII.
            
            
               ¶ Where glaſiers and lattiſe makers worke in ſight,
               This one difference in their two feates we fynde:
               Glas kepeth out the wynd and letth in the light,
               Lattiſe kepeth out the light, and letth in the wynde.
               Of both ſortꝭ I wiſhe, whan I ſhall wiſhe any,
               Lattiſe makers few, and glaſiers many.
            
         
         
            
            Two wiſſhes for two maner of mouthes. LXXXIII.
            
            
               ¶ I wiſſh thou hadſt a littell narrow mouth wife,
               Littell and littell to droppe out mords in ſtrife.
            
            
               And I wiſſhe you ſir, a wide mouth for the nonſe,
               To ſpeake all that euer you ſhall ſpeake at onſe,
            
         
         
            Of diſpreyſe. LXXXIIII.
            
            
               ¶ All men muſt be blind and defe er thou preiſe win.
               For no man ſeeth or herth ought to preiſe the in.
            
         
         
            A diſcharge from hipocriſy. LXXXV.
            
            
               ¶ Thou art no birde of hipocriciſe broode.
               For thou fleeſt all thingꝭ, that might ſhew the goode.
            
         
         
            Of the foole and the gentilmans noſe. LXXXVI.
            
            
               ¶ One gentilman hauing an other at meate,
               That gueſt hauing a noſe deformd foule and great.
               The foole of that houſe, at this tyme ſtandyng by,
               Fell thus in hand with that noſe ſodainly.
            
            
               Noſe autem, a great noſe as euer I ſawe.
               His maſter was wroth, & cride, henſe with that daw.
               One ſaide: talke no more of great noſes ye foole,
               Leſt ye be talkt with all in the whippyng ſchoole.
               The foole warnd of great noſes no more to ſpeake,
               To mend that faut, this way theſe wordes did breake.
            
            
               Said I, this is a foule great ſpittell noſe?
               Byr ladie I lyed, it is a faire littell noſe.
               
                  Will not that foole be had hence (ꝙ the maiſter?)
               Thou wilt foole (ꝙ one) be walkt with a waſter,
               If thou ſpe
                     •
                  ke of any noſe great or ſmall.
               The foole at third warning, mindyng to mend all,
               Stept to the boord againe criyng as he goſe,
               Before God and man, that man hath no noſe.
               The foole was feakt for this: but what of that?
               The great raut here to no
                     •
                  e, he amended nat:
               Which is this: Not the wiſe, but the foole ye ſee,
               In clukyng of one faute, makth fautes two or three.
            
         
         
            A foole taken for wiſe. LXXXVII.
            
               ¶ Wiſedome and foly in the (as men ſean)
               Is as it were a thyng by it ſelfe ſoole:
               Among fooles thou art taken a myſe man,
               And among wyſe men, thou art knowne a foole.
            
         
         
            Thynges to forheare. LXXXVIII.
            
            
               ¶ Diſpleaſures that fume and fret
               Good to forgeue and forget
               All othes, what, whan, and where,
               Better forbeare than forſweare.
               Other mens liuingꝭ all,
               As good forſteale as forſtall,
               Not at botom, but at brynke,
               Better foreſee, than forthynke.
            
         
         
            Of medlers. LXXXIX.
            
            
               ¶ To feede of any frute at any feaſt,
               Of all kyndꝭ of medlers, meddell with the leaſt.
               
                  Meddel not with great medlers. For no queſtion,
               Medlyng with great medlers, makth yll dig
                     •
                  ſtion.
            
         
         
            Of dwellyng. XC.
            
            
               ¶ Betwene Ludgate & newgate yu cauſt dwel neuer,
               For in Ludgate or Newgate thou muſt dwell euer.
            
         
         
            Of the milner and the ſexten. XCI.
            
            
               ¶ The milner tolth corne, the ſexten tolth the bell,
               In whiche tollyng, tollers thriue not a lyke well.
               Thone tolth with the claper, thother in the hoper.
               Thone ſauerth of ſyluer, thother ſoundth of coper.
            
         
         
            Of lokes and cheſe. XCII.
            
            
               ¶ No two thyngꝭ in all thingꝭ can ſeme onely one:
               Becauſe two thyngs ſo, muſt be one thyng alone.
               How be it redyng of bookes and eatyng of cheſe.
               No
                     •…
                   thingꝭ for ſome thingꝭ, more like one thē theſe.
               The talent of one cheſe in mouthes of ten men,
               Hath x. different taſtꝭ in iudgement moſt times when.
               He ſaith tis to ſalt, he ſaith tis to freſhe,
               He ſaith tis to hard, he ſaith tis to neſhe.
               It is to ſtrong of the reuer, ſaith he.
               It is ſaith he, not ſtrong enough for me.
               It is ſaith an other, well as can bee.
               No two of any ten in one can agree.
               And as thei iudge of cheſe, ſo iudge thei of bokes.
               On lokers on whiche, who that narowly lokes,
               
                  Maie loke for this: Seith he, that booke is to long,
               Tis to ſhort ſaith he. Nay, ſaith he, ye ſaie wrong,
               Tis of mete length: and for fine phraſe or faire ſtile:
               The like of that boke was not made this good while:
               And in touchyng the truth inuincibly wrought.
               Tis all lies, ſaith an other, the booke is nought.
               No booke, no cheſe, be it good, be it bad,
               But preyſe and diſpreyſe it hath, and hath had.
            
         
         
            Of heades. XCIII.
            
            
               ¶ Some heads haue taken two heads better thā one:
               But ten heads without wit, I wene as good none.
            
         
         
            The woodcock and the daw. XCIIII.
            
            
               ¶ A woodcock and a dawe ſet vpon a playne,
               Bothe ſhewde compariſon eche other to diſdayne.
               Back, ꝙ the wodcock: Straw for thee, ꝙ the dawe.
               Shall wodcocks kepe dawes now in dredfull awe?
               None awe (quoth the wodcock) but in behauiour
               Ye ought to reuerence woodcocks, by your fauour.
               For what cauſe (quoth the daw?) For your long bils?
               Nay (ꝙ the wodcock) but lords will by their wils
               Rather haue one wodcock, than a thouſand dawſe.
               Wodcocks ar meate, daws ar carren, wey this clauſe.
               In dede ſir (ſaid the daw) I muſt needes agree,
               Lords loue to eate you, and not to eate mee.
               Cauſe of daws curteſis, ſo, if wodcocks thus gather.
               Ye ſhal haue curtſy: For thus I woulde rather
               Be a daw, and to wodcocks curteſy make:
               Than be a wodcock, and of dawes curteſy take.
               
                  I were a double daw, had I not leuer,
               Birders ſhould (in their birdyng endeuer)
               Take vp gins, and let me go, whan thei get me,
               Than ſet gins to get me, for lordꝭ to eate me.
            
         
         
            Of few woordes. XCV.
            
            
               ¶ Few words ſhew men wiſe, wiſe men doe deuiſe,
               Whiche is oft tyme true, and oft other wyſe.
               In ſome caſe ſilence maie as ſtifly ſtand
               With follie, as with wiſedom, wiſely ſcand.
            
         
         
            Wottyng and wenyng. XCVI.
            
            
               ¶ Wottyng and wenyng, were thoſe two thingꝭ one,
               Who could wot him ſelfe wiſe like the, I wene none.
            
            
               Other wiſe.
               
                  ¶ I would geue the beſt fardell in my packe,
                  To be as wiſe as thou weneſt thou art Iacke.
                  And to be as wiſe as I wot thou art.
                  What would I geue troweſt thou? wat? not a fart.
               
            
         
         
            A muche like mattier. XCVII.
            
               Tom, thou thinkſt thy ſelfe wiſe ye what of yt Hewe?
               Thou thinkſt thy ſelf wiſer than I. Ye tom, trewe.
               It ſeemth (ſaid a third man) by this deuiſe,
               No maiſtrie for fooles, to weene them ſelfes wiſe.
            
         
         
            Wiſedome and foly. XCVIII.
            
            
               ¶ Thy wiſedom and foly both, nay no one
               Can be conteined in volumes great nor ſmall.
               Thy wiſedom beyng none, occupieth place none,
               Thy foly beyng all, occupieth place all.
            
         
         
            
            Of lacke. XCIX.
            
            
               ¶ One lacke of late in the ſaw wee,
               Whiche lackth not now, for this we ſee,
               Thou haſt lackt lacke of honeſtee:
               But now that lacke lackth not in thee.
            
         
         
            The wethercocke, the rede, and the wynde. C.
            
            
               ¶ The wethercock and the reede comparyng late
               Their ſeruice done to the wynde, fell at debate.
               The wynde (ꝙ the wethercock) wyndth no whetr▪
               
               But ſtreight bolt vpright I ſtand waityng there▪
               
               Forſoth (ſaid the reede) & where the wynd is found,
               At euery blaſt I bow downe to the ground.
               Surely ſaid the wynd, the waityng of the tone,
               And curteſie of the tother I take both one.
               And none of both good, but rather yll to me:
               For whan I ofte in corners ſecrete would be,
               Other the croked courtſy of the reede,
               Or wethercocks waityng, bewraith me with ſpeede,
               As life is to me, in ſuche ſeruyng pre
                     •
                  ence
               Single negligence, as double diligence.
               The weathercock and the reede, beyng both blanke,
               Ech told hiſelf, much ſeruice may haue ſmall thanke.
            
         
         FINIS.
      
      
         
            
            JMPRINTED AT LONDON IN FLETSTRETE IN THE HOVS OF THOmas Berthelet.
            
            Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
            Anno dni. 1550.
            
            
         
      
   