
      
         
            
            A
MODEST DEFENCE
OF THE
CAVEAT GIVEN TO
THE WEARERS OF
impoisoned Amulets, as
Preseruatiues from
the Plague:
            
            Wherein that point is somewhat
more largely reasoned and debated
with an ancient Physician, who
hath mainteined them by
publicke writing:
            As likewise that vnlearned and dangerous
opinion, That the Plague is not infectious,
lately broched in London, is briefly glansed
at, and refuted by way of Preface,
by FR. HERING D.
in Physicke.
            Reade without preiudice: Iudge without
partialitie.
            Quemadmodum ex attritu lapidum ignis elicitur: sic ex collatione,
& conflictu opinionum emergit veritas.
            LONDON
Printed by Arnold Hatfield for William Iones
dwelling in Red-crosse street at the
signe of the Ship.
1604.
         
         
            
            
            TO ALL THAT
loue health, and honour
Physicke, health of
Mind and Body.
            
               THere is an olde saying (friendly Reader)
that Phylosophers and learned
men agree together like the clocks of
a great citie, which doe seldome concur,
but for the most part differ, and
vary one from another. This is not
without some colour of trueth. Neuerthelesse
we must take heed, that
we doe not therefore condemne good Arts and Sciences, either
of vncertainty or of falshood, folly and vanity, as some haue
done. For this were Solem in crimen vocare, cum lippientes
potiùs oculos tonsori Licinio committeremus. As if a
bleere-eyed man assaying to reade at mid-day, and finding inability,
should lay the fault vpon the Sunne, and not rather seeke
remedy for his ill-affected eyes. Hominum haec sunt vitia,
non Artium. These are the faults of men, and not of good
Arts, whose principles and theorems are true, certaine, constant,
catholicke, and full of most cleare, resplendent and diuine
light; as the Poets haue most pithily shadowed in the Fable
of Prometheus, whom they set forth stealing fire from Jupiter
out of heauen. Ingenia nostra habent suos morbos, quemadmodum
corpora. Our wits indeed haue their diseases as
well as our bodies: as Phylauty or selfe-loue, Pride, Ambition,
Malice, Hatred, Couetousnesse, Vaineglory: and these as so

many clouds, doe come betwixt vs and Lady Alethia, 
               
                  〈◊〉
               
and darkening Prometheus sparks, the little candle or
light of our mindes, in such sort, as oft times we can not, and
sometimes we will not see the trueth. Books and opinions are
Mentis pignora & quasi liberi, as it were the begotten, and
children of our mindes. And what father is there (though otherwise
neuer so prudent) who may not be resembled to the
Crow which thinketh her blacke bird the fairest of all other; or
to the Ape who so ouer-loueth her yoong ones, that by colling
she killeth them? It must be a foule and blacke fault which a father
or rather a mother will see in her sonne: and it must be a
grosse and palpable errour which a man will acknowledge, if it
be of his owne breeding, brooding, or broching.
            Ingenio qui vult cedere rarus erit.
            
               Suum cui
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   pulchrum. Euery one is in loue with his owne
shadow. It is therefore nothing strange vnto me, that the ancient
Physician (with whom I conferre in my 
                  〈◊〉
                discourse)
and other learned men, hauing receiued these 
                  〈◊〉
               
by tradition, without any great examination, do labour to maintaine
them in their writings, by shew and colour of reason. But
I must needs confesse, I cannot but greatly wonder at the strange,
vncoth, and vnreasonable Paradox, broched of late in this city,
That the Plague is not contagious. This fantasticke conceit
bringeth to mind that of the Oratour: Nescio quomodo fiat,
vt nihil tam sit absurdum quod non dicatur & defendatur
ab aliquo Philosophorum. I know not how it commeth to
passe, that nothing can be spoken so absurdly, which is not defended
by some of the Philosophers.
            If any one of our coat, should maintaine this monstrous and
pernitious heresie, the Tribe of Physicians would be so farre
from disputing the matter with him, as they would straight
send him that Anticeras to purge his braine with Hellebore.
Contra principia negantem non est disp
                     ••
                  tandum. No argument
is to be held with him who denieth principles, and razeth
the grounds and foundations of Arts.
            
                The Plague is thus defined by Physicions Pestis est morbus

acutus contagiosus plurimos inter fiens &c. The pest is
a sharpe contagious disease.Fracast. lib. 2. cap. 3. de morb. contag. Gal. 1. de diff. feb. cap. 2. So that you see the Plague is placed
by Physicians in that ranke of sharpe diseases, which are contagious.
To this iudgement of Aescalapius schoole, the Philosophers,
Orators, Poets, and wise men of all ages haue subscribed.
How often doth Tully call Cataline, and other such like
factious firebrands, Pestes patriae, the plagues of their country:
because as the plague spreadeth his poison vpon the bodies of
men: so they infected the mindes of such Citizens as conuersed
with them, with poisonfull and seditious thoughts and inclinations.
            Shall the ich, scab, measels, small poxe &c. be acknowledged 
catching and infectious, by the experience of euery silly woman;
and shall the plague be esteemed Animal mansuetum, an
harmelesse and innocent creature. But they easily reiect the
authorities and reasons of Physicians as Naturians, for so they
call them, and reason thus from the Scriptures. The plague
is called the sword, the hand, the arrow of God, therefore it
commeth not by Contagion, since neither an hand, a sword, or
arrow doth wound by contagion.
            The French disease is called by a great learned man, Flagellum
diuinum scortatorum, Gods whippes sent from heauen,
to scourge whoore-masters. But if any man would heereupon
conclude that it were not contagious, common experience
would put out his Eies. Therefore these two will well concurre
together, that the Lues Gallica, is a punishment inflicted by
God vpon the filthy and beastly sinne of whooredome (which in
this age is counted but a sport) and may be truely called the
hand, the sword, the arrow of God smiting whoore-masters, and
that withall it is catching and infectious, as appeareth euidently
in that it commeth not onely by vncleane company, but likewise
by the breath or contrectation of the tainted parties, and is
sucked in, from the brest of impure women, by poore infants,
and the nurses themselues giuing sucke to a childe whose parents
were polluted, are oft-times infected. The like may be
said of the Leprosie, which may be also called the hand and arrow

of God, & neuerthelesse is so infectious, that in all well ordered
common-wealths, the parties tainted therewith, Communi
consortio excludantur, are commanded to dwell apart,
Non est malum in ciuitate, quod non faciat Dominus.
There is no euill in the city, which the Lord doth not. It is
therefore a fond conceit, to thinke that to euery particular man
a seuerall plague or arrow is sent, and not rather a generall disease
whereby one infecteth another. But they argue further.
            That which God inflicteth vpon men by the ministerie of angels,
is not to be reckoned among naturall effects: But the plague
&c. Psal. 88. 1. Paral. 21. Ezech. 4. therefore it is not to be
reckoned among naturall effects, and by consequent the plague
is no naturall disease.
            If they will reason firmly, they must adde this word (immediately)
vnto the proposition. And then we will chalenge the assumption
as faulty and insufficient. It must be confessed that the
angels themselues are not to be reckoned among naturall causes.
But what shall let that, by the appointment of God, naturall
causes should be mooued, and actuated by the angels. Doe
not angels both good and badde mooue and stirre vp the will of
man, though the maner of their workings be secret, and to vs
vnknowen, if not incomprehensible? This is euident by the history
of Achab,
               Vid. hist. Achab, Iudae. and Iudas. But who will deny that the will of
man is in the number of naturall causes, and principles. And
if the will of man may be inclined and disposed by angels, why
should we thinke that they haue nothing to doe with other naturall
causes. Moses by lifting vp his rod, brought armies of
flies and lice vpon Egypt, raised a terrible haile, smot the Egyptians
with malignant vlcers. This was an extraordinary ministery
of Moses, aswell as of the angels. But shall we therefore
thinke, that the lice and flies came not of putrefaction, the haile
of vapors concret sodenly in the aire, the vlcers by the rotting
of humors. Satan hauing a commission signed from God, by a
mightie tempest of winde blew vp the roofe where Iobs children
were. Doth it therefore follow that he vsed no naturall
causes, or is not rather euident that those Princes of the aire, do

in a moment stirre vp those naturall impressions? The diuell
casteth the saints into prison, 2. Apocal. 10. But by Tyrants
and enemies of the church. In the 6. chap. The pale horse, on
whom death sitteth as the horseman, receiueth power to kill,
by sword, famine, wilde beasts. Why shall we suppose that he
vsed not naturall matter in bringing the plague and famine, as
well as in sending wilde beasts or the sword, which are naturall
instruments. Afterward in the 4. chap. The angels haue
charge to restraine the foure windes that they hurt not the
earth or sea. Whereupon it followeth that vpon the Lords
command they are likewise turned loose, and bring with them
diuers affections and mutations of the aire, and especially contagious
seminaries. It is apparant that the diuell (who being a
spirit, and of long continuance and experience, must needs be a
great Naturian) reacheth to certaine witches called Veneficae,
diuers strong and vnknowne poysons: whereby those wretched
creatures worke much mischiefe. Againe, if no naturall
causes did concurre in the pest, then could no naturall remedies
ease it, much lesse cure it. But experience leadeth vs that both
these are vntrue. We deny not but that the angels are vsed
as instruments & ministers to inflict this iudgement and plague
of the plague for the sinnes of men, neither that this disease
hath in it Diuinum quid, a secret and hidden nature, so that
we may iustly with the inchanters of Egypt acknowledge it the
finger of God, yet we thinke it as absurd to affirme that there
commeth no plague, but by the stroke and ministery of angels,
as if a man should contend, that there was neuer any haile, tempest,
thunder, proceeding from naturall causes, because we
read, that great hailes, stormes and windes haue beene raised
by the ministery of angels. Historians report, that an old
arke or monument being opened in Babylon, there exhaled out
of it, so pernitious and infectious a spirit or breath, that propagated
the plague euen to the remote Parthians. And in the
time of Marcus the Emperour, the souldiers of Auidius
Cassius, digging into an ancient sepulchre in hope of golde,
which had not beene touched for many hundred yeeres, there

followed instantly a huge and fearefull mortalitie. Iulius Obsequeus
reporteth, that Aetna casting smoke and fire in abundance,
did exanimate and kill the fishes of the sea adioyning,
which the Liparenses certaine Ilanders feeding vpon greedily,
brought a greeuous pestilence among them. Orosius, Eutropius,
Augustine de ciuit. Dei, and Liuie lib. 9. make mention
of prodigious swarmes of Locusts in Africa, which lying
dead vpon the shores, and corrupting the aire, bred such a pest,
as consumed in the sole kingdome of Masinissa, 80000. and
many more in the adiacent Countries, and in Vtica, of 3000.
men, 10. onely suruiued.
            This may be sufficient to shew that the plague is not alwaies
the immediat stroke of angels. Galen reporteth, that vpon a
dearth in his time, wherein the poorer sort of people were constrained
to feed vpon roots, acornes, with other more vnholesome
and corrupted aliments, there insued a great mortalitie.
The vlcers & botches which are thrust out by nature, the preternaturall
heat, the drought, the restlesnesse, with many other
symptomes and accidents of feuers, doe proclaime this affliction
a naturall maladie. It hath beene obserued in this last mortality
among vs (the wounds whereof are yet fresh and bleeding)
that women haue passed thorow the pikes more easily & happily
than men. So that this hath bene called The womens yere; because
it is thought that for one woman, 6. or 10. men haue died.
We must not therefore thinke,The like may be said of children who haue died in great numbers: nature in thē being weak and not able to resist the furie of the disease. that either the Angell is partial
in sparing them, or their sins lesse hainous or notorious than the
sinnes of men. The reason hereof (as Physicians haue conceiued)
is because they haue beene more tractable and easily perswaded
to keepe themselues warme, to keepe house and bed:
and by these meanes (their bodies being likewise more soft, tender,
and perspirable) haue spent by sweating and insensible
transpiration the venimous matter of the Plague; giuing thereby
more speedy passage to that enemy of life, from the heart and
other noble parts: Whereas men for the most part being ill
house-doues, accustomed to stirring and motion, haue beene very
vnruly and inobsequent to the counsell of their Physicians,

and by exposing themselues to the aire, haue loked in that dangerous
guest, to whom they should rather haue made a golden
bridge. It hath beene likewise obserued, that this Epidemicall
disease hath had as his beginning, so his increment, state, and
declination, and that it is now (for it walketh still amongst vs
in corners) nothing so acute, violent and peremptory for the
most part, neither so contagious and pernitious, as it was in the
State and Strength. Some haue had the plague twise or thrise
this yeere: but if it came only by the Angell, he might vndoubtedly
say with him, Let me strike once, and I will not strike the
second time. Secession and departing the city hath beene questionlesse
a meane to preserue many; as appeareth euidently in
that a small handfull among those great numbers who haue
stepped aside, haue fallen by this sicknesse in the Countrey, and
those carrying with them from hence the seminaries thereof, in
comparison of those huge multitudes which haue died in the City:
And could not the Angell haue found them out, as well in
the Countreys as in London? Againe, diuers families vpon
their returne, being safe in the Countrey, haue beene presently
visited, & emptied. Shall we imagine that the punishing Angell
stayed their retiring, and had no commission to deale with
them out of the City? and not rather thinke, that the aire of the
City being tainted, & their bodies disposed to receiue infection,
this euill hath seized vpon them? If we looke into the city, we
shall finde that in Cheap-side and other open and large streets,Remember the hideous and lamentable crie in Oliues parish in Southwarke.
and in faire, roomy, and spacious houses the Pest hath not set
in such sure footing, nor made such hauocke, as in narrow lanes,
allies, and other pestered and noisome corners, where families of
poore people are thronged together, as men vse to packe woollsacks
one vpon another, so that one of them can scarse breathe
beside his fellowes face. Shall we imagine, that faire and ample
streets, that sweet and goodly houses are priuiledged from the
stroke of the Angell, or from the arrowes of the Almighty, more
than poore and smoakie Cottages? Are not such places as full
fraught and replenished with sinnes of all sorts crying to heauen
for vengeance, as those low and base Cabbins of simple and

miserable creatures? I am not ignorant how ignorant and vnlearned
men argue (as they suppose) strongly against all these
things. If the Plague proceed from naturall causes, or corruption
of the aire, then all persons without exception, who liue and
and breathe in the corrupted aire, must needs be poisoned and
infected: which all men know to be vntrue. But Reason it selfe
will easily teach vs the inconsequence of this argument: for who
knoweth not, that one and the same cause doth not alwayes
worke alike, and that effects are varied according to the variety
and diuersity of the suffering matters and obiects. The same
Sunne hardeneth the clay, and mollifieth the waxe: one and
the same Northern winde doth not pinch and pierce all bodies
with the like coldnesse. If we should grant that all mens bodies
were alike disposed to receiue the infected aire (which is most
false) yet there may be many causes why the like effect should
not follow in them all. As (to make it plaine) because one man
hath carefully vsed some soueraigne and apposit Preseruatiue,
another hath neglected or contemned all such courses; and as
bolde and blinde bayard rushed vpon all dangers: another being
a little touched or tainted, hath straightway sent for, or
consulted with a learned Physician, and taken a conuenient and
rationall medicine: another either scorneth and refuseth Physicians
and Physicke, or els sendeth to the Physician, when the
bell is ready to toll for him, and when the steed is stollen begins
to shut the stable doore.
            But beside and aboue all this, we must know that God Almighty
hath an ouerruling hand, whereby he doth guide and
direct naturall causes and effects, and heereupon it commeth to
passe, that Contagion though neuer so strong, cannot seaze on
all though neuer so much disposed and exposed thereunto. All
men are not poysoned that drinke poyson;Psal. 91. nor all killed with the
sword or shot, that goe to warre.Marc. 18. And yet poyson is lethall, and
the sword deuoureth as well one as another. Therefore to argue
that diuers Physicians, Nurs-keepers and Surgeons, conuersant
about sicke persons, are not tainted at all, therefore there
is no contagion in the Pest, is all one as if a man should reason

thus, that the poyson of the viper were not deadly, because the
Apostle Paul, being bitten by a viper, had no harme, or that
the sword is no deuourer,Act. 20. 5. because Iehosaphat being strongly
belaid, and crying to the Lord, was deliuered and passed with
his life. I haue cursorily runne ouer these things, because the
argument hath beene more largely handled of late by a iudicious
Diuine, and the opinion hath beene since that time somewhat
minsed, and qualified; how substantially and clarke-like
I will not now stand to discusse. Onely I thought meet (because
this conceit is not onely erroneous, but dangerous and pernitious
to the weale-publicke, and being too grossely broched at the
first, hath left a deepe impression in the mindes of the vulgar
sort, who are as the Oratour saith, Pluma ipsa leuiores, as
light as feathers, tossed to and fro with euery blast of vaine,
ann idle heads, briefly to touch it by the way, Tanquam aliud
agens. It remaineth, that acknowledging the pests, contagion,
we notwithstanding (who are Christians) carefully auoid that
faithlesse and Paganish fearefulnesse, whereby we are made
to breake all the bonds of Religion, Consanguinitie, Alliance,
friendship and pollicie: the husband forsaking and abandoning
his deare wife, the parents leauing their children to sinke or
swimme, the Pastor exposing his flocke to euery deuouring
woolfe, and the Magistrate his people vnder his charge to all
confusion and disorder. We are apt to rush into extremities.
This were Incidere in Scyllam, whilest we would Charibdim
vitare, to auoid one euill, and commit as great, or greater
mischiefe. As he is to be esteemed a good subiect and citizen,
who though he will not intrude into euery fray made by desperate
Ruffians, with whom he hath nothing to doe, least he catch
a broken pate, or woorse turne, yet will boldly enter the battell
against the enimie of his Countrey when he is thereto called by
his Prince, though with euident hazard of his life: so he is to
be reputed a grounded & discrete Christian, who as he will not
rush rashly into euery infected and visited house without iust
cause, warrant or calling, so when he is called, or tied by any
bond of Piety, Nature, or Policy, he will not forsake his station,

or detract and forslow any duty or office, though the performance
thereof be with euident danger of health, goods or life it
selfe. For in these cases we may confidently expect a protection
from Heauen, and say with Hester, If I die, I die. If we fall,
we shall fall in, and not out of our way, wherein the Lord of
heauen guide vs by his good spirit of wisedome, till we come to
the end thereof, which is the saluation of our Souls.
            Now to returne to our Amulets, from whom by occasion we
haue made ouerlong a digression: as I gaue at the first a briefe
aduertisement concerning them, without any euill intention to
wound any particular man in his credit, (no not if I had beene
able, as I am not) so I haue reioyned not in any contentious humour,
but in a desire to be satisfied if I erre, and reformed in
my iudgement. I must needs acknowledge, that considering the
obiect of my Profession, which is that short Epitome of the
grand world, that wonder and Miracle of Nature, that Temple
of the holy Ghost, that Lord of the inferiour creatures,
Man, I haue bene very scrupulous (if not superstitious in) vsing
any doubtfull, suspitious, or dangerous Medicine whereof
I haue not beene well and thoroughly perswaded. If any suppose
this to be Contentio de lana caprina aut asini vmbra,
too base and meane a toy or trifle to be stood vpon, let him remēber
that it is made no base dredge, but a noble, catholike, &
diuine Medicine, by the Authors and commenders thereof. He
may likewise call to minde, that the most precious Balmes, and
soueraigne Antidots, & (which is more, Physicke herselfe, that
noble science, is esteemed no better by many than a meere trifle.
Besides this, if the greatest, learnedest, and complet
Prince of Europe, haue vouchsafed of late to stoope so low as
to take vp (though to throw away againe) that base, strange,
ill-sauouring weede, or rather intoxicating poison Tobacco,
discoursing thereof so learnedly, iudicially, and admirably, as
he may seeme to haue beene brought vp all his life, at the feet of
Hippocrates, and not exercised from his birth, in the gouernment
of great States and Kingdomes, it can be no disparagement
for me, who am infimus è plebe, to spend some

few spare houres in the examination of these Amulets. Wherin,
if I haue failed, and slipped now and then, (as I feare I haue too
often) impute it I pray thee (friendly Reader) to my manifold
auocations and distractions in this heauy, dolefull, and lamentable
time of visitation:

                  Da mihi Maeoniden & tot circumspice Casus
                  Ingenium tantis excidet omne malis.
               
The Lord of his infinit goodnesse continue and perfect his gracious
worke of mercy toward vs, in remoouing wholy this grieuous,
contagious, and fearefull Plague, putting vp his sword
altogether into the sheath; and restoring vnto vs the daies
of Health and Comfort, that we being schooled by
these afflictions, may euery one of vs breake off
our sinnes by compassion to the poore, and
putting away the wickednesse that is
in our hands, serue him in holinesse
and righteousnesse
all the daies of
our life.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A
MODEST DEFENCE
OF THE CAVEAT GIVEN
TO THE WEARERS OF
impoisoued Amulets, as Preseruatiues
from the
Plague.
            
               
                  AMicus Plato, Amicus Socrates,
sed magis Amica Veritas. Plato
is a friend, & Socrates a friend,
but Trueth ought to be the
chiefest friend to all true Philosophers,
much more Christians.
I set foorth of late a
short Caueat, concerning empoisoned Amulets,
or Plague-cakes (as they are called) moued thereunto,
as by many other reasons, so especially, because
I greatly feared, that through an vnsound
and idle persuasion of their force, other more rationall
and effectuall remedies were neglected. An
ancient and graue Physician, whom I reuerence for
diuers good respects, hath stood vp, and pleaded
their cause. I amno Pythagorean; Nullius addictus
iurare in verba magistri. I would not willingly pinne
my iudgement vpon any mans sleeue, be he neuer
so graue and learned, vnlesse I be drawen by good

and sound reason. Humanum est errare. Therfore remaining
yet vnsatisfied, I haue thought good, not
in any contentious humor, but in desire the trueth
may be sifted out, and my selfe resolued and better
instructed (if I erre) to consider of them somewhat
more largely; That if they be found so noble and
Catholike a Medicine as some esteeme them, they
may be still retained, and imbraced in our bosoms;
and if vpon examination they prooue suspicious,
dangerous and hurtfull, they may be cashered and
abandoned. First therefore, because Opinion and
Name preuaile much to forestall the Market, and
wholly possesse mens mindes with preiudice, leauing
no one roome for reason, I will be silent a
while, and you shall heare one of the most learned,
wise, and famous Physicians of Europe (I meane Horatius
Augenius) very learnedly, ingenuously, iudicially,
grauely and honestly (after his maner) vttering
his mind of this point in Question. Whom
I produce the rather, because it is intimated, that
Italian Physicians (which Countrey without question
breedeth many excellent men in that faculty)
haue these Amulets in high and rare estimation.
Heare therefore what Augenius without exception
one of the greatest Masters in Physicke that Italie
nourisheth at this day (if he be yet aliue) speaketh
to this purpose Lib. 3. de Peste cap. 27. De sublimato,
Arsenico Cristallino, & Puluere Bufonis. I haue read in
the writings of some Empericks, that the powder
of a Toad, Arsenicke, or Sublimat, if they be
worne vpon the region of the heart, so as they
touch the skin, do maruellously preserue men from

the Plague. And they esteeme this as a great secret;
and as I vnderstand haue drawen some rich
persons to be of their opinion. I who do not easily
beleeue euery thing which I reade or heare, doe
greatly doubt of the force and nature of those poisons,
and do assuredly persuade my selfe, that they
can neuer produce any such effect. And that I may
lay open my opinion, we must know that Experience
(especially in such kinds) is perillous: for since
the action of the Physician is performed vpon so
noble a Subiect as the body of Man, the nature and
force of euery vnknowen medicine is with great
iudgement to be examined & searched out: and the
Rule of Examination is to cōsider whether Reason
approue and persuade it, or disclaime and reiect it.
If Reason allow and persuade it, thou maiest boldly
vse it without scruple; but if Reason gainsay it, no
medicine is to be vsed, vnlesse thou be assured of
the operation thereof, by the long experience of
men of singular iudgement. I say long experience;
for we must not trust one, two, or three experiments:
but very many are to be diligently considered
and wisely gathered, that the right habit of experience
may be attained, which may deserue the
commendation of all men, because it is one of the
instruments (as we haue sayd elsewhere) by whose
meanes and helpe, Remedies are inuented. We
must likewise marke well, that our experience take
her originall from a man worthy to be credited, of
great iudgement, wise, knowing well how to distinguish
from what cause the successe proceedeth,
whether from the medicine, the temperament of

the body, the time of the yeere, chance, or other
infinite respects. It falleth out dayly, that we see
many effects, which haue a farre different cause
from that the common people dreame of. Now to
applie those things that haue beene spoken, to our
purpose, I affirme confidently, that such a medicine
of poisons applied outwardly to the body, hath no
manifest, probable or demonstratiue reason, whereby
we may be persuaded that they haue so miraculous
efficacie against the Plague. They will say,
that by similitude of substance there is attraction of
the venim from the heart, to the outward part, by
the attractiue vertue of the poison. But this can not
so much profit, as euidently hurt. Let vs grant, that
the venimous facultie of the poison penetrateth to
the heart, I pray you what effect will it produce
there? It can not draw the venom to it: for there is
none, because he whom we will preserue is yet
sound. If therefore, the heart be disposed to receiue
the venimous infection of the aire, what shall hinder
the force of the outward poison, that it may not
infect the heart and other principall parts, and if it
be once entred into the heart, what shall let the distribution
of it by the Arteries into all the bodie?
O great miracle, and neuer yet heard of, that a venimous
facultie should flow into the heart, wander
thorow the Arteries, & not finding his looked for
friend, should go out againe without any offence
offered to the parts whereby he passed. Besides, if
the attractiue facultie be inuenimed, what reason
can be giuen, the heart should not be continually
offended by the poison thereof. It is euident, thar

the heart is the principall obiect of poisons: how
then shall it be touched by a venimous qualitie, and
not endure wrong? Touching their experience, I
cannot yet giue credit to it. I desire to see these
things often tried, with good successe, to haue many
testimonies of Physicians of great iudgement,
before I can beleeue them. But let vs come to those
that are infected, and haue the poison actually seized
on their heart. It may be they may doe them
good. None at all. For attraction proceedeth
from the stronger power, which draweth to it that
which is weaker. Let then some man tell me how
he can be sure, that the poison of the Plague shall
not draw to it the venim of the outward medecine;
and why the poison thereof may not be stronger
and greater than the other. Besides, the matter of
the Plague is not properly poison but by similitude,
and therefore cannot be drawen by another poison.
But me thinke I heare one answer to all my
arguments, that the effect is performed, though the
cause be vnknowen because it is secret. This is the
miserable refuge of al empericks, wherby they may
easily wind out of any doubt, and absolue the most
intricate Question of our Art without much adoe.
But I abhorre this from my heart; not because I allow
no secret causes, which I grant, but because I
thinke it a notorious fault, redounding greatly to
the reproch of our Art, if we run still to hidden causes,
when manifest reason may easily end the controuersie.
How will they demonstrate that poisons
haue this effect? By experience. But what experience
can they shew worthy to receiue this credit?

And where are the Physicians of note and learning,
which approue them? You haue heard my
opinion, reseruing to others their better iudgement.
            Now that I haue stayed your stomacks with this
honest, graue, and iudiciall speech of Father Augenius
that great and learned Italian Physician, who
(if I be thought too light) may well weigh in the
ballance with any one man whosoeuer he be, giue
me leaue briefly to examine the reasons that are
produced to proue, that these Amulets do no hurt:
secondly, that they do good.
            The first Argument, if it be not altogether impertinent,
must thus be reduced to forme:
            There is vse of poisons in Physicke: therefore
impoisoned Amulets of Arsenicke or such
like, may be safely vsed by men in health, to
preserue them from the Plague without hurt.
            The proposition is somewhat largely stood vpon,
which was neuer to my knowledge called into
question by any man of iudgement, and the consequence
which should haue beene proued, left altogether
vntouched.
            Physicke consisteth of diuers parts. That may be
of vse in the Hygieine the preseruing part, which
hath no place in the Therapeuticall. And there be
many things of speciall vertue in the Therapeutice,
which if a man should practise vpon sound bodies
to preserue their health, he might well be sent to
Anticyrae to purge with Hellebore his vnsound
braine. A sturdie horse requires a rough rider. Duro
Nodo durus Cuncus. In magnis & 
                     〈◊〉
                   Morbis,

vbi ager necessariòex morbo periclitatur anceps potius
Remedium tentandum quàm nullum.
               Vrimus secamus. In such cases
Physicians are inforced to vse Euphorbium, Opium,
and Paracelsus his deceitfull Laudanum, and
that sometimes in large quantitie: which yet no
wise man will prescribe to his Patients to preserue
them in health. There is therefore vtterly no consequence
in this, that because there may be sometimes
in some diseases vse of Deleteries in the Therapentice,
therefore they may be safely vsed as Preseruatiues
to maintaine health. For in such cases
they are opposed against the disease to fight with it
as an Enemy, and so by their colluctation Nature
sometime saueth herselfe, as when by the fighting
of two dogges, a Man sometime escapeth without
hurt or wound.
            In the Curatime part of Physicke, there is a necessarie
vse of the Saw, and of both potentiall and
actuall fire. Secamus, vrimus. And yet by your
leaue a Man in health will hardly be persuaded to
such Preseruatiues.
            Before I leaue this argument, I will by your patience
point at some defects in the proofe of the
proposition. Arsenicke, Orpiment, Toads and
Adders, are acknowledged ranke and deadly poisons
in the highest degree. This is true concerning
the Minerals which consist of similar parts. But
touching Toads and Adders, it cannot be verified,
that they be absolutely and generally poisons. For
these haue their venome, Incertis, & determinatis
Partibus: in certaine and determinate parts, not vniuersally
diffused thorow the whole bodie. Touching

Adders or Vipers it is euident that their Poison
lodgeth onely in the head, (specially the teeth
and taile. Their flesh (which onely is receiued) into
that noble Medicine (which thereof hath his
name, and is called Triacle) is so farre from being a
poison, that it is a present Antidote against the poison
of the other parts. And this will not seeme
strange if we dare credit Iacobus Ferrarius, a learned
Physician of Mantua, who in his booke De Theriaca
lately set foorth, reporteth that he hath seene
mens hands besprinkled with the blood of Vipers,
without any farther offence than a little itching for
a short time. And I haue beene informed by men
yet liuing in our owne Country, that they haue
seene of our adders after their teeth haue beene pulled
out, handled in mens hands, and caried in their
bare bosoms familiarly without hurt. The like is to
be verified of the Scorpion, who carieth his venom
in his taile. And therefore when they would dispatch
themselues, they turne vp their taile toward
their backe, and there shooting their stings kill
themselues. And this they doe when they are so
pursued as they see no way to escape, making by
that meanes a speedy riddance of themselues. Neither
could they die so speedily of so small wound, if
the instrument inflicting the same were not venemous,
since they will endure farre greater wounds,
without danger of life. Therefore it is euident, that
there is in the taile of the Scorpion a poison contrary
to the life and temperament of the Scorpion.
The poison of the Spanish flies called Cantharides,
is esteemed to reside in the head, wings, and legs,

and the body very medicinable. So the poison of
a madde dogge lodgeth onely in his fome. The
poison of Asps in their egges: of the Leopard in
the gall or choler onely: of the venemous Mouse
in the vrine: the Tortoise in the outward skinne.
But to returne to Adders or Vipers, incomparable,
Galen in his 11. booke of the faculty of simple medicines,
and in his booke De opt. Secta cap. 12. telleth
of certaine persons who being desperately diseased,
by the vse of wine, whereinto whole adders
had by chance fallen, not onely receaued no maner
of hurt, but happily thereby recouered their
health. There is therefore so great vertue in the
flesh of vipers to resist malignity, that the venome
of the externall parts seemeth by the force thereof
altogether drowned and subdued. It followeth not
therefore, because there is poison in the viper, therfore
his whole subiect is a strong poison. For so a
man might conclude, that the whole body of some
men is poison, because there is in their spettle and
teeth a venemous quality, as I my selfe with others
haue seene euidently by a man in London, who being
bitten by another lightly in the hand, was so
impoisoned, that the whole hand rotted, and the
party thereof shortly died. I maruell therefore that
a man of note for experience & iudgement, would
open such a gappe to the vulgar sort, to loath and
contemne Physicke and Physicians, (whereunto
they are prone inough of themselues) as to affirme
that one of their most noble and famous medicines
hath a strong poison, his Basis and principall Ingredient.
Galen in his booke De Ther. ad Pis. saith,

that the fat of the Crocodill laid vpon the wound,
helpeth those that are bitten by the Crocodill.
The biting of the venemous Mouse, is healed by
the Mouse brused, and laid vpon the place. After
the same maner, they that are smitten by the Viper,
are helped if you bruise the Viper and apply her to
the wound. The body of the Scorpion laide vpon
the part, healeth hir poison. Dioscor. lib. 6. cap. 44.
E alia quam plurima animalia sua curant maleficia.
Yet the fatte of the Crocodill, the body of the
Scorpion, or venemous Mouse, are not receaued
into the composition of the Treacle, but doe onely
helpe their owne poisons. We must therefore obserue,
that nature hath not onely giuen venemous
parts to these creatures, but others which are alexeterys
to their owne poison. Secus (ait quidam) omnia
illa, ad vnum maleficium edidisset, ac de venenis sollicita,
remediorum fuisset oblita Otherwise she should haue
framed them wholy to euill and hurt, and being
carefull of poisons, should haue beene forgetfull of
remedies. Natura autem vt in superfluis non abundat,
sic non deficit in necessarijs. Nature as she abounds
not in superfluities, so she is not defectiue in necessaries.
Now these alexetery parts (as I may call
them) are of two sorts: Some haue an ingenit propertie
of curing their owne poisons, without admistion
of other things, as the fatte of the Crocodill
and the Scorpion whereof our Marchants that
trauell to Constantinople haue good experience.
Other haue an ingenit and mixed faculty, as the
body of the Viper, which without other alexeterys
being laid on the wound, cureth hir owne poison:

and with commistion of other Antidots, extinguisheth
in a maner all poisons: Galen explicateth this
twofold faculty, Lib. de Ther. ad Pis. cap. 4. where
hauing said that the head and taile of the Vipers
are to be cut off, he addeth: And maruell not that
these parts being taken away, the rest of the members
doe make the Antidot more effectuall, by the
ingenit and admixed faculty of helping, which is
in their flesh. After he calleth their faculty ingenit,
and admixed: For as by their ingenit faculty they
cure their owne poison, so by their admixed property,
Potentissimum efficiunt Alexipharmacum. He
that would be farther satisfied, let him peruse the
booke of Galen, and he shall not thinke his labour
lost. Your sweet kernels in bitter shels, precious
Diamonds in course stones, and Pearles in base
oysters, might serue well to illustrate this which
hath beene already prooued, that there are certaine
liuing Creatures which haue some parts very
hurtfull, or of no or little vse, and others very commodious
and beneficiall to the life and health of
mankind: but maketh nothing at all for your Arsenicke,
who is a minerall and consisteth of similar
parts. The sweet kernell is of a different temperament
to the bitter shell, the precious Diamond of
a more excellent substance then the course stone,
or Oyster wherein he is found. The flesh or sides
of Vipers is of a differing temperament from the
teeth and head, wherein onely resideth the poison.
But in your Arsenicke you can shew me no part, be
it neuer so small, which is not Arsenicke, and that
is a strong and ranke Poison, you may seeke a good

while heere, before you finde either Kernell, Diamond or
Pearle. This is no newes to them who
haue any the least insight in Philosophy: who know
right well that in the body of man, there be Organical
parts much differing in temperament and nature:
and that euery least parcell or portion of a
similar part is of the same nature and substance.
Your cures wrought by the fume of Orpmint and
outward applying of Arsenicke, make nothing to
our purpose: for it hath beene shewed, that there is
vse of many things in the healing part of Physicke,
which haue no place in the preseruing part. And
yet Doctors will perhaps make doubt of them, and
be twise well aduised before they draw them into
practise in hope to worke such miracles as is reported
by them. It is well knowen that your dried
Toad hath failed in that maruellous effect attributed
to him.
            But of all other the words following sound very
strangely and harsh in my eares. I know not how
they can be perpetually opposite to mans nature, nay if
that be a true and sufficient definition of poison. At no
time to agree with nature, I see not how these things
may simply be called poisons, that at sometimes and in
some cases agree with nature aswell as a man would wish.
Here is strange doctrine and new learning indeed,
for our Philosophers and Physicians. You see not
how Arsenicke and such like poisons can be perpetually
opposite to nature. Then giue me leaue since
I learned Logicke since your time, to shew how I
haue conceiued of these matters. The very name of
poison or venom implieth (in my conceit) an absolute

contrariety and hostility vnto Nature. And
Warre is not more aduerse & contrary to Peace,
vertue to vice, blacke to white, then poison is absolutely,
perpetually & irreconcilably opposed vnto
nature. This wil more cleerly appeere if we peruse
the definitions of poisons set downe by the best &
most acute and sound Philosophers & Physicians.
            
               Mercurialis in his first booke of Poisons, cap. 5.
following Gallen and other Philosophers, defineth
poison according to the common notion and apprehensions
of men, to be such a thing as killeth
men and beasts irrecouerably, the cause being vnknowen.
Auicen (not so properly) calleth it a Medecine
contrary to mans nature. Galen lib. 3. de
Temp. calleth that an Aliment which is subdued
by Nature, and that Poison which subdueth and
vanquisheth Nature. Himselfe defineth it thus:
Poison is a mixed substance, enemy to the heart,
and corrupter of humane nature. Fernelius the
French Galen lib. de Abt. Rer. Caus. defineth poison
to be, not that which alwayes killeth or opposeth
the heart the fountaine of life, but whatsoeuer by
his whole substance and secret force doth either
extinguish or notably offend the substance of the
faculties or their functions.
            Physicians consider and contemplat a threefold
difference of Subiects in their reference and relation
to humane Nature: The first sort are called Aliments,
the second Medicaments, the third and last
Deleteries or Poisons. Aliments all are such things
as haue a substance like and familiar vnto ours, containing
a certaine benigne and wholsome heat and

spirit, whereby the heat and spirits of our bodies
are cherished and supported, and a matter passing
by alteration into the matter of our bodies nourishing
and increasing the substance of them. Deleteries
are such as in their whole substance, directly
and as it were ex Diametro, are opposed to Aliments.
For as they are in a neere familiaritie and
affinitie leagued and linked to our Nature; so these
are altogether enemies and pernitious vnto her,
which being vsed do not onely affect vs with their
first and second qualities, but in their whole kinde
do corrupt whatsoeuer they touch in our bodies,
and putrifying the substance thereof, turne it into
their owne kinde and Similitude. Therefore Aliments
and Deleteries are in their whole kinde and
substance extremely contrary one to the other. In
the middle ranke betwixt these two extremes purging
Medicines haue their place; which neither as
nutriments may be conuerted into our substance,
neither as Deleteries altogether corrupt and consume
the same. These doe partly agree and partly
disagree with Nature, so as they neither ouercome
her nor can be ouercome by her. Therefore Nature
thrusteth them out of doores as seditious and
turbulent guests, suffering them onely to carry
with them bagge and baggage, I meane that humor
which she may well spare, and hath most agreement
and affinitie with them. Now if Poison
be contrary to Nature, if it subdue and ouercome
Nature, if it be an enemy to the heart, and a corrupter
of Nature, if it be in his whole kind and substance
opposed to Aliments, Natures food, as Auicen,

Galen Mercurial, and Fernelius, the Lights and
fathers of Physicke and Philosophy haue determined,
I hope we shall salue Galens credit wel enough:
and Galens description of Poison will stand as true
and sufficient, That Poison is that which at no time
agreeth with Nature. How then shall we answer
this argument? If it it be a true definition of Poison
at no time to agree with nature, then you must put
out Arsenicke, Orpmint with others mo out of the
cense and order of Poisons, which sometimes and
in some cases agree with Nature as well as a man
would wish. How is this proued? Thus. All those
things which do cure any Disease, agree with Nature as
well as a man would wish. Arsenicke, Orpmint doe cure
some Diseases, as Vlcers and such like; therefore they agree
with Nature as well as may be.
            
            The lame legge of the proposition hath beene in
some sort already pointed at, and the extreme limping
and halting thereof will easily appeare to him
that hath but halfe an eye in Philosophy or Physicke,
at the first glimpse. For many Philosophers
hold it as a Principle (though not so soundly) that
all Medicaments or Curers do Vim aliquam inferre
Naturae. They that are more sound and iudiciall
make three Orders & Ranks of Medecines, which
(though some apply to purgers) may be verified of
all in generall. The first Order is of those which
they call Benigne and blessed medicines, because
they are very familiar and friendly to Nature, performing
their operation without any the least offence
of her. Others are called Indifferent or moderate,
because they worke though somewhat

more strongly, yet without offering any singular or
 notable wrong vnto Nature. The third and last,
are termed Violent, churlish or rough-hewen, because
they in their operation doe forcibly vellicat,
offend and violat her.
            Now if you will haue Arsenicke a Medicament,
you must needs set him in one of these three ranks.
In the first or second I am well assured you will not
place him. It remaineth then that he must be ranged
in the last band of sturdy and boisterous Companions,
who are ywis no great friends vnto Nature.
In this order are Scammony, Hellebore, Euphorbium,
who though they haue their vse, and
the woorst of them be more tollerable then Arsenicke,
yet was it neuer (as I suppose) pronounced of
them by any man of iudgement, that They agree
with nature as well as a man would wish. The saw, the
burning iron or actuall causticke do cure some diseases,
yet how abhorrent these things are to nature,
all men doe know. We must not thinke that all
those things who by vanquishing and subduing
their enemie the disease, doe giue reliefe and ease to
nature, are therefore in themselues and their proper
essence agreeable and friendly vnto Nature.
Ellebor, Scammony &c. (of whom before) who in
their owne essence being hot and fiery, are apt to
inflame the body, and to kindle a fire or feuer where
none was before, yet in a body stuffed with choler,
melancholy, and such ill humors, doe by carying
away with them the fuell which gaue nourishment
to the fire, do by accident relieue nature, put out
the fire, and cure the disease. Two or three Flemish

draughts of cold water haue somtimes cured a burning
feauer, by quenching the flame: And yet Arius
the Grammarian was killed by Thessalus by
one onely draught: and cold water agreeth so well
with most mens Natures, that they had rather
powre it into their shooes then their stomacks.
            In the next place we are instructed how to preuent
or cure the blisterings and vlcerations procured
by these plague cakes. This is all one as if a
man should first breake his fellowes head, and then
giue him a plaister. Onely one means is mentioned
to preuent this inconuenience, which is, the taking
away of the cakes, or rather (as I would counsell)
the vtter reiecting thereof, which I cannot mislike.
Otherwise your lapping of him in thicker stuffe,
your putting linnen betwixt him & the brest, your
annointing the place with oile, as they giue more
than suspition of his churlish and malignant property,
aduerse and pernitious vnto nature, who seemeth
to be in best case when he is farthest from
her, and to delight nothing in his neighbourhood,
so they will be found poore helpes, and weake
meanes to encounter his strong poison, and malitiousnesse.
            As for the question which is moued; Whether to
haue such things appeare, be not rather a benefit than
an harme. I take it to be out of all question, that to
raise blisters and vlcerations, in so noble a place, so
neere to the heart the fountaine of life, by so venemous
a subiect as Arsenicke, cannot be any way beneficiall,
but euery way offensiue and noisome. For
first what learned Physician hath euer counselled

Vesicatorys to be applied in that Region so neere
vnto the most principall Part. Next, what reason is
there of any such Euacuation, when we labour to
preserue them that are sound. And if they be tainted
with any venemous matter, how shall we be
perswaded that Arsenicke will by blisters expell the
same, and not rather ioine hand in hand with it to
ouerthrow Nature, hauing by them entrance and
accesse: especially if we consider the old Maxime,
Simile simili additum fit magis simile. Besides the best
learned who haue receiued these Amulets, hold
that Arsenick by a similitude of substāce doth draw
the poison of the plague vnto it selfe, and not expell
it, which must be done by an Antipathy and contrariety:
for that Arsenicke should strengthen Nature
and helpe her to expell it, since it is an vndoubted
and deadly enemy to Nature, is improbable
if not insensible.
            As no man doth affirme that all blisteres are poisons
because of that effect, and therefore you might
haue spared labour in proouing that which is not
denied, so it is euident that diuers poisons doe produce
that effect, and therefore are the more dangerously
applied neere any principall part, because
heereby they doe open as it were a doore or window
to conuey into the body their infecting noisome
spirits. The cause why Garlicke & Mustarddo
blister the outward skinne, and yet taken inwardly,
haue no such operation, is (as I suppose) because
their heat is an agent being applied to the outmost
skinne, which is a cold and membranous part, and
so hauing no resistance doth rarifie and dissolue his

continuity. But taken inwardly, they are Patients,
the inward heat subduing them, and scattering
their spirits, so as they can not vnite to performe
that action. But Arsenicke is of a farre other Nature,
whose pestilent heat will not be commanded
by Nature, whether he be outwardly or inwardly
vsed, but doth subdue and extinguish naturall heat.
And this I take (vnder correction) to be the solution
of this your Proplem.
            Whereas in the words following you affirme
that it is manifest both by Experience and Reason,
that things outwardly applied, haue action, and
work into the Body by cōmunicating their spirituall
qualities, to the Spirits of our Bodies, by meanes
of the warmth that openeth our Pores, and ratifying
the subtill parts of the medicine, is the cause of
a reciprocall action and passion; and hereupon inferre
that it may seeme strange that Arsenicke and
such like strong Poisons, hauing so strong poisoning
Spirits, should not poison our Spirits wheresoeuer
they meet, you acknowledge that these are
strange works and woonders in Nature: First, that
such poisonfull spirits should mingle with our Spirits,
and not offend them: Secondly, that they
should strengthen them & helpe them to expell infection.
These indeed are strange effects, & therefore
if we be readier to wonder at them than to beleeue
thē hastily, I hope you will pardon vs. But let
vs heare how you satisfie vs, & vnlose this Gordian
knot. First therefore, you set downe this Maxime
or Principle: Arsenicke and Orpmint are no wayes
poisonfull or hurtfull to Nature, but by their corrosiuenes,

or fretting qualities: otherwise, they are as good both
Preseruatiues and Curers, as any other most in vse: and
therefore so long as they are kept from corroding or fretting,
they can do no harme, but may do much good in that
kinde which they do respect: that is to say, in all Arsenicall
Diseases, as the Plague, the Plurisie, Noli me tangere,
Cankers, and Fistulas.
            
            If Arsenicke be a strong Poison (as you acknowledge)
and Poisons be (as hath beene shewed) Toto
Genere & Substantia Naturae contraria. The
deadly Foes, and irreconcilable Enemies to Nature,
then your Principle and Ground must needs
shake, and will prooue no good Foundation to
build vpon, which maketh it onely hurtfull to Nature
by his corrosiuenesse or fretting qualitie. If to
be offensiue to Nature by excesse in some qualitie
or other be sufficient to proue and make a Poison,
then are Scammony, Turbith, Colocynthis, &c.
Poisons, and not Medicaments; for these all offend
Nature in qualitie. You must therefore either
make these Poisons with many moe, to consort
with Arsenicke: and then we shall haue good store
of Poisons. For all such things as are in the 4 Degree
of cold or heat, must be put into this ranke; or
els bring backe Arsnicke from the cense of Poisons
into the Classe of Medicaments: for which I suppose
you will haue small warrant. These indeed by
reason of their excesse in qualitie, are sayd propè accedere
ad venena, and are called Maligna, or Venenata;
but Venena Poisons they can not properly be
called or accounted 
                  •
               ction & passion, according to
Arist. 1. de Gen. 50. 51. Fit inter contraria qua sub vno,

eodem
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Genere comprehenduntur. Therefore an Agent
according to qualities, shall affect the qualities
of the Body, but an Agent in the whole substance
altereth the substance of our Body. Now it
is manifest, that Arsenicke doth not onely worke
vpon the Qualities, but that he corrupteth the very
temperament and substance of the Body.
            If you meane by Arsenicall Diseases, such maladies
whose Curer and specificall Antidot is Arsenicke,
then are we beholding greatly to you, who
haue found out an appropriat Alexetery for the
Plague, whereunto the greatest and most profound
Philosophers and Physicians could neuer attaine.
For it is generally confessed by all, That the specificall
Antidot of the Pest is yet vnknowen. Thucidides
sayth, That that Malady did Superare Humanas
vires, or rather Humanam imbecilitatem. And
the learned Masters of our Profession with one
voice proclaime that forasmuch as the speciall weapon
to kill that Monster is not yet found out, we
must Pugnare contra illam Beluam communibus praesidijs
& remedijs aliorum Venenorum. But I rather suppose
you call those Diseases Arsenicall, because
they haue in them a malignant, poisonfull, and pernitious
venim, resembling the poison of Arsenicke.
How then shall Arsenicke be their Curer, when all
Diseases are cured by their contraries? vnlesse you
will maintaine that dotage of Paracelsus (for so I
must needs call it) against Galen, That Diseases are
cured per similia, by their like. And then, if the Body
be emptie, exhaust and extenuat, we must exhaust
and emptie it more, and not restore and repaire it.

If it be too ful and plethoricke, we must fill it more,
and not euacuat, if it be stopped and obstructed,
then we must ramme and stuffe it vp more, and not
de obstruct and open: if it be too hoat, we must lay
on more wood, and not put out the Fire either by
taking away the fuell or quenching the flame. If
there be Solutio continui, we must not vnite, but disioyne
the parts, & sic in cateris. If I thought that
this vncouth and vnscholarlike Paradox would be
mainteined, it were easie for me to make the Point
as plaine as the Kings high-way. But I muse much
how the Plurisie commeth into the Tribe of these
Arsenicall Diseases, vnlesse you put an addition to
him, and call him a Pestilentiall Plurisie.
            The way whereby these Poisons are metamorphosed
into as good if not better Preseruatiues and
Curers as any most in vse, is to keepe them (as you
say) from fretting and corroding. And that this
may be done, you prooue by example of the
Quacksaluers in Germany, who first drinking sallet
oyle, and after taking great quantities of these poisons,
are preserued from harme and danger. That
Sallet oile, butter, or any other vnctuous things
are good against poisons, it will be readily granted.
But that they should be of such force and efficacy
as to secure a man that should take after them great
quantities of Arsenicke, you shall giue me leaue to
doubt. And I thinke I shal haue mo fellowes, then
there be Mountebanks in Germany, or Curtesans in
Venice. For why should we not thinke that there is
as much vertue in Treacle, Mithridate, and those
other Antidots which they take after those Poisons,

at the least, as in Sallet oile. And yet I hold
not them sufficient to match and master these Poisons.
Neither is it like that Mathiolus had any such
inward familiarity with Mountebanks,Mathiolus telleth of another fraud or iugling tricke farre more probable. lib. 6. coment. in Diosc. prefat. as that they
would acquant him with the secrets and mysteries
of their Art, which they conceale, Tanquam sacra
Eleusinia. But suppose he was tolde this by some
odde Quacksaluer or other, and that he was so credulous
to beleeue it, shall we build the conclusions
of our Art vpon the credit of a iugling Mountebanke,
or will any man be so madde that is compos
mentis, vpon the Mountebanks word to try the Experiment,
& arming himselfe with a good draught
or two of Sallet oile, afterward deuour great quantities
of Arsenicke.
            That the corroding Qualitie of Arsenicke, may
be cleane taken away, you shall pardon me if I beleeue
not your Chynists, if they doe (as you say)
affirme it neuer so confidently. We haue an homely
and true saying, The Diuell will be the Diuell
whether you bake roste, seeth, or broile him, or
howsoeuer you handle him. Naturam expellas &c:
So Arsenicke so long as he remaineth Arsenicke,
(vnlesse you destroy his Nature, and then the case
is altered, He is no more He) will vndoubtedly
shew of what house he commeth by corrodings
and corrupting. Neither doe your instances of
Aron roots, or the gall of an oxe prooue the contrary.
For we must remember that there be two
kindes of Qualities, the one common or as some
call them accidentall; the other specificall and formall.
The Qualities which are common or accidentall,

may be remooued from their Subiects. But
those that are specificall, cannot be separated, Sine
interitu subiecti. As in a man to be hoat, cold, moist,
dry, may be absent or present with him: but to be
risibilis or irascibilis, can in no wise be separated
from him so long as he is a man. The burning Qualitie
of Aron roots is accidentall and common, and
therefore remooueable. But the corroding or poisoning
Quality of Arsenicke (for these you make al
one) is by all learned Physicions held specifical and
essentiall. For else how should it be Toto genere, &
substantia Deleterium. Concerning your Oxe Gall,
whose bitternesse you say you haue remooued, I
say onely this: If it be Gall, then it is bitter, if it be
not bitter, then it is not Gall. If a man put three gallons
of water to three spoonefull of wine, and drawing
out a glasse full, make his friend drinke thereof,
affirming it to be wine, he will be ready to say, that
were it not for the name of wine, he had as leaue
drinke water. Such mixture must haue their name
of the Praedominant. And I suppose that hee that
should taste your sweetned Gall, would call it galled
sugar, and not sugred gall, as one did a cuppe of
drinke mixed by his friend, yet not to the liking of
his stomacke, wined water, and not watred wine.
            Whereas you thinke it absurd, that there should
not be as sure away to correct the poisoning quality
of Arsenicke by minerall meanes, as there is means
to correct the offending qualities, of Scammony,
Agaricke, Hellebor, &c. by vegetables, me thinkes
your speech is very harsh and vncouth, both for the
phrase & sense. For mine own part I neuer heard or

read of the correcting of poisons, but onely of Medicines
offending in quality, of which sort are those
which you haue reckoned, whose offensiue quality
being retunded, they are vsed without danger, and
to the benefit and comfort of mankind. But as for
Arsenicke or such like poisons, being as hath beene
often prooued Toto genere deleteria, the infest and
mortall enemies of Nature, you may as soone make
an Aethiopian white with washing, as make them
friendly and comfortable to our bodies by correcting,
vnlesse by correcting you meane destroying
of their Nature and substance altogether, by
reducing them to a Caput mortuum, as you cal them,
and that is a strange kinde of correcting: or else
they produce such effect by accident, intending no
such matter any more, then Iasons enemy did, who
by his sword cured his Aposteme, which the Physicions
could not heale.
            All this while you haue endeuored to prooue
that these Amulets may be worne without harme,
which how you haue performed, Aliorum sit Iudicium.
Now you will shew how they doe good.
            
               Your opinion concerning the maner how they
doe good, you set downe in these words. I assure
my selfe that there is in these Minerals which the Alchymists
call their spirits, good store of gold, or to speake a
little plainer, of the spirits of gold, and from thence in my
opinion it hath that incredible and admirable operation
in preseruing our spiritis from infection.
            This (as I suppose) will be an incredible and admirable
opinion vnto our Philosophers & Physicians,
who may turne ouer a good number of books,

before they find any mention of such a far-fetched
and dearely bought conceit. There are three seuerall
opinions concerning this matter. The first is,
that by wearing these Amulets, the heart is inured
and accustomed vnto poison, and so by this familiarity
learneth to contemne it. Concerning this
conceit I will say nothing my selfe, but you shall
heare what Crato that most learned Germaine, and
Emperiall Physicion speaketh to it, Epist. ad Monanium.
            
            Touching the bagges of Arsenicke, I finde no
other reason for them woorth mentioning, saue
that thereby the heart is accustomed vnto poison.
But how weake and dangerous a reason this is, and
that a man carefull of a good conscience ought not
to trust to it, you easily discerne. Therefore though
you should produce sixe hundred Authors which
allow them, you shall not perswade me to vse or
approoue them. I can tell you, since you vrge me,
vpon my owne knowledge that Creckouius was so
weakened and exulcerated in the brest by them,
that he threw away the bagge with great indignation
in the castle of Grauestem. I could say the like
of others. That which followeth in Crato is worth
the reading, but I must make haste.
            The second opinion is that of Antonius Firmanus,
who saith that Arsenicke by similitude of substance
draweth to it the venemous and contagious Seminaries
of the Plague, and by that meanes preserueth
him that weareth it. This opinion the Discourser
at large would seeme to follow in his English
Treatise of the Pestilence, lately set foorth,

wherin he alloweth & commendeth the vse of these
Amulets because by a similitude one venome draweth
another as Arsenicke doth, who voideth the poison of the
Plague insensibly. Quod venenum & corpore attrahat,
& tota forma & ratione caliditatis. This Antipathy
in Arsenicke experience doth allow, &c.
            
            Marke how Clarke-like he reasoneth. First he
saith that Arsenicke draweth the venome by similitude
of forme, & ratione caliditatis. Then in the very
next words, either forgetting what he had saide
before, or notvnderstanding, what he was about
to say, he attributeth this effect to an Antipathy or
contrariety. But I will stand no longer about him,
but leaue him to his wandring Muses: Ne quem non
inuenio vsquam esse putem nusquam. Yet one thing
by the way would not be ouerpassed, that whereas
he would be reputed a great Linguist, he hath in
the Epistle to the Reader inserted onely two Greek
words, and the last seemeth not to be vnderstood,
and for the first a meane scholler in Mulcasters
schoole, will easily tell him that it is neither good
Greeke nor yet true Latine, but Caco ethen scribendi
indeed.
            Concerning the opinion it is not true, that
eueryvenome is like to Arsenicke, neither that
euery poison is like in substance and Nature with
another poison: neither can all contagious seminaries
be like to Arsenicke, since they are not
of the same violence, Analogie, or similitude
one with another, as might be easily shewed
some infecting onely Cattle, others Fishes, others
men. What then if the poison of the Plague be not

like in Nature with Arsenicke: what if it be like in
Nature but stronger and hoater then Arsenicke.
Surely then it must draw the poison of Arsenicke,
vnto it into the body, and double the euill.
            The third and last opinion is, that Arsenicke doth
by a certaine secret Antipathy or contrariety oppugne,
vanquish and expell the poison of the
Plague. This hath of all other the most probability
and ground of reason, but it hath place onely then
when the seminaries of the Pestilence are contrarie
to the poison of Arsenicke; for then the two poisons
may warre and skirmish one with the other in
such sort as they both spending their forces and rigor,
ech against the other, and so dying in that colluctation
and combat, the party by accident may
escape with his life. And in this case peraduenture
there might be some trueth in that obseruation
which Philippus Ingrasias, Fallopius and Massa,
learned men, and woorthy of good credit, haue
made. And in this case some suppose that might
be true which Ausonius Gallus reporteth of a leud
huswife in these verses.
            
               Toxica Zelotypo dedit vxor saeua Marito
               nec satis ad mortem credidit esse datum.
               Miscuit argenti lethalia Pondera viui
               cogeret vt celerem vis geminata Necem
               Diuidat haec si quis faciunt discreta venenum
               Antidotum sumit qui sociata bibet
               Ergo inter sese dum noxia pocula certant
               cessit lethalis noxa salutiferae.
               Protinus & vacuos alui petiere recessus
               lubrica deiectis quâ via nota cibis
               
                  
Quam pia cura deûm? prodest crudelior vxor,
               & cum Fata volunt, bina venena iuuant.
            
            And yet the discreet and prudent Physician wil not
heereupon counsell the wearing of Arsenicke to
cure the Plague. For in poisons opposing Nature
in their whole substance, there is no Artificiall or
rationall method as Galen teacheth Meth. 13. cap. 6.
and the Physician cannot discerne but by euent vnto
what poison, or Analogie of poison Arsenicke is
opposit. The sympathys or antipathys of poisons
together with the forces and secret insults of contagious
seminaries, are vnknowen to the Physician.
The idiosygcrasye, or particular Natures (as
Galen calleth them, are vnknowen, & (for ought we
can see) incomprehensible vnto humane imbecillitie,
Gal. 3. Meth. cap. 7. And if the Degree, Nature,
and facultie of that poison be not to be easily discerned,
which proceedeth of corruption of humors
in our bodies, much lesse is that hidden maliciousnesse
of these Minerals which is farre more
subtile, secret, and vnsearchable. First therefore
there must be a poison in the body: next that poison
must be contrary to Arsenicke: thirdly it must
be of equall force, else if he suruiue and be of force
after he hath subdued his enemie, he may doe a
shrewd turne when al is done. We conclude therefore
that it is rash and temerarious counsell, to vse
a Medicine, which if it finde not an enemy to struggle
with, will easily speed and kill the party. Better
it is to follow Galens aduise, who in his booke De
Simp. writing against Zenocrates, would haue a Physician
neuer to vse any Medicine which may be

preiudiciall or hurtfull to the health or life of mankinde.
            As for the fourth opinion, your golden Conceit
that this maruellous operation should be wrought
by the spirits of Gold in Arsenicke, I suppose there
is farre lesse likelihood or probability therein, than
in the golden dreame of the Philosophers stone,
whereinto many haue fallen being rich, and awaked
out of the same starke beggars.
            First, how should we imagine, that the Gold or
golden spirits which are fancied to be in Arsenicke
should more preuaile in preseruing Nature, than
the Arsenicall spirits (whose Quantity must needs
be farre greater) in violating and corrupting her.
Secondly, if this woonderfull worke of preseruation
proceed from gold and his spirits, being in so
small quantitie (as they must needs be if they be at
all) in a little lumpe of Arsenicke; why doe you not
rather counsell men to weare about their necks, vpon
the Region of the heart a double Ducate or a
plate of Golde, seeing therein must needs be greater
quantity of spirits, more neerely and firmely
vnited then in Arsenicke? Beside this might be
done without all danger and great securitie, the
Arsenicall spirits (which are so ill neighbors) being
remoued. I know right well that gold is of great
vertue. Auri sacra fames quid non mortalia cogis
Pectora?
            
            One saith truely, that there was no fort inexpugnable,
Ad quod Asmus auro 
                     〈◊〉
                   possit ascendere.
It is a cunning locke which a golden key will not
open. But yet among all the vertues and effects of

Gold (which are manifold) I neuer heard that reckoned,
that it should preserue the wearerers thereof
from Plague and Poison.
            Whereas you send vs to the Refiners of Mettals
to be satisfied in this point, I can assure you that
one of the skilfullest workemen and best practised
in that kinde about London being demanded, What
Golde he thought to be in Arsenicke, made this
answere: That there was as much Golde in Arsenicke
as in a Rat. And this he affirmed to be not
only his iudgement, but the conclusion of the cunningest
workemasters in Minerals about the City.
            As for Paracelsus to whom in the next place you
referre vs, I would be loath Bonas hor as tam malè
collocare, though I haue mispent some time in my
dayes, and it may be about him: of whose writings
I may say the cleane contrary, that Socrates did of
Heraclitus booke. Those things (sayd he, being demanded
what he thought of it) which I vnderstand
are very excellent, and therefore I suppose the rest
which I vnderstand not to be answerable to them:
For I can say, that such things in Paracelsus which I
vnderstand, are exceeding friuolous, absurd and ridiculous,
and therefore I suppose the greater part (if
not all the rest included in his barbarous Riddles) to
be sutable and agreeable with them. But because
you stile him absolutely the most learned Chynicall writer
and worker that euer wrote, and I may perhaps be
deemed partiall, you shall heare the iudgement of
that graue, learned and most iudiciall Physician
Crato concerning him, with whom I concurre in
that point, Epist. ad Theod. Zuingerum. Ep. Med. a

Scoltzim ep. 137. where hauing purged himselfe of
a false calumniation, that he should be an enemy to
Chymicall Preparations, he annexeth these words:
Insaniam verò Paracelsicam qui summos in Arte Med.
Magistros, imò Artem ipsam Med. propter Arcana sua
(vt appellant) contemnit, & nouam nobise fumis Medicinam
fabricat, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   discentes a bonis Authoribus ad
Fornaces ablegat, omnem deni
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Seculi nostri Excellentiam
deijcere studet, vt sua Medicamenta extollat, nunquam
probani. Artem enim ipsam Hippocratis & doctrina
methodicae Galeni, acceptam ferre, vt eruditum
Medicum oportet; ita Paracelsica somnia, tot verborum
falsitatis iuolueris tecta & tam monstrosis nominibus
variata, fugere virum bonum decet.
            
            Let Paracelsus be esteemed by you and his followers
a skilfull Chymicall writer and worker, vndoubtedly
he was neuer learned, neither will be euer
so reputed among the learned. Giue him what
place you please among Mechanicks or Empericks,
if you will needs haue it so; for that is the highest
Forme wherunto you can aduance him: but if you
offer to set him on the Bench among the Sages and
Senatours of Learning, you shall doe him wrong
and your selfe to. Neither doe I yet denie but that
he hath some things of good vse. And so had Thessalus
that olde Bragadochian of Galens time, and
Fioronamus that notorious Empericke & Impostor
of our time, who was banished Venice, but those,
mixed with so much vanitie, pride and insolencie
as marreth all. You shall finde it ordinary in illiberall
and illettered Natures (if you marke it well)
that hauing attained any little smattering knowledge,

small portion of riches, or meane degree of
honour, they are farre more eleuated, and transported
with high and ouerweening thoughts, than ingenuous
and generous mindes of farre greater sufficiencie.
I haue often maruelled how any man of
wisedome and modestie, seeing the incredible insolencie
and impudencie, the intollerable vanitie and
follie, the ridiculous and childish crakings and vantings
of Paracelsus, should once commend him
without nothing his contrary vices, and giuing him
a dash with a blacke coale.
            Touching Pistorius whom you onely produce
as a Patron of your Amulets, though I haue little
or no acquaintance with him, yet if ex vngue Leonem
I must needs say, That his speeches sauour of
too too much vanitie (if not follie and falsehood)
and come very neere the Mountbanks phrase, who
vse to set out their basest trash with el-long and
bombasted termes, and craking and lying vaunts.
First he affirmeth, That many Italian Physicians are of
opinion, That there was neuer a more excellent thing
granted to mortall men by God, to preserue them from
the Plague. Secondly, That they call it a diuine Medicine
inuented by God. Thirdly, that they take it vpon
their oathes, That neuer any fell sicke that ware them.
Haec dum recensentur satis super
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , confutantur.
            
            You heard in the beginning,These are Italian Physicians of great name. what Father Augenius
that learned and graue Italian Physician conceiued
of them. And it is certaine, that Massaria a
learned Reader of Padua hath learnedly and largely
disputed against them. And sure I am that Gerardus
Columba the great Physician of Messana disclaimeth

them vtterly. But it is woorth noting, First
that these Physicians who so highly commend
these Amulets, are namelesse. Secondly, that they
offer oath vpon the matter, fearing belike that their
words would not be taken: whereas (if their credit
were good) their bare words would passe as currantly
as their oaths. Lastly, their hyperbolicall cō
               mendations
of a poore poisoned cake, seemeth to
me the language of vaunting Quack-saluers, rather
than of learned Physicians. As for his experiment
in Zuricke Ann. 64. and in Basill, that he knew none
die who wore them; who will beleeue him, since
we haue more than sufficient experience, both
heretofore and of late in London,
               Of the contrary. and you your selfe
acknowledge the same, but holde it pitie to derogate
from the credit of so noble and generall a Medicine,
for a few particular Instances. How noble a
Medicine it is, I hope hath appeared by this time.
Sure I am that it is no rationall Medicine, and
that the most learned Physicians, who haue handled
the Argument of the Plague, do either directly
oppugne it, as Augenius, Columba, Massaria, &c. or
els passe it ouer in silence, as not woorthy to be named
or mentioned with rationall and noble Antidots
and Alexeteries (as Palmarius or rather Fernelius
that worthy Light of Physicke (for that learned
booke of the plague being the most Scholarlike,
iudiciall and absolute in that kind, that I euer met
with) is thought to be written by him, and set out
by Palmarius his Scholar) or els if they mention it
in the Tale after a great ranke of other rationall
Medicines, they set this or the like brand in the

forhead of it. Quidam Emperici, or Quidam (without
naming them) Consulunt tabellam ex Arsenico.
Certaine Empericks, or certaine (not woorthy to
be named) counsell a table of Arsenicke, as Platerus
Heurnius, &c.
            
            To conclude since Physicke is the Art of helping,
healing, curing, I see not what we haue to
doe with Poisons, vnlesse it be to giue councell of
Precaution, and Preuention, or to relieue them,
who by errour or malice haue medled with them.
Me thinks it is wholesome and Fatherly counsell
that Hippocrates giueth to all his Scholars, That
they should alwayes propound vnto themselues
these two ends: First, Ne noceant. Secondly, Vt prodesse
possint. First, That they be sure to do no hurt
to their Patients. Secondly, That they endeuour
to doe some good. As for those who leauing so
great varietie of safe, wholesome and salutiferous
Medecins, as God of his infinite bountie hath stored
vs withall, will needs be still tampering with
Poisons, and Deleteries, they seeme to me like the
foolish flies, who forsake the sweet herbs and flowers
to buzze about the candle, so long till their
wings be singed, and themselues oft times burned
with the Flame. I might giue instances heereof,
but that I hasten to an end. It is not good medling
with edge-tooles. Qui amat Periculum peribit in eo.
            
            Thus I haue presumed to inquire somewhat
more at large, concerning these Amulets non contentionis
amore, sed veritatis indagandae studio: and
that it may appeare that I am not of a seruile disposition

to relie vpon the opinion of any, be he neuer
so learned, vnlesse it be vnderpropped with Learning
and Reason: the rather because I vnderstand
that this Taske was expected at my hands. As for
that learned & ancient Physitian (who hath taken
vpon him their Defence and Patronage) I confesse
that as I aimed not directly and particularly at him
in my first writing against them (they being ordinarily
dispensed by many Chirurgians and Apothecaries
in London, some of them being my kinde
friends, so I doe now beare him no more grudge,
malice, or enuie, then my selfe: though I haue
beene of late discourteously and hardly intreated,
reiected and shut out from conference. Which
kinde of dealing, how it agreeth with the Rules of
Christianity or liberall Profession, let indifferent
men iudge. Who knoweth not that our greatest
Diuines and best Lawyers do dissent one from another,
in some one point or other of their Arts. Do
they therfore breake off all societie, and proclaime
open hostilitie one against another? God forbid. I
haue read that Aristides and Pericles though they
were at oddes, and iarred often in the Senate of
Athens by reason of secret emulation, yet when
they were to vndertake any publicke affaire or embassage,
they did Simulates in finibus Patria deponere,
eas
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   redeuntes resumere. So I could wish that Physitians
should leaue their priuate grudges and discontentments
at home in their owne houses, and
not carie them abroad in their bosomes among
their Patients, to the disgrace of their fellowes and

publicke opprobrie
                  •
               , and slander of their Profession.
As for me, I am neither too skilfull to learne,
nor too old to erre: But desire to follow that
councell of the Oratour. In sententia
permaneto. Enimuero nisi alia
vicerit melior.
⸫
            
               
                  Sit nomen Domini benedictum.
               
               
                  Amica sit (quaeso) haec inter nos dissentio,
Opinionum non Voluntatum,
Studiorum, non
Animorum.
               
               
                  Non opus habes Amuletis & Periaptis quibus
simul concurrit, & cooperatur
Diabolus.
                  Thou hast no need of Amulets, with whom
the Diuell doth concurre and
cooperate.
               
            
         
      
   