
      
         
            
            
            
            POPISH PIETIE, OR The firſt part of the Hiſtorie of that horrible and barbarous conſpiracie, commonly called the Powder-treaſon:
            
            Nefariouſly plotted againſt Iames King of great Britaine, Prince Henrie, and the whole ſtate of that Realme aſſembled in Parliament; and happily diſc
                  ••
               ered, diſappointed, and fruſtrated, by the powerfull and ſole arme of the Almightie, the fifth of Nouember, Anno 1605.
            Written firſt in Latin verſe by F.H. 
               
                  〈◊〉
                in Phyſicke: and tranſlated into 
                  ••
               
               gliſh by 
                  •
               . P.
            
               LONDON, Printed for William Ione 1610.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE ILLVSTRIOVS AND MOST VERTVOVS PRINCESSE, THE LADY Elizabeth, onely daughter of the Kings most excellent Maieſtie.
            
            
               I Haue preſumed to offer vnto your Grace (moſt gracious Princeſſe) an old Hiſtorie clad in a new Engliſh coate. But why do I call that old, which ought to be alwayes new, and freſh in euery true Engliſh heart, while the world laſteth? We haue a vulgar ſaying, that fiſh and gueſts are ſtale in a few dayes. And who ſeeth not, that the greateſt and ſtrangeſt workes of God wrought amongſt vs, are but wonders of nine dayes? Our Engliſh nation is iuſtly taxed, as too Athenian-like, euer eagerly and curiouſly liſtening after nouelties, and ouer ſlightly and lightly paſſing by the moſt remarkable and

memorable accidents and occurrents. This is a generall, and (as I may terme it) a nationall fault, which ought to be acknowledged and amended. Now howſoeuer many paſſages may without any great diſhonour vnto God or detriment to the State, be buried in the darke pit of obliuion, yet the Powder-treaſon, that monſtrous birth of the Romiſh harlot, cannot be forgotten without great impietie, and iniurie to our ſelues. The Iſraelites were commanded to celebrate yearely the memoriall of their deliuerance from Egypt, & often to inculcate vnto their childrē t
                  •
                
               
                  〈…〉
                workes which the Lord wrought f
                  •
                
               
                  〈…〉
                in drying the red ſea, in deuiding t
                  •
                
               
                  〈…〉
                of Iordan, in ſubduing the Canaan 
                  〈…〉
                expelling them before their faces. T
                  •…
               s in the time of Heſter by a ſolemne 
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  •
               dained an annuall remembrance of 
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  •
               ance from the cruell deſigne of Haman 
               
                  〈◊〉
                Agagite. The like courſe hath bene honorably taken in the Powder-Conſpiracie, by the great Counſell of our State, and 
                  〈◊〉
                on moſt iuſt and weightie conſidera
               
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                For this helliſh plot, being as it were 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               nt-eſſence of Sathans policie, the fur
               
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               th and ſtraine of humane malice and 
                  〈◊〉
                not to be paralleld among the ſauage

Turks, the barbarous Indians, nor (as I am perſwaded) among the more then brutiſh Cannibals; & the deliuerance being wrought without any humane helpe, by the great watchman of Iſrael, who neither ſlumbreth nor ſleepeth, ſo as our enemies muſt needs acknowledge with the Egyptian ſorcerers, Certè hic Dei digitus eſt: we ſhall be guiltie of horrible ingratitude, the fouleſt of all vices, if we do not embrace all meanes of perpetuating the memory of ſo great, ſo gracious, and wonderfull a preſeruation: Nunquam nimis inculcatur quod non ſatis diſcitur. Beſides, we cannot forget this maruellous deliuerāce, without apparent danger vnto our ſelues and our poſteritie. Improbe Neptunum accuſat, qui bis naufragium fecerit. We haue had many faire warnings from theſe Romiſh Amalekites; if we hereafter fall into their hands, we ſhall not be pitied, but laughed at, by a 
                  •
               o
                  •
               r neighbour nations. I hope therefore your Grace, who ſhould haue acted a wofull and yet principall part in the cataſtrophé of this Tragedie, will vouchſafe the acceptance and peruſing of this ſhort Poeme, written by my ſelfe in Latine, and tranſlated into Engliſh by a friend of mine: wherein you may be 
                  •
               old as in a criſtall glaſſe, the irefull faces of your

greateſt enemies, and the gracious and amiable countenance of the Almightie watching ouer the King your father, the Queene your mother, that Prince of admirable hope, your brother, and your ſelfe, for your deliuerance from thoſe ſnares and nets which were ſo ſecretly and craftily laid, to haue entangled all your ſelues together, and to haue put out and quite extinguiſhed the lights of Iſrael in one day. The ſame almightie Lord grant, that as he hath bene the ſole author of your preſeruation and reſeruation (as we all hope) for ſome excellent worke which he hath to accompliſh by your hands, ſo you may be worthy inſtruments in your places of the aduancement of his Goſpell here in earth, to his glorie, and your owne eternall happineſſe in the life to come.
            
               
                  Your Graces to be commanded in all dutifull ſeruices, Fr. Hering.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               POPISH PIETY, OR The firſt part of the hiſtorie of that horrible and barbarous conſpiracie, commonly called the Powder treaſon.
            
               1
               A Riſe my Muſe, to ſtudies quite forlorne,
               And intermitted ouermuch, retire;
               The wals with hang'd vp armes no more adorne,
               But ſnatch them thence, herein to ſhew deſire;
               If thou refuſe, the poſts and ſtones will ſcorne,
               Nature in them ſhould ſilence ſtill require:
               Each thing that's void of ſenſe (if thou wilt not)
               Will to the world reſound this barbarous plot.
            
            
               2
               This barbarous plot, then which th'al-ſeeing Sunne,
               A more outragious fact did ne're behold,
               Not to be matcht ſince the firſt age begun,
               In marble records fit to be inrold:
               O thou whoſe dole of grace is neuer done,
               Vnworthy vs that doeſt aliue vphold:
               O grant vs life to celebrate thy praiſe,
               Almightie Father fauour our iuſt layes.
            
            
               
               3
               I ſing a ſtrange blacke monſter, rude and fell,
               Late on that Whore which doth the world beſot,
               In groſſe thicke darkneſſe, vtmoſt caues of hell,
               In curſed coupling Lucifer begot
               A fearfull monſter, all our world to quell:
               The purple ſtrumpet ſoone againe he got,
               Sent backe to Lerney lake, where with cloſe mirth
               She was deliuered of her monſtrous birth.
            
            
               4
               Which ſhe nurſt vp with Romiſh milke a ſpace:
               This Snake, the prodigie of humane kind,
               More dangerous then Hydra waxt apace:
               Whom when the damme did well perceiue in mind,
               To ſwell in deadly venime, and to outface
               In divelliſh guile all others, and did find
               Inſtructed fully in all helliſh arts,
               Thus ſhe beſpake, and thus to him imparts.
            
            
               5
               There is a people that are Brittons hight,
               (If elſewhere any) they to me do beare
               No goodwill: thy great Father too they ſpight,
               And haue much damage done to Peters chaire,
               And Peters kingdome, once a Realme of might,
               (Nor leſſer yet) they go about I feare.
               What rich rewards? O how great reuenues
               This wealthy nation yearely once did vſe
            
            
               
               6
               To pay the Sea Apoſtolicke? how trim?
               How gallantly it made our chimneys ſmoke?
               (For which our greateſt zeale hath alwayes bin,
               The truth to thee, my ſonne, I liſt not cloke,
               What ere we did pretend, their eyes to dim)
               What ſwarmes of Friers linkt in holy yoke
               Did it maintaine? what ſtately monaſtries'
               What goodly Temples, menacing the skies,
            
            
               7
               Did that ſame nation build, and conſecrate
               Vnto the Virgine, that diuinely bred?
               And to ſome other heauenly ones, of late
               Whom we among the ſtarres haue ſaintified?
               There was no place as then (behold our fate)
               Where our colonies not inhabited,
               No place of wealth, of honor or renowne,
               Were it in citie, countrey, field or towne.
            
            
               8
               Through the whole Iland did mine honours ring,
               This wealthie Prouince England of it ſelfe
               (Although but ſmall) by dayly ſuites did bring
               The Romane treaſury more ſtore of pelfe
               Then any elſe. France though a greater thing,
               Or Germanie though large, not like this elfe:
               Short tale to make, the profits got thereby,
               Did farre exceed the kings owne treaſury.
            
            
               
               9
               Perhaps tis ſtrange I ſpeake, but tis moſt true:
               And doeſt thou thinke that I can patiently
               Endure ſo rich a prey by Luthers crew
               Should be bereft me? Ile not eaſily
               Pocket this wrong; lo, Ile reuenge purſue;
               Reuenge that onely ſweetens iniurie:
               After that Luther that vile run-agate,
               That Church-robber, that ſpoiler of our State:
            
            
               10
               Our battels and campes Catholicke forſooke,
               O with what troubles, with what ſodaine ſtormes,
               The gorgeous triple mitred kingdome ſhooke!
               Saint Peters holy body he deformes
               And rends; for with himſelfe away he tooke
               Germaines and Frenchmen many; and reformes
               Almoſt all thoſe that liue in Brittons Ile,
               Engliſh and Scots, now Brittains both in ſtyle.
            
            
               11
               I am a mightie Queene, I once did ſay,
               No alteration ſhall I euer find:
               No times ſhall ſee my Monarchie decay,
               My ſtate ſhall haue no period aſſign'd,
               No age to come ſhall euer ſee the day,
               When deſolation makes me come behind:
               But haſte, with too long ſpeech I weary thee,
               Now come I to the point, my ſonne, quoth ſlie.
            
            
               
               12
               Our ſtate declining dayly, doth compell
               Vs to aske counſell, and to hammer out
               On Platoes anvill ſome new wiles of hell,
               To weaue ſome plots with riddles wrapt about:
               Mine onely hope's in thee, thou knoweſt well
               Thy fathers lore, and all my purpoſe ſtout:
               Go to faire England, luckily reduce
               That rebel kingdome to our Scepters vſe.
            
            
               13
               He takes his iourney onward, and with ſpeed
               He went about his curſed mothers will,
               And to the Brittons comes with equall heed,
               The Brittons who a ſecond world do fill,
               Diuided from the other: by his weed
               A Catholicke: 't hath bene the cuſtome ſtill
               Of Satan, that being clad in truths attire,
               Cloſer he might deceiue, and play the lier.
            
            
               14
               Here he was called Fawkes or Falſe, I find
               Elſewhere his names were Ionſton, Foſter, Browne,
               
               A ſecond Proteus, that could eaſly wind
               And turne himſelfe to all the ſhapes i'th towne:
               Fitting the place, he to himſelfe aſſign'd
               New names, in each new coaſt the old laid downe:
               But ſtill the ſelfe ſame wicked mind he keepes,
               His harmfull heart ſtill wakes and neuer ſleepes.
            
            
               
               15
               He euery where ſolicites many men,
               In loue to Rome too ſeruent and too bold,
               Who in their ſecret murmurings long agen
               For Egypts fleſh pots, and the cups of gold,
               Of her that was a mightie Empreſſe then,
               When by her ſelfe ſhe rul'd the world of old:
               Such male-contents ſhe ſtirreth vp amaine,
               And ſets their hopes on cockhorſe, though in vaine.
            
            
               16
               And tels them how th'ineuitable time,
               And fatall dayes do now poſt on apace,
               Wherein the Caluiniſts no more ſhall clime,
               Nor thoſe whom Beza brought to ſtate of grace:
               And that the time's at hand, and in full prime,
               When they may build Romes wals without diſgrace,
               Puniſh their foes, and Catholicke faith reſtore
               To th'ancient ſplendor that it had before.
            
            
               17
               Theſe men receiue with gaping greedineſſe,
               The hony words that this falſe Sinon ſpake,
               And hid them in their minds with ioyfulneſſe,
               And of their owne free will for Romes ſweet ſake,
               Promiſe themſelues, and all the readineſſe
               That they or theirs by any meanes can make:
               Yea they will pray, and that with feruencie,
               For iuſt euent to this his prophecie.
            
            
               
               18
               Thus being proud of this his good ſucceſſe,
               He doth inuade the Princes royall place,
               Where ioyfully he walkes amid the preſſe
               Of Englands Peeres, and gentlemen of race;
               Where Iames the mightie monarch, with no leſſe
               Powerfull hand doth ſway the Scepters mace.
               
                  Iames who with one applauſe and full conſent,
               Sits on that throne God his Anceſtors lent.
            
            
               19
               Whoſe clemencie at his firſt entrance here,
               Did ſpread it ſelfe to all of euery kind:
               This noble Prince by ſuch meanes thought it cleare,
               That he could ſupple their rebellious mind,
               And bow their ſtiffe neckes that hold Rome ſo deare;
               But now farre otherwiſe he doth it find:
               For they abuſing his moſt princely grace,
               Began herein t'aduance their combes apace.
            
            
               20
               And euery where to ſwell with ſuch diſdaine,
               As was outragious; and to lay a plot
               For new garboiles, and then to ſpread amaine
               Amongſt th'vnſtable commons, who knew not
               The courſe of ſtate, ſome odious ſpeeches vaine,
               Tending to ſet Seditions barke on flote,
               And openly to take offenſiue armes,
               Euermore thirſting after others harmes.
            
            
               
               21
               Firſt Watſon an old craftie Popiſh ſage,
               Dared to trouble this our peacefull ſtate:
               Fond Lancaſhire, I know not with what rage
               Blinded, did ſecond him; Wales after that:
               But better tis to come to that ſlie page,
               That ſubtill Sinon, whom we leſt of late,
               Walking along the ſtately ſumptuous court,
               Where all the gallants of the land reſort.
            
            
               22
               Who hauing pondred in his plotting mind,
               The ſubtill ſtratagemes that there were fram'd,
               He meets with Percie, Percie moſt vnkind,
               Who by his ſtyle a Penſioner was nam'd,
               Yet a firme vaſſall to the Pope combin'd:
               To him he vtters all, and neuer ſham'd,
               Euen all the buſineſſe he had in charge,
               With hels commiſſion thereunto at large.
            
            
               23
               
                  Percie both man and meſſage doth embrace,
               And with affection entertaines them both,
               Though he nor Percie had nor 
                     〈◊〉
                   nor grace,
               Yet each to other gaue their 
                     〈◊〉
                   troth,
               Not to diſcloſe what ſpee
                     ••
                   
                  
                     ••
                  at place
               Had paſt betweene the 
                     〈◊〉
                   unto an oath
               Was added, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  ng hand in hand,
               They ſweare th
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  erate league for ay ſhould ſtand.
            
            
               
               24
               Marke how you cheriſh in your laps (great States)
               Fell vipers, whileſt the Papiſts ye admit,
               Though but within the entries of your gates:
               Vnder their faire ſhew doth a ſerpent ſit:
               Infamous treaſon with her helliſh mates,
               Damned rebellion, murders moſt vnfit
               Once to be nam'd, with poyſonous dregs that ſmell,
               And ſauour all of the deceits of hell.
            
            
               25
               Theſe are the ſtudies of the Romiſh traine,
               Publiſht abroad for all the world to view;
               And theſe the laſting monuments of fame,
               Erected by the Catholicke Sect and crew.
               Theſe are their holy merites; by theſe ſame
               They clime to heauen, and claime it as their due:
               Hereby they thinke they ſhall ſupply a roame
               In heauens Starre chamber, free from other do
                     •••
                  e.
            
            
               26
               Eftſoones this ſhifter Faulkes hath chang'd his name,
               Commonly taken to be Percies man,
               And in that forme vnknowne, himſelfe doth frame
               To belch out deadly venime all he can,
               Securely, void of feare, bereft of ſhame;
               And by degrees he afterwards began
               To draw on many, who with full conſent
               Conſorted with him in his leud intent.
            
            
               
               27
               Beyond ſea then he cloſely packes againe,
               And to his holy Mother doth relate,
               Both what, and how, and all in order plaine.
               She likes it well; and ſtraight, at any rate,
               Wils them go on, and ſpare nor coſt, nor paine,
               To make the end, and iſſue fortunate.
               So well apaid, and well rewarded too,
               She ſends him backe, with new charge what to do.
            
            
               28
               Hee's quicke enough in ſpeeding his retire,
               And bawkes not old acquaintance by the way,
               But viſits Auſtria's court, where that graue Sire
               Is Lord and ruler, who, 'tis hard to ſay,
               Whether he be a Prieſt of holy quire,
               Or ſouldier fierce in fight, his foes to fray:
               He ſtraight aſſembles th'Engliſh vagrants there,
               Who wiſh for change, and harme to this land here.
            
            
               29
               Monſters of men, that take delight to fiſh
               In troubled waters and tempeſtuous ſeas,
               They ſee him forward, anſwering to their wiſh,
               They ſpurre and pricke him on; and each of theſe
               Giues his aduice, though all not worth a riſh.
               They lode him home (ſuch lode he thought an eaſe)
               With new inuentions, trickes, and ſubtill wiles,
               And teach him knauery, cloakt by knauiſh guiles.
            
            
               
               30
               He backe returnes, ſerues his old maſter ſtill,
               And tels him all that hapned; and withall
               They muſt make haſt, their purpoſe to fulfill;
               For hee's prepar'd, and ready at a call,
               With all the weapons that the wit and skill
               Of Italy for fraud renown'd of all,
               Or yet the kingdome of that fiend of hell
               Could yeeld, he knew them all exceeding well.
            
            
               31
               Now ſettle they to worke, and to begin,
               Among their wicked conforts counſell take,
               Each man in order giues his verdit in,
               Which way may moſt for their aduantage make.
               Go, kill the King (ſaith one) paſſe not a pin,
               To thruſt him thorough for thy countries ſake,
               
                  Braſutus-like, let nothing hinder thee,
               Vntill thy purpoſe fully acted be.
            
            
               32
               Another thinkes it beſt, in ſubtill ſhew
               Of friendly entertainment of the King,
               To watch a time when he ſhould weary grow
               By heate or hunting ſport, and then to bring
               Him to the place where he to reſt ſhould go,
               And there then act this cruell curſed thing,
               When ſweet ſound ſleepe poſſeſt him, as he lay
               To throttle him, and take his life away.
            
            
               
               33
               It ſtrikes a horror to my very heart,
               To tell the ſtorie of their diuelliſh plot,
               My tongue as loth herein to beare a part,
               Cleaues to my iawes, and willing opens not,
               And do theſe country-killers neuer ſtart,
               Nor feare at all, that haue theſe things begot?
               Nay act, at leaſt intend; theſe curſed deeds,
               Fit fruites to come from ſuch accurſed weeds.
            
            
               34
               A hotchpot they, and mingle mangle make
               Of things diuine and humane, all is one,
               They make no difference: yea, the oathes they take,
               And leagues of friendſhip, which not thoſe alone,
               That Chriſtians were, but heathens neuer brake,
               But alwayes kept inuiolate; yet none
               Of theſe, theſe wicked monſters care to keepe,
               Though oathes and faith be ſounded ne'er ſo deepe.
            
            
               35
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   heard each mans tale, and hearing all,
               You miſſe the marke (ſaid he,) for all your skill;
               To pettie matters, fits not vs to fall,
               But roote and branches at one blow to ſpill:
               Say that we kill the King, yet after ſhall
               His noble heire Prince Henry reigne, who will
               Sharply (no doubt) reuenge himſelfe on thoſe,
               By whom his fathers death vntimely growes.
            
            
               
               36
               We know he is a Prince of vertue great,
               Exceeding toward, of great forwardneſſe:
               Therefore if he enioy his fathers ſeate,
               Our danger will be rather more then leſſe:
               And therefore we muſt caſt to worke a feate,
               To helpe our ſelues this matter to redreſſe:
               For if we ſuffer him to liue and grow,
               His life will worke our diſmall ouerthrow.
            
            
               37
               So vſe ſmall ſeeds to riſe to great increaſe,
               The litle Hart at firſt vnweaponed,
               Small ſprigs at firſt ſprouts out, and doth not ceaſe
               Till he grow captaine, all the reſt to leade
               His fellowes like himſelfe horne-headed beaſts:
               Small ſparks of fire haue much endangered
               Whole cities by neglect of carefull heed,
               Suffering one fire another fire to feed.
            
            
               38
               This litle Henry makes me call to mind
               
                  Henry the eight, that mightie potent King,
               Who firſt our holy Father (as we find)
               With deadly wounds, ſo mightily did ſting:
               
                  Henry that fatall name to all our kind,
               I do abhorre as an vnhappie thing:
               Thus ſtands my mind, this ſtocke hereticall
               Plucke vp at once, that all at once may fall.
            
            
               
               39
               This may be thus; neare Percies lodging ſtands
               That ancient houſe, where Englands Nobles all,
               And all the chiefe eſtates of Brittaines lands
               Do ſit in counſell, when the King doth call,
               That haue the kingdomes cauſes in their hands,
               And order all things that in queſtion fall,
               And the firſt day of cuſtome vſually
               The States meete there in great ſolemnitie.
            
            
               40
               The King, the Queene, the Prince, will all be there
               With mightie pompe, attended royally,
               All in their robes, all glittering, bright and cleare,
               Their garments all beſet moſt ſumptuouſly
               With gold and precious ſtones; and farre and neare
               The people throng and flocke exceedingly,
               And fill the ſtreets, to ſee the gallant ſhow;
               All theſe at once 'twere braue to ouerthrow.
            
            
               41
               This may be eaſly done; for tis not hard
               Vnder that ancient houſe of Parliament
               To place a fier, which with good regard
               Set for the purpoſe whereunto tis bent,
               Will ſend both them and th'houſe to heauenward,
               For fire to mercie will no whit relent:
               So while the King is ſpeaking, Nobles ſtill
               One blaſt of powder all at once ſhall kill:
            
            
               
               42
               And make them flie aloft into the skie.
               Here Catesby ends: the reſt applauded well
               What he had ſaid, and praiſd it mightily,
               Of all their plots this plot did beare the bell:
               Then Faulkes thus ſeconds him, Surely (quoth he).
               Thy counſel's good, and doth the reſt excell:
               So ſhall the houſe which wrought the Pope ſuch woe,
               Be well rewarded with this worthy blow.
            
            
               43
               So ſhall we counted be in time to come,
               The men that did the Catholicke cauſe reſtore:
               So by our holy mother Church at home,
               As Saints we ſhall be canoniz'd therefore;
               So ſhall they beare the iuſt reuenge and doome,
               Their ſinnes deſerue by making lawes ſo ſort▪
               
               (Vniuſtly too) brewing their hands in bloud
               Of holy men, religious Saints, and good.
            
            
               44
               They by our wealth and ſpoiles are growne too gre
                     ••
                  
               
               And proud withall; tis time they had a fall;
               And neuer was inuented ſuch a feate,
               To worke their vtter ouerthrow withall.
               Henceforth ſome choice yong men to worke are ſet,
               And ſworne by oath, both ioynt and ſeuerall:
               Some dig and delue the earth and wals of ſtone,
               To vndermine at laſt the royall throne.
            
            
               
               45
               Some flie abroad, and get more companie
               To ioyne with them, and wiſh them at the day,
               That ſhould amongſt themſelues appointed be
               To be all readie arm'd, that ſo they may
               Vpon a ſodaine ſpoile their enemie,
               And vnawares may ſweepe them all away,
               And rid the land cleane of this hatefull kind,
               That not ſo much as one be left behind.
            
            
               46
               In Percies houſe the diggers firſt begin,
               Which bordred neare the houſe of Parliament,
               And there they dig deepe hollow trenches in,
               Vntill by mining caues ſo farre they went,
               That they at laſt ſuch ground thereby did win,
               That they vnbared (to fit their leud intent)
               The maine foundation of that ſacred place,
               Which they ſo leudly labour'd to deface.
            
            
               47
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     ercie meane while a celler doth eſpie,
               More fitting for their vſe, becauſe indeed
               Right ouer it, that ancient houſe did lie,
               With hope of ſpoile whereof themſelues they feed:
               This for his mony he did hire or buy,
               And therein laid what ſhould their purpoſe ſpeed;
               But made a ſhew that he the ſame did hire,
               To lay in beere, and wood, and coales for fire.
            
            
               
               48
               Theſe things thus happening to their minds ſo fit,
               They make no doubt but all will well ſucceed;
               The cloſe of all to Falſe they do commit,
               For hee's the man that vndertakes the deed:
               Mans name's too good, for he deſerues not it,
               But Diuell ſhould I call this helliſh weed,
               Night-walking goblin, maſter of his skill,
               Falſhood and fearfull miſchiefe working ſtill.
            
            
               49
               Gun-powder ſtore this fellow cloſely brought
               Into their hired celler; and the ſame
               In powder barrels fully ſtuft and fraught,
               Some here, ſome there, he placed as it came.
               This did not ſerue his turne, but ſtill he ſought
               Which way he might ſome new-found miſchiefe frame;
               Two barrels more he brought, full fraught likewiſe,
               With cables, ropes, and ſuch like merchandiſe.
            
            
               50
               Theſe things he puts right vnderneath the throne,
               Whereas the King himſelfe in ſtate ſhould ſit;
               Next, many barres of iron he layes thereon,
               And piles of wo
                     •
                  d againe layes ouer it:
               Of diuelliſh meanes be ſlips not any one,
               That might their diuelliſh curſed purpoſe fit;
               But all things 
                     ••
                  e with like deuice and skill.
               He did contriue to worke their wicked will.
            
            
               
               51
               Theſe things in their diſorderd order done,
               This fellow thus poſſeſt with harmfull heart,
               Nouembers fift (when Parliament begun).
               With longing lookes for, readie for his part
               To act ſuch miſchiefe as ne'er ſaw the Sun:
               The thought whereof would make a good man ſtart:
               Old Romes bad member wicked Catiline,
               
               And Iewiſh Haman may to theſe reſigne.
            
            
               52
               They neuer thought on ſuch a villanie,
               Nay toſſe and turne the monuments of old,
               All bookes that write of any crueltie,
               Yea looke to Barbarie, yet Ile be bold
               Thus much to ſay, and to aſſure it thee,
               That all theſe hiſtories will not vnfold
               So great, ſo horrible, ſo vile a fact,
               Nor ſuch as odious, hatefull, cruell act.
            
            
               53
               The King, Queene, Prince, and royall progenie,
               The gallant Lords and Nobles of eſtate,
               The buds and branches of Nobilitie,
               Graue Fathers of the Law, that ſit in ſeate
               Of iuſtice, and the reuerend Clergie,
               The flower of Engliſh gentrie, and that great
               And famous Senate-houſe, yea all the land
               Had periſht all with turning of a hand.
            
            
               
               54
               From Percies houſe, one cruell piercing blow
               Should ſpoile them all: euen as the ſilly Hare
               Securely ſitting in her forme ſo low,
               One with his club doth kill her vnaware;
               The name and nation of the Brittons, ſo
               This cruell Dragon ſodainly prepares
               Quite to ſuppreſſe; and Engliſh Chriſtians all
               To ſwallow vp at once, both great and ſmall.
            
            
               55
               Such huge wide ſwallowes, throates inſatiate,
               Haue theſe Italian monſters: and admit
               They had at once both vs and all our State
               Brought to confuſion, as they purpoſd it;
               Who ſhould haue told the ſtorie, or relate
               That dayes deſtruction? who could once befit
               Amid thoſe ruffling ruffians, to bewray.
               The cities ruines, and the Realmes decay?
            
            
               56
               Had I an hundreth tongues, they all would faile,
               And to my tongues an hundreth wits withall,
               All would not ſerue to tell the dolefull tale
               Of all the ſorrowes that on vs ſhould fall
               By this their enterpriſe; that worke would quaile
               
                  Homer himſelfe the Prince of Poets all,
               If now he lift'd, his worke he much would feare
               To take in hand, as ouer-hard to beare.
            
            
               
               57
               For now me thinkes I once againe behold
               That famous Troy in flaming fier burne,
               And there where earſt were pleaſures manifold,
               All to tumultuous noiſe and horror turne,
               And gallant London gay and rich in gold,
               Me thinkes I ſee all ſad, and ſet to mourne:
               London the Empires ſeate, and Europes mart,
               Of furious flames, me thinkes, doth feele the ſmart.
            
            
               58
               Me thinkes the wals are broke and battred ſore,
               The ſtreets with armed angry ſouldiers fild;
               Dead corps diſperſt abroad, all rent and tore,
               Streames running full of bloud vntimely ſpild,
               Streets, Churches, houſes (neuer like before)
               Such fierce laments, nor can, nor will be ſtild:
               No place me thinkes is free, but all reſound
               Sighes, ſobs, and teares, for loſſes lately found.
            
            
               59
               Poore wofull mothers, by their houſes gay,
               Wonder, me thinks, embracing in their armes
               Their tender babes, with woe and well a day,
               Wailing their owne, and all the cities harmes;
               Giuing their babes ſweet kiſſes, but by th' way
               Salt teares among, as thicke as Bees in ſwarmes:
               The houſes they in gentle ſympathie,
               Suite womens moanes with mournfull melodie.
            
            
               
               60
               Me thinkes the fire conſumes and burnes vp all
               The ancient ſeates of iudgement, where of old
               Graue reuerend Iudges ſate; Weſtminſter hall,
               The tombes where former kings lie clad in mold,
               Thoſe tombes me thinkes by fire to ruine fall;
               And ſtately monuments bedeckt with gold,
               Which in that famous Church and Chappell be,
               And many yeares haue ſtood vntoucht and free.
            
            
               61
               Nay more, the funerall and buriall day
               Of countrey, citie, London, now the ſeate
               Of Engliſh Kings that Brittiſh Scepter ſway,
               (So politicke their plot, their gall ſo great)
               They meant not one behind aliue ſhould ſtay
               To celebrate the ſame, or mourne thereat:
               The King, the States, and court of Parliament,
               Once being gone, thus was their miſchiefe bent.
            
            
               62
               Their purpoſe was the fault themſelues had done,
               To turne the ſame vpon their enemie,
               And with the Puritanes to haue begun,
               To make them authors of the villanie;
               And to proclaime that they were thoſe had ſpun
               The wicked we
                     ••
                   or that vile treacherie;
               And ſo to baniſh, kill, and roote them out,
               By fire and ſword through all the Realme about.
            
            
               
               63
               Theſe be the diuels arts and cunning ſleight,
               No mans deuice, but forg'd in fire of hell,
               An odious fact that dare not bide the light;
               To hide and couer with a fact more fell,
               To trouble and traduce the harmleſſe wight,
               And him by what he may to ouerquell,
               Whole kingdomes to ſubuert, and glut his throate
               With guiltleſſe bloud, by him vntimely ſought.
            
            
               64
               Either blacke Plutoes darke affrighting cell,
               Is voide of ghoſts, or this is Satans deed,
               Plotted by man, though ſprung and nurſt in hell,
               In humane forme and ſhape of Adams ſeed:
               But great Iehoua, who on's throne doth dwell,
               Hath care of his, and from their foes hath freed;
               His watchfull eye each corner doth vnfold,
               His neuer winking lampe the ſeas behold.
            
            
               65
               The blindeſt corner cannot him bereaue
               Of piercing ſight, who doth the waues make ſtill,
               To whom a guilefull heart, thoughts to deceiue,
               Are knowne, and eke diſcloſed by his will.
               To him are rebels hatefull, that do weaue
               We be to deſtroy poore infants free from ill;
               But God approues of all things iuſt and right,
               And ſeeing our King now in a dangerous plight:
            
            
               
               66
               Our State in danger; from his throne aloft,
               With ſuch like words our perill did relate:
               See, ſee, how Satan with his guilefull craft,
               With helliſh falſhood, and vnheard of hate,
               Hath couertly prepar'd a deadly ſhaft,
               To ouerthrow faire Englands royall ſtate,
               To place mute images and gods of corne,
               And marble pictures, as the Goſpels ſcorne.
            
            
               67
               If theſe his plots ſhould take a wiſht ſucceſſe,
               The triple crowned beaſt of Italie,
               Babel the Queene of riot and exceſſe,
               The worlds illuder, full of villanie,
               Would ſoone repaire her ruinous ſtate doubtleſſe,
               And ſo fruſtrate the ſacred prophecie,
               Which hath diuin'd and told ſo long before,
               The certaine ruine of that Romiſh whore.
            
            
               68
               Let's turne from England what their foes intend,
               To bring vpon them to their vtter fall,
               Deſtruction, thine, and a diſmall end,
               With cruell ſlaughter to deſtroy them all:
               Wee ſee whereto their cruell plots they bend,
               At once to maſſacre both great and ſmall:
               Let's therefore now their plots withſtand and ſtay,
               Which they ſo fiercely gainſt the Engliſh lay.
            
            
               
               69
               Though their defaults haue merited this ill,
               Though they be worthy of much puniſhment,
               Becauſe they haue abuſde our fauours ſtill,
               Abuſde our benefites that we haue ſent
               To them and theirs; yet all at once to kill
               By their vnworthy hand we are not bent:
               Better it is theſe flames ſo fierce and fell,
               Now readie thus to burne, to quench and quell.
            
            
               70
               With that a ſwift wing'd meſſenger he cals,
               And bids him quickly tread on Engliſh ground,
               Warning the King by dreame, what cruell thrals
               Hang ore his head; what vipers do abound,
               Nurſt in his boſome; vp and downe they crals;
               And now of late theſe vipers we haue found
               To haue prepar'd a bloudie treacherous gin,
               To ſnare the King, and all his kingdome in.
            
            
               71
               And with aduice bid him beware the place,
               Wherein great Romane Iulius once did fall;
               Then to the Lord Mounteagle hie apace,
               For hee's forewarn'd to keepe him from the hall▪
               
               A friend concealing both his name and face,
               By letter ſent, admoniſht him of all,
               For why? (forſooth) both God and men conſent
               To giue this wicked age due puniſhment.
            
            
               
               72
               Into the countrie he was will'd retire,
               There to expect th'euent that ſhould enſue,
               And told that once the paper caſt i'th fire,
               No further perill could to him accrew;
               Call to his mind, and ſo his heart inſpire,
               What from the ſubiect, is the Princes due;
               Warne him that now his loue he muſt not hide,
               Nor from his country, nor his countries guide.
            
            
               73
               Bid him reueale the writing to the King,
               Which was to him ſo ſecretly directed,
               Without a name, but yet a happie thing,
               That ſo the plot thereby might be detected.
               Swiftly the legate with his featherd wing,
               Makes haſt to England, as he was directed;
               And there perform'd, and acted faithfully.
               What was to him enioyn'd by God 
                     〈◊〉
                   high.
            
            
               74
               He ſtraight inſpires in noble Morleys heart,
               A due regard of King and countries weale;
               The King he lightens with a wondrous art,
               Obſcure darke riddles eaſly to reueale,
               Like Oedipus to open euery part,
               And looſe the knots, and tell it euery deale.
               One of the Priuie Councell Morley choſe,
               To whom in order he did all diſcloſe.
            
            
               
               75
               One whom he knew, Vlyſſes match to be
               For iudgement ſound, and ſharpe quickwittedneſſe:
               He tels the reſt; and then both they and he
               Go ſhew the king with great amazedneſſe.
               The letter's brought; and (as in doubts we ſee)
               Each ſeuerall man doth giue a ſeuerall geſſe,
               Our prudent King in's mind well pondring all,
               Brake forth at laſt, and let theſe ſpeeches fall.
            
            
               76
               What points out perill may not be deſpiſed,
               I well remember how a litle ſmoke
               Doth ſhew huge flaming fires therein compriſed,
               In ſtraw foule t
                     •
                  ades do oft he hid and croke.
               I call to mind (or I am miſaduiſed)
               Speeches of late haue euery where bene ſpoke
               Of buſie Papiſts ſtirr'd by diuelliſh hate,
               Threatning ſo
                     •
                  e miſchiefe to our Realme and State.
            
            
               77
               Preuenting care did neuer preiudice
               Monarchs, whoſe liues with foes are ſet about.
               Perhaps their purpoſe is ſome new deuice,
               Some Troian horſe or ſome ſeditious rout▪
               
               Some Iacobite to make an orifice
               By ſtabbing me, to make my bloud guſh out.
               Aſſure your ſelues they haue ſome plots in hand,
               Some monſtrous miſchiefe to ſubuert the land.
            
            
               
               78
               Theſe are no rouings of a crazed braine,
               The writing ſauours of ſome hainous plot;
               Hee's earneſt with his friend, he ſhould refraine,
               And keepe him abſent out of dangers ſhot:
               Some great, ſome ſodaine blow, ſome cruell baine,
               As fierce as lightning it doth ſeeme to note:
               Gun-powder ſure he meanes ſo fierce and cruell,
               Hels damned ofſpring, and deſtructions fuell.
            
            
               79
               Perhaps they meane this powder to abuſe
               To our deſtruction: gladly would I know,
               Who dwell in houſes neare, or cellers vſe
               Vnder the hall, gainſt which they bend this blow▪
               
               Of theſe things would I haue the certaine newes,
               Ere we to any other matter go:
               Make carefull ſearch therefore and what you find,
               Returne with ſpeed, to ſatisfie my mind.
            
            
               80
               He that did keepe the houſe of Parliament,
               Made ſearch forthwith, and viewed all things well,
               Carefull of's charge, in's dutie diligent:
               And what he found, he to the King did tell,
               That Percie in the roomes next adiacent,
               Vnto that houſe did at that in ſlam dwell;
               And that the cellers, vaults, and vnder holes,
               Were ſtuft and fraught with ſtore of wood and coles.
            
            
               
               81
               Hence more and more ſuſpitions did ariſe;
               And ſo Nouembers fourth, a worthy Knight,
               An ancient Courtier, truſtie, graue and wiſe,
               
                  Kneuet by name, in mids of that ſame night
               Was ſent to ſearch each thing with good aduiſe,
               And euery corner, to bring all to light;
               Feigning ſtolne garments of the Queenes he ſought,
               Taking few with him, for ſuſpecting ought.
            
            
               82
               Firſt Falſe he finds, the diuell of the vault,
               Alone, cloth'd, booted, ſtanding at the doore:
               Fire-ſpitting Aetna he had lately fraught
               Fit for his purpoſe, with prouiſion ſtore,
               Whereby with flaſhing ſulphur flames, he ſought
               To bring his country to deſtruction ſore:
               Poore England now within ſome twelue houres after,
               Neare to a deadly wound and bloudy ſlaughter.
            
            
               83
               Firſt him they faſtned on, and by and by
               Entring the vault, the wood-piles ouerthrow;
               Forthwith in great amazement one did crie,
               Some cruell treaſon, here be things do ſhow,
               Here's powder hid, one barrell found haue I,
               No doubt here's more lies hidden here below,
               Vnder this wood; let's ſearch it carefully,
               For ſure there is ſome monſtrous villanie.
            
            
               
               84
               Treaſon, ah treaſon great, they crie amaine,
               And plucke out powder barrels more and more;
               In all they ſpied and diſcloſed plaine,
               Gunpowder pipes in number thirtie foure.
               Two barrels more the celler did containe,
               To furniſh vp this diuelliſh wicked ſtore;
               All fild with helliſh powder, darke and blacke,
               Prepar'd for Englands fatall ſpoile and wracke.
            
            
               85
               In ſearching Faux, about his necke they ſpie
               A crucifixe, which he had hanging there,
               His bodie cloth'd with ſackcloth inwardly,
               And in his clothes match hidden did he beare,
               Whereby he might fire to this heape apply,
               To make it burne, and all before it teare,
               And ſo faire Brittains Empire, Engliſh nation,
               Euen in a moment bring to deſolation.
            
            
               86
               The fault it ſelfe was plaine and manifeſt,
               He could not hide, nor colour, nor deny't,
               Nor was this mind, but ſhameleſly confeſt,
               And voucht the fact, and ſaid, that all the ſpite,
               And all the griefe his ſpitefull mind oppreſt,
               Was that the thing was diſappointed quite;
               He bluſht not to affirme himſelfe diſtracted,
               Onely becauſe the thing remain'd vnacted.
            
            
               
               87
               All in an vprore ſtraight exclaime and crie,
               O heauens, O earth, O monſtrous wickedneſſe!
               O new-found plot! that ſauage Barbarie,
               Or Turkie (cruell be it) neretheleſſe
               They cannot this foule fact exemplifie;
               The bloudie French maſſacre we confeſſe
               For bloudſhed is the ſtaine of this our age,
               Yet cannot march with this in equipage.
            
            
               88
               The rumor ſtraight is blaz'd abroad, and ſpred
               Through citie, court, and euery countrey towne
               Both 
                     〈◊〉
                   and wide, on wings of fame it fled
               Through all the land, each village vp and downe:
               And euery where, where it was publiſhed,
               This great deliuerance of ſo great renowne,
               Wrought wondrous ioy to them, to God great praiſe,
               With hands lift vp to him with holy layes.
            
            
               89
               O thou that ſway'ſt and rul'ſt the heauens aboue,
               That rul'ſt the earth, and mak'ſt the thunder cracke,
               That keep'ſt thy couenant alwayes, and thy loue,
               That art to anger ſlow, to vengeance flacke:
               How ſhall we do (as well doth vs behoue)
               To ſound thy praiſes, and keepe nothing backe:
               What vowes ſhall we poore ſoules repay to thee,
               That thus from direfull ſlaughter ſetſt vs free?
            
            
               
               90
               Thou didſt preſerue vs when we were appointed
               To bloudie ſword, and fearfull flames of fire,
               To haue our bodies euery lim diſiointed,
               By cruell ſlaughter and deſtruction dire;
               Thou ſafely keepeſt Sion thine annointed,
               And wak'ſt for vs though we gainſt thee conſpire:
               Thou keep'ſt vs from the Beares deuouring iawes,
               From helliſh harmes, and out of Satans clawes.
            
            
               91
               Thy hand O Lord, twas thy right hand alone
               Kept and preſerued vs (vnworthy we;)
               Twas Lord thy loue, deſert in vs was none,
               Whereby to challenge any good from thee:
               When we like rebels had againſt thee gone,
               Stiffe necked, vicious, leud as leud may be,
               Contemning ſtill thy worſhip and thy name,
               Scorning the Prophets that declare the ſame.
            
            
               92
               To liue vpright we hold it a diſgrace,
               And hee's moſt blamed that doth no man wrong,
               As madmen vſe, when as there comes in place
               A quiet, ſober minded man among
               Such mad companions, him they will outface,
               And make of him their laughing ſtocke, their ſong;
               They thinke him mad, becauſe he is not mad;
               So him that doth leaſt harme, we thinke moſt bad.
            
            
               
               93
               Thy bounteous goodneſſe Lord doth farre exceed,
               That careſt for ſuch a people ſo vnworthy,
               And that at ſuch a time, a time of need,
               So careſt for them that care ſo little for thee;
               For thee or thine ſo ſmall their care indeed,
               As rather might to wrath and vengeance ſtirre thee;
               For, honour, pleaſure, gaine, is all their aime,
               To get themſelues a great and glorious name.
            
            
               94
               Lord let thy bountie ſoften at the laſt,
               And mollifie our hard and ſtonie heart,
               Diſſolue vs all to teares for follies paſt,
               Rou
                     ••
                   v
                     •
                   our ſlouth with thy all-piercing dart,
               Shake off our drowzineſſe hangs on ſo faſt,
               So old, ſo ſtrong, that we can hardly part:
               Lighten our eyes, our ſinnes fore paſt to ſee;
               Seene, to bewaile with teares (O Lord) to thee.
            
            
               95
               O Lord we know and muſt acknowledge it,
               Thy holy word to be the onely treaſure,
               The whole worlds compaſſe cannot ſample it
               With equall worth, or neare in any meaſure;
               Lord let vs liue worthy the light of it,
               To make thy word our onely ioy and pleaſure:
               Lord let not vs that Chriſt his name do beare,
               Liue heathen-like, voide of thy holy feare.
            
            
               
               96
               That yeare of late of great mortalitie,
               Did thouſands of our brethren ſweepe away,
               When that great Plague did rage ſo cruelly,
               And euery where vpon ſo many pray;
               And now theſe helliſh ſnares full narrowly
               We haue eſcaped in this happie day:
               The ſword now readie to haue cut our throte,
               Thou haſt pull'd backe, ſo that it hurt vs not.
            
            
               97
               Theſe things (O Lord) crie out, and crie amaine,
               That thou for ſinne art angry with our land;
               Threatneſt, although to ſtrike thou doeſt ref
                     •••
                  er
               Thou ſhewſt the rod, and with a gentle hand
               Thou ſhak'ſt it ouer vs, and layſt it downe againe:
               Euen as we may conceiue a mother ſtand
               With trembling hands, offring to beate her ſonne,
               But yet relents before the deed be done.
            
            
               98
               And if words, warnings, threatnings f
                     •••
                  erly,
               Will nought preuaile, nor do vs any good;
               (For all of theſe we haue had formerly,
               And nothing now remaines but 
                     •••
                  pes and bloud)
               We may expect thy great ſeueritie,
               That haue ſo long againſt thy patience ſtood:
               Now looke that thou to puniſh wilt begin
               And burne vs vp like ſtubble for our ſin.
            
            
               
               99
               But Lord let vs (ſo often warn'd by thee)
               Learne now at laſt thy iudgements to beware,
               Learne to adore thy ſacred Maieſtie,
               Learne of thy word and Goſpell greater care,
               To bring forth fruite in more ſinceritie;
               But after Babylon that Romiſh chaire,
               That ſeate of Antichriſt, all goodmens foe,
               That ſinke of ſinne, Lord let vs neuer go.
            
            
               100
               Grant rather (Lord) thoſe Prophecies of yore,
               May now by vs be fully compliſhed,
               That we may burne that great, that purple Whore,
               That hath ſo long with bloud of Saints bene fed;
               And race thoſe Romaine towers, which heretofore
               Were built by bloud, and to that glory ſpred:
               Grant Lord this glory to our worthy King,
               Let him and his, Romes pompe to ruine bring.
            
            
               101
               Lord, as his life was precious in thy ſight,
               So let thy glorie be to him moſt deare,
               Still to aduance thy glorious Goſpels light,
               Throng hall his Realmes, and kingdoms farre and heare;
               Know and auoide his foes, and by his might
               To puniſh thoſe that hatefull minds do beare:
               To pitie thoſe that faithfull are and true,
               And 
                     〈◊〉
                   rebellious ſubiects to ſubdue.
            
            
               
               102
               Lord make his zeales of righteouſneſſe ſo great,
               That he may make it runne like water-ſtreames,
               Through all the coaſts of his Imperiall ſeate;
               Each citie, countrey, corner of his Realmes,
               So let him rule, ſo gouerne and intreate
               His mightie people by his princely beames,
               That liuing, loued; after death his name
               May euer liue in euerlaſting fame.
            
            
               103
               Thoſe Worthy Peeres and Nobles of the land,
               And that great Senate of the Parliament,
               For ſo great bountie from thy gracious hand,
               So great deliuerance to her countrey ſent,
               Lord let them euer for thy glorie ſtand,
               That ſtill ſo graciouſly to them art b
                     ••
                  t:
               There, let good lawes by them enacted be,
               For Church and kingdomes ſafe proſperitie.
            
            
               104
               Euen there I ſay, where they appointed 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               like harmleſſe ſheepe to ſlaught 
                     〈◊〉
                   to fire,
               There let their care and wiſedom
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   appeals,
               To giue their foes their due deſer
                     •
                  ed hire;
               Thoſe Cananites, that Rome ſuch loue do beare,
               And nor aduancement do ſo much deſire,
               Let them by law be rooted out from hence,
               That haue 
                     〈◊〉
                   long bene cauſe of much eſ
                     •••
                  ce.
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
               
               105
               Theſe many yeares to vs and to our State,
               They haue bene pricks and thornes; and now they meant
               This ſtratageme which they deuiſde of late,
               Should to this land a fatall blow haue lent;
               All at one blow (as they had laid their baite)
               To cut their countries throate was their intent,
               That ſo the acting of their tragedie,
               To Neroes wiſhes might compared be.
            
            
               106
               Such miſcreants that breathe out nought but blood,
               Slaughter of innocents, murders of kings,
               Stealth, rapine, inceſt, nothing that is good;
               Moſt filthy whoredomes are but trifling things
               With them that are of this accurſed brood,
               Diſtaſt to them no ſinne or miſchiefe brings;
               No, not thoſe ſins, whereof the very name,
               True Chriſtians do abhorre, deteſt, and ſhame.
            
            
               107
               A filthy ſee, and yearely rent they take,
               Of common whores, and neuer bluſh withall:
               Of heauen and earth they do a mixture make,
               A viperous generall 
                     〈◊〉
                   are they all,
               That in their countries bowels loue to rake,
               All full of poiſon, full of bitter gall.
               And ſhall we harbour in our boſomes then
               Such monſters, odious both to God and men?
            
            
               
               108
               Which care not to deface, and quite blot out
               Euen natures lawes, ingrauen in our hearts
               From heauen aboue; which daily go about
               To breake the ſinewes and the ſtrongeſt parts
               Of humane life; a cruell ſauage rout,
               Which ſtill delight in ſhooting deadly darts;
               Which act ſuch things, as Turke or Africane,
               The Indian or Barbarian would diſdaine.
            
            
               109
               Lord of this people and their wickedneſſe,
               Long triall, many warnings haue we had,
               Our ſelues againſt our ſelues are witneſſes,
               If ſtill we foſter them ſo beaſtly bad,
               Worthy we are to fall (remedileſſe)
               Into thoſe pits that they for vs haue laid:
               And thou (Lord) counted iuſt in after ages,
               If thus thou leaue vs to their cruell rages.
            
            
               110
               Let's rather Lord, with all our force and mights,
               The vigour of our ſpirits and our wits,
               Th
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  lots ſelfe and all her ſubtill ſleights,
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   audid and ſhun, as well beſts,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     ••
                  ll befits vs poore vnworthy wights,
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   by thee freed from their dangerous pits:
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  ord let vs henceforth neuer entertaine
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •••
                  endſhip or fellowſhip with them againe.
            
            
               
               111
               Thou mightie Father, our eternall God,
               Our portion, and the ſhield of our defence,
               Which ſtill haſt kept vs from our enemies rod,
               Vnder the wings of thy omnipotence.
               As hitherto thou haſt out foes downe trod,
               So keepe them vnder ſtill, ſtill keepe them hence,
               Still ſcatter and diſperſe their Romiſh wiles,
               Their ſubtill ſleights and Babyloniſh guiles.
            
            
               112
               That ſo they may be taught and learne thereby
               No more to fight gainſt heauen and heauenly powers,
               No more to glut themſelues ſo greedily
               With bloud of holy ones; as this land of ours
               By wofull triall well may teſtifie,
               Hauing from them bid many ſtormie ſhowers:
               Lord teach them by thy iudgements to ſurceaſe
               Their plots, ſo farre from pietie and peace.
            
            
               113
               
                  
                     •
                  o we thy power and mightie Maieſtie,
               With thankfull minds ſhall euermore record,
               With chearfull ver
                     •
                  e and ſolemne melodie,
               Thy name, thine 
                     ••
                  nor, and thy praiſe O Lor
                     •
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   temple, houſe, 
                     •••
                  et, towne, and coloure,
               Of Engliſh nation aye ſhall be ador'd:
               Thy worſhip there ſhall ſpring; and neuer die,
               While glittering Sunne circles the ſtarrie skie.
            
            FINIS
            
            
            
         
      
   