
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧
               A fourth hundred
of Epygrams,
Newly inuented and
made by
Iohn
Heywood.
            LONDINI.
Anno Chriſti.
1560.
         
         
            
            To the reader.
            
               WEre it as parellous to deale cardes at play,
            As it is quarellous to deale bookes this day,
            One and forty men, among one and fyfty,
            Wold flee one and thirtie, to flee one vnthrifty▪
            
            And yet cardes ſo dealt ſhould haue, in reuealyng,
            Foredeale of bookes in this harde tyme of dealyng.
            Cardes be tooted on but on the tone ſyde:
            Bookes on both ſydes: in all places porde and pryde.
            Not to content, but to contend, vpon ſpyall
            Of leaſt tyttle, that can come in tryall.
            If the beſt wryter to wryte be muche afrayde,
            More may I (the woorſt) by fearefull feare be ſtayde.
            And were not this one thyng, feare ſhoulde ſtay me ſo,
            That booke or ballet, I neuer durſt wryte mo.
            In all my ſymple wrytynge neuer ment I,
            To touche any pryuate perſon diſpleaſantly.
            Nor none do & touche here: by name, but onely one,
            Which is my ſelfe: whom I may be bolde vpon.
            This ment in my makyng, ſyns proofe doth declare,
            I pray you readers to ſcan this, by this ſquare.
            As I, for myrth, myryly dyd make it,
            So you, in myrth, myryly will take it.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            The table.
            
               OF weenyng and wottyng. 1.
               Of a man of lawe and his clyentes. 2.
               An aduyce againſt mockyng. 3.
               Of Itchyng and ſmartyng. 4.
               Of a ſharpe tunge. 5.
               Of a horſe. 6.
               Of a butler and a horſe. 7.
               Of Braſſe. 8.
               Of a louces dwellyng place. 9.
               Of a ſtraunge glaſſe. 10
               Of a dryuyng and drawyng. 11.
               Of longe ſutes. 12.
               Of lightneſſe. 13.
               Of a diſagreement. 14▪
               
               Of cheapyng of contes. 15.
               Of a wyfe hauyng chylde. 16.
               Of a bachiler and a mayde. 17.
               Of ſhort payment. 18.
               Whence certayne thynges came fyrſt. 19
               Of furred and lyned gownes. 20.
               Of a wyne drawer. 21.
               Shorte checkes betweene a man and his wyfe. 22
               Of a woman dekte in two coloures. 23.
               Of vnſweete breath. 24
               Of clyppyng and clenſyng. 25.
               Of a man and his wyues departyng. 26.
               
                  
                     •
                  n accounte of a mans children. 27.
               
                  
Of a woman of Huntington. 28.
               Of a laundres. 29.
               Of a cutter of purſlane. 30.
               Of one that ſtandeth in his owne conceite. 31.
               Of one that harde without eares, 32,
               Of an archers rouyng, 33.
               Of peryll to one by the numbre of three. 34.
               Of Gloria patri. 35.
               Of a Diar. 36.
               Of a Iugge. 37.
               Of the three cuppes. 38.
               Of Braſſe and Iron. 39.
               Of Iacke and Iohn. 40.
               Of wreſtlyng. 41.
               Of pryde. 42.
               Of one hanged. 43.
               Of a dettar. 44.
               Of 
                     •
                  ouyng of a gooſe. 45.
               Of harpe ſtrynges. 46.
               Of Fortune. 47.
               Of choyſe. 48.
               Of a falſe bragge. 49.
               Of lying and true ſaiyng. 50.
               Of a dawe pate. 51.
               Of water and wyne. 52.
               Betweene dogges and a deere. 53.
               Of twelue and one. 54.
               Of verdingales. 55.
               Preceptes of a man to his wyfe. 56.
               Of a man expert. 57.
               
                  
Of deliuerance from yll. 58.
               Of cuttyng of the herbe tyme. 59.
               Of one fearyng the ſwette. 60.
               Of one thynkyng on an other. 61.
               Of one beyng at a poynte. 62.
               Of Teſtons. 63.
               Of red Teſtons. 64.
               Of ſtampyng. 65.
               Of Iohn long the carier. 66.
               Of turnyng. 67.
               Of maiſter Carter. 68.
               Of goyng farre. 69.
               How money is made lame. 70.
               Of an olde wooer. 71.
               Of a young wooer. 72.
               Of weakeneſſe and ſtrength. 73.
               Warnyng of pryde. 74.
               Of pacience. 75.
               Of pleaſyng. 76.
               Of a handgoon and a hande. 77.
               Of Braſſe and Syluer. 78.
               A difference betwene wyſe men and fooles. 79.
               Of a pythye wyt. 80.
               Of choyſe to be a wyſe man or a foole. 81.
               Of a knights carterly coller. 82.
               Of males and male horſes. 83.
               A man diſcommended. 84
               Of runnyng. 85.
               Of pollyng. 86.
               Of plate lent foorth. 87.
               
                  
Of a man of lawe and his wyfe. 88.
               Of pennes and pence. 89.
               Of a womans thinne tunge, 90.
               Of drynkyng to a man. 91.
               Of runnyng at Tylte. 92.
               Of expence. 93.
               Of fraiyng of babes: 94.
               Of reedes and okes. 95.
               Of biyng a morter. 96.
               Of a ſtepmother. 97.
               Of a lyer. 98.
               Of tunges and pynſons. 99.
               Of Heywood. 100.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            Epigrammes.
         
            Of weenynge and wottinge. 1.
            Wyſe men in olde tyme, wold weene thē ſelues fooles.
            Fooles now in newe tyme, will weene thē ſelues wiſe.
            Weene wiſe, and wot wiſe differ in wyſe ſchooles:
            To weene them ſelues wyſe, when fooles ſo deuyſe,
            As foolyſhe as fruteleſſe, is thenterpryſe.
            This caſe is thus adiudgde, in wiſedomes ſchoole:
            who weenth him ſelfe wiſe, wiſoome wotth him a foole.
            Made by Iohn Heywood to theſe fooles euerychone,
            And made of Iohn Heywood, whē he weenth him ſelfe none.
         
         
            Of a man of ſawe and his clientes. 2.
            Twentie clientes to one man of lawe,
            For counſell in twentie matters did drawe.
            Ethe one praiyng at one inſtant to ſpeede,
            As all at once wolde haue ſpeede to proceede.
            Freendes all (ꝙ the learned man) ile ſpeake with none,
            Tyll one barber haue ſhauen all, one by one.
            To a barber they went all togyther:
            And beyng ſhauen, they returnde againe thyther.
            Ye haue (quoth the lawyer) taryde longe hence.
            Sir (quoth one) twentie coulde not be ſhauen ſence▪
            
            Of one barber, for ye well vnderſtande,
            One barber can haue but one ſhauyng hande.
            Nor one lawier (quoth he) but one talkyng tung
            Learne clientꝭ this leſſon of this lawier ſprung.
            
               
Like as the barber, one after one muſt ſhaue,
            So clyentes of counſailours, counſaile muſt haue.
         
         
            An aduiſe againſt mockyng. 3.
            Vſe to thy true freende no deriſion.
            If thy freende ſpie it, he takth it poyſon.
            Though thy freend diſſemble theſpyall cleerely,
            Yet ſpyde in a freende, it toucheth him neerely.
            Tellyng thy freende his faute, mockyng him not,
            If he thanke the not, then is he a ſot.
         
         
            Of itchynge and ſmartynge. 4.
            Ytchyng and ſmartyng, both towch vs at quicke.
            When we ytche, we ſcratch: when we ſmart, we kicke.
            But in our kyckyng at our preſent ſmarte,
            Let vs conſyder our former deſarte.
         
         
            Of a ſharpe tunge. 5.
            Wyfe, I perceiue thy tunge was made at Egeware.
            Ye ſyr, and yours made at Raylye, harde by thare.
         
         
            Of a horſe. 6.
            A Tylte horſe, alias a beere horſe to bee,
            Whiche woludſt thou bee? a beere horſe I ſay to thee.
            When the horſe is ſeene cheerely to drawe the beere,
            He is ſo prayſde, that he may be proude to heere.
            
               
At Tylte when the horſe runthe as faſt as he can,
            All crye well runne, not to the horſe, to the man.
            And if the horſe fall with the man ouerlade,
            Then crye they all, a vengeance on that lame iade.
         
         
            Of a butler and a horſe. 7.
            The butler and the beere horſe both be lyke one.
            They drawe beere bothe: that is a truth to byde one.
            Bothe drawe beere in deede, but yet they dyffer Ione:
            ye butler drawth & drinkth beere, the horſe drinkth none.
         
         
            Of braſſe. 8.
            I perceiue well now that braſſe is waxen proude,
            Becauſe braſſe ſo muche with ſyluer is aloude.
            And beyng both toynde, ſins they moſt by braſſe ſtande,
            That makth braſſe bolde, to ſtande on the vpper hande.
         
         
            Of a louces dwellinge place. 9.
            Were thou a louce & ſhouldſt choſe one dwelling place,
            Whether woldſt thou dwell, hauing choiſe in this caſe,
            In mens bygge breeches, or in womens thicke ru
                  ••
               es?
            I would be, both for the places and ſtuffes,
            In ſommer with women, in winter with men.
            In ſommer the womans necke pleaſant then,
            In wynter the mans breeche is cloſe and warme.
            Large walks for lyſe to walke warme without harme.
            Galeries, gable endes, chambers, parlers, halles,
            Colde froſte to defende, a doſen double walles.
            
               
ſom ſeeld, ſom hangd, ſom dide, ſom painted, ſom ſtaind,
            Rents of all ſyſe, great and ſmall rentes retaind.
            And when by louce bytyng, the legge is itchyng,
            The barres of mens breeches haue ſuch ſtrōg ſtitching,
            Such bolſtring, ſuch broydryng, let men ſtare & ſtampe,
            The louce is as ſafe there, as he were in a campe.
            In wynter I ſay theſe breeches are alone.
            But then in ſommer let the louce thens be gone,
            For feare of a plague: if he then thyther gette,
            A thouſande to one, he ſhall dye of the ſwette.
         
         
            Of a ſtraunge glaſſe. 10.
            Good god what a glaſſe to vewe is this?
            See what an vnſightly ſight here is.
            Great promyſe, ſmall performance.
            Great countenaunce, ſmall continuance.
            Great wynnyng, ſmall ſauyng.
            Great hopyng, ſmall hauyng.
            Great hyues, ſmall honie.
            Great purſes, ſmall monie.
            Great gappes, ſmall buſhes.
            Great ſpeares, ſmall puſhes.
            Great wyne, ſmall water.
            Great woords, ſmall mater.
            Great botome, ſmall brinke.
            Great brewyng, ſmall drynke.
            Great rent, ſmall place.
            Great ſpace, ſmall grace.
            Great dryfte, ſmall ſhyfte.
            Great gyfte, ſmall thryfte,
            
               
Great watchyng, ſmall catchyng.
            Great patchyng, ſmall matchyng.
            Great blood, ſmall bruite.
            Great flowers, ſmall fruite.
            Great wooddes, ſmall okes.
            Great ſtaues, ſmall ſtrokes.
            Great hennes, ſmall egges.
            Great hoſe, ſmall legges.
            Great ſtudie, ſmall arte.
            Great dyſyre, ſmall deſarte.
            Great geuyng, ſmall takyng.
            Great marryng, ſmall makyng.
            Great ſhippes, ſmall ſaylyng.
            Great loſſe, ſmall auaylyng.
            Great markyng, ſmall myndyng.
            Great ſeekyng, ſmall fyndyng.
            Great lawyng, ſmall louyng.
            Great ſturryng, ſmall mouyng.
            Great ſowyng, ſmall growyng.
            Great trowyng, ſmall knowyng.
            I trowe ſo great yll, and ſo ſmall good,
            In one glaſſe together, neuer ſtood.
         
         
            Of driuyng and drawing. 11.
            If thou muſt be forſte foorth to take iorney quicke,
            whether woldſt yu be driuē forth, or drawne forth dicke?
            I wolde be dryuen forth Iacke: for as doth appeere,
            Drawyng and hangyng drawe vengeable neere.
            I thynke it leſſe yll Iacke, hauyng choyſe in ſcope,
            To be dryuen with the whyp, then drawne to the rope.
         
         
            
            Of longe ſutes. 12.
            Sutes hange halfe a yere in Weſtminſter hall,
            At Tyburne, halfe an howres hangyng endeth all.
         
         
            Of lightneſſe. 13.
            Nothyng is lighter then a feather, Kytte,
            Yes climme: what light thyng is that? thy light wytte.
         
         
            Of a diſagreement. 14.
            Eche one man welnie falth out with another,
            And lykewyſe eche thynge diſagreeth with other.
            Namely malte and water, theſe two thinges are
            So far falne a ſunder, by ſcornefull ſquare,
            That no bruer, be he luſtie or lyther,
            Dare cou
                  •
               h malte and water, in houſe togyther.
            But chiefly ſowre water now beareth ſuche ſway,
            That, ſwete malt from brewhouſe, water driuth away.
         
         
            Of cheapnyng of Conies. 15.
            Iane thou ſellſt ſweete conies in this pultry ſhoppe:
            But none ſo ſweete as thy ſelfe, ſweete conye moppe.
            What is the pryce of thee? forſooth ſhe tolde,
            At what pryce ſo euer my ſelfe ſhalbe ſolde,
            Strange is the hearyng, for ware or for monye,
            To heare a woodcocke cheapen a conye.
         
         
            
            Of a wyfe hauynge childe. 16.
            My wyfe hath a childe now at fowre ſcore and ten.
            At fowre ſcore & ten yeres? nay freend, nay: what then?
            At fowre ſcore and ten quarters of a yere I ment.
            Ment ye ſo? and I ment yeres. by whiche extent
            Your wyfe might ſeeme your mother: but now I ſmel,
            You may ſeeme your wyues father wonderfoole wel.
         
         
            Of a bachiler and a mayde. 17.
            Is that bachiler a woer to that mayde?
            The commons common ſo: tys commonly ſayde,
            Where dwelth that bachiler? wyde a bowe of brydewel.
            Where dwelth that mayde? at broken wharfe: very wel.
         
         
            Of ſhorte payment. 18.
            Thy dettar wyll paie the ſhortly: ſhortly?
            He wyll make that ſhort lye, a long lye, dread I.
         
         
            whence certaine thinges came firſt. 19.
            Whens come great breeches? from little wittam.
            Whens come gret ruffes? frō ſmal brainfoorth thei cam.
            Whens come theſe round verdingales? frō ſquare thrift
            Whens come deepe copped hattes? from ſhallow ſhift.
            Whens come brawdred gardꝭ? from the towne of euil.
            Whens come vncomde ſtaryng heades? from the deuil.
            
               
Whens come theſe womens ſcarfs? from folly Iohn.
            Whens come their glittering ſpangs? frō much wāton.
            Whens come perfumde gloues? from Curioſitee.
            Whens come fyne trapt moyles? from ſuperfluitee.
            Whēs come cornde crooked toes? frō ſhort ſhapē ſhoone.
            Whens come wilde hie lookers? frō mid ſomer moone.
            Whens come fayre painted fares? from painters tooles.
            Whens come all theſe? from the vicar of ſainet fooles.
         
         
            Of furred and lyned gownes. 20.
            Thicke furd gownes worne in ſōmer, ſhew bare worne threedes.
            Thin linde gownes worne in winter, com frō S. needes.
         
         
            Of a wyne drawer. 21.
            Drawer, thy wyne is euen with thee now I ſee:
            Thou perſyſte the wyne, and the wyne perſith thee.
         
         
            Shorte checkes betweene a man and his wife. 22.
            I am carefull to ſee thee carleſſe, Iyll:
            I am wofull to ſee the wytles, Wyll.
            I am anguiſhte to ſee the an ape, Iyll:
            I am angry to ſee the an aſſe Wyll.
            I am frettyng to ſee the flie from me, Iyll:
            I am ſory to ſee the ſeeke to me, Wyll.
            I am madde to ſee the mate thy huſbande, Iyll:
            I am ſad to ſee the ſklaunder thy wyfe, Wyll.
            I am dumpyſhe to ſee the play the drabbe, Iyll:
            I am knappyſhe to ſee the plaie the knaue, Wyll.
         
         
            
            Of a woman deckte in two coloures, 23.
            My honny bes, blacke & white doth ſet the out nette.
            Thy here whyte as perle, thy teeth blacke as iette.
         
         
            Of vnſweete breath. 24.
            Thine vnſauery breath lackth ſalte, beale belſabubbe:
            It hath tane to much wynde in the poudryng tubbe.
            Thy breath, hodge, with ſalte is ſo ſauery to ſmell,
            That no ſeaſonyng lyckour, can ſeaſon it well.
         
         
            Of clyppynge and clenſynge. 25.
            Not clyppyng your beards, why clyp you your nailes?
            Not kombyng your heades, why wype you your tailes?
            Theſe beyng ſuperfluous thyngs euery chone,
            Kombe, clip, or clenſe all: or clip or clenſe none.
         
         
            Of a man and his wyues departynge. 26.
            Wife I will go abrode. wyll ye take the payne?
            Beete: but whē the diuell will ye come in agayne?
            Makſt thou me a diuell? nay then be out of dout,
            The diuell will come in, whē the diuels dāme goth out.
         
         
            An accounte of a mans children. 27.
            Wyfe, of ten babes betwene vs by encreaſe growne,
            Thou ſaiſt I haue but nyne. no mo of y•our owne.
            
               
Of all thynges encreſyng, as my conſcience lythe,
            The parſon muſt needes haue the tenth for the tythe.
         
         
            Of a woman of Huntington. 28.
            Where dwelſt thou Sys? I dwel at huntington nowe.
            Lyke ſo, for thou lookſt lyke a newe hunted ſowe.
            Where dwelſt thou Sym? at hammer ſmith dwell I.
            A meete ſoyle for thee? for hammer hed is hard by.
         
         
            Of a laundres. 29.
            A lyke laundres to the, neuer ſawe I.
            Thy clothes waſhte but once a weeke commonly,
            Thy ſelfe waſhte once in an houre vſually.
            And yet eche weekes ende doth this thus trye,
            Thy clothes euer wette, thy ſelfe euer drye.
         
         
            Of a cutter of purſlane. 30.
            This herbe purſlane thou cutſt pretily I ſee:
            But to cut a purſe in a lane, none lyke thee.
         
         
            Of one ſtandyng of his owne conceite. 31.
            He ſtandeth well in his owne conceyte eche man tels.
            So had he neede, for he ſtandth in no mans els.
         
         
            Of one that harde without eares. 32.
            I ſee men heare, though they eares haue none.
            Thou doſte heare me ſpeake, thyne eares beyng gone.
         
         
            
            Of an archers rouyng. 33.
            What a ſhotte ſhootes he with a rouyng arrowe?
            Styll he hyttꝭ the marke, be it wyde or narrowe.
            Where ſhooteth this ſharpe ſhooting archer moſt, wyll?
            He ſhooteth moſt at rouers on ſhooters hyll.
         
         
            Of perill to one by the number of three. 34.
            In thy hande I ſee, thy fortune ſhalbe ſuche,
            That the number of three ſhall daunger the muche.
            Three bedfelowes in thy bed ſhall diſpleaſe thee,
            Three lye in thy bumme breeche ſhall oft diſeaſe thee:
            Three cuppes full at once ſhall ofte dyſguyſe thee,
            Three bearers of thee home ſhall ofte diſpyſe thee:
            Three drynkes, wyne, ale, & beere, ſhall ouerflowe thee,
            Three wreſtlers in one ſygne ſhall ouerthrow thee:
            Three wiues in three yeres ſhal wonderſly weare thee,
            Three ſhe beares thoſe three yeres, ſhal al to teare thee:
            But in thinges numbred by three, aboue all theeſe,
            B
                  ••
               s thee three thouſād times, frō frame of thre treeſe.
         
         
            Of Gloria patri. 35.
            Dicke, I meruaile muche, why in euery plat,
            
               Gloria patri ſtandth before Sicut erat.
            
            Tom, Gloria patri is a gentylman:
            In pleaſant ſpeache, ſpeake ſo ſweetely no tunge can.
            
               Sicut erat is a churle ſo rude and plaine,
            That to heare him ſpeake, all degrees do diſdaine.
         
         
            
            Of a dyar. 36.
            Is thy huſband a diar woman? alacke,
            Had he no collour to die the on but blacke?
            Dieth he oft? ye, to oft when cuſtomers call,
            But I wolde haue him one day, die once for all.
            Were he gone, diar wolde I neuer mo wed.
            Diars be euer diyng, but neuer ded.
         
         
            Of a Jugge. 37.
            Pot him Iacke: pot him Iacke? nay pot him Iugge.
            To pot the drunkarde, the Iugge is the dugge.
         
         
            Of the three cuppes. 38.
            Whers thine In Iohn? at the three cuppes in bredſtrete Ihone.
            At three cuppes in breadſtrete? well let bread alone.
            At thoſe three cuppes when euer thou dines or ſuppes,
            Ere thou goe to bed, thou haſt in all thy cuppes.
         
         
            Of braſſe and Jron. 39.
            Braſſe and olde Iron who brought thoſe two togyther?
            Braſſe thinketh ſtorne to ſee them brought ſo hyther.
            Olde Iron is rouſty and rotten to vewe,
            Braſſe with ſyluer faire blauncht and polyſhte newe:
            
               Otherwyſe.
               Braſſe ſaide to olde Iron with braſſe perkyng late,
               Backe ye kancred karle, ye be not my mate.
               
                  
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   braſſe (quoth Iron) plainnes is moſt talowe.
               I ſhewe as I am: and ſo dooſt not thou.
            
         
         
            Of Jacke and John. 40.
            Iacke and Iohn in degree dyffer farre brother.
            Iacke dawe is one, maſter Iohn dawes is another.
         
         
            Of wreſtlinge. 41.
            Where we wreſtled by couples, we wreſtle alone:
            And ſhall, tyll tyme our ſhakeled breeches be gone.
            In ſteppyng and ſtrydyng it is a wunder,
            How we wreſtle to get our legges a ſunder.
         
         
            Of pryde. 42.
            If thou wylt nedes be proud, marke this freend mine:
            Of good deedes be not proude: they are not thine.
            But when thou plaiſt the knaue in yll deedes growne,
            Be proud of thoſe yll deedes: they are thyne owne.
         
         
            Of one hanged. 43.
            What faute had he done that was hangde yeſterday?
            Of any faute done by him I can nought ſay.
            Two or three two peny tryfles were layd to hym,
            But, his fayre gay hangde houſe, man, did vndo hym.
            Here is tyt for tat meaſure met very trym:
            Firſt he hāgd his houſe, now his houſe hath hangd hym.
         
         
            
            Of a dettar. 44.
            Doth your maſterſhippe remember your dette to mee?
            Remember my dette? ye freende, I warrant thee:
            I remember it ſo, that though I ſay, it,
            Ile neuer forget it, nor neuer pay it.
         
         
            Of louinge of a gooſe. 45.
            A gooſe, greene or gray whiche loueſt thou better?
            A greene gooſe: for it is farre the ſwetter.
            Loue both as thy ſelfe, for as proofe ſhewth ryfe,
            Thou art and haſt bene a gooſe, all thy lyfe.
            
               Otherwyſe.
               Thou loueſt a gooſe to much: ware ſurfet elfe.
               I neuer ſawe gooſe yet, lyke thee, loue him ſelfe.
            
         
         
            Of harpe ſtringes. 46.
            Which ſtring in al the harpe woloſt thou ſtyll harpe on.
            Not the baſe, I wyll be none vnderlyng, Iohn.
            Nor the ſtandyng tennor: for ſtyffe ſtandyng.
            Nor the treble: for feare of to hye hangyng.
            Nor the counter tennor: for countryng to long.
            Vppon what harpe ſtring then woldſt yu harpe thy ſong?
            Aboue all ſtryngs, when we ſhall fall to harpyngs,
            The harp ſtryng to harp on, is the meane harp ſtryng.
         
         
            
            Of Forrune. 47.
            Take thy fortune as it faith, ſome aduiſeth:
            But I wolde fayne take fortune as it riſeth.
         
         
            Of choyſe. 48.
            Choiſe is good in moſt things folke ſay, in which choiſe,
            For choiſe of one of two thinges, thou maiſt reioice:
            No man aliue lyke thee franke choyſe can haue,
            To play the knauyſhe foole, or the foolyſhe knaue.
         
         
            Of a falſe bragge. 49.
            I was neuer but an honeſt man.
            Put out that but, and thou ſaiſt truth than.
         
         
            Of liyng and true ſayinge. 50.
            Wyfe, the people are diſpoſed all to lye:
            For thou art commended, vniuerſallye.
            Nay ſyr: the people to tell truth, are all bolde,
            For you are diſcommended of younge and olde.
         
         
            Of a dawe pate. 51.
            Thou arte a very dawe pate, as euer I ſawe.
            Syr, in deede the pate is chiefe parte of a dawe:
            For when dawes ſhall appere in any coſte,
            Of al thoſe dawes parts, their dawe pates be moſte.
         
         
            
            Of water and wyne. 52.
            Thou makſt curtſy to waſhe hands with water of mine.
            Makyng no curtſy to waſhe thy mouth with my wine.
            But I pray the make this change in this matter:
            More curtſy at my wyne, and leſſe at my water.
         
         
            Betwene dogges and a deere. 53.
            Set malles aſyde: ſayd a bucke to a greyhounde.
            Beware of pryde: ſayd that dogge to that deere.
            Be pacient in trouble: a hounde ſayd rounde,
            Louyng aduyſe to this deere this dyd appeere.
            In which counſell geuen, to kyll him they run neere.
            Which counſell amounth to this euery man ſeeth,
            Comfort him with their tunges, kyll him wt their teeth.
         
         
            Of twelue and one. 54.
            It is twelue a clocke: ſyr tys more, well ny one.
            Is one more then twelue? thats a reaſon alone.
            Sir when the daie to after noone doth amounte,
            One is more then twelue, by our ſextens accounte.
         
         
            Of verdingales. 55.
            Alas poore verdingales muſt lye in the ſtreete:
            To houſe them, no doore in the citee made meete.
            
               
                  •
               yns at our narow doores they in can not wyn,
            
               
                  •
               end them to Oxforde, at Brddegates to get in.
         
         
            
            Preceptes of a man to his wyfe. 56.
            Stande ſtyll wyfe, I wyll:
            Be ſtyll wyfe, I nyll.
            Now barke wyfe, I wyll.
            To warke wyfe, I nyll.
            Proue me wyfe, I wyll:
            Loue me wyfe, I nyll.
            Now chat wyfe, I wyll:
            Leaue that wyfe, I nyll.
            Keepe chayre wyfe, I wyll:
            Speake fayre wyfe, I nyll.
         
         
            Of a man expert. 57.
            Is he ſuch an expert man? an expert man?
            Put out that ex, and no man more expert than.
         
         
            Of deliuerance from yll. 58.
            Wyfe, from al euyll, when ſhalt thou deliuered bee?
            Sir, when I (ſaid ſhe) ſhalbe deliuered from thee.
         
         
            Of cuttyng of the herbe tyme. 59.
            All tymes of the day to night from the pryme,
            Thou gardner wylte not leaue cuttyng of tyme.
            Thou wylt neuer leaue cuttyng of tyme, I ſee,
            Tyall ſuche tyme, as tyme, ſhall in tyme cutte of thee,
         
         
            
            Of one fearynge the ſwette. 60.
            Sweatyng ſicknes ſo fearſt thou beyonde the marke,
            That wynter or ſommer thou neuer ſweatſt at warke.
         
         
            Of one thinkinge on an other. 61.
            When doth your maſterſhyppe thinke on me? euer.
            When doe you thinke vpon my matter? neuer.
            Me ye remember, my matter ye forget:
            Remembrance and forgetfulneſſe, is wrong ſet.
            For I wolde wyſhe you rather, if it might bee,
            To remember my matter, and forget mee.
         
         
            Of one beynge at a poynte. 62.
            Is he at a poynte with his creditors? yee.
            For he is not woorth a poynte they all ſee.
         
         
            Of Teſtons. 93.
            Teſtones be gone to Oxforde, god be their ſpeede:
            To ſtudie in Braſennoſe there to proceede.
         
         
            Of redde Teſtons. 64.
            Theſe Teſtons looke redde: how lyke you the ſame?
            Tys a token of grace: they bluſhe for ſhame.
         
         
            
            Of ſtampyng. 65.
            We ſtāpe crabs, we ſtamp teſtōs: which ſtāping doone,
            We ſtare vppon Teſtons now beyond the moone.
            Which ſtampyng of Teſtons brought it not ſome ſkyll,
            Our ſtaryng on Teſtons coulde iudge them but yll.
            But as the whot ſunne melteth ſnowe away,
            So ſhall whotte fyre melt colde Teſtons, as folke ſay.
            We, for Teſtyons leauyng ſcoldyng and ſquaryng.
            And on Teſtons leauyng ſtampyng and ſtaryng.
         
         
            Of John longe the carier. 66.
            Of what length is Iohn longe the caryer prat?
            A quarter of a yere longe. how proueſt thou that?
            Thertene wekes paſt he ſhuld haue brought me a wat:
            But yet longe Iohn, Iohn long: wt that wat comth nat.
            Whereby I Iohn Short, am as ſhort to compare,
            As Iohn longe by this length is longe to declare.
            For as Iohn longe lurkth to longe this wat to fet,
            So I Iohn ſhort leape to ſhort this wat to get.
         
         
            Of turninge. 67.
            Wilt thou vſe turners craft ſtyll? ye by my trowth.
            Much thrift and moſt ſurety in turners craft growth.
            Halfe turne or whole turne, where turners be turning,
            Turnyng keepes turners from hangyng and burning.
         
         
            
            Of maſter Carter. 68.
            Is that gentlemans name maſter earter? ye.
            How his name and condicions differ now ſe.
            So cunnyng, ſo cumly, ſo curteiſe, ſo kynde,
            So gentle a gentleman in eche mans mynde:
            That all men are ſtryken in pytyfull wunder,
            To ſee maſter carter and the carte aſunder.
         
         
            Of goynge farre. 69.
            As he gothe farre that neuer doth turne him backe,
            So goſte thou farre wyde: thou neuer turnſt agayne.
            Wher yu goeſt, or what thou doſte, come luck come lacke,
            Thy ſelfe or thy matters foorth they go amayne.
            To turne againe no counſayle can the reſtrayne.
            Except thy wyll ſhall ſhowe thy wytte in the wane,
            Fynde meanes to take a houſe in turne agayne lane.
         
         
            How money is made lame. 70.
            Money, with couetouſneſſe thou doſt reſt ſo,
            That lacke of vſe doth lame thee: thou canſt not go.
            With prodigalitee thou trudgeſt ſo faſt,
            That exceſſe of to much exerciſe, doth lame the at laſt.
            Theſe two beyng lame letts of extremitees,
            Where woldſt thou be lotted to be from both thees?
            With lyberalitee wolde I be the meane.
            With lyberalitee? nay he is gone cleane.
         
         
            
            Of an olde wooer. 71.
            Lady I loue you, in way you to wed:
            But myne age with your youth diſagreeth ſo,
            That if I ſpeake: I thinke not to be ſped.
            Your age in your ſute, is no whyt your fo,
            To your yeres many, had ye many mo.
            We wolde wed the ſooner by yeeres, ſhowyng playne,
            That I ſhould the ſooner be vnwed agayne.
         
         
            Of a yonge wooer. 72.
            I brought the late an olde ryche wydowe to woo:
            whō yu mightſt haue had, but nought woldſt thou thē doo:
            Nor nought canſt thou do now: thrift and thou art od.
            For now lieth ſhe ſpeechles at mercy of god.
            For the mercy of god bryng me now to hir:
            I neuer ſawe meete tyme: tyll now, to woo hir.
         
         
            Of weakneſſe and ſtrength. 73.
            Weakenes & ſtrength, here ſhowſt thou both in preefe,
            Thou art a weake man, aud yet a ſtrong theefe.
         
         
            Warninge of pryde. 74.
            Beware of pryde, ſayſt thou to mee.
            Let pryde, ſay I, beware of thee.
            In euery place thou dooſt ſo watche him,
            That if pryde ſturre, thou wylt ſure catche him.
         
         
            
            Of pacience. 75.
            Be pacient in trouble. how can that bee?
            Sins out of trouble nothyng pleaſeth thee.
         
         
            Of pleaſynge. 76.
            Be glad to pleaſe, yea be glad to pleaſe brother.
            But whom? pleaſe thy ſelfe, ſee thou pleaſe none other.
         
         
            Of a hande goonne and a hande. 77.
            Thou haſt a good handgoonne: but whats thy hand?
            When thou ſhootſt of, out of daunger to ſtand,
            No ſtandyng more ſure in any place or plat,
            Then to ſtande cloſe to the marke thou ſhootſt at.
         
         
            Of braſſe and ſyluer. 78.
            Braſſe hath beene alofte, with ſyluer ſet vp.
            Come downe braſſe and drynke on an aſhen cup.
         
         
            Of difference betwene wyſe men and fooles. 79.
            Betwene wyſe men and fooles, amonge thinges many
            This one differth. when both ſortes get things any,
            Whiche to their pleaſures are pleaſantly alloud,
            Of thoſe things wun, wiſe mē are glad, fooles be proud.
         
         
            
            Of a pithie wytte. 80.
            Good god, what a pythy wyt haſt thou dicke?
            The pyth of thy woords ſo deepe and ſo tricke,
            Thy woordes ſo pythyly pearſe to the quicke,
            Pyth of no woodrs agaynſt thy woordes may kycke,
            No more then the pyth of a goonſtone may prycke,
            Agaynſt the pythy pyth of an elder ſtycke.
         
         
            Of choiſe to be a wiſe man or a foole. 81.
            A wyſe man or a foole: if thou muſt be one,
            Which woldſt thou be in wynter, Iohn? a foole Ihone.
            Where beſt men in wynter ſyt next fyre from colde,
            
               
                  •
               here ſtādꝭ the foole warme while all his tales be tolde.
            Which woldſt thou be in ſommer, when winter is gon?
            A foole. a foole, why? that why ſhowth herevpon.
            In ſommer when ſtates ſyt from fyre in the coole,
            At that boordes end in coole ayre there ſtands the foole.
            Winter and ſommer what tyme men muſt to wurke,
            Which woldſt thou be? a foole to loke on and lurke.
            All tymes of the yere for one thynge or other,
            Better be a foole then a wyſe man brother.
         
         
            Of a knightes carterly coller. 82.
            I had this carter bryng my collar of golde:
            And he bryngth me my horſe collar, holde knaue holde.
            Sir if I may ſpeake my thought without fearyng,
            This collar of both ſhowthe beſt for your wearyng.
         
         
            
            of males and male horſes. 83.
            Of all horſe, a male horſe wolde I not bee.
            Where he erſt bare one male, now berth he three.
            Thoſe are one behynde and one on eche ſyde,
            The man, who on the male horſe doth ryde,
            Werth on eche legge, one male. for his ſloppes are:
            Eche one ſloppe one male (kyndely to declare.)
            Longe, round, wyde, weightie as a male eche one.
            But all horſe are now male horſes euerychone.
            For euery one horſe, bearth two males at leaſte.
            Of male horſe and male men, freends herſe a feaſte.
         
         
            A man diſcommended. 84.
            Not once a yere ought ſeene in the to alowe.
            Not once a yere thy knee to god dooſt thou bowe.
            Not once a yere openeſt thou thy lyppes to pray.
            Not once a yere ſhowſte thou goodneſſe any way.
            Not once a yere geuſte thou almes to the pore,
            Not once a yere dooſt thou repent thee therfore.
            But all tymes a yeere thou woldſt all vnderſtood,
            Thou neuer dooſt repent, but when thou dooſt good.
         
         
            Of runnynge. 85.
            In pooſte haſte run hooreſon run. art thou here yet?
            Shall I run out of breath? nay run out of thy wyt.
         
         
            
            Of pollinge. 86.
            Our heads grow to long, god geue our barbers curſes.
            Our barbers polle no heads, our barbers polle purſes.
         
         
            Of plate ſent foorth. 87.
            Where is thy plate? lent out to a mariage.
            Whither? to ſainct needꝭ. to whom? to maſter gage.
         
         
            Of a man of lowe and his wife. 88.
            You beyng a pleader at lawe exelente,
            Yet hath your wyfe brought you to an exigente.
            Pray hir to let fall thaction at lawe now,
            Or els, ſo god helpe me, ſhe wyll outlawe yow.
         
         
            Of pennes and pence. 89.
            Pennes and pence, differ far in proporcion.
            The penny flat and round, the pen ſtraight and long.
            And yet for aydes, in caſe of extorcion,
            Pennes and pence are lyke in woorkyng of wrong.
         
         
            Of a womans thinne tung. 90.
            I neuer ſawe wyfe lyke thyne for this thinge: dicke,
            Hir tung wondrous thin, & hir ſpeech wondrous thicke.
            Tom, I haue ſpent much in vaine ſince ſhe was yong,
            To haue hir thicke ſpeeche as thinhe as hir tong.
            
               It is the tunge of tunges: dicke, for runnyng rounde:
            I take the tyype for ſyluer: by the ſhryll ſounde.
            It hath, Tom, a ſhakyng ſharpe ſounde in the eare,
            But it is no ſyluer, wolde god it weare.
         
         
            Of drinkyng to a man. 91.
            I drinke to the Iohn, nay thou drinkſt frō me Ihone.
            When yu drinkſt to me, drinke for me thou leueſt none.
         
         
            Of runninge at Tylte. 92.
            We apply the ſpygot, tyll tubbe ſtande a tylte.
            Ye, ren at the ſpygot tylt, leaue the ſpeare tilte yu wylte.
         
         
            Of expence. 93.
            What may he ſpend? ten pound a yere he might ſpēde.
            Iſt morgagde? nay: no man wyll one peny lende
            Vpon it. iſt ſolde? nay, no man wyll bye it.
            Then he holdth it: nay, he can not come nye it.
            Why foole? how may he ſpend ten pound by yere than?
            I ſaid not he may, but he might ſpende it man.
            Meanyng he might ſpend it, if he had it.
            O, if he had it: a ſyr the diuell mad it.
         
         
            Of fraying of babes. 94.
            When do mothers fray their babes moſt from duggs.
            When they put on blacke ſcarfs, & go lyke beare buggs.
         
         
            
            of reedes and okes. 95.
            Wyl you reedes at the winds wyl ſtil make lowe beckꝭ?
            wil you okes ſtād ſtiffe ſtil while wind breke your neckꝭ?
            Wil you reedes, like apes, ſtil tucke & bowe eche ioynt?
            Wyll you okes, like aſſes, ſtil ſtiffe at one poynt?
            Wyll you reedes be ſtyll bendyng bowyng bodies?
            Wyll you okes be ſtill ſtoute ſtiffe necked nod
                  •
               es?
            Wyl you reedes be ſtaggeryng ſtill for vayne auailes?
            Wil you okes be ſtern ſtil til your tops kiſſe your tailes?
            Wyll you reedes ſhrinke ſtill to all wyndes towardly?
            Wyl you okes ſwell ſtill at all wyndes frowardly?
            Wil you reedes crouch ſtil to be the winds footeſtooles?
            Wil you okes crake ſtill to be the winds hed fooles?
            Okes will dooe as we haue done. ſo will we reedes.
            Wherin for our purpoſe marke what ende proceedes.
            In eche one ſtorme a thouſād okes downe are blowne,
            In a thouſand ſtormes not one reede ouerthrowne.
         
         
            Of biyng a morter. 96.
            That ſpyce mortar to ſell it be you wyllyng?
            Yea miſtres: whats the pryce? ten ſhyllyng.
            Ten ſhyllyng? freende: I am hyther entyſed
            To bye a ſpyce morter, not a morter ſpyſed.
         
         
            Of a ſtepmother. 97.
            Thy fathers ſecond wyfe, thy ſteppe mother,
            For a ſteppe mother thers not ſuch an other.
            
               
At three ſteppes I ſaw hir ſteppe, ſyns ſhe was wed,
            From a ſtayre foote, ſtraight vp to thy fathers hed.
         
         
            Of a lyar. 98.
            Where doth Frances fabler now lye, Iane?
            At ſygne of the whetſtone in double tunge lane.
            He lyeth by night: and by day dayly hee
            Lyeth downe right, in what place ſo euer he bee.
            That he lieth ſtill day and night, this thing doth trye,
            He neuer ſpeketh woorde but it is a lye,
         
         
            Of tunges and pynſons. 99.
            One difference this is, on which our tunges may carpe,
            Betwene pinching pynſons, & tauntyng tunges ſharpe.
            Where theſe two nyppers nyp any whyere or when,
            Thoſe pinſons nyp dead things, thoſe tunges nyp quick men.
         
         
            Of Heywood. 100.
            Art thou Heywood with the mad mery wyt?
            Ye forſooth maiſter, that ſame is euen hyt.
            Art thou Heywood that applieth myrth more thē thrift?
            Ye ſyr, I take mery myrth a golden gyft.
            Art thou Heywood that hath made many mad plaies?
            Ye many playes, fewe good woorkes in all my dayes.
            Art thou Heywood that hath made men mery long?
            Ye: and wyll, if I be made mery among.
            Art thou Heywood that wolde be made mery now?
            Ye ſyr: helpe me to it now I beſeche yow.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            IMPRINTED AT
London in Fleeteſtrete in the
houſe late Thomas
Berthelettes.
            Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
         
      
   