
      
         
            
            
            THE SPIDER and the Flie.
            A parable of the Spider and the Flie, made by Iohn Heywood. 
               ♣
            
            IMPRINTED AT LONDON IN FLETE STRETE BY THO. POVVELL. ❧
            
            ANNO. 1556.
            T. P.
         
         
            
            
               
                  I H
                  portrait of John Heywood
               
            
         
         
            
            The preface.
            
               
                  A Parable: is properlie one thing,
               That of an other doth conceiuing bring.
               Yea: (oftentims (as parables are ſcand,
               One ſcore of things: by one, be vnderſtand.
               Eche one of all: ſcanned and vſed well,
               Maie teache the ſcanner good: to take & tel.
               Contrarilie: ſcanned and vſed ill,
               Like il likewiſe, the fruite a mounteth vntill.
               Wherfore, before entrance to ſcanning here:
               In preſent parable here to appere,
               Firſt to induct (for to conduct) the waie:
               How readers and ſcanners: redilie maie:
               Right ſcanning (in right reading) here purchaſe,
               Good readers: reade and ſcan (rightlie) this caſe.
               There chaunſt at once: at one fayre glaſſe to bee,
               Them ſelues tatire at once, fayre women three.
               Where one an other enuide: till all were dreſt,
               Who might (when all weare dreſt) ſeme dreſſed beſt.
               But in the time of trimming of their geare:
               There foreheads ſtriking vp: broyding their heare:
               Lacing and laying it: with euerie thing:
               Lookte in the glaſſe: directing trim trimming,
               In all this time: theſe women euerychone,
               Behelde eche other: but them ſelues not one:
               That in the glaſſe: vpon her ſelfe caſt iye,
               Good or ill tiring (in her ſelfe) teſpie.
               One heare ley low: one other lay to hie:
               On this ſide: or on that ſide: cleane awrie.
               But herevpon: when eche had other eſpide:
               In tire atired: all a wrie or wide,
               
                  
Lord in all three: what inward ſport there was,
               Eche one to ſe an other, in that glas.
               All three ſore ſweld: but be it beſt or wurſt:
               Twayne muſt vent vpward ſtreight: or both muſt burſt,
               While margret went a ſide: her pins to fet,
               Marian and margerie: back they both get.
               To touch thatire, of margaret thus worne.
               Betwene them twaine, to laugh that third to ſcorne.
               Marion ſaide to Margerie: ſe you not,
               How Meg is dreſt, yes Madge (quoth ſhe) god wot.
               Might not a beetill blind beaſt: bring to paſſe:
               To dreſſe her ſelfe as well at any glaſſe,
               Yes madge: and with one Iin: I can now ſe:
               What ſpots (vnſene to her) in her face be.
               Ye Mall (quoth Madge) I thinke I ſhould il hie me:
               To dreſſe my ſelfe ſo ill: the glaſſe ſo nie me,
               God hath done his part: ſhe hath a good face,
               Which gift of God, her ſelfe doth ill diſgrace,
               Marion at this: ſtepping fro margerie,
               Margret to Margerie: ſtepth by and bie.
               And ſtreight of Marion: margret falth in hand:
               How fer from frame: Marions a tyre both ſtand.
               Madge and Meg finding faute: at marion more,
               Then Madge and Marion: found at Meg before.
               The thirde corſe was: that madge did ſtart a ſide:
               Whearwith Marion to Meg: haſtelie hide.
               And Margeries atyre: they ſet a broche,
               As yll (or woorſe (the worle her to reproche,)
               Then ſhe was tierde in deede. Thus all theſe three:
               Deuided thriſe in twaine, did thriſe agree:
               
                  
Eche twayne, the thirde to mocke and geſte vpone:
               Tyll euerie one, had mocked euerichone.
               Eche mocking others faute: they fautie all,
               Eche mockers mocke, moſt on her ſelfe did fall.
               This done, one of theſe three to the glaſſe went:
               No face but hers, then being repreſent.
               Where: when ſhe did her ſelfe onlie behold,
               Her ſilent ſight: her fore follie ſo told:
               That marking firſt her ſelfe, her ſelfe ſhe a tierde.
               And then the reſt, (in theyr atyre) deſierde,
               That eche vpon her ſelfe: wolde ſet ſure iye,
               Ere ſhe caſt iye on other, low or hie.
               They doing ſo: all weare atired ſo,
               That whether a part, or they together go:
               Had they bene willing: they had bene vnable,
               Sparke or ſpek to ſpie: diſcommendable:
               Ech in others atire. Which women and glaſſe,
               Are a glaſſe, this booke, and readers to compaſſe,
               In ſcanning ſence to towch men in this booke:
               As glaſſe lookers lookte: if booke readers looke:
               He vpon him: and he on him: to ſcan:
               Sence moſt and beſt, naie moſt and worſt thei can:
               Scanning who is the ſpider: who the flie:
               Neither of either: to him ſelfe taplie:
               Scanning no whit: by ſcanning here to ſe:
               In caſe ſpiders: in caſe flies: all ſcand maie be,
               Glaſſe looking: and booke reading: in ſuch wiſe,
               May well be ſcand, one lyke vaine exerſiſe.
               Who that this parable doth thus define,
               This parable thus, is his and not mine,
               
                  
To this, this one thing I muſt mind you to minde.
               Concerning ſpiders, flies, and eke thants kinde.
               Wheare I: their naturall operacion:
               With the largeſt enlarge: tenlarge foundacion:
               Wheron I frame this top ſtorie: here to ſee,
               As both: both in length and breadth: maie moſt agree,
               This (for this cauſe) ſtrecht the more long and wide,
               I praie you beare with me: wheare it is ſpide.
               Wherin: my faut maie ſeme ſumwhat the leſſe,
               That wiſer men then I (in like proceſſe,)
               Haue done the like and late: one wiſe and olde:
               In an old booke did reade (as he me told,)
               That when ſo euer ſpiders, flies, and ants ſpeake,
               Their approprid properties, they likewiſe breake.
               Which if them ſelues do: ye will graunt I hope:
               That I (doing it for them) may haue like ſcope.
               Thus wiſhing wiſhinglie: in reading this,
               Readers: to reade and ſcan: all ſentencis:
               As we firſt marke and mend our ſelues: and then,
               To marke: to mend: the fautes of other men:
               Without more ſcanning here: I now herein,
               End circumſtaunce, the ſubſtaunce to begin.
            
            FINIS.
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            THE TABLE.
            
               THe Introduction to the matter, ſhowing how the flie chaunſed to fall in the ſpiders copweb. Cap. primū,
               ¶ The lamentacion of the flie, with declaracion (partlie) of the propertie of Fortune, and of his owne eſtate paſt and preſent. Cap. 2.
               ¶ The dreadfull wonder of the ſpider, at ſodaine ſhakinge of his copweb. Cap. 3.
               ¶ The ſpider taking comfort, entreth in quarell with the fiie. Cap. 4.
               ¶ The ſpider ſterting into his houſe to comfort his ſhouſhold, the flie deuiſeth what waie to eſcape the daunger of the ſpider. Cap. 5.
               ¶ The ſpider being returned to the flie, after a few woordes betwene them had, the flie ſewth to the ſpider to be herd ſpeake which he graunteth. Cap. 6.
               ¶ The oracion of the flie to the ſpider, commending iuſtice, and iuſt iuſticers, requiring to haue his cauſe heard throughlie and adiudged iuſtlie. Cap. 7.
               ¶ The ſpider graunteth the flie both to here and adiudge this caſe, as maie moſt agreably ſtand with reaſon, law, cuſtome, and conſcience. Cap. 8.
               ¶ They ſtand both in hope to conuince ech other by iuſt cauſe, the flie praying the ſpiders pardon, of ſuch rude ſpeeche and all behauiour, as he may chaunce to ouerſhoote himſelfe in, the which the ſpider doth graunt. Cap. 9.
               ¶ They entre into the principal argument. The flie ſuppoſing no lawfull profe by winteſſe of any ill there againſt him: the ſpider allegeth the contrarie. The flie (vpon occaſion,) requiring to be bailde vnder ſuretie, the ſpider denieth it. Cap. 10.
               
                  
¶ The ſpider chargeth the flie, firſt with burglarie, which the flie anſwereth vnto: than the ſpider chargeth him with ſingle felonie, which the flie reaſoneth vnto. Cap. 11.
               ¶ The ſpider (in a maner) graunteth, that the flie came into the copweb againſt the flies owne will. which the ſpider ſo graunteth, for ſuch policie foorthwith appering: as ſeemeth to wei ſore againſt the flie. Cap. 12.
               ¶ The flie herewith is abaſhed. but a none he gathereth hym ſelfe to a ſtaie ſhewing a reaſon, that maketh a manifeſt ſhow cleerelie to ouerthrow the ſpiders foreſaide policie. Cap. 13.
               ¶ The ſpider checketh the flie for his comparing aboue the ſpider in knowledge of law and cuſtom. which the flie meyntey neth by one reaſon comunlie reported. Whervpon the ſpider perſeyuing the poliſie for which he ſemed to graunt the flie to cum againſt his will: taketh litle or no place, that much weakeniug his part he driueth the flie to draw back that graunt. Chapter. 14.
               ¶ They reaſon a freſh to trie whether the flie cam in to the ſpiders copweb with or againſt his will. Cap. 15
               ¶ They continew in purſewte of triall whether the flie came thither willinglie or vnwyllynglie ſo fer, that the Flie at length offreth to take a booke othe, that he came againſt his will. Cap. 16.
               ¶ The ſpider not admitting the flie to his othe, the flie bringth in the ſtrength of the affirmatiue for his part: againſt the negatiue on the ſpiders ſide. Wherunto adioyned his other reaſons laide in diſcharge of charge paſt, he hopeth accordinge to Iuſtice promiſed, to be ſtreight diſcharged. Cap. 17
               ¶ The ſpider vpon a caſe in law touching thaffirmatiue, taketh holde to deteyne the flie ſtill in poſſeſſion: but yet vnder

promiſe of iuſtice before promiſed. Cap. 18.
               ¶ The ſpider, ſeeing that he cannot take full hold of the flie in caſe of burglarie, nor felonie: he chargeth him now with treſpas, to which the flie reaſoneth. Cap. 19
               ¶ The ſpider (at the flies anſwering him to a queſtion) chargeth the flie with procuring of other flies to diſturbe him in his copwebs: which the flie denithe. Cap. 20.
               ¶ They fall in compariſon touching their euidence written or vnwritten. Whervnto the flie layeth preſcripcion of cuſtome: whyche he before (alleged) ſuppoſing therby, that the ſpider ought both to deliuer him, and make him amendes. Cap. 21.
               ¶ The ſpider denith the flies diſcription of cuſtome, alleginge the ſayinge of auncient ſpiders for his intereſte by cuſtome. wherin anone bothe ſhewynge eche to geue ſmall credite to other, the flie moueth to put the mattier in arbiterment: which. (as yet,) the ſpider doeth not graunt. Cap. 22
               ¶ The flie (after a few woordes conſerning a peale) dothe brieflie recapitulate, the effect paſſed in the principall caſe. Cap. 23.
               ¶ The ſpider putteth a caſe in a peale ill (in a parence) for the flie: as the ſpider drawth it, and a none, he by example of the Lordes wyll had in cortes of coppie hold, ſeming to leane toward will: the flie laboreth to qualifie that wyll. Cap. 24.
               ¶ The flie cleymeth all hooles in all windowes to be flies in freeholde: & that ſpiders ſhould builde by the ſides or in the toppes: which caſe to be tride by law or cuſtome, they in maner agree: but the flie mouing it to be tride at the comon law, the ſpider refuſeth it. whervpon ariſeth matter of digreſſion,

in which the flie commendeth the ſpider for expedite heringe herof, briefly definyng the properties of iuſtice, mercie, and tirannie. Cap. 25.
               ¶ The flie (for cauſe here appering) deſyreth to repete hys diſtinction of iuſtice, mercie, and tirannie, which the ſpider denieth. Wherewith the flie layth to the ſpider, breche of promiſe made to hym before. In diſcharge wherof, the ſpyder anſwereth. Cap. 26.
               ¶ The ſpider (reducing the flie to the principal matter) moueth the triall to be had in his owne lordeſhip. which the flie miſliketh. Wheron enſueth a glaunce at the diuerſite of gouernement, betwene one ſpider and twelue flies. Cap. 27.
               ¶ They agree to be tride by arbiterment, whether all or howe manie hooles in all windowes belonge to ſpiders, and howe manie to flies. The ſpider choſing for his parte, the ant or piſmere, the flie chooſinge for his ſide, the butterflie. Wherevpon they, thone couple in one parte, and thother couple in an other part, talke together forthwith. Cap. 28.
               ¶ The ſpider to the ant, and flie to butterlie (after woordes of greetinge) declare, that they are choſen theyr arbiters here in: wherin the ant and butterlie promiſe to do their beſte. And they then anone draw all foure together in (or at) the copweb. Cap. 29.
               ¶ The ſpider declareth, and the flie graunteth the iſſue to be, that all flies clayme (in freehoolde) all hooles in all windowes to be theyrs by cuſtome. And ſpiders claime all hooles with all partes of all windowes to bee theyr freeholde by cuſtome. And after talke betweene them therin had, the ant requireth full inſtruction of the two parties to them two arbiters. Cap. 30.
               ¶ They (in couples ſeperate againe) declare eche how he wolde

haue his arbiter handle his parte: and firſt is here tolde the tale of the ſpider to the ant. Cap. 31.
               ¶ The tale of the flie to the butterflie how he ſhall vſe the flies parte: whiche doone, the arbiters withdrawe them ſelues towarde the top of the windowe. Cap. 32.
               ¶ The ant & the butterflie met together in the top of the wyndow, certaine ſpiders on their one ſide: and certaine flies on their other ſide, Tharbiters commaunde them to ſtande backe while they two talke together. Cap. 33.
               ¶ Thant declaring the cauſe of that meeting, the ſpiders and flies acknowledginge the ſame, and that they come to geue euidēce, the flies are apoynted to depart while the ſpiders firſt ſhew, what they can ſaie for theyr parte. Cap. 34.
               ¶ After a few woordes betweene the ant and the butterflye, one ſpider as mought be for all, declareth to thoſe two tharbiters, all euidence that all ſpiders for their parte can deuiſe. And that doone, the ſpiders are commaunded awaye, and the flies bidden to approche. Cap. 35.
               ¶ Vpon a ſhort talke betweene the arbiters, one flie: ſpokes flie for all flies, diſcloſeth all euidence for their parte: wherewith the flies at commaundement departe aſide. Cap. 36.
               ¶ The arbiters (in debating theuidence on both partes gyuen) can not otherwiſe agree, but that the ſame weyth euē as much for the tone parte as for the tother. At ende wherof, they call agayne all the ſayde ſorte. Cap. 37.
               ¶ The ant ſhewth to them all, that theuidence weyth to one effecte on both ſides. So that all reſteth now vpon knowledge whiche parte to credite moſte: and vpon that mocion, one ſpider and one flie fall in argument to trie the ſame: wherein is touchte (partlie) the properties of credence, woorſhip, and honeſtie. They agreeing that credence ſtandth vpon

honeſtie: as thus. as euerie ſpider or flie is honeſt, ſo is he credible. Which talke ended; they are all againe ſequeſtred. Cap. 38.
               ¶ By thantꝭ prouocacion the butterflie repeteth thargument before made: in his groſe termes, not fer from full. And they twaine ſeeming to agree vpon the point herein, they commaunde the ſpiders and flies backe againe. Cap. 39.
               ¶ Thant telth them, that where theuidence for both ſides goth to one effect, and that in debatinge which ſide is moſt credible to awarde the window vnto, it is concluded, that credence ſtandth vpon honeſtie: and that as all ſpiders and flies are honeſt, ſo are they credible: now muſt it firſt be tride, whiche ſide is moſt honeſt: theron to iu
                     •
                  ge whiche ſide is moſte credible. Cap. 40.
               ¶ One ſpider and one flie reaſoning which ſide is moſt honeſt agreeing (in concluſion) that thoneſtie on both ſides appeereth to them 
                     •
                  wo: to be one, that flie requireth the arbiters to ponder the caſe as they ſhall thinke good. Cap. 41.
               ¶ Tharbiters commaunding all to go aparte againe, they fall in talking ſomwhat at large touching bothe credence and honeſtie in bothe theſe ſides. whiche doone, to ſhew therin their mindes, they call all before them agayne. Cap. 42.
               ¶ The ant telleth them, that they two determine thoneſtie o
                     •
                   bothe ſides to be one. Willing them to go foorth in the matter. wherwith one tart taunting ſpider: and one ſharpe ſaucie flie, forbearing till this time (with much payne) ſpeaking or rather rayling, ſtande now foorth (vpon tip toes) to 
                     •
                  hop logike eche with other in rude reaſoning of this caſe. Cap. 43▪
               
               ¶ Where an other ſpider and flie reaſoned late before to proue whiche ſide of both is moſt honeſt, this ſayd quareling ſpider and cocking flie, labour to proue which parte of both is moſte

diſhoneſt: in woordes and deedes. As by vſurpacion in windowes and other miſbehauiour. At ende wherof infurious fumes, thence 
                     •
                  onth the ſpider one waie, and the flie flingth an other. Cap. 44.
               ¶ After a few woordes, whiche the ant ſpeaketh to the reſt of bothe ſorts there, they are aſſigned to ſtande backe againe: while tharbiters gather out of this rayling, 
                     •
                  uche reaſons as they can. Cap. 45.
               ¶ Tharbiters conſider in this ſaide taunting talke, that ſondry diſhoneſt abvſes there are in ſ
                     •
                  dry parties on b
                     •
                  th ſides. vp
                     •
                   their agrement of concluſion wherin, thei haue before them thoſe other ſpiders and flies againe. Cap. 46.
               ¶ Thant declarth to thoſe ſpiders and flies, that the tales of the pearte ſpider & flie before tolde, do charge ech others part in ſuch ſort, that they cānot ſay which ſide is moſt diſhoneſt. but they two adiudge clereli in diſhoneſt thingꝭ, both ſides of like diſhoneſtie. Wherwith they all auoyded backe againe, tharbiters talke to fall to apoint betwene them ſelues what reporte finallie and fully to make. Cap. 47.
               ¶ Tharbiters being agreed on their report, thei call to them againe the ſpiders and the flies. Cap. 48.
               ¶ Thant ſhewth them, that the butterflie and he are at poynt what to reporte. deuiſing it to be reported before the head ſpider and the flie in the copweb: the two principall parties. And to haue with them to here and witneſſe theyr reporte, two ſpiders and two flies, witty and diſcrete. And the reſt to ſtaye there till theyr returne. Whych beyng agreed, they ſet foorth ſtreight to the ſayd copweb. Cap. 49.
               ¶ The ant aſſociete with the ſayde ſort pronounceth at length (to the ſpider and flie in the copweb) this briefe effect. That in as much as on both ſides the euidence is one, and that the cre
                  
                     •
                  ence

is one, by thoneſtie being one, they two can (in reaſon) no waie trie howe to laye thaccuſtomed right more on thone ſide then on thother, they finallie leaue the caſe euen at libertie, as they founde it. And ſo departe to the place of abitremēt agayne. Cap. 50.
               ¶ Thant and butterflie ſet where they had ſit, thant repeteth to thoſe ſpiders and flies, the reporte made by him at the ſayde copweb. At end wherof, the ſpiders and flies, ſeeing that time ſpent all in vayne, eche ſide amonge them ſelfes fall in mourmuring. Cap. 51.
               ¶ Vpon the ſpiders and the flies mutring murmering, ſodenlie there cum nie aboute them: a wonderfull nombre of all manner of flies: in theyr warlike manner. Wherat with twynke of an iye (as it were) the head ſpider (with a greate nombre of ſpiders,) hath builded a ſtrong caſtell in that copweb. With ordinaunce and weapons and ſpiders redie in order of defence. Cap. 52▪
               
               ¶ This huge heape of flies light aboute tharbiters. Apprehending thant, caſting a halter aboute his necke: drawing him to their tree of reformacion (as they call it) to hang him ſtreyght. But at his ſute to be hard ſpeake ere he die, on fli fleeth into the tree, wherwith the captaine commaundeth ſilence. Cap. 53.
               ¶ The flie in the tree: to perſwarde the flies to here the ant ſpeake, wadeth honeſtlie, politiklie to a lewre them, to quiet heryng of the ant before they put him to death. His which tale tolde, he remoueth to his place agayne. Cap. 54.
               The flies former fine tale, nowh
                     •
                  t ſturreth the groſe flies to the hearing of the ant. Whervpon the butterflie (that was an arbiter) fleeth into the tree: laboring the flies to haue the ant heard ſpeake ere he die. Cap. 55.
               
                  
¶ The butterflie (to get thant to be heard) telth his tale in ſuch rude maner and matter, that anone he ſetth them all (welnie) together by the eares. But vppon his groſe tale groſely tolde, (much more lyked then the flies fine
                     •
                   tale) thei graunt to hers the flie ſpeake. Cap. 56.
               ¶ The ant prayth to be herd ſpeake thorowlie before anie part of his tale be adiudged. And then they to adiudge the whole as ſtandth with equite. Firſt alleging matter to cleare himſelfe from offending the flies. Finallie geuinge them (as it ſemeth) freendli counſell, (touchyng this ſtrife) grounded vpon this common ſaying: before thou ought begin, haue an iye to the ende. Cap. 57.
               ¶ Thant hath ſet the flies in ſuch feare of the ſpiders, that moſt are redie to ronne awaie, whom to ſtaie, the captaine flie deuiſeth thant to ſet the ſpiders in like feare of them: by a tale tolde on the ſame grounde that he tolde this: in paine of hanging at his returne. Cap. 58.
               ¶ Thant after entre in talke (before the hed ſpider) he to hym, and all the ſpiders (vpon this ſaide grounde: ere thou ought begin: haue a iye to the ende,) inueyth what he can to ſet the ſpiders in feare of the flies. Cap. 59.
               ¶ Thāt hauing brought the ſpiders in great feare of the multitude of flies, the head ſpider takinge greate diſpleaſure with the ant for th
                     •
                   ſame, he anſwereth thantes tale ſo that he bringeth all the ſpiders in corage agayne. Geuinge (in his owne name and all theyrs,) defiance to the flies. Cap. 60.
               ¶ Vpon defiāce geuin by the ſpider to the flies, the ant brought agayne to the flies, maketh full report of all ſayde at the copweb. At end wherof, two flies argue wether thant haue deſerued life or death. By keeping or breaking former comnant to bring the ſpiders in feare of the flies. Cap. 61.
               
                  
¶ At ende of this laſt argument. The captayne axing the ant what he can ſaye? whye he ſhould not die, the ant after a few woordes ſubmitteth him to their order. Wherevpon the captaine goinge to the queſtion, the ant is condemde by the voyce of the moſt nombre. The captaine then willing hym to make his laſt prayers, he doth ſo. Cap. 62.
               ¶ While the ant ſaith his prayers on the ladder, two 
                     •
                  lies thinking him to be wrongfullie caſt a waie, pitteing the caſe, They touche (in talke) three ſortes of flies ſeene there then. Wherin is toucht ſum parte of properties of new
                  
                     •
                  er flies. Cap. 63.
               ¶ The ant hauing now made his prayers, beinge at poynt to be turnd from the ladder, a flie, a far of, crieth holde. Who (lighting in the tree) bringeth ſuche a meſſage from the hed ſpider, as the Ant (thereby) is repride, and caried to priſon. Cap. 64.
               ¶ The captaine flie, inueith vpon matter before paſt: in ſuch ſorte ſo encoraging the flies againe, that anone thei all crying to the captaine to march forwarde, thei brauely ſet foorth. And laiyng their ordinaunce to the copweb caſtell, thei beſege it rownde. Cap. 65.
               ¶ The flies geue onſet in aſſawte vpon the caſtell: the ſpiders defending it in furious fighte. And vpon the ſlaughter on both ſides, the flies retire to their campe. The ſpiders wife and childerne on kneſe to him beſeching him to take peace with the flies. Cap. 66.
               ¶ The ſpider hauing compaſſion on his wyfe and childerne as on him ſelfe, he ſaith that he will: with the aduice of his councell, in their ſute do all that maie be done for the beſt. Cap. 67.
               ¶ The ſpider ſet with twelue of his counſaile, declareth his wiues and childerns ſute (adioyning therunto cōcideracions of

his owne) for peace to be taken with the flies. Requiring thoſe counſellers while he departe and returne) to determine what waie he ſhall take. Cap. 68.
               ¶ Straight as the ſpider is gone, the reſt ariſe withdrawing a ſonder in three plumpes fowre in a plumpe, no one knot knowing what the reſt ſaith, which done: thei all ſet downe again againſt the ſpiders returne. Cap. 69.
               ¶ The ſpider ſet againe with his cownſaile, in thoſe three ſaid ſortes, ariſe thre diuers waies to take herin. The beſt one wherof to chooſe, the ſpider departeth to deuiſe vpon. Willing them to cauſe all corners of that caſtell to be clenſed and all battred places made ſtronge againe. Cap. 70.
               ¶ The flies in campe be at cownſell: deſirouſly deuiſing: by what meane to get peace beſt. Whervpon the captaine inuenting a meane to driue thāt to ſew for peace if thei will be ruled by him, thei thervnto agree. And thervpon the ant is brought before the flies. Cap. 71.
               ¶ The captaine telth the ant that the flies haue retired from thaſſaute: (wheare manie ſpiders are ſlayne) to ſe whether the ſpiders wyll ſew for peace, for which ſince they ſew not, the flies will aſſaute them agayne. But the ant they wyll hang ſtreyght before they go. Cap. 72.
               ¶ The Ant vpon ſoden ſhorte warning of his death: beynge much diſmayde, laying all that he can for his life, and yet can get no grace, he prayth reſpight: while he be brought to the ſpider to ſe whether he wyll grow to anie peace to ſaus the antes life. Whiche graunted, the ant is brought before the ſpider. Cap. 73.
               ¶ Thant (in waie of peticion) ſewinge to the ſpider for peace laying conſiderac
                     •
                  ons to prouoke him the rather therto, the ſpider doth attentiuelie, geue the ant hering. Cap. 74.
               
                  
¶ The ſpider (vpon thants tale tolde to him) alegith certaine thinges by which he 
                     •
                  emeth in doubte much to graunt peace to the flies. Wherin the ant and he trauerſing ſumwhat: anon he graunteth peace to them vnder condicion expreſt, wherewith thant is brought to the flies agayne. Cap. 75.
               ¶ Thant declaring peace: as it is graunted, the flies in muche ioye ſet the ant thankfullie at libertie, and home goeth he. Whervpon the captaine commaundeth all flies to draw nere to here him ſpeake ere they depart. But they flee all awaye a few excepte. Cap. 76.
               ¶ Vpon a litle talke had betweene the captaine and the few flies there lefte, touchinge the rewdneſſe and lightneſſe of the common ſort of flies, miſliking their former light lewde demenure, they depart. The campes on both ſides, clere brooken vp. Cap. 77.
               ¶ Thant being cum to the molehill, ſolemlie receiued of hys wyfe, and childerne: and a great numbre of ants, he telth (to them all a tale diſcorſinge theffect of all his trouble, had amōg the ſpiders and flies. Willing them diligentlie to marke, what he ſaith. Cap. 78.
               ¶ Thant hauing ſaid: what he wyll ſaie, willeth all ants to note whie he ſaide, that he ſaide. Whiche is to warne them by his armes to beware, how they meddle in matters betweene ſpiders and flies. Cap. 79.
               ¶ Foure flies (in the name of all 
                     •
                  lies) at the copweb, thanking the ſpider for pardon and peace, declaringe the conditions and the performance on their parte) 
                     •
                  ew to the ſpider on his parte, to performe his graunt: in laying out and poſſeſſing them of theyr limitts with halfe the hooles in the window, which he graunteth bidding them a litle time ſtaie. in which while: he ſendth the yongeſt ſpider of his twaine to the ant, praying him to cum to him againe. To deuide and

deliuer the hooles to the flies as the ſpider will apoinct them. Cap. 80.
               ¶ Vpon this meſſage done, thant feinth a let of his cūming: bi a hurt miſchanſing him that morning. with which anſwere, the yonge ſpider returneth to the olde. Cap. 81
               ¶ The ſpider after a few woords to the foure flies, aſſineth to them al the ſmal holes beneth. Halfe the holes in numbre: but ſcant the ſixt parte of the roome. At whiche they ſumwhat grudge. But they muſt take them or none. Cap. 82.
               ¶ The foure flies flowne thence, the ſpider to the flie in priſon leith: that in all kinds of triall that daie on both parts laide, he thinketh his owne part approued beſt. as he thinketh the flis wolde thinke were he a ſpider, contrarie iudgement wherof, the flie thinketh in the ſpider were he a flie. wherupon they agree to change places (eche for the time) to imagin and ſet foorth others part the beſt they can. Cap. 83.
               ¶ They hauing Chaunged places: they alege eche for his diſſembled ſide. Wherin the flie anone is ſo alured to pride and ambyſſyon in occupying (for the while) the ſpiders ſtatelie place, that he at laſt with an othe affirmeth that ſpiders are owners of all windowes. The ſpider graunting it trew, ſterteth to the flie, ſeeming to 
                     •
                  ake end vpon the flies owne iudgement. Cap. 84.
               ¶ The flie out of that chaier falne flat before the ſpider, perſeyuing his ouerſight and daunger therin, he declareth howe change of place changed his affection. In diſcoorſing of which caſe, he partlie toucheth the commoditie of aduerſitie, and the diſcommoditie of proſperitie. Beſeeching the ſpider to relinquiſhe all aduauntage therin to be taken againſt him. Which the ſpider graunteth. Cap. 85.
               ¶ The ſp
                     •
                  der vpon a glaunce geuen at his deſert of thanke to

be had at the flies hand, allegeth cuſtom to be hys warrant to diſtroy the flie: which the flie can not denie. Whervpon he deſireth that the caſe maie be reaſoned in conſcience. Which the ſpider now graunteth. Cap. 86.
               ¶ They both laie ſundrie ſharpe reaſons in conſcience for the ſpiders life and death. But the ſpider in concluſion draweth theſe foure principles (reaſon, law, cuſtom, and conſcience, which he at beginning graunted to trie all by) ſo to combine that he maketh therby an aparence, to ſhow the fli conuinſt. & ſtreight by cuſtom: he geueth iudgement of the flies death. To which the flie yeldeth. Praying to ſpeak with twelue flies before he die. And it is graunted. Cap. 87
               ¶ The flie (to twelue graue flies for all flies) geueth his aduice for a voiding their parels by their ſtrife had in windowes againſt ſpiders. the great grounde of which tale ſtandeth moſt vpon conſideration of theſe three things. Wherfore they ſtriue, with whom they ſtriue, and how they ſtriue. Cap. 88.
               ¶ As the ſpider is about to kill the flie, the mayde of the houſe commeth in and ſtriketh downe the copweb and the ſpider to the ground. Cap. 89.
               ¶ The maide being at poinet to treade the ſpider to death: the ſpider praieth her to here him ſpeake ere he die: and then to adiudge him iuſtlie. The maide graunting to vſe him (as he dyd vſe the flie) as maie beſt ſtand with reaſon, law, cuſtom, and conſcience. She at his requeſt (for the time) withdrawing hyr foote, they fall to reaſoning of the caſe. Cap. 90.
               ¶ In reaſoning of both ſides, the maide driueth the ſpider to graunt him ſelfe conuinſt (by cuſtom eyded with the other principles erſt ſaide) as he conuinſt and adiudged the flie before. Whervpon ſhe (by cuſtom) decreth the ſpider to die. He then deſiring to ſpeake with his ſonne and his counſell. Which the mayde graunteth. Cap. 91.
               
                  
¶ The ſpider to his ſonne and twelue ſpiders geueth his beſt aduiſe for moſt quiet and beſt gouernance. His tale ſtandynge, moſt vpō theſe three termes. Firſt a declaration of him ſelfe, ſecond an exhortation to them, the third a ſubmiſſion for him ſelf. Whervnto he deſireth licence to take his childe in his armes: now at theyr departing, whiche the mayde graunteth. Cap. 92.
               ¶ After a few wofull woordes of the ſpider had to his ſonne (they bothe claſpynge eche other in armes verie naturally) he kyſſeth and bliſſeth him. Wherewyth that ſonne with all the twelue ſpiders dolefullie departe from the ſpider. Cap. 93.
               ¶ The mayde (appering as woe to diſtroye the ſpider as he is to be dyſtroyde) wyth her foote preſſeth hym to death. Cap. 94.
               ¶ The mayde hath before her the twelue ſpiders and the twelue flies that had bene before in place. And upon her ſhow that all harms doone by thoſe generacions is growne by myſorder, ſhe fynally deuiſeth full redreſſe in poynting them to grow to order. Cap. 95.
               ¶ The twelue ſpiders and twelue flies hauyng hearde theyr order ſet by the mayde, they thankefullie receyue it. And vpon her commaundement to them, to put thys order in vre amonge all ſpyders and flies, they ioyfullye departe that commaundement to fulfill. Cap. 96.
               ¶ The ſpiders and flies beynge now abſent, The mayde ſweepyth the wyndow cleane in euerie place. As far as her breme and arme wyll ſtretch, which doone ſhe departeth. Cap. 97
               ¶ The maide being gone, the auctor cūmeth in. And vpon hys

beholding the wyndow fayre and cleane ſwept wythoute anie combirus copwebs or exceſſif flockes of flies he departeth. Cap. 98.
            
            FINIS TABVLAE.

                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  I H
                  portrait of John Heywood
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ The Introduction to the matter, ſhowing howe the flie chaunſed to fall in the ſpiders copweb. Cap. primū.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               
                  IN ſeaſon what time euery growing thinge
               That ripeth by roote, hath liuely taken hart
               Graſſe, leafe, and flowre, in field ſo floriſhing
               That wintered withered ſtalkꝭ, ſtand in couart
               Though weerie wythered hartꝭ, plaie than like part
               Couertly coucht in bed, them ſelues to hyde
               Yet hartꝭ of luſt, the bed can not abyde.
            
            
               But vp they muſt, profe of that luſt to make
               In whiche like cherefull tyme, it chaunced me
               From ſleepe one night, ſo timelie to awake
               That how ferre night, or how nie daie might be
               It paſt my reache, of ſearche, ſure ſine to ſe
               But ſtreight, the ſearche of nature wrought the crowe
               Of daunyng of the daie, warnyng to ſhowe.
            
            
               Vpon whiche admoniſion I aroſe,
               But by the tyme, that I coulde get me out,
               The daie apeereth and ſo brode breaketh loſe,
               Leadyng mine eye, at large to loke about
               The fieldꝭ, ſo freſhe, that be ye out of dout
               For ſauour, ſight, and heringe eche byrdꝭ voyſe
               No chaunge could chaunce, to chooſe the better choyſt.
            
            
               Whiche I (reioyſynglie) herde and behelde
               Tyll ſuche time as the ſonne, was cum in ſight,
               So that the dew (drawne by his powre) muſt yelde
               From therth to thaire, from whence it fell that night
               And hauyng herein had mine appetight
               I made returne (temprately to remayne)
               Out of whot ſonne, to temprate houſe agayne.
            
            
               
               Where as (anone) a booke I tooke in hand
               Some thinge to reade, to fode foorth fantaſie
               And ſtepping to a window, there to ſtand,
               In at a lattes hole, right ſodenlie
               Euen at a fling, faſt flew there in a flie
               That ſang as ſhrill, and freſhlie in my minde,
               As any byrde coulde do, bredde of that kinde.
            
            
               About the parler flew this flie full rounde,
               And as apeerde: he ſought for foode in deede,
               But when in no wiſe, ought wolde there be founde,
               In to the buttrie (haſtelie) he yeede
               And ſtale in to the almerie to feede,
               Where he (at pleaſure) triumpht vncontrolde,
               Till he had there (at will) wrought what he wolde.
            
            
               From whenſe (anone) couragiouſlie he flang
               Now here, now there, of winge he made no ſtore,
               But for a flie oh lorde how he then ſang
               Two notes aboue his higheſt note before,
               Wherin, encreaſt his courage more and more,
               He flew, he friſkt, he toſt, he turnde about,
               The flie of flies, no flie I trow ſo ſtout
            
            
               But as the firmament moſt cleere and blew
               The golden ſonbeames bent to bewtifie
               The courtaine drawne of clowdie weeping hew
               Withdraweth and chaungeth, that chriſtall aſure ſki
                     •
                  
               
               From blew to blacke: ſo fareth it with the flie.
               Amyd whoſe ioy, at window to haue paſt,
               A copweb maſkth his winges and maketh him faſt.
            
            
               
               Thus chaunce hath (by exchaunge) the flie ſo trapt,
               That ſodainly he loſt his libertee:
               The more he wrange, the faſter was he wrapt
               And all to thencreaſe of his ieoberdee,
               Which parell, when he did conceiue and ſee
               Suche was his rage in haſt from thence to flitte
               As made him ſeeme, welnie out of his witte
            
            
               He wafted his winges, he wagged his tayle
               He ſhooke his head, he frounde, he ſtared wyde,
               He ſpurnde, he kickte, but when nought wolde auayle
               To ryd him thence, but there he muſt abyde,
               As breath and breaſt wolde beare, loudely he cryde
               And wofullie as any one flie can
               In folowynge foorme, this wofull flie began.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The lamentacion of the flie, with declaracion (partlie) of the propertie of Fortune, and of his owne eſtate paſt and preſente. Cap. 2
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               ALas, alas, alas and welawaie,
               To crie aloude alas, what cauſe haue I
               Alas (I ſaie) that euer I ſawe this daie,
               My whole eſtate in twinklyng of an eye
               Is here tranſformde from myrth to miſerie,
               For frowarde fortune hath led my mys hap
               To lay and locke me in myne ennemies lap.
            
            
               Oh ſodayne ſorowe, from ſetled ſolas,
               For ſo ſat I in ſolas: as me thought.
               Oh fortune, falſe flaterer that euer was,
               In one moment, and in an other wrought
               So furious, that both thaffertꝭ foorth brought,
               Furie, or flaterie, which is worſt in thee
               Hard for a flie, to iudge the certeintee.
            
            
               Namelie for me, who all my life haue beene
               Lapped in lap of thy fayre flattering flowres,
               Till from thoſe roſes, now thou caſteſt me cleene
               Into theaſe nettles, of thy furious ſhowres,
               Wherin my lacke of practice, lacketh powres.
               (My whole tyme hauing bene ſpent in the tone)
               To iudge in theaſe two, whiche is the woorſt one.
            
            
               I lacke (I meane) iudgement to iudge at full,
               Bothe theaſe ſayde ſides: Howbeit here to declare,
               Somwhat in bothe partes, I bothe can and wull
               Mine entrie now, in chaunge from ioye to care,
               Hath in this inſtant taught me to compare
               Flaterie with furie, trewth in both to trie,
               When Fortune telleth treuth: and when Fortune doth lie.
            
            
               
               Who while ſhe was (or rather ſeemde) my freende,
               Thapparaunce of hir pleaſaunt countenaunce
               Promiſed me, my welth ſhoulde haue none eende,
               But ſwifter then the ſtar doth ſeeme to glaunce
               That aſſemblaunce: turneth to diſſemblaunce,
               Myne ended welth, now turnde to endles wo,
               Amyd monge hir falſe flaterie, proueth ſo.
            
            
               And putting now hir fewrie here in vre
               Threatniug the daunger of my life preſent,
               Perfourmaunce therof doth appere as ſure
               As it in maner had experiment,
               Hir fewrie is a glaſſe right excellent
               Betwene fewrie and flaterie to deuiſe
               To take hir threats trew, and hir promeſſe lieſe
            
            
               Flaterie, and fewrie, thus in hir this goſe,
               When ſhe ſpeaketh fayre, then hath ſhe luſt to lie.
               When ſhe ſpeaketh foule, then trewth ſhe will diſcloſe,
               Which thinge ſhowth ſomwhat ſtraunge, but commenlie
               In man to man, mans vſe doth verifie,
               In loue, and hate, diſcloſyng trewth and lieſe
               The ſelfe ſhow ſhowde in dailie exerciſe.
            
            
               In ſundrie thinges experience doth tell,
               No friende, with friende (in friendſhip) will be plaine,
               As foe, with foe, will in his fewrie fell.
               Loue, to tell trewth, doth ofte for loue refraine,
               Hate hideth no iote vntolde for to remaine.
               Loue, lockth in trewth, leaſt trewth might friendꝭ diſpleaſe,
               Hate, laſhth out trewth, foes to diſpleaſe and diſeaſe.
            
            
               
               Friendes (in this caſe) will hide trewth, and ſhow lieſe.
               Foes (in this caſe) will hide lies and ſhew trewth,
               Of trewth that towcheth in diſpleaſant wiſe.
               Hate hideth nought, that memorie endewth
               In man, and fortune, who that fully vewth,
               How vſe of trewth, and lies herein hath gone,
               Shall ſe in both, ſmall difference ſaue this one.
            
            
               Loue cauſeth friendes to hide diſpleaſant trowth,
               To kepe their friendes in quiet while thei maie.
               By loue in friendes to friendes, a lothneſſe growth,
               In thing extreeme, the trewth extreeme to ſaie,
               Where hiding of the trewth, harmeth no waie
               Or that the trewth, is better hid then tolde
               There friende, to friende, by loue will trewth with holde.
            
            
               But thoſe reſpectes, fortune doth nought attend,
               Hir hidden trewth, in pleaſaunt preſent ſhow,
               Is to begile, ſuch as on hir depend,
               When from hir grace, their greefe vnknowen ſhall grow
               By fore purpoſed, folowing ouerthrow.
               In quiet calme, ſhe ſhadoweth ſhipwracke rockes,
               To make hir mariners hir mockyng ſtockes.
            
            
               And noting here (from hir proclaimed calme)
               How ſodenlie hir ſtolne ſtormes, do ariſe
               Of ioie longe ſought, late had, the ſodeine qualme
               I iudge to be hir great ioy, to deuiſe
               By hir which ioy: my ſorow in this wiſe,
               Teatheth me (I ſay) to ſay that I haue ſaide,
               And ſo much more, as is next after laide,
            
            
               
               What is long liking life, the tyme once paſt,
               Except the ſame, haue bene orderlie ſpent
               Thaccounted audite daie, muſt cum at laſt,
               When woorde, and deede, with thought of eche entent,
               Shall haue a iuſt account, with like iudgement
               Wolde god for all whiche dredfull doubtfull doutes
               That I had died euen in my ſwadlynge cloutes.
            
            
               For liue we neuer ſo longe a time here,
               The tyme determined once that hence muſt wee,
               Then doth all worldelie pleaſure paſt, apere
               Euen as in deede it is, all vanitee,
               Whiche pleaſure hath bene longe poſſeſt in mee
               I thinke in no creature liuynge more
               That euer liued here, a flie before.
            
            
               Full many a night, haue I eſcaped harme,
               When many a flie, to harme was bought and ſolde
               And many a night haue I lien cloſe and warme
               When many a flie abrode hath died for colde,
               And many a flie the flap hath iobde and iolde,
               When I haue ſafely kepte from ieobardee,
               My ſelfe, and all the flies, that folowde mee.
            
            
               Wherby (with flies) I was then ſo eſteemed
               That few thinges paſſed without my councell
               And where I paſt: there was no daunger deemed
               Nor no cauſe why, for in all thinges that fell
               My woorke did then approue my wit ſo well
               That nowhit cared I, what flie did know it,
               Nor yet how far or brode al flies did blow it.
            
            
               
               I haue bene (ere this daie) theſe many daies,
               By mine experience and mother wit,
               Highly in eſtimation many waies,
               And where I was preſent, no filie wolde ſit,
               Nor pertely preaſe, to blow or bite one bit
               Till I were ſet, for where were fleſhe or fiſhe,
               The choiſe of both was mine in euery diſhe.
            
            
               And I ſuppoſe as longe as preſent tence,
               Maie keepe poſſeſt poſſeſſion peaſably,
               To ſtand in place and caſe of reuerence,
               Is thing much pleaſaunt, to all flies welny,
               But once in chaunged, caſe as now am I,
               The preter tence, preſentlie takinge place,
               Then hath the preſent tence loſt all his grace.
            
            
               Alas my ioyfull ioy of yeſterdaie,
               How can it cure my carefull care preſent,
               Of pleaſure paſt, remembraunce doth alwaie
               The pinche of preſent payne, right much augment.
               Then in this preſent caſe this conſequent,
               Conclewdeth (I ſay) all pleaſure paſt to bee
               Nought els, but vaniſhed vaine vanitee.
            
            
               Thus lithe there now in charge of my repreefe,
               Thoſe thinges, which I haue longe time gloried in.
               Which glory paſt, encreaſeth preſent greefe,
               And as my woorthy wyt did woorſhip win,
               So ſhall ſhew of my foly, neuer blin
               To bruite defame, report of this diſtreſſe,
               Shall toſſe and turne my wyt to foolyſhneſſe.
            
            
               
               As thus, the ſimpleſt flie whiche by my ſkoole,
               Is taught (ere this) of copwebs to beware,
               And ſeeth his maſter plaie ſo far the foole,
               To be my ſelfe now tript in the ſame ſnare,
               Shall by reporte my folie full declare,
               Whiche ſurely ſhall amonge all flies ſuruiue
               As long as any one flie is aliue.
            
            
               And though, this fall, I take to be as cleane
               Without my faute, as without remedie,
               And parience the medſonable meane,
               To take all fautles falles, reioiſinglie.
               And eke where no helpe, helpeth maladie,
               To make a vertue, of neceſſitee,
               Yet thoſe two poinctes, are poynctes to high for me.
            
            
               For be I faultie, or be I faultles,
               Sins I, this dreadfull daunger muſt endure,
               I am not mortified to beare diſtres,
               And being cleere remediles from cure
               Of all my paines, that putteth moſt paine in vre,
               From ſtep, to ſtep, ſtretcht on this ſtraining ſtaier,
               No ſtep like that, ſtraineth daunger of diſpaier.
            
            
               For where as if remedy, anie weare,
               Hope (out of hande) ſhoulde ſet me there about,
               As hope of helpe is drownde, ſo I for beare
               All diligens, that hence might helpe me out,
               Thus though the caged byrde (with ſtomake ſtout:
               And voiſe right ſweete) can ſing his ſongꝭ by roate,
               Yet can the fettred flie, ſo: ſing no noate,
            
            
               
               Example of my ſelfe, whoſe weeping eieſe,
               With ſobbing ſighinge harte, bewaileth my payne,
               Appeering ſuche, by ought I can ſurmieſe,
               As doth (in maner) ſhow my death certaine,
               Namely if ſo the ſpider now remaine
               In this his manſhion, ſet here preſentlie,
               Then dred I doutles, here, foorthwith to die.
            
            
               Of ſuch a death as moſt abhorth vs flies,
               Which, flies haue felt, and folke haue ſeene to plaine,
               Of propertie the ſpider hath the giſe,
               Firſt to ſucke out, and ſo eate vp our braine,
               To his ſmall gaine: and our moſt loſſe and paine,
               Thus hath it bene, thus is it, and thus ſhalbe,
               Till pittie may mitigate thextremite.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The dreadfull wonder of the ſpider at ſodaine ſhakyng of his copweb. Cap. 3.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               VVhat tyme the flie, this to him ſelfe had ſaide,
               About the houſe he caſt a dolefull looke,
               Wherwith (to breake away) he made abraide,
               With ſuch a thruſt, that all the copweb ſhooke,
               At whiche the ſpider ſtert, and ſtreight awooke
               Out of ſounde ſleepe, full faſt trembling for feare,
               And feintlie ſpake (anone) as ye ſhall heare.
            
            
               Alas where am I: alas whence came I?
               Or whither ſhall I? whatꝭ this an erthe quake?
               Or cometh the daie of doome now ſodeinly?
               Nought els (I trow) but that, my houſe coulde make
               In euery place to ſhatter and to ſhake,
               What is this buzzyng blumberinge trow we: thunder?
               Holde houſe, alas my ſeelyng riueth a ſunder,
            
            
               No parte hath reſt, in all partes of this frame,
               From roofe to groundſill, within any roome.
               Is it the diuell? or is it our dame?
               Or is it the page? or is it the groome?
               Or is it our maide with hir birthin broome?
               Betwene the diuel, and all theſe, laſt and furſt,
               The diuel take me, if I can chooſe the wurſt.
            
            
               But ill, woorſe, and woorſt, diuel, and all togither
               Do me aſſaute as it (to me▪ doth ſeeme,
               Hath fortune wrought my foes at this tyme hither,
               And not ſo much as warnde me to miſdeeme,
               Now fie on fickle fortune thus extreeme,
               And I defie the garde of ſuche a guider,
               Alas (this day) I am but a dead ſpider.
            
            
               
               Theſe woordes thus ſpoken, downe anone he ſanke.
               Kneling a while, deuoutlie on his knee,
               And then rounde on a heape, to grounde he ſhranke
               Like an vrchyn vnder an aple tree.
               No felon, faſt in fetters for his fee,
               Nor ape in chaine, that euer lookte more pale,
               Then look
                     •
                  e this ſpider, after this tolde tale.
            
            
               So that theſe twayne, ſtand now in one eſtate,
               For in like langour, both be now here led,
               And of their liues, both like deſperate,
               For now the ſpider, is as far in dred,
               And by that dred he is euen as neere ded,
               As is the flie. Who thinketh he ſeeth at eie,
               His death aproachyng him, aparantlie.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The ſpider takyng comfort, entreth in quarell with the flie. Cap. 4.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               Howbeit anone, the ſpider well eſpide
               That ennemies were there none ſaue onely one:
               And him he ſawe ſo ſafe, and ſurely tide,
               That vp he ſtoode to ſtretche him, and anone
               (His former feare from him now beyng gone)
               To the top of his copwe
                     •
                  , he ſtept boldely,
               And in theſe wordes: began to common coldely.
            
            
               Who are you that lithe there? ſpeake if ye can?
               Forſooth (ſaide then the flie) ſyr it is I,
               I, be you I (quoth he) I pray you than
               What I be you? tell me that by and by.
               What I am I? forſooth ſir a poore fly:
               What thou falſe theefe, art thou here quoth the ſpider
               Thou ſhalt feele cauſe, to wiſhe thou hadſt gone wider.
            
            
               And therwithall full furiouſlie he flang
               Towarde the flie, but what tyme he eſpide him,
               Oh lord how his feat feete and handes he wrang,
               Beſeching his great god, that day to guide him,
               And from his mortall ennemie to deuide him:
               With out whoſe ayde, from which his foe: to flit,
               He ſaw it paſt a flies poore powre and wit.
            
            
               And his dreadfull diſpayre, was muche the more
               To ſee how ſpeedelie the ſpider ſpan,
               All rounde about his houſe eche ſyde to ſhore,
               No weauing workman in this worlde that can
               Weaue that like web of that like ſtuffe wouen than,
               In eche weake place is wouen a weauing caſt,
               By warde, in warde, to warde the flie more faſt.
            
            
               
               Whiche done, theſe woordꝭ the ſpider ſewrely ſaide,
               Thou auncient enemie and arrant theefe.
               Whoſe lignage alwaie hath ſhewde banner ſplaide
               Againſt my parentage to their great greefe,
               And now thy ſelfe renewing their miſcheefe
               With mallice of thine owne in vre to put,
               Art ſtolen in to my houſe, my throate to cut.
            
            
               And neuer had my houſe, and houſholde harme
               By any flie, ſo much as now by thee,
               I ſhrew thy naked hart, I was full warme
               Naked a bed, a ſleepe ſo mo
                     •
                  e I thee,
               There as my wife: and all my children bee,
               Where god knoweth what they do, or how they do,
               By feare whiche thou at this time bringeſt them to.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The ſpider ſterting into his houſe to comfort his houſholde, the flie deuiſeth what way to eſcape the daunger of the ſpider. Cap. 5.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               ANd with theſe woordes aſide the ſpider ſtart,
               Where his ſaide bedfelow and ofſpring were.
               Saying theſe woordes: now good mine owne ſweete hart
               And my two babes be ye all of good there,
               The preſent cauſe of all your preſent fere
               Is paſt, I haue the caiteffe faſt in ſnare,
               That was the cauſe of all your fearefull care.
            
            
               What horeſon is it huſband, (quoth he) wife
               A fleſhe flie as big as a humble bee,
               That ſhall (if I liue) ſurelie leeſe his life.
               The yongeſt ſpider there, at this cride he,
               Oh, father father I hertelie pray ye
               Remembre when ye ſhall returne againe,
               To bring me ſome part of that fleſhe flies braine.
            
            
               How ſay ye to this babe (quoth the mother)
               Will ye here this vrchin of eyght weekes olde,
               It is a babling brat aboue all 
                     •
                  ther,
               Ye (quoth the father) childe hardely be bolde.
               Thornes pricke yonge, that ſhalbe ſharpe folke haue tolde,
               Which ſheweth in thee, in that thou art en
                     •
                  linde
               To craue (thus yonge) accordyng to thy kynde.
            
            
               And while the ſpider dalied in this wiſe,
               The flie (conſidering this extremitee)
               Did with him ſelfe, aduiſedlie deuiſe,
               To ſcape with life, what might his beſt meane bee,
               S
                     •
                  ftely, as I might here, ſaying, I ſee
               Like as muche contenſion can nought prenayle,
               So: to muche cowardiſe might all quayle.
            
            
               
               Betwene theſe two, cowardiſe and contenſion,
               The ſpiders ire the rather to aſſwage,
               I temprately muſt tempre mine inuenſion,
               To plead my right in reaſon not in rage,
               And ſens my body lieth in iayle forgage,
               My iayler faire and gentlie to beſeeche,
               That is (in flies) no flaterie but faire ſpeeche.
            
            
               From deſperate feare: hope makth me now ſuppoſe,
               If I may obteine hearyng reaſonably,
               I nother life nor libertee ſhall loſe,
               But be let lowſe from bondage by and by,
               And herevpon the ſpider ſodeinely
               From where he was, returned backe againe,
               And ſtreight to gripe the flie began to ſtraine,
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The ſpider being returned to the flie, after a few woordes betwene them had, the flie ſewth to the ſpider to be herd ſpeake which he graunteth. Cap. 6.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               THe flie (to him) lift vp both hart and handes,
               And in moſt milde behauiour humblelie
               Saide: ſyr, ſins I am bound here in your bandes,
               Vnder commaundment thus aſſuredlie,
               What brute might breede to you more infamie
               Then here (in hucker mucker) me to murder,
               The cauſe wherefore I die, publiſht no furder.
            
            
               Flie: (quoth the ſpider) I dare ſay: the cauſe
               Is open enough, for a thowſande marke
               Will not repaire that, which againſt all lauſe
               Thou haſt here broken: beholde thine owne warke,
               Wherin to aunſwere all: that at me barke,
               To whom thy dolefull death ſhalbe apparant,
               To them thy diueliſhe deede ſhalbe my warant.
            
            
               Sir (ſaide the flie) if it in deede ſo be
               That this my deede, aparantly appere,
               So far my faute, that it may warrant ye,
               To geue me death therfore with conſciens cleere,
               Then as my body is in priſon heere,
               So with my bodie yeelde my will, will I,
               Vnto your will, at will to liue or dy.
            
            
               But ſyr, before we ſhalbe ſo fer foorth,
               I you beſeech right humbly as I maie,
               Alow my ſewte, for ſuch: and ſo muche woorth,
               To win your graunt (ere I be caſt awaie)
               To here, what I can in this matter ſaie,
               So thou with ſpeede ſhow what thou haſt to breake,
               I (quoth the ſpider) graunt to here the ſpeake.
            
            
               
               I thanke you humblie (quoth the flie) but ſur
               Of a gooſe with garlicke ſauſte: ſo late I eete,
               That my breath ſtinketh, and ſins I may not ſtur
               From you, for you I thinke it very meete,
               To ſtep from me: a loofe: to aire more ſweete,
               The ſpider ſtepping backe a little way,
               The flie therwith (ſomwhat lightned) did ſay.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The oracion of the flie to the ſpider, commending iuſtice, and iuſt iuſticers, requiring to haue his cauſe herd throughly and adiudged Iuſtlie. Cap. 7.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               MAiſter ſpider, note (I beſeche you) this,
               Ye know right well, the vertue of Iuſtiſe,
               In euery creature here liuynge, is,
               Both in you ſpiders, and eke in vs fliſe,
               And in euery other wight beyng wiſe,
               The thing: which is generally pretended,
               And where it is in deede, highly commended:
            
            
               And where that vertue, lacketh in any wight,
               All other vertues, there do bid adew,
               What vertue can (in place) take place of right,
               In ſuche as to ſhew Inſtice, dooe eſchew:
               Who lacketh Iuſtice, he can not be trew:
               And who in Iudginge all thinges, Iuſtly Iudgeth,
               To chooſt that Iudge his Iudge, no wiſe wight grudgeth.
            
            
               Great lettꝭ wherin are foure, loue, hate, meede, and dreede,
               In all whiche iudgementes geuen, adiudgeyng geines,
               Loue, Iudgth the loued, more, then iuſtice ſheweth decreede.
               Hate, Iudgth the hated, leſſe, then Iuſtice conſtreines:
               Meede, Iudgth the meeder, more, then Iuſtice conteinſe.
               Dred, in dred of the dreddid, the dredder driues
               To Iudge, more or leſſe, as the dreddid contriues.
            
            
               And tavoyde parſhall iudgement betwene partiſe,
               Though thone partie for iudge, I wiſhe none of them,
               Yet change of minde or matter, doth oft ſo riſe,
               That the iudge, is iudge, and partie one of them,
               As you ſeeme iudge here, beyng the tone of them,
               Selfe loue in whiche iudge, he thother part hatinge,
               May iudge muche iudgement, of much vniuſt ratinge:
            
            
               
               Ye though the iudge, hate thother partie no deele,
               That ſelfe iudge, him ſelfe, louyng more then enough,
               Leſſe right then enough, thother part may ſoone feele,
               Selfe loue, to him ſelfe tender, to the reſt tough,
               Is, of iuſt iuſtice, neither roote, braunce, nor bough.
               Loue (namely ſelfe loue) corruptibly growyng,
               Is cheefe lodeſter of letꝭ, in iuſtice ſhowing.
            
            
               For though corrupt loue, and hate: contrariſe mere,
               Woorke one like wronge, both in one like degree linkt,
               Yet that loue, woorſe then that hate: Jadiudge here,
               It is more hard, loue to our ſelues to extinkt,
               Then hate to other, to plucke from thartꝭ preſinkt,
               Thus, of iuſtice no let ledeth intrupcion,
               Like this loue (named ſelfe loue) growne of corrupcion.
            
            
               But to the point, iudges that iuſtice vſe,
               In all, betwene them ſelues and all the reff,
               To claime or holde, by wyll who doth refuſe,
               Thinges, wherof they wolde be, or be poſſeſt,
               And euen as iuſtice, iuſtly hath adreſf,
               Both geue and take the dew extended rate,
               Thoſe are (for iudgement) woorthy moſte eſfate.
            
            
               Syns iuſtice that ſweete flowre full fayre doth grow,
               In perſons ſuche as of moſt baſe ſorte bee,
               That floure more fayre and ſweete muſt needely ſhow
               In thoſe that ſtande, aboue the meane degree,
               Beynge therto knyt vnto autcoritee,
               As more or leſſe, who may commaunde at will,
               So more or leſſe, he may do good or ill.
            
            
               
               And in our caſe, were iuſt iuſtiſe clene reiect,
               What iniuries might therby here ariſe.
               Offlies factes, if ſpyders willes weyd, theffect
               Right ſoone, might wilfull will, without iuſtiſe,
               Draw vnto death, a hundreth thowſand fliſe,
               Which: will may do (if will ſhall knit the knot)
               Whether that we flies, offend or offend not.
            
            
               Howbeit I hope ye will do inſtice, ſuche
               As may with this iuſt iuſtice ioyne iuſtly,
               In mine accounte your wiſdome is to muche,
               To blot or blur your fame, for any fly,
               Wherby I ſtand in truſt aſſuredly,
               Juſt iudgement in this matter, now to haue,
               And other thing then that, I do none craue.
            
            
               Saue that this caſe, may be firſt fully hard:
               And fully perceyued, by reaſonyng lykewiſe,
               Whiche done, as equytee, beſt afterward
               Shall you aduyſe, my iudgement to deuiſe,
               Without further apeale in enterpriſe,
               I ſhall (as I ſay) other to liue or die,
               Into your handes, yeelde me contentedlie,
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The ſpider graunteth the flie both to here and adiudge this caſe, as maie moſt agreably ſtand with Reaſon, Lawe, Cuſtome, and Conſcience. Cap. 8.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               FLie (quoth the ſpider) I eſpie right well,
               Thy braine is muche, which I right much ſet by,
               By which thy preſent ſewte, the treuth to tell,
               Thou ſheweſt here wittely and honeſtly,
               Requeſt wherin, ſhoweth ſuch conuenienſy,
               Full heringe and reaſonyng, to win me to:
               That reaſon bidth me graunt, and ſo I do.
            
            
               And for the reſt, behold me now (quoth he)
               Wherwith, his feete to his mouth he toſſis,
               Saieng theſe woordꝭ, now flie here vnto the
               I ſweare a ſollem othe, by all theſe croſſis,
               Thou ſhalt haue iuſtice, though I ſuſteyne loſſis,
               As reaſonably may ſtand, for thy defence,
               In reaſon, lawe, cuſtome, and conſcience.
            
            
               In cumpas of which foure principles towcht,
               All debates, diſcourſt, and diſcuſt ſhulde bee,
               Reaſon, to perceiue, mans great ground is vowcht:
               Lawe, on reaſon: muſt take grounde to agree:
               Cuſtome, ſtandeth (or ſhoulde) on reaſons decree:
               Conſcience, with reaſon concurth: to withdrawe
               Thextremitees of cuſtome, and of lawe.
            
            
               Vpon theſe foure (eche one) one corner poſte,
               The ſtintyng of debate, takth ſtandyng ſtay,
               Wheron this building, ſhalbe ſo enboſte,
               That as I ſware, againe I ſweare I ſay,
               Without corupcion on my part, this day,
               Thou ſhalt be vſed herein, at my hand,
               As moſt with reaſon, and this reſt maie ſtand,
            
         
         
            
            ¶ They ſtand both in hope to conuince ech other by iuſt cauſe, the flie praiyng the ſpiders pardon, of ſuche rude ſpeeche and all behauiour, as he maie chaunce to ouer ſhoote him ſelfe in, the which the ſpider doth graunt. Cap. 9
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               THere neuer was Fryer limiter, that duckt
               So low, where beggyng woon him twenty theeſes,
               As is the flie now to the ſpider ruckte,
               He makth him ſewre to wyn, who euer leeſes,
               And here with all (by chaunſe) the ſpider ſneeſes,
               Now (quoth the flie) chaunce I to win or leeſe.
               Chriſt help, and longe in helth wel mote ye ſneeſe.
            
            
               The ſpider herefore, gaue the flie ſuche thanke,
               As hath in vſage, courſe of curteſy,
               But note theſe twaine, ſo lately ſo like blanke
               And both now, in lyke mirth immediately,
               Me thought, that chaunſed very pretyly,
               The flie thinketh, reaſon ſhall ſure make his waie,
               The ſpider, thinketh in reaſon, ſurely nay.
            
            
               Sir (quoth the flie) I muſt you here beſeethe,
               To ratefie your pardon my protection
               In my behauiour, namely in ſuche ſpeeche
               As may (by rudenes) rightly craue correction,
               If I ſhall larke your ayde, to this election,
               Then may my reaſonyng, for my libertee,
               Leeſe my libertee, and wyn my ieoberdee,
            
            
               This is encluded (flie) in my ſworne othe,
               By whiche Ierſt haue promyſde the iuſtiſe,
               Suche ſpeeche as in thy caſe dyrectly gothe,
               So that thou rayle not, to fer out of ſiſe,
               For whiche thou ſeemeſt a flie, as fer to wiſe,
               Spare not to ſpeake thy mynde: and vnto me
               (So ſaide) ſay what thou wilt: I pardon the.
            
            
               
               That pardon I receyue, with hartie hart,
               And hartely thanke your graunting of the ſame,
               The ſhale now of this nutte, ſhaled cleere apart,
               The crackyng of this nutte: to put in frame,
               For winning of the carnill of this game,
               To your pardon had, your pacience praying,
               To here for further ſerchyng, further ſaying,
            
            
               Here ſtoode they both, a while in ſilent ſtay:
               The flie deuiſing warely what to ſpeake:
               The ſpider likewiſe, warely watcht at bay,
               What great woordes, out of his mouth, ſmall and weake,
               Of chalenge or defence, ſhoulde there then breake,
               Wherwith at curteſy, low and reuerent,
               From circumſtaunce, to ſubſtaunce, the flie went,
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ They entre into the principall argument, the flie ſuppoſing no laufull profe by witnes of any ill there againſt him: the ſpider allegeth the contrarie, the flie (vpon occaſion) requyring to be bailde vnder ſurety, the ſpider denieth it. Cap. 10.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               MAiſter ſpider, the pith now to aduaunce:
               I pray you declare plainly (quoth the flie,
               How can (by law) in reaſon this miſchaunce
               Support in you: to kepe me cruellie,
               To lie in priſon, here thus piteouſlie,
               And with your fetters fettring me thus faſt,
               No laufull proofe of cauſe, by witnes paſt.
            
            
               No laufull proofe (quoth he) flie ſaiſt thou ſo?
               What proofe can reaſon ſhow in law more cleere,
               Then ſight of him that one inche can not go,
               From preſent place: where plainely doth appeere,
               Suche an acte done: as thou haſt now done heere.
               I thinke the falſeſt flie, of all thy kin,
               Woulde iudge for haynous, thy thus breakynge in.
            
            
               But put the caſe, that I atached you,
               In this my lordſhip, faſt in iaile to ſit,
               But as ſuſpect, no act aproued now,
               Yet might I keepe ye faſt, leaſt ye might flie,
               Tyll ye were founde giltie, or els a quit,
               Except this caſe run right, the law runth wronge,
               For this is lawe, and lawe it hath bin long.
            
            
               Keepe (quoth the flie) I pray you in ſuſpence,
               The firſt aleged eaſe: of theſe laſt twayne,
               Till in this laſt, law ley experience,
               Wherby it may apeere, ye may detaine,
               A flie: ſuſpect of crime, not proued plaine,
               But vnder ſurety, out of common Iayle,
               The priſoner ſhall at ſute, be let to bayle,
            
            
               
               Let flies to baile: friend flie (quoth the ſpider)
               Nay by my fathers ſoule, that will not bee,
               Except he here, wilbe ſuche a byder,
               That he will ſit faſt by the feete for thee.
               And take thy turne: him will I take ſuretee,
               Nay (quoth the flie) that trieth a freende to muche,
               I haue good freendes, but ſure I haue none ſuche,
            
            
               To binde a flie herein, body for body,
               Were bond ſufficient: for a thing thus ſleight.
               Well (quoth) the ſpider, fly call thou me noddy,
               Except I proue this a thinge of much weight,
               But thou alluredſt me in way of reſeight,
               Of one flie here, now faſtned faſt in Iaile,
               To go lay ſalt on another flies taile,
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The ſpider chargeth the flie, firſt with burglarie, which the flie anſwereth vnto: than the ſpider chargeth him with ſingle felony, which the flie reaſoneth vnto. Cap. 11.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               THis reaſon dryueth vs now (quoth the flie)
               Streight to your reaſon, before ſuſpenſed,
               Wherein mine act, apeering euidently
               So huge, and heynous offence commenſed,
               As by that reaſon, it is precenſed.
               Then lawe and reaſon both, will that I faile,
               Oflight ſurety, to borow me to baile.
            
            
               But in mine act apparantly committed,
               Although the deede, I nowhit do deny,
               Yet how can lawe, by any wight well witted,
               Lay in my faute, offenſiue fáct therby.
               Flie (quoth the ſpider) that can (and will) I,
               And thy reproche, to broche foorthwith at large,
               I lay (in lawe) burglary to thy charge.
            
            
               That charge is ſoone diſcharged, ſir ſaide he,
               The breache of houſes, in the tyme of night,
               Shewth euidence where thoſe offenders be.
               But not onely: the ſonne doth ſhine full bright,
               Ere flies a morningꝭ, cum abrode in ſight,
               But alſo at eeue, ere the ſonne be ſet,
               Eche flie to his lodgeyng, againe will g
                     ••
                  ,
            
            
               By this, this breathe, can be no burglary,
               And ere I now came here, all men might ſee
               The ſonne apeeryng vniuerſally,
               Though it (at thy commyng) were day with thee,
               Yet was it night (quoth the ſpider) with mee,
               I was a ſleepe, and no day yet had ſeene
               Theſe two longe houres, had not this miſchaunce beene.
            
            
               
               Sir (quoth the flie) admit that ye now were
               A ſleepe, till that the ſonne were ſixe howres hie,
               Coulde any reaſon, ſhow reaſon to beare,
               You to affirme, or firmely verifie,
               The day for night, till time ye day eſpie,
               So were it a thing, eaſy to be doone,
               With a winke, to make it midnight at noone.
            
            
               Why fly, at noone: midnight is it with mee,
               If I at noone be a ſleepe: ye (quoththe flie)
               But if ye againſt one noone ſleeper ſhall ſee,
               Ten thouſand noone wakers, night from noone to trie,
               Ye ſhall poorely proue, this night noone burglarie,
               And ſlept ye till noone: yet in courſe of the ſunne,
               Ye are not ignorant, how the day doth runne.
            
            
               Well ſaid (ſaid the ſpider) and put the caſe,
               That I in this caſe, yeelde thee the maiſtrie,
               Yet ſhall this other caſe (I trow) take plaſe,
               I here arreſt thee flie, of felonie,
               Which cauſe of arreſt thou canſt not denie,
               For breakyng in here thus, and neuer knocke,
               As good or better, were to picke the locke.
            
            
               I brake into this houſe now (quoth the flie,
               Like as a theefe doth breake into newgate,
               Sauyng that the theefe, doth moſt commonlie
               Pretend at his entrie there, more eſtate,
               For breake a theefe in there: erely or late,
               He hath as many leaders as a bride,
               With weyters, attendant on euerie ſide.
            
            
               
               And yet no theefe is there of all the rout,
               That into that houſe breakth ſo willinglie,
               But he wolde rather go ten mile about,
               To ſhun this vanites of vaine glorie,
               Then be reſeiued ſo honorablie.
               Acounting his life: no daie the ſhorter,
               In taking paine to be his owne porter.
            
            
               And as the theefe, full fer againſt his will.
               Doth breake in there, ſo brake I now in heere,
               For theefe or flie, what one hath wit ſo ill,
               To preaſe to rob where he hath knowlage cleere,
               By robry: to ſteale ought, nought can apeere,
               Nor no commoditee there conſequent,
               But death, or perpetuall priſonment.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The ſpider (in a maner) graunteth, that the flie cam into the copweb againſt the flies owne will, which the ſpider ſo graunteth, for ſuch policy foorthwith appering: as ſeemeth to weigh ſore againſt the flie. Cap. 12.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               So mote I thee good felow flie (ſaid he)
               That allegacion recheth here, ſo ſer and nere,
               That in aparance, it concludeth me,
               For glad or willinglie, who wolde cum where
               As he ſhoulde cleerely know, his comming were
               An euident and vndouted induction,
               To his infallible fall of deſtruction,
            
            
               Wherby it ſeemeth, I can no way auoyde
               Thy cummyng here, to be againſt thy will,
               But now the flie, ſo fer is ouer ioyde,
               That by no maner meane, he can ſit ſtill,
               He ſtretcht, and fet a hem right ſharpe and ſhrill,
               Wherat the ſpider, ſmirke, and ſmothlie ſmiled,
               To ſee the ſeely flie, ſo fer begiled,
            
            
               And yet ſhowde he, ſemblaunce of falſitee,
               So as it might apeere, that he did ſmile
               (For ioie) vpon the flies behalfe, that he
               So wittily wounde out of this exile,
               Which ſet the flie, in glorie for the while,
               In ſight wherof: the ſpiders pleaſure had,
               From laughing looke, to lowring looke full ſad.
            
            
               Theſe woordꝭ he ſowrely ſaide, though I now yeelde,
               Grauntyng that thou camſt here vnwillingly,
               Yet ſhall the flie (at one ſtroke) leeſe the feelde,
               In all the reſt hereof immediatly.
               Euen with the ſame weapon, thou wanſt this by,
               As thus, by the daunger that flies here finde,
               Thou proueſt to cum hither againſt thy minde.
            
            
               
               This well excuſeth thy commyng hither,
               But (quoth the ſpider) for thy goyng hence,
               When we haue ſcanned theſe woordꝭ togither,
               Thy reaſon is hardly woorth forty pence.
               It is a perfect proofe in euidence,
               For my parte, and encludeth breefe conclucion,
               Of condemnacion, to thy confucion.
            
            
               For though thy cummyng, were againſt thy will,
               What hope to helpe thee henſe: doth that implie,
               Sins death here had: or impriſonment ſtill,
               Is all thy proofe, thy ſo cumming to trie,
               Now (quoth the ſpider) ſpeake out good man flie,
               This verdit thus geuen by your owne conſent,
               Who can blame me, theron to geue iudgement.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The flie herewith is abaſhed, but a none he gathereth him ſelfe to a ſtay ſhewing a reaſon, that maketh a manifeſt ſhow cleerely to ouerthrow the ſpiders for eſaide polycie. Cap. 13.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               THe flie at this, 
                     •
                  et ſuche a perſing ſigh,
               As made the hart in his poore carkas quake,
               And clapt his hand, ſo hard vpon his thigh,
               That of that copweb, euery part did ſhake,
               And time it was for him, now to awake,
               Suche a chokyng checke, to a flie in 
                     •
                  loiſter,
               A meane wit maie deeme, it was a chokyng oiſter.
            
            
               The ſpider yeldyng to the flies fore ſaiyng,
               Was a caſt beyonde the flies expectacion▪
               
               Wheron the flie ſpiyng the ſpiders inuaiyng,
               Thus far againſt the flie, in aprobacion,
               He ſeemed to take great diſcontentacion,
               With him ſelfe, to ſee his owne woordꝭ geue ſtate,
               To the ſpider, to geue him this blinde matr.
            
            
               Howbeit anone, ſtey in him ſelfe he toke,
               Saiyng theſe woordes, both with good hart and wit,
               Good maiſter ſpider, if ye rightly loke,
               In all yet paſt, all knottꝭ betwene vs knit,
               Iudgement with iuſtice: ſhall feare me nowhit
               Flie (quoth the ſpider) tell me that tale ſoone,
               We haue well begonne, but nothing nigh doone.
            
            
               And yet euen now: for all thy braggyng b
                     •
                  ſt,
               Ta
                     •
                  ounte this caſe, if we now condiſend,
               The pa
                     •
                  ment of thacounte wilbe thy coſt,
               For though thou burglary do here defend,
               And felony, that doth hereon depend,
               Yet of my purpoſe, thine owne confeſſion
               Hath peaſably, put me in poſſeſſion.
            
            
               
               What though thou didſt vnwillingly this deede,
               Yet thy ſelfe confeſſing as thou doeſt here,
               Death or dealy priſonment to proſeede,
               What helpeth I ſay, thy proofe to ſtand cleere,
               Sins not with ſtandyng though that proofe apeere,
               Thy ſelfe haſt confeſt here thy ſelfe to be,
               Deade, or dead priſoner, at leaſt: with me.
            
            
               In deede ſir (ſaide the flie) euen as ye ſaie,
               Except my woordꝭ for my now hither cūming,
               Maie haue expoci
                     •
                  ion ſum other waie,
               Then it ſeemeth they ſhall haue, after your ſuming,
               Better for me were to exerciſe mūming,
               Then that my ſpeech ſhoulde ſhow me ſuche an el
                     •
                  e,
               To make myne owne woordes condemne mine owne ſelfe.
            
            
               But ſins my reaſon, ioynde with your conſent,
               Approueth my cūmige here againſt my will,
               By fore knowne death (I ſay) or priſonment,
               Then is my reaſon, to the pointe not ill,
               For as ye haue graunted, and muſt graunt ſtill,
               Diſcharge me (at full) it dooeth and muſt do,
               Of burglary, and felony, both two.
            
            
               And thus this one reaſon of mine (ye ſee)
               Aunſwereth all your reaſons (ſaue one) wherby,
               Ye lay to me, that I acknowlage mee
               (In maner) by agreement here to dy,
               Or till I die, here in priſon to ly,
               But once mine anſwere to thoſe woordꝭ ſpoken,
               If Iuſtice holde, this priſon is broken.
            
            
               
               For though I acknowlage to know before,
               Suche daunger, as witneſſeth my confeſſion,
               Yet lieth the right or the wronge, ſtill in ſtore,
               The which muſt trie, whether your poſſeſſion,
               Of me here be laufull, or oppreſſion,
               But haue I knowne parelles here, neuer ſo longe,
               Doth that knowlage proue you to do no wronge.
            
            
               If that were true, euery theefe might ſay,
               In place where as robberies accuſtomed were,
               That he might by cuſtome rob there alway,
               Be cauſe cuſtome auouchth that theeues rob there,
               I ſee this example offendeth your ere,
               And ſo it may: for it proueth by proofe clere,
               That I am impriſoned wrongfully here.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶The ſpider checketh the flie, for his comparing aboue the ſpider in knowlage of law and cuſtome, which the fly mainteyneth by one reaſon commonly reported: Wherupon the ſpider perceiuing the policie, for which he ſeemed to gra
                  •
               nt the flie to cum againſt his will, taketh little or no place, that much weaking his part, he driueth the flie to draw backe that graunt. Cap. 14.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               THis is a good bragge, 
                     ••
                  ie (quoth the ſpider,
               To ſet in the fore frunt of thy battell,
               And a meete reaſon, for an out rider,
               That wolde by facyng, his ennemies expell,
               And be ye ſure it doth wonderſly well,
               To ſee a flie, thinke him ſelfe preſumtuouſly,
               Better ſeene: in law and in cuſtome: then I.
            
            
               For ſooth (quoth the flie) no diſpleaſure taken,
               My lernyng of reaſon, ought to paſſe yours,
               In weſtminſter hall, I am not forſaken,
               But may be a 
                     •
                  ermer all 
                     •
                  ymes and howrs,
               And that in aparance, paſſeth your powrs,
               For as common report, maie be a proofe,
               There neuer cumth copweb, in that hall roofe.
            
            
               The buzzing beyng in weſtminſter hall
               Of a fleſh 
                     ••
                  ie, euery man may forbere
               As well as my preſens. And ſure I ſhall
               Proue it as hard, for thee to get out here,
               As thou woldſt prous for me to get in there:
               And ere we depart, I ſhall turne that Iorney,
               From perſonall aparence to attorney.
            
            
               And which of our lerninges alſo is beſt,
               Shall cum to triall when we cum to ende,
               And my replication as yet ſhall reſt,
               Vnto your anſwere, by which ye pretende
               To proue me: by extorcion to offende,
               Wherin in effect, ye ſay that I laie,
               No reaſon of right, your body to ſtaie,
            
            
               
               In whiche, what matter I haue to aledge,
               By reaſon, conciens, cuſtome and law,
               Not only to keepe you here as in pledge,
               But alſo your body to death to draw,
               That corſey woulde curſtly your ſtomake gnaw.
               How be it for an eaſe to your panting hart,
               I ſhall (for a ſeaſon) ſet that apart.
            
            
               And partly peruſe, by way of retret,
               Sum part of this matter graunted before.
               Nay ſir (quoth the 
                     •
                  lie) that were but a let,
               Let vs here retret, or repete no more,
               Till time that indgement do try our hole ſtore.
               By gis flie, thou ſpeakeſt like a foole (quoth he)
               The ſooner we take ende, the woorſe for the.
            
            
               But I perceiue thou wouldſt pas ouer this,
               Therby to win, all betwene vs yet paſte,
               Wherin I graunt thine aduauntage growen is,
               By meane of my grauntyng, in ouer much haſte
               That thou arthere agaynſt thy will now plaſte,
               Whiche graunt I graunted, to make thine owne grounds
               Proue the, in priſon here rightfully bounde.
            
            
               And yet my wordes in this graunt throughly weyde,
               Wey not this abſolutely graunted to be.
               To thy wordes for cummyng againſt thy wyll leyde,
               I ſayde they (in aparance) concluded me.
               And that as it ſemde I muſt graunt it to the,
               Which woordes import not ful power to be able,
               To binde this thus graunted, ireuocable.
            
            
               
               But ſins thou haſt found this 
                     •
                  eate ſ
                     •
                  ertyng hols,
               To hyde thy head in, thus promptly prouided,
               I will yet once againe, quicken this cole,
               Whether will or not will, the hyther guyded.
               Why ſir (quoth the flie) then am I deryded.
               Not a whit (quoth the ſpider) be content,
               And olde tale, miſrecknyng is no payment.
            
            
               And if thou thinke it an hinderaunce to thee,
               This part of proces to call backe againe,
               When thou canſt take like aduauntage of mee,
               I graun
                     •
                   thee, like libertee to obtaine.
               Agreede (quoth the flie) for when he ſawe plain
                     •
                  ,
               The ſpider, thus bent determinately,
               
                  
                     •
                  e thought it 
                     •
                  oly him to contrary.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ They reaſon a freſhe, to trie whether the flie came into the ſpiders cop web againſt his will or not. Cap. 15.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               FLie (quoth the ſpider) go we to the pith,
               Thou ſaiſt thou camſt hither againſt thy wyll.
               And thy onely reaſon to proue it with,
               Is, fore knowlage of death, or this as ill,
               Perpetuall priſoner, here to lie ſtill.
               Concludyng as no wyght were ſo vnwiſe,
               Willingly to cum, where knowen parels ariſe.
            
            
               Contrary wherof is ſeene euery day,
               In ſeyng dayly that theeues euery thone,
               Committing robries in any high way,
               Do know aſſuredly twenty to one,
               If they be had, they ſhall hang therupone,
               And yet if they totter twenty togyther,
               Still do theeues rob there, now who leadth them thyther.
            
            
               That do them ſelues (quoth the flie) and cauſe why,
               Eche theefe thinkth to ſcape thens, as hath ſcapte mo.
               Thynke they ſo (ſayde he) then why may not I
               Thinke, that thou thoughtſt likewiſe from henſe to go.
               Nay ſir (quoth the flie) I coulde not thinke ſo,
               Neuer was there flie in this net, thus maſked,
               That euer ſcapte, as fer as I haue aſked.
            
            
               Well flie (qoth he) if thou this part wilt ſaue,
               Anſwere well theſe queſtions that follow heere.
               Haſt thou had free will: as other flies haue?
               Ye ſir. Is not (quoth he) thine eye ſight cleere?
               Yes ſir. Did euer franſy in the apeere?
               Nay ſir. Be thy winges good and eche other lym?
               Ye ſir. And all thy body luſty and trym?
            
            
               
               Ye ſir. Then (quoth the ſpider) it ſhould ſeeme
               Thou art thine owne leader? Ye (quoth the flie)
               Dyd any wight (quoth he) vſe meanes extreeme
               To bring the? None that I can verefie.
               Did I ſend for the? Nay ſir verelie.
               And yet thou art here, art thou not quo
                     •
                  th he?
               Yes ſir. Againſt my will, I aſſure ye.
            
            
               Well then (quoth the ſpider) thou grauntſt to haue had
               Free will, and that thou haſt good ſight of eye,
               Luſty lims to lead the, and neuer waſt mad,
               Compelde to cum, as who ſay forſyblye,
               Or to be ſent for, thy ſelfe doſte denye,
               And yet thorow facyng, thou faineſt heere,
               To cum now hyther, againſt thy wyll cleere.
            
            
               Whiche falſe demeanour, conſyder who wyll,
               Doth well aproue the a crafty kynde theefe.
               Lyeng and ſtealeng, wyll together ſtyll.
               Oh (quoth the flie) this augmenteth my greefe,
               Thus to be chargde, with deſertles repreefe,
               I am a trew flie, ſure I can no falſe knackꝭ,
               Alas maſter ſpyder ye be to capackꝭ.
            
            
               As by this exſample may well be tryde,
               Put caſe free wyll, and your lims led you now,
               To pas ſum narow bridge by ſum high waies ſide,
               And in that paſſage, ſhould chaunce (god ſaue you)
               To ſlyp into the diche, and breake your brow,
               Or els (in a good howre be it ſpoken)
               Ye were in perell your necke to be broken.
            
            
               
               And that while ye were in that diche ſcrallyng,
               And ſcratting in the myre to ſaue your life,
               The lorde of that ſoyle, woulde in that falling
               Atache you of theft, and then wolde be rife
               To charge you, as ye charge me, in this ſtrife,
               Againſt your will, ye were not thyther brought,
               But your will it ſelfe: brought your ſelfe vnſought.
            
            
               How woulde ye anſwere this ſir (quoth the fly)
               I woulde (quoth the ſpider) ſay that my will
               Led me not to fall in, but to pas by,
               What if that ſayenge liked him ſo ill,
               That he wolde ſay, he might call ye theefe ſtill,
               In that for your paſſing, vnder or ouer,
               Ye were of your will, let in neyther nother.
            
            
               Then were I dryuen (quoth the ſpider) to moue,
               Sum parte of the difrens betwene theſe three,
               Will, powre, and chaunce, wherin I might ſoone proue,
               That although my will be neuer ſo free,
               Yet in actiue thinges, will can not bring mee,
               To accompliſh thoſe actes, for powre or chaunce,
               Muſt ioyne with will, ere outward acte avaunſe.
            
            
               For woulde I neuer ſo willingly will,
               To weare powles ſteeple for a turkey hat,
               Yet ſins I might in deede, eate a hors mill,
               As ſoone as haue powre, ſo to pranke with that,
               That will were as wiſe, as will of a wat,
               My will: may will freely, this to optaine.
               But will aboue powre, thus wilde, is in vayne.
            
            
               
               Will without powre, as in thinges actuall.
               Can woorke nought, and where powre and will both bee,
               Chaunce doth right oft, both powre and will apall,
               Aboue powre and againſt will, oft we ſee,
               That contrary to powrs and willes decree,
               Chaunce chaunceth ſo, as when by powre and will
               We are preſt foorth, chaunce charmith vs to ſtand ſtill.
            
            
               Exſample hereof, let vs here now make.
               By the ſaide bridge and diche, that you erſt leyde,
               At which though powre and will, wold vntertake
               To bring me ouer, chaunce might ſe me ſteyde,
               And both from powre and will, ſo fer conueyde,
               In goyng ouer that bridge, that chaunces tryp,
               Might pop me in to that diche: euen at a whip.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ They continue in purſuite of triall, whether the flie cam thither willingly or vnwillingly, ſo fer, that the flie (at length) offreth 
                  •
               o take a boke othe, that he cam againſt his wil. C. 16.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               THis is vnanſwearable (quoth the fli
                     •
                  )
               And a reaſon for my part worth a pyke,
               As chaunce agaynſt wyll myght make you there lie,
               Why myght not chaunce euen aſwell in caſe lyke
               Ley me in this copweb, as you in that dyke.
               Flie (quoth the ſpyder) thou art not aſkyd
               Whether chaunce ſo myght, but whether chaunce ſo dyd,
            
            
               What (quoth the flie) if this man did purpoſe.
               That queſtion to you, I coulde (quoth he) well
               Make aparant proofe, on my part diſcloſe,
               That into that diche, chaunce did me compell.
               For nought is there to ſteale, but aparell,
               And all men know I nought deſyre nor neede
               Thoſe ſtaryng garmentꝭ of mire and greene weede.
            
            
               In faith (quoth the 
                     ••
                  ie) and I loue as 
                     •
                  ll
               To be in theſe ruſſetꝭ at witſontide,
               I weare your gray garment with as ill will
               As ye woulde the greene, at the diches ſide,
               Wherfore this reaſon is as well aplyde,
               For my deliuery out of this place,
               As for yours (god ſau
                     •
                   you) were ye in caſe.
            
            
               Ye (quoth the ſpider) but our two caſes
               Be as vnlyke, as our gray and our greene,
               Diches be common and open places.
               Wherin to ſpiders, and all folke is ſeene,
               That nother now is, nor neuer hath beene,
               For ſpiders in diches, ought to deſyre,
               By ſtelth, gift, borowing, biyng or hyre.
            
            
               
               But what commoditee here is for thee.
               That is to thee: and to all the worlde hidden,
               This houſe is to cloſe thou ſeeſt, in to ſee,
               And alſo all flies that herein haue ſlidden,
               They haue (as thou ſaiſt) ſo long here abidden,
               That by returne of any meſſengere,
               Tydyngꝭ from hens (I know) thou couldſt none here.
            
            
               Wherfore although thou find nought here in deede,
               Yet I thinke thou thoughtſt ſure, to haue founde better,
               Sir though ye thinke, I thought better to ſpeede.
               Shall thinkyng leade you, without worde or letter,
               To caſt me away thus, the proofe no gretter,
               Remember (quoth he) and began to tremble,
               The peryll of your ſoule, if ye diſſemble.
            
            
               For by the way that my ſoule ſhall goto,
               I cam hither againſt my will vnfayned,
               Which cleerely declareth, I thought to do
               No robry here, but fayne woulde haue refrayned,
               Any part of this houſe, to haue conſtrained,
               Which to be trew (quoth the flie) if ye looke
               To haue me ſworne, I will ſwere on a booke.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The ſpider not admitting the flie to his othe, the flie bringth in the ſtrength of the affirmatiue for his part: againſt the negatiue on the ſpiders ſide. Wherunto adioyned his other reaſons leide in diſcharge of charge paſt, he hopeth according to Iuſtice promiſed, to be ſtreight diſcharged. Cap. 17.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               VVhy haſt thou (quoth he) thou vnhappy hooks,
               No conſcience to be a peri
                     •
                  rde wretche,
               That othe (quoth he) by the way that god tooke,
               Should: of my conſcience nother make bretch
                     •
                  .
               Nor yet any parte of my conſeience ſtretche.
               Well (quoth the ſpider) yet wolde I be lothe,
               In this caſe, to truſt a flie by an othe.
            
            
               Sir mine affirmaunce in thaffirmatiue,
               In law and reaſon, is much more credible
               Then your deniall, in the negatiue,
               Your nay, to my ye, muſt needes be fallible.
               And in caſe preſent, it is impoſſible,
               To aproue your parte, for how can it bee,
               That you, the ſecretꝭ of my breſt can ſee.
            
            
               It is as certaine, that you know them not,
               As it is certaine they are knowen to me.
               Then: if I ſwere that chaunce me hither got,
               Againſt my will, were it reaſon if ye,
               Sware the contrary, beleeued ſhould be,
               As well as my ſelfe, when trewth can apeere,
               To none but my ſelfe, as apeereth cleere,
            
            
               I make my ſelfe ſewere, your ſelfe thinketh not ſo:
               Which conſidered, let vs now conſider,
               Sum parte of this paſt, ere we further go,
               Wherin proofe prooueth my cumming hither
               To be againſt my will, all togither.
               Whiche ſqwyre ſhall ſqware me, a ſ
                     •
                  antlin well bent,
               For a right rewle, to ſhow me innocent.
            
            
               
               And in the eares, of all that ought can ſkill,
               Shall diſcharge me, in all that hath bene lay
                     •
                  e.
               Or 
                     •
                  an be layde, cummyng againſt my will,
               How can burglary, againſt me be wayde.
               And in this felony, what can be ſayde.
               Thanky
                     •
                  g my trewth. I may here trewly ſay,
               This wiſp
                     •
                  , hath wyped all this wo
                     •
                  rke away.
            
            
               That wiſpe of yours (quoth the ſpider) ſhowth wa
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               Of cleanly ſ
                     •
                  owring, when all cumth togyther,
               Proofe of your tale, I take it very ſrant,
               To make me take your preſent 
                     •
                  ummyng hither
               To be agaynſt your will, for how or whither,
               Coulde ye thus 
                     •
                  um, but ye myght ſoone deny,
               To cum with will, as long as ye can lie.
            
            
               Though I can lye, that is yet no tryall
               That I haue lyde, in whiche ſir (quoth the 
                     ••
                  ie)
               Onely except ſ
                     •
                  iffe or ſ
                     •
                  erne deniall,
               Ye can aledge no reaſon to byde bie,
               Wherin I haue allegde aprobately
               Your nay, againſt myye, can in this caſe,
               By no reaſonable meane, rightly take place.
            
            
               Now ſins this parte, we haue not onely brought,
               To ye, and nay, and that mine affirmaunce
               Hath fullie brought, your negatiue to nought,
               So that the ſame by grounded ſure ſubſtaunce,
               Diſchargeth (in effect) this charged chaunce,
               Perfoormed promiſe of iuſtice I 
                     •
                  riſt,
               Shall from this court, now ſe me ſtreight diſmiſ
                     •
                  
                  ▪
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The ſpider vpon a caſe in law touching thaffirmatiue, taketh holde to deteine the flie ſtill in poſſeſion: but yet vnder promiſe of iuſtice before promiſed. Cap. 18.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               VVoulde ye trudge in poſt haſt flie, nay not ſo.
               Ye may reporte in me ſmall curteſie,
               Except I make ye drinke once ere ye go,
               I thanke you (quoth the flie) but verelie,
               I will not drinke, for I am now not drie.
               Though ye will not tary to drinke (quoth hee)
               Yet muſt ye tary of neceſſitee,
            
            
               Put caſe your allegaſions matche with mine,
               And furder ſet your ye, aboue my nay,
               Yet will I not permute nor yet reſine.
               Poſſeſſion of your body here this day,
               For your affirmatiue which ye do lay,
               Againſt my negatiue, for without witneſſe,
               Thaffirmatiue doth no ty
                     ••
                  e diſpoſſeſſe.
            
            
               Thus: though poſſeſſion fully not ſu
                     ••
                  yce
               To be a bar, againſt your affirmatiues,
               Yet bryngth poſſeſſion clauſe of warantiſe,
               By which, I here may keepe you in theſe giues,
               (You lackyng witneſſe) ſum part of our liues,
               But (quoth the ſpider) truth, truly to tell,
               Thou haſt (for a flie) ſaide excedyng well.
            
            
               Concernyng cummyng here againſt thy wyll,
               Wheron (as yet) our matter all doth ſtay,
               Both partes apeere, of ſo pure perfight ſkill,
               That we haue brought eche other, to the bay.
               I thee to ye, and thou me to nay,
               And as in law: thy ye, ſeemth to ſeeme gretter,
               Then doth my nay, which ſhowth thy part the better.
            
            
               
               For that ye, once: by witneſſe well aproued,
               That thou againſt thy will doſt here apere,
               Then haſt thou woon the whole (as yet) here moued,
               Aprouyng thy ſelfe cleerely to ſtand cleere
               Of burglary and felony laide here.
               For by what meane, can any wight make preefe,
               That any wight without will is a theefe.
            
            
               But for aſmuche, as that point is not yit
               Laufully proued, I entend to keepe
               The in poſſeſſion, a while here to ſit,
               Tyll we this matter wey, ſum what more deepe,
               Nay feare not flie, thou art vnwiſe to weepe,
               For I will not all onely not deſtroy thee,
               (Vnrightfully) but further: not anoy thee.
            
            
               Nor of or on, geue iudgement any way.
               Tyll tyme thy ſelfe (if thou reaſonable bee)
               Shalt ſee, that I may iuſtly do and ſay,
               By iuſtice erſt promiſed vnto thee,
               All that ſhalbe ſayde, or doone here by mee.
               Whiche iuſtice ſhall proue me ſo iuſt a iudge,
               That thou nor no flie, ſhall haue cauſe to grudge.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The ſpider, ſeeing that he can not take full hold of the flſe in caſe of burglarie, nor felony: he chargeth him now with treſpas, to which the flie reaſoneth: Cap. 19.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               HEreunto for entree toward an ende,
               Admit for time, thou camſt againſt thy minde,
               Declaryng thy defence, well to defende
               Burglary and felony, of eche kinde,
               Yet thou nor no flie, is ſo beetle blinde,
               But thou and they, aparantly may ſee,
               That at the leaſt, thou haſt treſpaſſed me.
            
            
               I ſay and thou doſt ſee, a thouſand marke,
               Framthe not this frame, as it framde ere this fyll,
               Were it then meete, in ſuche a peere of warke,
               I crie you mercy I thought you none yll,
               Or els, I cam hither againſt my will,
               Shoulde be full reſtitucion for the acte,
               Without a more amendes made in compacte,
            
            
               In caſe it is, and in caſe it is not,
               As by example (quoth the flie) put caſe
               That in ſum high way, it ſhoulde be my lot
               To driue a carte, in ſum one ſuch a plaſe,
               As from that wayes ſyde, within litle ſpaſe,
               There were ſtandyng a houſe on a fayre greene,
               And I perceyuyng that way muche more cleene
            
            
               Then the high way, ſtreight to that way I coaſte,
               And as I driue, the ſaide houſe to pas bie,
               My carte wheele catchth holde of the corner poaſte
               Againſt my will. and by violencie,
               Aſunder cruſſheth it, to which haplie
               The reſt of that houſe, is ſo bent and bounde,
               That in defaute therof, all falth to the grounde,
            
            
               
               In this caſe: maiſter ſpider (quoth the flie)
               Chaunce the chaunce by day, or chaunce it by night.
               And chaunce it neuer ſo vnwillinglie,
               Yet law and laufull reaſon, ſhowth it right,
               That recompence puniſhe mine ouerſight,
               Law maintainth no man, with or againſt will,
               To do an acte ſo, to any mans ill.
            
            
               But now put caſe, that within this high way,
               This houſe were ſet, where as my cart ſhould go,
               Whiche did ſo cruſhe the ſame, that there it lay,
               For houſes in high wayes encroachyng ſo,
               Caſt I downe one houſe, or a thouſand mo,
               There am I bounde by reaſon nor by law,
               To recompence, the value of a ſtraw.
            
            
               Weyth not the law (flie) theſe caſes for ſuche,
               As both in the tone caſe, and in the tother,
               The owners hurt to be fully as muche
               In one of theſe caſes, as in an other,
               His hurt is (quoth the flie) in thone and thother,
               Hurtfull a like, for be he leefe or lothe,
               Downe cumth his houſe, in either caſe of bothe.
            
            
               But the doing diffreth, for the firſt facte
               I did againſt the law, as law doth tell,
               And euery wight is chargde with euery acte,
               Of his owne doyng, at his owne parell.
               Wherby the law prouideth very well,
               Drining my cart, by aduenture at lage,
               The hurt in thaduenture I muſt diſcharge.
            
            
               
               But in this laſt fackte, the fawte (quoth the flie)
               Is wholy turnde vnto the ſuffrers ſide,
               For him ſelfe did an acte vnlaufullie,
               His houſe to ſet vp there, whiche deede ſo tride,
               My ſelfe and eeke my carte, law doth prouyde
               Harmles to ſaue, for ſir the law is ſtrong,
               In takyng ſuch hurtes, for hurtes without wrong.
            
            
               And in this laſt caſe (quoth the flie) ſtand we,
               In all this hurt here done, I do no wrong,
               But all the hurt ye haue, is (ye may ſe)
               By your wrong dooyng, on your ſelf a long,
               What can you ſpiders, ſhow your ſelues among,
               By any kynd of law, what wey ye may
               Lawfully bylde, within this my high way.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The ſpider (at the flies anſwering him to a queſtion) chargeth the flie with procuryng of other flies to diſturbe him in his copwebs, which the flie denithe. Cap. 20.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               THy high way (flie) art thou lorde of this ſoyle?
               A poore lorde ſir. but if trewth may be founde,
               I ſtand in caſe to defend this ſpoyle.
               What is thy name (quoth the ſpider) ſpeake rounde?
               Buz (quoth the flie) with curtſy to the grounde.
               That name of buz (quoth the ſpider) doth ſhow thee,
               Euen for a ringleader, to make me know thee.
            
            
               Of all the flies, that herein haue bene ſtayde,
               Neuer was there one in my conſcience,
               But the firſt worde that euer he hath ſayde
               Was bvz. whiche is aparant euidence,
               That all flies haue thee in great reuerence,
               Thinkyng the policy or powre of thee,
               Shall ſet them all from hens at libertee.
            
            
               Wherby I may (and do) take occacion,
               To thinke: that thou haſt bene the ſoole procurer,
               Of euery flie, that hath made inuaſion
               Into my houſe, and ſuche alewde allurer,
               Ought by good reaſon, to be kept much ſurer
               Then forty flies, ſuche as thou haſt beforne
               Entiſte hither: and then laught them to ſkorne!
            
            
               Sir (quoth the flie) trewth is my trew recorde,
               I am giltles of this ſuſpected blame,
               I haue enciſte in erneſt nor in borde
               Any flie hither, nor it is no game,
               One flie to mocke at an others harme or ſhame,
               Nor by entiſement to bring a flie, where
               As the entiſer doth ſticke, to cum there.
            
            
               
               And though (as I ſaide) I can proue it ſuche,
               That this high way, is mine for free paſſage,
               And that euery flie hath right here as muche,
               Yet was I neuer ſo ſet in dotage,
               To ſet any flie (by vndeſcreete corage)
               To put poſſeſſion of his right in vre,
               To his deſtruction, and your diſpleaſure.
            
            
               If ye can proue that euer I prouokte
               Any flie hither, by worde or wrighting,
               Or by ſine of purpoſe craftely clokte,
               To poſſeſſion here, any flie erighting,
               Then, without mo wordꝭ by mouth or endightyng,
               In our hole caſe much doughtfull how to try,
               I yelde my ſelfe condemde vndoughtedly.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ They fal in compariſon touching their euidence written or vn written, whervnto the flie leith preſcripcton of cuſtome, (which he before alleged) ſuppoſing therby, that the ſpider ought both to deliuer him, and make him aniendes. Cap. 21.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               VVell (quoth the ſpyder) though this ſuſpicion
               Were clerely clered: yet haſt thy ſelfe clere,
               Brought in an other of worſe condicion,
               As thus: thy claime to haue thy high waie here,
               Bringth thee ſuſpected, a theefe to apere.
               This is tholde vſe alwaie: all the worlde knowes,
               Trew men: in at doores, theeues in at windowes.
            
            
               Maiſter ſpyder: harpe no more on that ſtringe.
               I cum the ſame waie that your maiſterſhip doth,
               There is ſmall melodie in that harpinge.
               Conferryng preſidentꝭ with preſent ſooth,
               Chaungth ofte, the barkyng tonge to byting tooth.
               Barke or byte who wyll, flie I dare abyde
               To ſe tytle preſent, by preſident tride.
            
            
               Syr: ſo dare I then: and ſhall be well able,
               To voide your ſuſpicion. and proue my gyſe,
               Not onely lawful: but therto lawdable.
               What euidence haue you contrary wiſe.
               But gnatꝭ, beeſe, waſpes, hornetꝭ, and all we flyſe,
               At creuis, and windowes, with bag and baggage,
               Haue had egres and regres by olde vſage.
            
            
               This weith as (who ſaie) thers none euidence
               Showth contrary, but this waie thine maie be,
               Whiche is no profe, for thy parte worthe two pence
               So might I claime euery thing that I ſee
               Whiche were in wryting: not forbidden mee
               But it is not enough, not to be denide,
               For tytels muſt ſpecially be ſpecifyde.
            
            
               
               Sir (quoth the flie) ſpecialties in writinge
               Specially to ſpecifie: yours and mine,
               Shoulde we be driuen: to ſhew ſuche enditinge
               That wolde (I feare) blanke both our partes in fine,
               Our chiefe euidence that we can aſine,
               For profe or diſprofe: by any decrees,
               Standth in vertue, of vnwritten veritees.
            
            
               Flie, this tale weith not a flie taile (quoth he)
               Canſt thou ſhew ought: of profe or diſprofe clere
               By written or vnwritten wordes to ſee.
               But that our poſeſſion: ſhall clere apere,
               As auncient as thy ſucceſſion here.
               Sir (quoth the flie) I ſticke not to agre
               Ye haue byn poſſeſte, here: as longe as we.
            
            
               And longe mote be. For by the god of might,
               I neuer knew flie: but was with the ſame,
               
                  
                     •
                  artely contente as fer as by right
               Your owne grounde might beare, to inlarge your frame.
               But to be plaine, this is the thing we blame,
               That ye thus of will, without our conſente,
               Vſ
                     〈…〉
                   pe on vs: by meane of encrochement.
            
            
               Good honeſt flies a thowſande that I knowe,
               Will ſaie and ſweare: it was tharuſtomde giſe,
               That ſpiders builded in euery windowe,
               In the top: or by the ſides in ſuche wiſe,
               As the reſte of the lateſſe for all fliſe,
               By comon knowne cuſtome, when we wolde iet,
               
                  
                     •
                  tode free at libertie: from any let.
            
            
               
               But this is building of an other ſiſe
               How maie any flie: this waie eaſily get,
               By any waie that his wit can deuiſe
               Here is a frame: in ſuch a 
                     •
                  acion ſet,
               As all were fiſh: that might cum to the net.
               So fer this lateſſe is ouer couered.
               I maruell your ſelfe will ſe it ſuffered.
            
            
               The caſe of the carte: in lawe laide e
                     •
                   this
               (Cuſtome adioinde) this waie mine owne to try)
               Auouchth for me that you haue done amis
               To encroche or vſurpe vnlaufully,
               In my high waie, then of reaſon thinke I,
               
                  
                     •
                  e ought: in lawe, cuſtome, and conſcience,
               Both let me paſſe: and make me recompence.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The ſpider denith the flies diſcription of cuſtome, allegeyng the ſaiynge of aunciente ſpiders for his intereſte by cuſtome. wherin anone vothe ſhewynge eche to geue ſmall credite to other, the flie moueth to put the mattier in arbiterment, which (as yet) the ſpider dooeth not graunte. Cap. 22.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               LAwe and cuſtome, thoſe twaine of thy laide three
               (Namely lawe) ſome what reſoned here haue byn
               But of conſcience (ſaue that name, namde we)
               No worde was touchte, ſince we did firſte begin.
               Tyme comth not yet, to bringe conſcience in.
               Oflawe and cuſtome: to eaſe rygours force
               Conſcience at laſt courſe: procureth remorce.
            
            
               But thy carte caſe: and al caſes laſt laide,
               In charge of treſpas thy parte to defende
               May be determinde (for ought here yet waide)
               As thei on lawe and cuſtome do depende
               whiche thou doeſt alledge, with me to contende.
               But thy deſcripcion of preſcripcion here
               In our acuſtemde rightes, I denie clere.
            
            
               Flie: I can bring foorth ſpiders trew and olde,
               More worſhipfull then thou canſte bringe forthe flyſe
               To ſwere that to them, their forefathers tolde
               Tyme fer beyonde minde, cuſtomes exerciſe
               Aproued vs to bylde in as large ſyſe,
               As I haue bilded here. and in thy plat,
               Ten or twelue holes, to crepe in and out at.
            
            
               Towchyng cuſtome, thothe of ten thowſande flyſe
               Can (by wale of witnes) brynge nought to eaſe
               In flies credence, to ſpyders, there doth ryſe
               No dyffrence in othe, the woorth of a peaſe
               Betwene a thowſond flyes, and a thowſande fleaſe.
               Naie flie (quoth he) and ſhoke him by the neb
               There ſhall no flyes othes, miniſh this copweb,
            
            
               
               Where ye (quoth the flie) thinke flies perciall,
               For witnes herein, that chalenge maie be
               In ſpiders and flies in this caſe equall,
               Sins ſpiders be parties as well as we,
               Why ſhoulde not we feare percialitee,
               As muche in you: as you thinke it in vs,
               And truſte you as little, this ſtanding thus.
            
            
               But reaſon (ſaide the ſpyder) ye ſo do.
               Then can this treſpas not be tride this waie:
               We are at ye and naſe againe bothe two.
               For you no credence geue, to that I ſaſe
               And I as little credite that you laie
               Naught grauntinge eche to other: but deniall,
               How can we twaine determine then this triall.
            
            
               If (quoth the ſpider) I wolde condiſſende
               To bylde in corners: at thine aſſignement,
               And ſtreight let the paſſe, we were ſtreight at ende
               So were we (quoth the flie) were I contente,
               At your onely woorde, my lyfe to relente
               Of whiche two waies, if the tone nor the tother
               Be reaſonable, let vs looke out an other.
            
            
               What waie (flie) by thy faithe canſt thou eſpie
               That maie ſeme mete: to make vs twaine agree,
               If I be the deuiſer (quoth the flie)
               Then ſhall you chooſe one, whom it pleaſeth ye,
               And I an other whom it pleaſeth me.
               And as thei two awarde vpon the whole,
               We two to bide, happie man, happie dole.
            
            
               
               So might I haply be happie (quoth he)
               But I coulde not be: both bappie and wice,
               This prouerbe proueth this a fooles decre,
               A thinge aſſuerde, to haſarde at the dyce.
               It bought and had, to bie at a newe pryce
               Or bringe a certentie for any ſaiyng,
               To an vncertentie: by douwtfull daying.
            
            
               All thinges conſidered in this tyme and place
               What were wy wit: to put this thing in vre,
               What coulde I win by that caſte in this caſe
               And what couldſt thou here leſe ſms thou arte ſure,
               at wyll, in my hande to die or endure.
               The worſte of this weie were hurteles to the,
               And the beſte of this waie: fruteles to me.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The flie (after a fewe woordes concerninge appeale) doeth brefely recapitulate theffect paſſed in the principall caſe. Ca. 23.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               SYr: if ye conſider nothinge but winnynge,
               No doubte (quoth the flie) it is ſo in dede.
               But by your promeſſe: made me at beginninge,
               Of iuſtice here. I hope no haſte of ſpede,
               For gredy gettinge ſhall make ye procede,
               Contrary therto in hope of whiche dealing,
               I did at beginninge renoke apealyng.
            
            
               But if your dealyng: deale dole otherwiſe
               Contrarying iuſtice erſt graunted here,
               My reuocacion of apeale lykewyſe
               I wyll reuoke, and as thinges nowe apere,
               I muſte reuoke that reuocacion clere.
               Or els that iuſtice here: although ye wolde,
               Can not (acording to your promeſſe, holde.
            
            
               For ſo is nowe this matter brought aboute
               That it to iudge: neither can you nor I,
               We both be parties ſo perciall that this doute
               Muſte be diſcuſte and iudgde indifferently,
               By folke indifferent. which if ye deny,
               In ſuche fourme as I haue here erſte deuiſed,
               Then by the Iuſtice whiche ye erſte promiſed,
            
            
               I claime thre comon lawe. where I am ſure,
               To ſaue me ſafe from harme, that lawe hath grounde.
               For if your euidence, be put in vre,
               That is ſo ſleight, I ſhall be gilteles founde.
               And being ſilent, if no witnes ſounde
               Then this bondage of priſon to diſcharge
               Proclamacion ſtreight, ſhal ſet me at large.
            
            
               
               Naie ſir: ye muſt paie your fees er ye go.
               But goth my parte, flie in thine opinion,
               No nere vnto the pyth? for ſooth ſyr no.
               Your caſe in lawe: is not worth an inion.
               Well flie (quoth he) ſins thou arte a minion,
               Of ſo large learninge: I praie the teache me,
               Sum leſſon: in this tale to beleue the.
            
            
               That leſſon ſhewth here, not ſo ferre behynd
                     •
                  
               
               In lacke of learning as of remembrance,
               For if it lyke you, here to calle to mynde
               By brefe recytall: the very ſubſtance,
               Argude (as yet) betwene vs in this chance,
               I doute not in the ſame your ſelfe to ſe
               Cauſe, in my former wordes to credite me.
            
            
               As thus. ye remember our mattier paſte
               Your ſelfe hath deuided into partes thre,
               Burglary, felonie, and trepas laſte.
               And firſte: for burglary ye ſaw: and muſte ſe,
               That flies: by nature no night theues can be.
               And though we coulde: yet might your ſelfe in ſight,
               Witnes with me: to cum nowe by daie lighte.
            
            
               And vnto this: touchinge the ſeconde charge,
               Whiche chargeth me with ſingle felonie,
               I am aſſured: you ſerching at large,
               Remembring my cumminge vnwillinglie,
               Shall well perceiue, my pure innocencie.
               In talke wherof: the trewthe muſte make vs ſai
                     •
                  ,
               That we at length: were driuen to ye and naie.
            
            
               
               Wherin I proue, that mine affirmatiue:
               Your negatiue, ſo crerely doth confute,
               That I dare ſaie, any iewry alyue:
               (You letting not the caſe fall to nonſute,
               But ſtande to triall, in that we diſpute,
               Shall, (vpon hearinge: what this mounth vntill)
               Geue verdite with cumming againſte my will.
            
            
               And thirdely: in treſpas you charginge me
               With the hurte of your howſe: I nothinge donte
               The carte caſe ſhall make iewry and iudge ſe,
               This treſpas on my ſyde cleane ſcraped out.
               And this debate at ende ſo brought aboute
               That in this lates: lawe ſhall well aproue,
               The holes all mine, and you to bylde aboue.
            
            
               Now ſins of vs twaine: no one can be iudge.
               Becauſe we be both extreme perciall partiſe
               I wonder what cauſe: doth cauſe you to grudge,
               At the arbitermente that I deuiſe.
               In theſe thre ſaide caſes there can ariſe,
               In your recouery by the comon lawe,
               None aduauntage, to the value of a ſtrawe.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The ſpider puth a caſe in appeale, ill (in apparence) for the flie, as the ſpider drawth it: and anone he by example of the lordes will: had in courtes of copie holde, ſeming to leane to, warde will: the flie laboreth to qualefie that will. Cap. 24.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               THou ſhalte (quoth the ſpider) in this ſtrife all
               Anſwere thy ſelfe by thy anſwering me,
               To one queſtion: whiche nowe demaunde I ſhall.
               My felow flie, I put this caſe to the.
               That this ſame daie, at London chaunſte to be,
               Some man committing ſuche a heinous dede,
               That death (by lawe in London) ſhould procede.
            
            
               The whiche dede: being at Louane committed,
               Lawe (there) for that dede no death doth prouide.
               The faughter herin, ſo wilely witted,
               To ſaue his lyfe, apealth to be repride.
               From London to Louane, there to be tride.
               Were it (flie quoth he) reaſon in this caſe,
               That this mans apeale ſhoulde take any plaſe.
            
            
               I thinke ſir (quoth the flie) it were no reaſon
               To graunte requeſte of ſuche apeale in race
               Of trymes, deſeruing death, at any ſeaſon.
               But thottender being taken in place,
               Where he hid the dede, to ſtande to the grace,
               Of lawful lawe, in that precinkte preſente.
               Whiche: ſo iudgeing him, I take iuſte iudgemente.
            
            
               Ouoth the ſpider god haue mercie on the.
               A men (quoth the flie) but why ſpeake you that?
               I ſpeake (and praie) it euen of charite.
               Neuer was there yet, any larke or wat,
               Before hawke or dog, flatter darde or ſquat
               Then by this anſwere: al thy matter is,
               Thou haſte condemde thy ſelfe, now in all this,
            
            
               
               How ſo (quoth the flie) thus (quoth the ſpyder)
               Thou grantſt, where faughters do an enterpriſe,
               Whiche, worthy death the lawe doth coſider
               Thenterpriſer ſhall apeale in no wiſe
               But take ſuche chaunce, as by lawe there doth ryſe
               Adewe arbiterment: and niſi prius,
               In ſtede of twelue or twaine: one ſhall nowe trie vs.
            
            
               What one ſhall that be? my ſelfe quoth he.
               Thy dede done here: hath by lawe here, death ſure,
               Alonely to be tride at wyll of me.
               At mine erſte ſewte, (ſaide the flie) here in vre,
               Ye promiſed iuſtice to be ſo pure,
               That with or againſt me, ye wolde nought do,
               But as my ſelfe in reaſon muſte gre to.
            
            
               Wherin we being cumminge towarde the pointe
               In performance of promiſe: to ſee triall,
               Nowe is iuſte iuſtice, ſo iotted out of ieinte,
               That ye here vniuſtely, ſtande at deniall,
               To do me iuſtice and wolde by power ryall:
               Sirecte mine acquitall or condemnacion,
               Euen as wyll in both: weith your acceptacion.
            
            
               Flie: doeſt thou waie my will herein thus lighte?
               In euery pety courte of copy holde,
               All grauntes that paſſe, paſſing in their moſte mighte
               Paſſe to holde at lordes will, and ſo enrolde.
               Syr (quoth the flie) copy holders of olde,
               Holde to them and theirs, at wyll of the lorde,
               As with cuſtome of the maner doth acorde.
            
            
               
               But this terme cuſtome: ſtandeth not here idle
               Cuſtome (in many caſes) ſemeth to me,
               To tenauntes a bukler. to lordes a bridle.
               From treſpaſſing wherin if tenauntes ſe,
               (On their partes) cuſtomes kepte as thei ſhoulde be,
               The will of the lorde moſte wilfully bente,
               Winthe nought worthe a bente, by cuſtoms extents.
            
            
               Were this windowe your maner in freholde
               And flies here your copie holders knowne clere.
               And that I: being your tenaunt, ye wolde
               Ley in me, breche of cuſtome to apere.
               Yet ſhoulde not your onely will be iudge here.
               For as thomage (vpon their othe) preſent,
               So cuſtome bindthe the lordes wyll in iudgement.
            
            
               Flie: thinkſte thou this caſe a bukler for the?
               This caſe: to our caſe (quoth the flie) being ſcande
               Is nother ſworde to you: nor bukler to me.
               With ſworde and bukler we maie goe or ſtande,
               Betwene bothe caſes and touche neither hande.
               This caſe: to lordes and tenauntes: is concurrant.
               But you are not my lorde, nor I your tenant.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The 
                  ••
               ie claimeth all holes in all windowes to be 
                  •••
               es in 
                  ••
               eholde: and that ſpiders ſhoulde builde by the ſydes or in the 
                  •
               oppe
                  •
               : whiche caſe to be 
                  •
               ride by law or cuſtome, thei in maner agree: but the flie mouing it to be tride at the comon law, the ſpider re
                  ••
               ſeth it: wherupon ariſeth mattier of d
                  •
               greſſion, in which the flie commendeth the ſpider for expedite heringe herof, brefely definyng the propertie of iuſtice, mercy, and tyrannie. Cap. 25.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               I take not my ſelfe apointed to pates,
               As you will ſet limittes and bownds fer or nere
               But clerely I claime: all holes in all lates,
               To be flies freholde. as maie right well apere,
               Where I diſtribed when I preſcribed here.
               Your auntiters buildinge: the ſydes and the top.
               As 
                     ••
                  iſe at libertee, in and out might chop.
            
            
               And as lawe and cuſtome or the tone of them,
               Shall iudge this pointe: wherin ſtandth muche parte of all,
               To that will I ſtande: refuſinge none of them.
               Standinge with your pleſure this caſe ſo ſtande ſhall,
               Then quoth the ſpider take cuſtome: let lawe fall.
               
                  
                     •
                  awe can 
                     •
                  ittle ſaie herein. Lawe muſte refar,
               The iudgement, to cuſtome to make or mar.
            
            
               For 
                     •
                  rew trying of cuſtome. Sir (quoth the flie),
               The lawe (pleaſe it you) maie trie how cuſtome weith,
               What lawe flie? the comon lawe ſyr thinke I,
               Where ſhall we trie flie: what that lawe herein ſeith?
               In weſt minſter halle ſyr. Why flie by thy feith,
               Wold
                     ••
                  e thou place this caſe: wheron hangeth the ſum,
               Where (thou ſaiſte) I nor no ſpider maie 
                     •
                  um?
            
            
               How fer arte thou from the quitee towarde me,
               That thou deſyreſt in me towarde the to growe
               Thou woldſte bring forth a thouſande fliſe for the,
               Where no one ſpider: for me maie make ſhowe.
               And ſo by ſtelthe woldſte win mine ouerthrowe.
               The lawe is one grounde of fowre (quoth the fly,)
               Whiche your former graunte, graunth to t
                     •
                  ie all by.
            
            
               
               And though cuſtome (as who ſaie) in reſpecte
               Of triall in this caſe: is it ſelfe lawe.
               Yet (I ſaie) la
                     •
                  e, for foorme in pleding directe,
               Aparence of that triall for the to drawe,
               Is mete to be had. I graunte thee that, dawe.
               But not without this, that we both do agre,
               The pleding to be: where both preſent maie be,
            
            
               It is meete (quoth the flie) and by you well we
                     •
                  de.
               (Vrgente cauſe excepte) where mattier ſhall procede,
               Againſte any perſon: or perſons leide,
               That he or thei anſwere preſently in dede.
               And in greatteſt crymes, this hath greatteſt nede.
               For in crymes moſte criminal: that lawe is peine
               The charged partie: ſhall no counſaile obteine.
            
            
               Whiche ſhouth that lawe: in moſte nede, leaſt helpè 
                     •
                  alow.
               Wherto: if the partie be kepte in abſence,
               So that he: nor no man for him maie auow,
               Any worde in plea: pleadid for his defence,
               This law is ſumwhat ſore, in my conſcience.
               Though faire tales in mine eare, peinte this a feire race,
               Yet in mine Iie: this caſe hath a crabed face.
            
            
               Sins ye denie me not lawe: but ye denie,
               To pleade this plea: where ye preſent maie not be,
               Of that denial: apeerth ſo good cauſe why,
               That I ſhall not only moſte gladly agre,
               To haue it pleaded where we both ſhall decre,
               But alſo I reioice: that your ſelfe eſpieth,
               This gall in this caſe: and what ill therin lyeth.
            
            
               
               One other ioie (with many ſorowſe) I haue.
               The cauſe wherof, commendth you vnſpecablie.
               In leſſe tyme (in maner) then my ſelfe could craue,
               After I am broughte 
                     •
                  ere: in priſon to lie,
               It ſtanth with your pleſure: moſte charitablie,
               To here, ye and determine out of hande.
               How my caſe ſtandth, and wherto my ſelfe ſhall ſtande.
            
            
               Oh (maiſter ſpider (the ſelfe dedes done in this,
               Commende you more, then may pen or tunge of man,
               Thatachid of ſuſpicion: or facte amis,
               Enquerie at full had, quickely as ye can,
               As iuſtice iudgeth, ſtreighte to diſpatche him than,
               Not letting him lie: tyll his lyms rot or lame,
               Iuſtice and mer
                     •
                  ie: both concurre in the ſame.
            
            
               Flie (quoth the ſpider) fauour is not al loſte,
               Shewde vnto the for thou canſte conſider it.
               But many other fliſe therbe in the coſte,
               In hauing lyke fauour: the diuell ſpede the whit,
               The
                     •
                   do ponder it: wherfore it is not fit,
               When chaunce or deſerte: fl
                     •
                  ſe into priſon ſtrike.
               To vſe frowarde and flexibill fliſe: a lyke,
            
            
               Iuſtice (quoth the flie) weith what, and why to do.
               Not to whom to do, by fauor, mede, or frey,
               The man is not the marke: that iuſtiſe ſhooteth to,
               The mans matter: Iuſtice ſhooteth at alweie.
               Betwene god: and the diuell: Iuſtice doth diſpley,
               His baner indifferently. Yeldinge eche parte,
               In all dewe dewtiſe, the very dew deſarte▪
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
            
            
               
               Mercy: ioynde with iuſtice doth either remit
               Or qualifie peines, that dewe by iuſtice ſeme.
               Tiranie not with iuſtice, but againſt it:
               Not weiyng deſerte, awardth peines moſt extreme.
               Tyranie, and mercy, thus maie we here dems
               Tyrany: not with but againſte iuſtice ſhowth,
               Mercy with: and not againſt iuſtice growth.
            
            
               Iuſtice place I here, in the middes as who ſaie.
               Mercy on the right hande of iuſtice to ſtande.
               Tiranie on the lefte hande. now if we ſweie,
               From the ſtreight lyne of iuſtice: to either hande,
               That ſweie muſte nedes bringe our ſweiyng to be ſcande,
               As we maie apere to ſweie aparantly,
               Either towarde mercie, or towarde tyrany.
            
            
               But in leaning to any hande of theſe twaine,
               From ſole iuſtice: when we encline to decline,
               As comon welthe in this caſe maie vs mainteine,
               From corrupte conſtruction, this caſe to define,
               I wiſh that we: eche as our callinges aſine,
               Maie leane to that hande with mete ſtrength, or vigor,
               That mercy leanth vnto: rather than rygor.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The flie (for cauſe here appering) deſireth to repete his diſtinction of iuſtice, mercie, & tiranie, which the ſpider denith, wherwith the flie leith to the ſpider, breche of a promes made to him before in diſcharge, wherof the ſpider anſwereth. C. 26.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               THe ſpider hunge downe both his hed and his lyp.
               Like one y• had nought: or wiſt nought: what to ſpeke.
               Wherwith thought the flie: I haue geuen him a nyp,
               Theſe diſtinctions: haue ſhewde his parte ſo weke,
               That ſtudiyng for matter: he findth none to breke.
               But where he thought the ſpider in ſtudy depe,
               He was deceiued: the ſpider was a ſlepe.
            
            
               And herwith ſterting awake, fy ſlouth quoth he.
               I had forgot my ſelfe. I herde my ſelfe rout.
               Naie ſir (quoth the flie) ye had forgotten me,
               The beſte parte (for my parte) ye haue ſlepte quite out.
               Naie not all flie: for I put the out of dout.
               Of all thy wordes had: in my commendacion,
               I herde euery worde: and can make relation.
            
            
               But thine entre: to matter more ſerious,
               Brought me a ſlepe: but I prey the hertelie,
               Whats the pointe of that caſe ſo imperious,
               The pith is the diſtinction: quoth the flie,
               Betwene iuſtice, mercy, and tyranie.
               Whiche: ſins you herde not: and it muche mete to here
               I ſhall repete to you in forme brefe and clere.
            
            
               That wolde (quoth the ſpider) make me ſlepe againe.
               And phiſike forbidth me to ſleape twiſe a daie,
               Repeticion hereof I denie thee plaine.
               Reaſon, lawe, cuſtome, and conſcience: ye ſaie,
               Shal (quoth the flie) all our preſent matter waie.
               But touching reaſon, lawe, cuſtome, and conſcience,
               Two of thoſe fowre principles: are gone euen ſens.
            
            
               
               Which two (quoth the ſpider?) theſe two (quoth the flie)
               Reaſon, and conſcience as how flie quoth he?
               as thus quoth the flie. Ye retreted latelie,
               And reuokte a caſe: which ye had graunted me,
               Touching cumming here: againſt my will to be.
               At whiche: when I grudged: ye made me promiſe,
               To haue in the lyke caſe, lybertee lykewyſe.
            
            
               And nowe when I wolde (not reuoke) but repete
               This pe
                     •
                  e: for my parte, ye plainly that denie.
               What reaſon or conſcience is here to gete,
               Good reaſon: and good conſcience: felow flie.
               But ſince reaſon is ſufficient this to trie,
               Let conſcience (I ſaie) ſtaie: till the laſte inſtante.
               Leaſt narow conſcience, reſons wyde ſcope might ſcant.
            
            
               And vpon peruſing: let reaſon ſtreight iudge,
               How far fled from reaſon: thy ſelfe herin arte.
               My retreted caſe (wherat thou didſt erſte grudge)
               Is: of matter preſent: a principall parte.
               Betwene whiche: and thy caſe thou maiſt driue a carte.
               Diſtinction of termes: in our maine matter mente,
               Is (at nexte) a very fer fet incidente.
            
            
               But though thou wilte ſaie, thou canſt draw this thy caſe.
               To ſtande with (or within) our gronnde principall.
               Yet is it nedeles, to be brought here in place.
               Diſtinction of theſe termes: and other all.
               I knowe: and can weie: as well as a flie ſhall,
               This degreſſion: in tellyng: loſte tyme before,
               And now in repeting: it wolde leſe tyme more,
            
            
               
               Sir: it maie lengthe tyme: but not leſe tyme: frende flie,
               Lengthe of time: is no loſſe of tyme to the in ded
                     •
                  .
               Lengthe of tyme is thy geine: but I leſe therbie.
               Long tyme winth the long lyfe. And leſeth my quicke ſpede.
               Which I ſhulde quikly haue: weare this quikly decrede,
               Of this my frewtles walke: auoiding the waie,
               To wyn weie more frewtfull: this waie lets aſaie.
            
            
               From pith of this proces (flie) where we fled out,
               Thether retrete we: more loſſe of time to flee.
               This repetition whiche thou woldſte bringe aboute,
               As winnig therof winth nought at lengthe to thee,
               So leſing therof leſeth nought at lengthe by me.
               Sins repeticion, the flie coulde not recouer,
               He ſhoke his head, and ſo lete it paſſe ouer.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The ſpider (reducing the 
                  •
               ly to the principal matter) moueth the triall to be had in his owne lordeſhip: which the flie miſliketh. wheron euſueth a glaunce at the diuerſitee of gouernemente, betwene one ſpyder and twelue fliſe. Cap. 27.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               Ere while (by preſcripſion) of old flieſe thou leydſt,
               All holes in lattes: to be other flieſe and thine.
               In which preſcripcion againſt vs: as thou ſeydſt,
               Acuſtomed right in windowes doth define,
               In the top and ſides: our building to aſſine,
               Which I denide: ſaieng our forefathers old,
               Preſcribed for vs, to byld here: where we wold.
            
            
               Vpon this iſſue thou ſheudſt thy ſelfe content,
               That cuſtome ſhould (being pleaded in lawe)
               Iudge how the caſe ſtandeth by cuſtomes extent.
               Pleading wherof: to common lawe thou didſt drawe.
               Pleading wherin: as thou ſaidſt: and I ſawe,
               Should be in ſuch place as I could not cum to:
               I denide triall there, and denie it I do.
            
            
               Which deniall to be reaſon, thy ſelfe told,
               And here: from purpoſe principall: out fled we
               By thy digreſſing. But againe to take hold,
               And go foorth therin, now let vs further ſee,
               (Sins the common lawe) is as vnmeete for mee
               As meete for thee (to pleade cuſtome herein)
               What other meete meane: for vs both, we may win.
            
            
               What thinke you (quoth the flie) freend flie this thinke I,
               Sins I will not: and thou canſt not, go hence,
               So that we both ſhall remaine here preſently,
               To here and anſwere in perſonall preſence,
               Lawe, in my lordſhip: muſt trie cuſtomes defence.
               Be ye there againe (quoth the flie) by my fay
               We ſhall catch bydres to morow: and flies to day.
            
            
               
               Will is now cum in againe: and muſt be cald law,
               By thy ground laid for copy hold at will,
               It ſeemth: thou needſt not care for my will a ſtraw,
               As thomage preſenteth (ſaidſt thou) good or ill,
               So doth the lords will, in iudgement ſaue or ſpill.
               So ſhould the lordes will do ſir, I therin ment,
               But here goth the hare away: right to preuent,
            
            
               I: being nother ſpider, nor ſpiders peere,
               Nor ſpiders tenaunt, nor ſpiders freend (ye ſay)
               I may haue quick ſpeede: and faile of good ſpeede heere.
               Though thomage ſhuld vprightly the verdite lay,
               And the lord (in iudgement) with the right likewiſe way,
               Yet ſum ſay, ſumtime, that the law is eended,
               In ſum caſe, in ſum place: as folke are freended.
            
            
               And I (quoth the ſpider) being nother flie,
               Nor to any flie, of aliaunce or kin,
               Nor taken any flies frende: why may not I
               In any pleading place: ſaue that we be in,
               Dought there (as thou dredſt here) good ſpeede to win.
               This caſe ſhall kepe our caſe: as the caſe now falles,
               Both from weſtminſter hall: and all ſuch law halles.
            
            
               Thou being abrode, buzzing in euery place,
               Where thou haſt more freendſhip, or les enmitee
               Then I haue: thou maiſt in eury place purchaſe
               Freendes againſt me: mo then I againſt thee.
               And when we in pleading, ioind in iſſue bee,
               Thou maiſt finde freendſhyp, to impanell the queſt,
               Of twelue ſuch freendly flies, as ſeme for thee beſt.
            
            
               
               Whiche kinde of triall (for my parte) I lyke nat.
               Wiſe lernde counſaile, coſtly fine pleas firſte deuiſe,
               With coſte and peine longe folowde. And after that,
               Twelue vnlerned rude ignorant corrupte fliſe,
               Shall ſtrike the ſtroke, as blinde affection doth riſe.
               By excellent wittes: lawe is euer begoon,
               And by ignorant wittes: ende of lawe ofte woon.
            
            
               Whiche to helpe, were I one of the procurers,
               I wolde thinke it far better to breede vp in broode,
               One wiſe trew iudge: then twelue foliſh falſe iurers,
               It is (quoth the flie) as olde fliſe vnderſtoode,
               Not more harde (for ſpiders) to ſpie twelue fliſe good,
               Then eaſy (for fliſe) to finde one ſpider noughte,
               And now note we here: to what ende this is brought,
            
            
               In place of twelue fliſe: were one ſpider plaſte,
               To geue verdite and iudgement: of matters clere,
               Yet might that change bring ſmal good ſpede: in great haſte,
               One wyly lernde ſpider might hurte as muche here,
               As twelue vnlernde blunte fliſe: by ought doth apere,
               And twelue good fliſe ſhulde (for all fliſe are not yll,)
               Do more good then one yll ſpider: wey who will.
            
            
               Betwene one good ſpyder: and twelne ill fliſe,
               Or thoſe twelue fliſe good: and that one ſpider yll,
               Apte compariſon (quoth the ſpider) doth not here ryſe,
               But that one: and thoſe twelue: draw we here vntill.
               (To worke good or ill) of one good or ill wyll
               And ſo then beſte or worſte, twelue or one: let vs try,
               Thone beſte ſorte of two: to gouerne windowes by.
            
            
               
               And the one ſpiders parte (in this parte) Ile take.
               And ile take parte with the twelue fliſe (quoth the fly)
               Ile ley firſte (quoth the ſpider your parte to ſhake,)
               Reſons: leide by a learned clerke formerly.
               For the rule of one ruler capitally.
               Whoſe arche articles here togither to wey,
               In theſe nexte woordes here togither: I will ley.
            
            
               Exampling the gouernement of one moſte hie,
               He puth the three perſons: whiche three, are god one.
               And further he bringth in (this texemplifie)
               The ſhip, on one keele all partes ſtande: eurychone.
               The houſe: ſtandth vnder one top rafter alone.
               Thoſte, vnder one captaine. Beſe vnder one be.
               The cranes one crane. the herde one ſhepherde ſaith he.
            
            
               To this (quoth the flie) an other clerke anſwerith.
               Similitude of god and man. To man and man,
               As far wyde: as far fet: the matter varith.
               And lybertee (being gods great gifte to ſcan)
               To take from all, no one by autoritee can.
               As who ſaie: any one mans autoritee,
               Shall not or ſhulde not, leſe all mens lybertee.
            
            
               Further (he ſaith) one mannes iudgement is ſubdewde,
               To yll affectes, ſoner then many can be.
               As one booket of water (in reſon vewde)
               May ſoner be poiſoned: we in reaſon ſe,
               Then may a poole or a ponde, and more ſaith he,
               Though one crane gyde all, where euer cranes range,
               Yet: nowe this one: then that one: thei ofte times change,
            
            
               
               Whiche exſaumple partely doth your parte apall.
               For it as muche maie a ſenate ſignify.
               As one: one tyme choſen, all times to rule all,
               And where all beeſe folow one bee: vnchangeably,
               Yet is that bee: of a more exelenſy.
               And of an other kynde: then thother beeſe are.
               As the ſheperde aboue the herde: he did declare.
            
            
               This laſte ſample moueth choice of one ruler in place,
               Of a more exelent kynde, then the reſte be.
               The ſaide lernde man (quoth the ſpyder) in this race,
               Repliyng to your clerkes reſons, this ſaith he,
               Firſt where your clerke ſaith: one wightes auctorite
               Can not take all from libertee, this man ſeith.
               Tis not lybertee, to liue as mans will weith,
            
            
               But to liue in thordinance of good lawſe.
               And the order of nature (ſaith he) aſſinthe,
               Sum to ſerue, ſum to rule, as aptenes drawſe.
               The weake wit: ſtronge of body, to ſeruice enclinthe.
               The witty lernde head, reaſon towarde rule combinthe,
               And a kyng calde in ſcripture goddes anointed,
               Hath (of god) giftes aboue the reſte apointed.
            
            
               God promiſeth to rule the hartes of kynges,
               Whiche gifte ſhowth a kyng aboue the reſte,
               And where it is more harde (by your clarkes ſaiynges)
               To corrupte many: then one, ſo our clarke witneſ
                     •
                  e,
               More eaſy to finde one good, then many, thus ſelfe,
               Thargument of theſe two, and our clerke anone,
               Chokte your clerke with one reaſon ioinde hervpone.
            
            
               
               Theſe thre kyndes of comon welthe, he tride.
               Of a kynge, of the peeres, and of comons laſte.
               In whiche as there maie be: three good rulinges weide,
               So maie be in theſe thre, thre yll rulinges caſte.
               In rule of a kynge, tiranie may blow blaſte.
               In peeres, vſurping. In few comons gouernance,
               All to be gouernours: maie them ſelues auaunce.
            
            
               Now: whoſe contrary is worſt (ſaith he) thatꝭ beſte.
               But tyrane is worſte of theſe thre, ergo,
               Rule or reigne of a kyng is beſte: manifeſte.
               This is the concluſion of our clarke: and ſo,
               Thargument (in effecte) endth without worde mo.
               Which: for rule preferde in a ſenate or prince,
               For one or many rulers, doth thy parte conuince.
            
            
               Syr (quoth the flie) theſe olde clarkes clarkly ſaiyng,
               The repeting therof let vs leue of quighte.
               And fall we to reaſon: of weighty waiyng,
               Experience, herein ſene in our owne ſighte.
               On whoſe ſyde theſe or theſe lyke caſes run righte.
               Beet (quoth the ſpider) but ere we enter that,
               Here me clere a caſe: that might diſpleaſe ſumwhat.
            
            
               In that we (in this caſe) draw nere to compare,
               A ſpider to a kyng: and fliſe to a ſenate,
               Contectors that capcious or curious are,
               (If cauſe ſhall: to them: our talke communicate)
               May chaunce to coniect
                     •
                  : that we two derogate,
               Thoſe two eſtates, in that we two do deuiſe,
               To cowple kynges and peeres, with ſpiders and fliſe.
            
            
               
               But witnes thou with me, as I wyll with the.
               That for my parte I know: and for thine I trow,
               We no whit meane thoſe ſtates: Imbaſed to be.
               By our talke, as a kynge in propertee to ſhow.
               Lyke a ſpider: or compariſon to grow.
               In fliſe and a ſenate. For propertee of fliſe.
               Moſte rude of vs. Not ſo rude: that tenterpriſe.
            
            
               Syr (quoth the flie) as you here for your ſelfe ſaie,
               So may you here aſſuredly for me ſweare.
               This example meane I: to reſpecte no waie,
               But only thorder of rule: that thoſe ſtates beare.
               And ſo reſembling them and vs, I whyle eare,
               Entended, by waie of example, to treate.
               And do ſo (quoth the ſpider, an ende to beate.
            
            
               Then (with your fauer) haue at it (quoth the flie.)
               Paſſing from all former clarkely argument,
               To our owne experience familierly.
               For fliſe gouernement, Ile ſhew good reaſon bente.
               By ſample of a ſenate. Standing in extente,
               At this preſent daie. From hundrethes of yeres paſte,
               To this daie proſpering, and ſo lyke to laſte.
            
            
               It ſelfe being but a citee, Doth yet poſſeſſe,
               Kyngdomes: fer from it: in ciuile order ſuche,
               As no kynge hath one realme in more quietneſſe.
               Iuſte iuſtice goth forth there, who euer gruche.
               Their people obedient, few other ſo muche.
               This ſample of ſenate: for flyſe rewle I ſaie,
               Againſte one ſpyder, or one kynge here I laie.
            
            
               
               The moſte (quoth the ſpider) that this makth for the,
               Is that, that ſenate: rewith as well as a kyng.
               To whiche one ſenate (for mo there none be)
               Many kynges, in many realmes: haue ſole gouerning.
               Eche one of whoſe gouernance, all (or moſte,) prouing.
               In both kyndes of comon welthe: ſince thei began,
               As good as that one 
                     •
                  enate, ſcan who can ſcan.
            
            
               One kynges rule as good: as one ſenates rule is,
               Compareth herin (For rule) both our partes euen.
               And many kynges rulyng ſo, the nomber in this,
               Shouth thy ſide, to the worſte ſhore to be dreuen.
               And by one reaſon mo, more weakenes is geuen.
               Vnto thy parte: whiche plainly ſhall apere,
               In theſe my nexte wordes, now folowing here.
            
            
               Although thoſe ſenatours in ſondry reſpectes,
               Seme equall for gouernance in open ſhow,
               Yet in other ſondry reſpectes profe directes,
               Show: of one amonge all: aboue all to grow.
               One hath of all, theſe place, and reuerence we know,
               In whoſe eſtate: ſtaie of the reſte doth moſte ſtande.
               Hauing voice, as muche as twaine: in his owne hande.
            
            
               In many and moſte thinges. Preeminence he hath,
               Moſte lyke to kyngly ſuperiorite.
               Two partes of three: in ſenates gyding path.
               Are drawne out of kyngly rule, in properte.
               Without whiche: to gouerne well, it will not be.
               Thus a ſenates rewle. wherin ye your brag brought,
               Backyng aide of a kynges tewle (ye ſe) doth nought,
            
            
               
               I coulde (quoth the fly) ſay more but I will not.
               This caſe ſtandth not in our caſe principally,
               This law: or that law: what law ſtande, it ſkill not.
               So the law and miniſters: geue iuſtice iuſtely,
               My cauſe is ſo iuſte, that no iuſte lawe feare I,
               Nor for euery faute in lawes: or lawiers geſte,
               To remoue lawes or lawiers, I thinke not beſte.
            
            
               Corrupcion in lawes: or miniſters of lawſe,
               I wiſh vs to redreſſe: rather then remeue,
               Either lawes or lawyers: without weighty cauſe,
               The caſe: vpon light cauſe: if we ſhulde ofte prene,
               Where it ſhulde eaſe one: it myght twenty agreue,
               Deuyſers in ſuche thinges: may ſoner deuiſe,
               To ſhew ten miſcheues: then ſhape two remediſe.
            
            
               Thou ſaiſt well (ſaide the ſpider) but to reuolue,
               Thimpediment in lawe of fonde flie Iurers,
               I can no waie other waie reſolue
               But with them: and al pelting procurers,
               To be quite cut of. As lawles enurers,
               Of verdites falſe or fooliſh: in this or that,
               Sumtymes thei care not: moſte times thei know not what.
            
            
               And ſure (I thinke) this ſore might be ſalued ſone.
               Or the ſmarte muche eaſde, did diſcrecion deuiſe,
               And diligence put in vre: thinges meete to be done,
               But to lordes: lawes lawiers homage and iuriſe,
               Corrupte frendſhip: thow leydſt erſte here in ſuche wiſe.
               As it generally apereth to repine.
               Againſt all courtes: aſmuch as againſt mine,
            
            
               
               As muche? ye and ſo muche more ſir that excepte,
               Your owne ſelfe, no wight in your courte I there touchte.
               Your courte of all officers is ſo clene ſwepte,
               That none officer in that courte can be couchte,
               But your ſelfe. For your ſelfe hath your ſelfe auouchte,
               Plaintif, pleader, iurer, Iudge, and iailer.
               Stop fly (what) from a reaſoner to a railer?
            
            
               I cry you mercy. Sir if this do diſpleaſe,
               I reuerſe and reuoke it ſtreight, for I haue:
               As ſmall apetight, as I ſhall haue ſmall eaſe,
               To moue you. Well ſince thou forgeuenes doſt craue,
               Stande vp fly. I forgeue euen as god forgaue.
               And how our ſaide caſe (by cuſtome) ſhalbe tride,
               Let vs yet once againe ſerche how to prouide.
            
            
               Concerning that prouiſion ſyr (quoth the fly)
               If we here (in this your preſent courte) did make,
               Agrement: to try this determinately.
               Though I hope (as I hope) I ſhoulde no wronge take,
               Yet humbly I beſeche you: for my mindes ſake.
               Sins my hartles harte againſt this triall ſwels,
               To graunte to trie this caſe ſum way, ſum where els.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Thei agree to be tride by arbitermente, whether all or how many holes in all windowes belonge to ſpiders, and how many to flies, the ſpider choſing for his parte, the ant or piſmere. the fly chooſinge for his ſide, the butterfly. whervpon thei, thone couple in one parte, and thother couple in an other part, talke togither forthwith. Cap. 28.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               NOw (quoth the ſpider) by this croſſe of ten bonſe,
               There liueth not thy lyke (for a flie) I trow,
               For tunge wit: thou arte the fly for the nonſe.
               But go to: let vs towarde ende ſum wey grow.
               I ſhoude my minde laſte: wherfore thy minde now ſhow.
               What waie (as thou thinkſte) we may yet beſt puruey,
               To knit vp this knot, without furder deley.
            
            
               The beſte waie in my minde when all waiſe are caſte,
               Is that one (quoth the flie) that I touched twyſe.
               To haue bene our triall, in all caſes paſte.
               Whiche was: to put the whole in comprimiſe.
               Flie: this laſte one caſe: to be tride in that wyſe.
               I graunte thee. I thanke you (quoth the fly) praiyng,
               That we maie name our daiſemen in this daiyng.
            
            
               I name (quoth the ſpider) a coſin of mine.
               Perce piſmere. called antony ante otherwiſe.
               Of perſon ſmall, of wit great vpright and fyne.
               And I (quoth the flie) what euer hap ſhall riſe,
               My graund ſyre Bartilmew butterfly deuiſe.
               Ofbody big: of wit and ſpeche blunt, and plaine.
               Well (quoth the ſpider) agre we on theſe twaine.
            
            
               Thei did ſo: and forthwith there lighted by chaunce,
               Harde by the copwebs ſide, the butterfly.
               Wherwith one of the yonge ſpiders did auaunce,
               At tholde ſpiders commaundment, in haſte to hy,
               For the ant to repeire to him by and by.
               Spede cam ſo to paſſe, that at tholde ſpiders hande,
               The yonge ſpider out of hande, brought thante to ſtande.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The ſpider to the ant, and flie to butterfly (after woordes of gretinge) declare, that thei are choſen their arbiters herein, wherin the ant and butterfly promiſe to do their beſte, and thei then anone draw al fowre together in (or at) the copweb. C. 29.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               THe ant to the ſpider made curtſy low.
               Wherwithal the ſpider to the ant did draw,
               Smiling and becking on him, in moſte louing ſhow.
               Thei ſhoke handes: manerly as euer I ſaw.
               But for fliſe, as Stans puer ad menſam ſhowth law,
               For makyng of curtſy: or ſhaking of handes,
               Butterfliſe pardon fliſe. bounde h
                     •••
                  e and foote in bandes,
            
            
               The ſpider: as of vſe in talke new entri
                     •
                  ,
               (Frendes are of frendes: the ſtate of their frendes frendly,)
               Axte how his coſins (thantꝭ father and mother) did.
               His brothers ſiſters with all kyn and aly.
               Thant ſaid thei did well. And in lyke wordes harty,
               Axte him how his aunte ſpider and all theirs farde.
               The ſpider with thankes to thant, their helthes declarde.
            
            
               The fly of the butterfly, with teares tender,
               Axte: to know his grandam butterfliſe eſtate.
               With all vncles and auntes, of their engender.
               The butterfly ſaide well. And did him animate,
               To be of good 
                     •
                  here. Falſe harte to captiuate.
               Reaſon then ebbing: teares of natures flowing,
               To ſhew their grefes as reaſon might make ſhowing,
            
            
               The ſpider to thant. And fly to butterfly,
               Diſcourſte their greues a parte: and how thei therin,
               Refuſinge ſundry weiſe of ende: finally,
               Choſe them twaine for arbiters: ſum ende to win.
               And ſince thone twaine: and thother twaine: are of kin,
               Thone 
                     •
                  hooſeth thon, thother choſeth thother.
               Both promiſde their beſte, the tone and the tother.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The ſpider declareth, and the flie graunteth thiſſue to be, that all flies 
                  •
               laime (in freholde) all holes in all windowes to bee theirs by cuſtome: and ſpiders claime all holes with all partes of all windowes to be their freholde by cuſtom: and after talke betwene them therin had, thant requireth ful inſtruction of the two parties to them two arviters. Cap. 30.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               THe ſpider and fly thanking the other both,
               Thei
                     •
                  oure thervpon drawing to gither all,
               The ſpyder: directly to the matter goth.
               Coſin ant: and felow buterfly: ye ſhall,
               Vnderſtande: that we twaine do you twaine now call,
               Not to wey all caſes in which we contende,
               But one. on whiche one, all ſeme to depende.
            
            
               The fly claimth by comon cuſtome beyonde minde,
               All holes in all lates: flies freholde to be.
               And ſpiders (ſaith he) by cuſtome are aſinde,
               To bilde at ſides or in top: wherto marke ye,
               I ſay that cuſtome awardthe all windowes fre,
               At ſpiders willes without that: that any fliſe,
               Haue ony ſuch right, by cuſtomes warantiſe.
            
            
               That this is our iſſuee, we do both agre.
               And vpon this iſſue. we be both agreede,
               That you two: by arbiterment ſhall decre,
               What cuſtome hath herein: directely decreede.
               Is it thus 
                     ••
                  ie (quoth thant) yea (quoth the fly) in deede.
               As conſcience in you twaine: for vs twaiue ſhall try,
               How cuſtome doth ſtande, ſo (for my parte) ſtande I.
            
            
               Thou ſemſte (quoth the ſpider) a coſterde monger.
               Conſcience euery handwhile thou doſte cry.
               I muſte (quoth the flie) ſe ſum token ſtronger.
               Ere I can ſuppoſe you of that miſtery.
               I call not for conſcience more comonly.
               Then you ſpeake of it ſeelde, flie I tolde the erſte.
               Cauſe why: that conſcience at laſte ende ſhulde be perſte.
            
            
               
               Thatꝭ now (quoth the fly) if theſe two now take ende,
               As I hope thei ſhall, but here me thinkth I ſmell,
               That your caſt is: conſcience thus to ſuſpende,
               Firſte till thende. And then at thende faire and well,
               Cut conſcience of: conſcience ſo to expell,
               As when all is done, conſcience may ſaufely ſaie,
               And ſwere: that conſcience cam not here this daie.
            
            
               Then conſcience or I: the tone ſhalbe forſworne.
               Reaſon, law, cuſtome, and conſcience, theſe foure,
               To be our growndes in triall: I ſware beforne.
               Then (quoth the fly) in laſte ende: of this laſte houre,
               Let conſcience cum in: to ſaue that oth of youre.
               What thinge can conſcience do here fly ſaiſt thou?
               Three thinges ſir (ſaide the fly) whiche I will tell you.
            
            
               Firſte conſcience as euen balance may euenly wey,
               What cuſtome yeldth to ſpiders, and what to fliſe.
               Seconde, conſcience may wey: what reaſon can ley,
               What good and what yll, cuſtome doth exerciſe:
               In either parte. Thirdly conſcience may deuiſe.
               To alow the good: and diſalow the ill.
               Wheron: theſe two may awarde: as conſcience will.
            
            
               Theſe two fly (as my meaning was to take them,)
               We choſe daiſemen: to try this by reaſon clere.
               But, (not arbiters,) chauncelers thou doſt make them.
               By conſcience to iudge, how much cuſtome doth here.
               And what good or ill, in cuſtome doth apere.
               Laſte caſe of whiche twaine (by thee craftely couchte,)
               In thiſſue that we ioine on: is no whit touchte.
            
            
               
               The pointe that we pitche on: to try out the ſoth,
               By reaſon (not ſcrupulous conſcience,) is this.
               Not what cuſtome is, but what cuſtome doth.
               How good or how ill: cuſtome it ſelfe is,
               Is an other farder caſe. (Which fly, I wis,
               When we ſhall try (by conſcience with reaſon)
               It wyll bringe ſmall brag for thy ſide to ſeaſon.
            
            
               For fine: coſin ant, and good man butterfly,
               What entreſte cuſtome doth geue to him and me,
               How muche or how little: in windowſe low or by,
               As you by reaſon agre, ſo I agre.
               To this axte the butterfly (fly) what ſay ye?
               Since: who may not as he will, muſte as he may,
               I ſay (ſaide the fly) as maiſter ſpider doth ſay.
            
            
               There ſaidſt thou wyſely (ſaide the ſpider) and note.
               Thou ſhalte by that ſaiyng no damage ſuſtaine.
               If reaſon win thee this caſe euery iote,
               Conſcience (by reaſon) muſte me ſtreighte conſtraine,
               Iobey reaſons awarde, at handes of theſe twaine.
               And pas thei with me, I promiſe mine aſſente,
               To vſe the gaine, as conſcience yeldth extente.
            
            
               So ſaide and ſo done (quoth the butterfly) in feith,
               (Son fly) this is of maiſter ſpider well waide.
               Yea ſyr (quoth the fly) I here well what he ſeith,
               God rewarde his maiſterſhip: it is well ſaide.
               Pleaſeth you (quoth thant euidence may be laide.
               By your ſelues or other: wherby we twaine maie,
               Perceiue (in reaſon) wherto cuſtome doth waie.
            
            
               
               Ye (quoth the ſpider) coſin cum we hither.
               Thei as far as thei liſt: withdrew them ſelues quight.
               The butterfly and fly: drawing togither,
               As far, not as thei liſte, as far as thei might,
               Thei two telling their tales, as I ſhall reſight.
               Whiche two tales though I: as in one time hid here,
               Yet firſt thone: and then thother: muſt here apere.
            
            
               Though two eares in one inſtant two tales here may,
               One tunge: in one inſtant: two tales can not tell,
               Since thone of theſe two tales: muſt ſtande here in ſtay,
               Till thother be tolde, I thinke it will do well,
               The fliſe and the butterfliſe talke to expell,
               Or ſuſpende. tyll the ſpiders talke with the ant,
               Ye may vnderſtande: whiche is nexte aparant.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Thei (in couples ſeperate againe) declare eche how he wolde haue his arbiter handle his parte: and firſte is here tolde in Their perſons the tale of the ſpider to the ant. Cap. 31.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               COſin ant (quoth the ſpider) that ye be wyſe,
               It is to me knowne. Wherto all folke do know
               That vnto the wiſe, few wordes at full ſuffiſe.
               And to your wiſdome: I doubte not your ſhow
               Of friendſhip, naturally to me to grow.
               For ye know: as we differ far in ſtature,
               So we in kinred: ioine nie by nature.
            
            
               Preſident wherin ſought, what olde recordes cary,
               Shall ſhew no recorde of ſolemne ſolemnitee,
               That euer ſpider and ant: did yet mary,
               Whiche growth (I ſaie) of kinred. not of emnitee
               Did I (in you) by ingrate endemnitee
               Doute here: wiſdomes iudgement: or natures kyndnes,
               I were a beaſte: of beetill heded blindenes.
            
            
               Whiche two: in their workinges: to geue or take righte,
               Nature workth friendely, wiſdom workth ſurely.
               Though right in eche cauſe: ſeme the poſte of moſt mighte,
               Yet wante of wiſdom (whoſe polycy purely)
               In ſentence or ſemblance: ſterne or demurely
               Shulde ſet forth that righte, mighte in concluſion quicke,
               Thwighte that myll poſte of righte: to a poding pricke.
            
            
               As if Croſſum caput, lyke an aſſe in a caſe.
               Setting forth a right, homly in rewde termes bare.
               A witty lernde head: that righte in that place,
               Did finely pronounce: thoſe two tales ſhulde declare,
               Forty pence diffrence, in righte to compare.
               One tale in two tellers: with one entente tolde,
               May differ in ſhow: as doth braſſe and fine golde.
            
            
               
               And wiſdomes ſure driftes had: if natures friendſhip lacke,
               To take, here, and tell, that tale: in friendly wyſe,
               That righte with that wiſdome: may yet runne to wracke
               Thus: wiſdome to worke ſurely: by poliſiſe
               And nature: to worke friendely: both muſte ariſe,
               To ioine in one: in friendes by friendes required,
               To obteine thinges: at handes of friendes deſired.
            
            
               Whiche policy and friendſhip: where thei are knit,
               Againſt partiſe: to try thinges in ſtrife growing
               Thei call crafte: and corrupſion euery whit.
               But policy and friendſhip: with partiſe ſhowing.
               Thoſe partiſe praiſe both: with open mouth blowing.
               Both ſtanding againſt folkes: folkes daily accuſe them.
               Both ſtanding with folkes, folkes hourely vſe them.
            
            
               But to ſhow our caſe: out of accuſacion.
               In putting policy and friendſhip: in vre,
               Marke this ſhorte circumſtance: in aprobacion.
               Comprimiſe, the ende of cauſes to alure,
               Two ſortes of election: in courſe doth procure.
               In choice of the choſen partiſe: (here meane I,)
               To arbitrate all debates indifferently.
            
            
               One is: that the two partiſe in ſtrife meued
               Do chooſe arbyters: to them both indiffrent.
               Thother is: that either party greued,
               Doth choſe for him ſelfe: ſuch as he knowth bente,
               To take ende: or leaue ende, as he will aſſente.
               The firſte waie of both (though it the beſfe waie be)
               It can not be had: betwene the fly and me,
            
            
               
               In this caſe preſent, amonge ſpiders and fliſe
               We all: can no one: indifferent prouide.
               Affinitee, or affection, doth ſo deuiſe,
               That all be partiſe: on thone or thother ſide.
               but might (and ſhulde) this caſe this firſte wey be tride,
               Then might ye honeſtly: leane parcially
               To neither ſide, by frindſhip nor policy.
            
            
               Howbeit this other caſe, bringth this other cauſe.
               The flie, for him ſelfe. And my ſelfe, for me.
               This choiſe haue choſen: ſo that this thus drawfe
               Another my ſelfe: I chooſe you here to be.
               Wherby: in all frendly poliſy (ye ſe,)
               Of honeſtie to ſticke to my ſide iuſte,
               Not only ye maie, but alſo ye muſte.
            
            
               And (as I ſaide) I doubte not but ye wyll,
               And pray ye do. But promyſe formerly,
               Of knowne rewarde at ende, to flee the yll
               Of ſuſpecte bribry: though I preſently,
               Rate not rewarde: yet if hereafter I,
               May you requite: in pleaſure one or other,
               Then thinke your ſelfe, as me it as another.
            
            
               Syr ſaid the ant: your rated rewlde rewarde,
               Now: or at ende: if I herein apeaſe you,
               Is not the thing: that I ſo muche regarde,
               But at the ende as ye ſe how I eaſe you,
               I ſay no more: but vſe me as it pleaſe you.
               Coſin: well ſaide (ſaide then the ſpider) and ſith
               This pointe is paſte, paſſe we now to the pith.
            
            
               
               All holes in all windowes (as the fly ſeith,)
               Are flyſe freholde. And that we ſpiders holde,
               Right nought by righte, but ſides and toppes on heith.
               And we (ſay I) holde all, thus to be tolde.
               Holes, ſides, and toppes, brode, narow, depe, and ſholde.
               Vpon whiche iſſue: you two muſte firſt here,
               And after iudge whiche ſide bringth profe moſte clere.
            
            
               Wherin for me, of auncient parentage,
               Ye ſhall here ſpiders ſpeake: bothe ſage and wiſe.
               And on the flies behalfe: here now in gage,
               There wyll cum foorth a ſorte of forkte tailde fliſe
               That will not ſticke to tell, a hundred thowſande liſe.
               And ſaie: and ſwere that thei ſay true: howbeete,
               Ye wyll (I doute not) truſte them as is meete.
            
            
               And whan ye herein: haue done what ye maie
               To make our euidence ſhine clere in ſhow.
               And darkened theirs, your wiſdome ſhall ſure wey,
               The groſſe rude butterfly: to ende to grow,
               What waie ye wyll. And thus for hie and low.
               After wordes great and many: where few mighte ſeme fit,
               Into your handes, this matter I commit.
            
            
               Vncle (quoth the ant) I perceiue your minde,
               At full. And ſhall at full: do all my beſte.
               Wherin to do you good: if I can noughte finde,
               Yet ſhall ye (for me) ſtande harmeles at leſte.
               Vpon this concluſion theſe twaine did reſte.
               And now: betwene the fly and the butterfly,
               What waie was had: enſueth enſuingly.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The tale of the fly to the butterfly how he ſhall vſe the flyſe parte: whiche done the arbiters withdra we them ſelues towarde the top of the windowe. Cap. 32.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               GOod graundfather: ſince we two (ſaide thé fly)
               One fleſh and blood: by natures woorkyng are,
               In that I: from you: deſende linially
               As in degrees: our petigrees declare,
               And that nature: naturally takth care,
               To ſee ſucſeſſe: of her ſucſeded burdes,
               I wyll not length this peece: with peinted wurdes.
            
            
               But natures zeale I ſet: to interſeſſe
               To you, for me, without moe woordes of me,
               To do your beſte: in this my depe diſtreſſe.
               Wherin: what waie to woorke: as I beſte ſe,
               That ſhall I ſhow. But ere we ſo far be,
               Here me diſcloſe (for our purpoſed cauſe,)
               A neceſſary brefe conceiued clauſe.
            
            
               We here and ſee: giftes of nature are diuers.
               Sum be faire, ſum tall, ſum haue ſtrength, ſum wit.
               Sum: in ſcience: excellent contriuers.
               Sum haue ſmall wit, and haue much truth with it.
               With many mo: then now: to moue were fit.
               And this moue I: to moue here onely now,
               Diffrence in giftes: betwene the ant and yow.
            
            
               The ant hath gifte of right good wit (no doute.)
               And therto (for an ant) lernde excellently.
               And you haue gifte: of pleines ſterne and ſtoute.
               Not being geuen ſo much ingeniouſly:
               To lerned iudgement: and yet this know I
               No wighte can proue: from hence to Englandes eende,
               That euer ye brake promiſe with your freende.
            
            
               
               But that ye walde (and durſte perfourme the ſame,
               And this: to this: in you righte well is knowne.
               A grounde once in your head, faſtned in frame,
               Let lerned lawiers pype vp trumpets blowne
               Of rules in lawe: to rule you as their owne.
               Yet ſhall their reaſons no whit make ye ſtarte,
               From that grownde on your (or on your friendes) parte.
            
            
               Whiche propertee: is worth ten thowſande marke.
               In you to me, in caſe of comprimiſe,
               For whiche: againſte the ant that cunning clarke,
               Mine arbiter: I did you here deuiſe.
               To holde your holde: in blunte aſſured wiſe.
               Either this matter wholly to recouer,
               Or ſaue (at leaſte) my ſide from geuing ouer.
            
            
               The ant is ſharpe and fine. As ye are blunte and groſe.
               The ant hath circumſpection: ye haue nane.
               You pacſtaffe plaine: the ant crafty and cloſe.
               The ant ſciuile, you ſturdy as the ſtone.
               This ſaide brefe blunte and ſharpe compariſone:
               Shall ſhow who ſhouth moſte brag to ſtinte this ſtrife,
               The blunte whetting whetſtone, or ſharpe whetted knife.
            
            
               To this the butterflie ſaide: fly ſon mine.
               The groſſe blunte whetting whetſtone: feare thou not,
               To matche this whetted pen knife: ſharpe and fine,
               Tell thou to me plainly: what is the knot
               That I ſhall knit or vnknit in this plot.
               And thant ſhall with a tabor take a wat,
               As ſone as make me ſhrinke from thee: in that.
            
            
               
               Sir (ſaide the fly) our iſſue whiche ye herde
               To rype remembrance, here yet once againe.
               I ſaie all holes in windowes, are referde,
               In tenure of freholde, to vs tapertaine.
               All ſpiders: in fides and in toppes to remaine.
               Whiche he denith: affirming thei and he,
               Holde all partes in all windowes: in tenure fre.
            
            
               In whiche two ſides, you two the truthe muſte trie,
               And then determine, as reaſon can decre.
               Vpon whiche ſyde: this ſhall by cuſtome lie.
               Wherin ye ſhall haue flies: to ſpeake for me
               Sage, wiſe, lernde, and well ſpoken as can be.
               And for the ſpiders parte, it is no doute,
               Of ſpiders there will be: a ſpitefull route.
            
            
               The knot herein: whiche I wolde haue you knit,
               Is this. Either do me good, or do none yll.
               If: in this matter ye can win no whit,
               Then leſe righte nought: but let it ſtande euen ſtyll.
               As it erſte ſtode. And if thante no way wyll.
               Geue any place, cum harken in your eare.
               Wherin he whiſpred woordes, what I wiſt neare.
            
            
               Wherat the ſpider caſte iye, to them both.
               Wherwith: the butterfly from the fly flieth,
               And the ant from the ſpider away goth.
               Eche one of whom (anone) the other eſpieth,
               And eche of both to other haſtely hieth.
               The ſpider: ſtreighte into his houſe ſtepte ſtoutely,
               The fly: fell on kneeze to his booke deuoutely.
            
            
               
               Thanf and the butterfly, fogether drew.
               To thextreme parte of the window: on the top ſyde.
               And after ſaluting in their maner dew,
               Both ſtudiyng: how thentree ſhulde be firſte aplide.
               Thei both: caſting their eies aboute eſpide.
               On thone ſide: ſpiders aproching: ſixe or ſeuen.
               And on thother ſide, fliſe ten or a leuen.
            
            
               Neither ſorte the other: oughte ſaluted thei,
               But bothe ſortes to tharbiters: made curtſy low.
               The ante praide both partes in their aproche to ſtele,
               Tyll the butterfly and he (in talke) mighte know,
               And agre: what waie of proceding ſhoulde grow.
               With this thei all, ſtepped backe and there ſtaide.
               Whervpon: thant to the butterfly ſaide.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The ant and the butterflie being met in the top of the window, certaine ſpiders on their one ſide, and certaine flies on their other ſide, whom tharbiters cauſe to ſtande backe while thei two talke together. Cap. 33.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               BEfore we furder wade maiſter butterflie,
               No maiſter ſir: I am but a yeman (quoth he)
               Thatꝭ no matter (ſaide thante) as the caſe doth lie,
               But: gentilman or yeman: what euer ye be,
               Since we two come hither: theſe two to agre,
               Let vs be agrede: on the nexte and beſte waie,
               To bringe them agrede, in matter here to ſale.
            
            
               Our waſe wherin (as thinketh me) is this.
               We both muſte baniſh all parcialitee,
               That by corrupte affection, engendred is.
               By affinitee, or conſanguinitee,
               So that we clerely cleue vnto equitee.
               As of theſe two: neither of either ſhall,
               Droue vs: or either of vs: vnequall.
            
            
               Nay (by my fathers ſowle) ſaide the butterfly,
               I wyll play no whit of venum mecum his parte,
               Holde with the hare and run with the hounde: will not I,
               Such reaſons: as out of this blunte braine maie ſtarte,
               For my frende, run thei right: run thei ouertharte,
               Out wyll I powre them: and in gods name,
               For your friende, as ye ſee cauſe, do you the ſame.
            
            
               Theſe two tales (in theſe two perſons) ſemde here tolde,
               In thone of plainnes: in thother of policy.
               The buttehfly ſpake his thoughte (as he muche wolde.)
               Thant contrary talked diſſimilately.
               His mouing the butterfly tendiffrency,
               (Him ſelfe ſhowing a ſhow to be indiffrent,
               Semde moued, for this crafty couerte entent.
            
            
               
               The antes drifte was: the butterflie to driue,
               From affectionate ſtanding: on the flies ſyde,
               Indifferently to ſtande. While him ſelfe contriue,
               To be parciall with the ſpider. whiche aplide,
               Might (thought the ant) to the butterflie vnſpide,
               Draw him to withdraw: ſum parte of affection,
               Fore bent in his breſte, for the flies protection.
            
            
               But when the butterflie: lyke a ſtiffe nekte cur,
               (As ye haue herde) made anſwere vnto the ant,
               So that this waie wolde not: the butterflie ſtur,
               Thant (on this plaine ſonge hauing ſhifte of deſcant,)
               Axed the butterflie: cum we this inſtant?
               To helpe the ſpider and flie to take ende,
               Ye ſir (ſaide the butterflie:) that I entende.
            
            
               If I: for the ſpider: and you for the flie:
               Show our ſelues: not arbiters but partiſe,
               Reaſoning: eche for eche: affectionately,
               What ende betwene vs twaine: for them can ryſe:
               More then them ſelues: in them ſelues can deuiſe:
               I cannot tell (quoth the butterflie) howbeit,
               Harke what waie is beſte, we take (after my wit.)
            
            
               You, reaſoning for your frende: and I for my freende,
               Vpon our euidance: to this iſſue leide,
               If my reaſons ſeme better then yours at eende,
               You: alowing them aboue your owne, here weide,
               Or your the better reaſons: in my head ſteide.
               I alowing them lykewiſe: aboue mine owne,
               Reaſon may ſet ende, and time ſhow ende, wel growne:
            
            
               
               Vpon this: thei both were agrede anone.
               The ſpiders and flies on both ſides: to call nere.
               Both being agrede: that the ant ſhoulde propone,
               The ſpiders: Now ſtanding on the righte hande to here,
               The flies: on the leafte ſide, as nie did apere.
               Both ant and butterflie (eche in a chaire ſet)
               To declare the caſe, the ant his tunge hath whet.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Thant declaringe the cauſe of that metinge, the ſpiders and flies acknowlageing the ſame, and that thei come to geue euidence, the flies are apointed to departe while the ſpiders firſte ſhew, what thei can ſaie for their parte. Cap. 34.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               KInſefolke ſpiders: and friendes files: I doute no whit▪
               
               But in this terrible trembling tragedy,
               Betwene the ſpider: and flie: in copweb knit.
               Ye know: the miſchaunce miſchaunced lately,
               And how thoſe chaunces chaunced to chaunce. wherby,
               The ſpiders paleſſe is depely periſſhed,
               And the flies perſon deadly perilled.
            
            
               Alſo (I ſuppoſe) ye know that we twaine,
               I for the ſpider: and he for the flie,
               Are choſen arbiters. Suche ende tobteine:
               As euidence ſhall ſhow: both ſides to trie.
               Whiche to ſhowe (I deme) ye apere preſently.
               Saide one ſpider firſte: and then one flie: all this,
               We know, and to geue euidence: our cumming is.
            
            
               This knowne (quoth thant) douting whether ye know.
               How far our auctoritee ſtretcheth here,
               To meddle in this matter, here me ſhow.
               Nomber and weighte of ſtrifes cloudy and clere,
               Betwene theſe twaine: many and great apers.
               Of all whiche: aurtoritee haue we none,
               To touche in this talke, ſaue only this one.
            
            
               The flie claimeth all holes in all windowſe,
               To pas and repas: to be free for flies all.
               Alegeing that ſpiders (by all olde ſhowſe.)
               In toppes and ſides: haue place eſpeciall.
               The ſpider claimth the whole: in generall.
               To hering wherof, we our awarde wolde knit,
               What parte: eche parte ſhall haue: from all to nowhit.
            
            
               
               Sir (ſaide the ſpider and flie) that erſte had ſeide,
               This know we, and haue purueide euidence:
               As clere for eche parte, as eche parte can ſe weide.
               Then (quoth the ant) for our intelligence,
               Will ye friende butterfllie: that the flies go hence?
               Whyle we here the ſpiders ſpeake: ye (quoth he)
               Coſins flies: ſtande backe till ye called be.
            
            
               The flies ſtepte backe: the ſpiders forwarde drew.
               Standidg before thoſe two: in their cheires ſet
               Declaracion: to whom: what thei herein knew,
               Was deuiſde: and determinde. Ere thei there met.
               Wherein: for entre to let lenger let,
               The butterflie: ſtreight entring as here enſeuth.
               Thant prouoketh the ſpiders to ſpeake the treuth.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ After a few wordes betwene the ant & butterflie, one ſpider as mought be for all, declareth to thoſe two tharbiters all euidence that all ſpiders for their parte can deuiſe: and that done, the ſpiders are commanded awaie, and the flies bidden to aproche. Cap. 35.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               MAiſters (or lordes) ſpiders: what ſhall I call ye?
               In thingꝭ here now to talke: harke wel this one thing:
               At my blunte behauour, barke ye or ball ye.
               If ye bringe in ſoviſtry: or booke larning,
               To blynde mine eies with: I geue you plaine warning,
               Tom troth will not be wownde that waie. And therby,
               Be warnde: to talke trewly and homlily.
            
            
               Thei wyll do ſo (quoth the ant) I dare ſaie
               So will the flies than (quoth thother) I dare ſweare.
               Then (quoth thant) without more delated delaie,
               What ye ſpiders can ſpeake, ſpeake while we geue eare.
               With this, one ſpider (as all agrede weare,)
               Standing formoſte, and as a bolte vprighte,
               Soberly ſaide, with curtſy lowe as he mighte.
            
            
               May it (maiſters) lyke you: a ſpider am I,
               Of ſuche yeres, as no liuing flies yeres may,
               Witnes (by remembrance) my full age for why?
               I tooke lyfe in this worlde, (olde ſpiders wolde ſay)
               Iuſte in the leape yere: before the yll maie day.
               My parentes (as I am) weare blacke nebde and balde.
               The longe lyued ſtocke: of ſpiders thei were calde.
            
            
               By parte: of my whiche parentes, this I gather,
               In their tymes, worſhipfull ſpiders (though I ſey it,)
               My father: graundfather: and great graundfather:
               Wolde ſaie: as thei harde elder ſpiders wei it,
               That euery window: hunge it, ſtode it, or ley it.
               All partes of the ſame: in loweſt and hieſt,
               Were ſpiders freholde, both fardeſt and nieſt.
            
            
               
               And euer haue bene (ſaide thei) at will to beelde,
               In parte: or in all: and that thei coulde not know:
               That euer flie (of right) any parte there heelde.
               Theſe few woordes of forefathers ſpiders: make ſhow,
               In all partes: of all windowes: the right to grow,
               On our parte. The contrary wherof to wafe,
               No ſpider: hath herde any ſpider: oughte ſaie.
            
            
               Say all ye ſpiders thus (quoth thant?) ye (quoth they.)
               Haue ye herde (quoth the butterflie) any wighte
               Say ought herein: ſauing ſpiders? quoth they, ney.
               Haue ye (quoth thant) ought els in this to recighte?
               Ye (quoth one ſpider) ſtanding behinde all quighte.
               I haue a counter verſe to ſinge: in this place
               Whiche ſhalbe countred, with the flies face to face.
            
            
               Ye ſhall (quoth the butterflie) ſinge that verce anone.
               But we muſte here the flies indiffrently.
               As we haue herde you. Till whiche tyme, be ye gone.
               Thei ſtepping backe: the flies forthwith ſoberly,
               Stode in their place. Tharbiters glaunſingly,
               Ere the flies ought ſaide, in their repairing nere,
               Had betwene them ſelues: theſe woordꝭ, which ye ſhal here,
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Vpon a ſhorte talke betwene the arbiters, one flie: ſpokes flie for all flies, diſcloſeth all euidence for their parte: wher with the flies at commaundemente departe aſide. Cap. 36.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               THe ſpiders tale (ꝙ thant) ſemth a choking choke plum
               Againſt flies. Ere ye (quoth the butterflie) gruche,
               Againſt any parte, audum altum paltum.
               
               This terme fet far from the laten: and mo ſuche,
               Lernde in the ſcoole of ignorance, he ſpake muche:
               And vnderſtoode littell. But this being ſtaide,
               An auncient flie: ſtoode foorth, and thus to them ſaide.
            
            
               My maiſters arbiters I am a fly,
               Of ſuche age, as ſpiders few or none maie boſte.
               My fathers hande writing (for witnes) haue I,
               That I was bred, in the yere of the great froſte,
               Before the great ſweat. When many flies were croſte,
               Out of the booke of lyfe. Who by extreme colde,
               Were froſen to death: midaged, yonge, and olde.
            
            
               In all whiche daies: to this daie, I haue herde flies ſaie:
               All holes in all windowes, where thei ſtoode or ſtande.
               Haue bene (and be) flies freholde: as their high waie,
               To pas and repas. And that the ſpiders bande,
               Owners of the ſydes and toppes onely: are ſcande.
               Wherto, I nor no flie (I dare verify),
               Euer herde any flie, ſay contrary.
            
            
               Flies (quoth the butterflie) take ye this tale trew?
               Ye (quoth thei. know ye ought (quoth thant) but by fliſe?
               Nay (quoth thei.) Foorth (quoth the butterflie) purſew.
               Can you (or any of you) ought els deuiſe:
               Wherby furder light in your right, maie ariſe?
               Ye ſir: ſaide one flie: then ſtanding all behinde,
               To the ſpiders teethes: anone, yle tell my minde.
            
            
               
               That ſhall ye do (quoth thant) but friende butterflie,
               Wyll ye firſte require them to withdraw aſide?
               Whyle you and I: ſum parte of this paſte maie trie.
               Hence (quoth the butterflie) wherwith thens thei hide,
               Thei twaine then onely there, them ſelues thei aplide.
               Eche one with other: togither to conſowlt,
               What frewt: out of this erſt ſaide, their braines could bowlt,
            
            
               Ere either of other: did herein ought breake,
               Thant deuiſde, what waie beſte to enter it.
               The butterflie ſtudied not what woordes to ſpeake,
               But to ſpeake with voice clere, he coughte and he ſpit:
               Till his voice was much more clere then his wit.
               And yet fer from witles: but plaine blunte groſenes,
               Showde his woordes: ofte tymes to ſhow witles loſenes.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The arbiters (in debating theuidence on both partes geuen) can not otherwiſe agree, but that the ſame weith euen as muche for the tone parte as for the tother, at ende wherof thei call againe all the ſaide ſorte. Cap. 37.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               SAy (ſaide thant) your opinion vprighfly:
               What weith this euidence on both ſides thinke you?
               To try whiche ſide ſhowth beſte (quoth the butterflie,)
               Theſe woordes as muche matter: for fliſe do alow,
               As for ſpiders, ſo do thei (quoth thant) auow,
               As muche matter in woordes to alow, in lykewiſe,
               In ſpiders for ſpiders, as in fliſe for fliſe.
            
            
               And more (for thone halfe: welny that ſpiders claime.
               The fliſe do graunte. But ſpiders graunte vnto fliſe,
               No parte of theirs, whiche is to the fliſe a maime.
               The ſlies owne tale: ſides: and toppes of windowes triſe:
               To be the ſpiders, by cuſtoms warantiſe.
               Wherto: the ſpiders tale for the fliſe parte waide,
               Weith no heare breede in windowes for the flies aide,
            
            
               Spiders (quoth the butterflie) ſhew them ſelues here,
               More ſiding to their ſide: then flies to their are.
               As flies indiffrantly make cuſtome to apere,
               Sides: and toppes of windowes: for ſpiders ſhare,
               And that flies (by cuſtome) the holes: theirs do clare
               So ſhoulde ſpiders: endiffrantly conſither,
               To leie (as flies do) both cuſtoms togither.
            
            
               Spiders (quoth thant) take thoſe cuſtomes far vnlike.
               Theirs to grow of righte, flies: of vſurpacion.
               If (quoth the butterflie) the flies do here pike:
               That quarell to ſpiders, in cuſtomes vſacion.
               That is tit for tat, in this altricacion.
               So that for any thinge: any parte can get,
               Both partes in all thinges yet, on euen hande are ſet.
            
            
               
               But to trie: how good or how ill: cuſtom is,
               Is no parte of our charge. ye know we muſt tri:
               How muche or how little: cuſtom doth in this.
               Perferring or debarring: cleime of eche parti
               Wherin, for all laide here yet againe ſay I
               Flies leie (where reaſon and equalneſſe be giders,)
               As much for flies, as ſpiders leie for ſpiders.
            
            
               Well (quoth thant) as we both hearde both partes aparté,
               So now let vs both: both partes together here.
               How we both: betwene both partꝭ: can the hare ſtarte.
               Both agreede that all on both partꝭ ſhoulde apere.
               Thei did ſo. And all on both ſides ſetled nere,
               The ant declaring the pith: of all yet wroughte,
               Entre to matter more, thant induction broughte.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Thant ſhewth to them all, that theuidence weith to one effecte on both ſides, ſo that all reſteth now vpon knowlage whiche parte to credite moſt: and vpon that mocion, one ſpider and one flie fall in argument to trie the ſame: wherin is touchte (partly) the properties of credence, woorſhip, and honeſtie: thei agreeing that credence ſtandth vpon honeſtie, as thus, as euery ſpider or flie is honeſt, ſo is he credible. Which talke ended, thei are all againe ſequeſtred. Cap. 38.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               FRiendes all: ye all erſte aſſembled in partes twaine,
               Before vs twaine here for both partes haue declarde:
               By the mowthes of twaine, two tales: which two containe,
               One effecte. For the matter ſelfe in regarde,
               The onely diffrence in both: being confarde,
               Is this. What one ſpider for all ſpiders laith,
               The ſelfe ſame ſentence, one flie: for all flies ſaith.
            
            
               As thus: that ſpider ſaide all ſpiders haue laide,
               All holes in all windowes: to be ſpiders freholde.
               Whiche ſelfe ſaiyng: that ſaide flie (for all flies) ſaide.
               In few woordes at full then, theffecte to vnfolde,
               Both partes preſent, to this tale is to be tolde,
               Sum mattier to trie: what apparence maie riſe,
               Whiche parte we ſhall credite moſte, ſpiders or fliſe.
            
            
               With this, a well ſpoken ſpider ſtepte in place.
               Saiyng: if compariſon in credence growe,
               Then muſte ye with vs ſpiders rule this cace,
               Spiders haue bene and be worſhipfull ye knowe.
               And flies honeſte (quoth a witty flie) I trowe?
               And of credence: the propertie or maieſtee,
               Stanth not more by worſhip: then by honeſtee,
            
            
               Nor ſo muche nother: as all kyndes of flies thinke,
               No: no colour of cauſe of credence: can ſtande,
               Where as woorſhip with honeſtie: doth not linke,
               And honeſtie without worſhip (ſkilfully ſkande.)
               Maie haue: and muſte haue: credence at euery hande.
               If ye ſpiders woorſhippes: for credence do here ley,
               Flies honeſties: ſhall ſpiders woorſhippes outwey
            
            
               
               Weare this gaie couchte caſe (quoth the ſpider) graunted,
               More credence for flies: then for ſpiders might be geſte,
               Which ſhouth you to deme: as you it auaunted,
               That no ſpider: but all flies, are honeſte.
               And all ſpiders worſhipfull: wherin ye expreſſe:
               Cauſe of credence: in flies honeſties: to grow,
               Much more, then in ſpiders worſhipes: there may ſhowe.
            
            
               Credence, honeſtie, and worſhip, thus take I.
               Credence in this woorde truſte: plainly terme we maie
               Honeſtie, vertue morally and ciuily.
               Worſhip, reuerence, or eſtimacion to ſaie.
               Honour: is alſo reuerence: as vſe doth waie.
               Honour and worſhip: both one in vſe take we,
               Saue: honour is reuerence, in the higher degre.
            
            
               Now note: that the full cauſe of credence or truſt,
               Springth and ſpreadth out of vertue or honeſtee.
               And honour, or worſhip: is dewly diſcuſt,
               Dew, where vertue or honeſtie is. then ſee.
               Who is not honeſt, woorſhipfull: he can not bee.
               For: woorſhip: and honeſtie: thone and thother,
               The tone of the twaine, dependth on the tother.
            
            
               What (quoth the flie) meaneth this circumquaquie,
               This (quoth the ſpider) where ye (in your laſte ſaiyng,)
               Seperate in ſunder: woorſhip and honeſtie,
               Woorſhip: to ſpiders, and honeſtie: to flies laiyng.
               Flies credence aboue ſpiders, tauaunce in waiyng.
               Woorſhip: and honeſtie: I ioine ſo: that here,
               Woorſhipfull ſpiders: be honeſte ſpiders clere.
            
            
               
               Honeſt ſpiders are woorſhipfull (quoth the flie.)
               By honeſtie. And credible to, no naie.
               But where ſpiders honeſtie ſtandeth awr
                     •
                  e,
               Woorſhip and credence, ſtande awrie to I ſaie.
               So (quoth the ſpider) be honeſtie awaie,
               The flies credit: ſtandth a crooke euen as far,
               As the ſpiders. But let vs touche this caſe nar.
            
            
               Graunt: hers a ſpider of honeſtie no whit,
               To whom: admit a flie of great honeſtee.
               The ſpider (not the flie) to auctoritee knit.
               Is not that ſpider: in auctoriſed degree,
               More woorſhipfull and credible taken to bee,
               Then that inferior flie? (quoth the flie no.
               Which ye ſhall here, but firſt here how your woordes go.
            
            
               Credence. honor. woorſhip, or reuerence,
               To vertue or honeſtie, ye firſt auoucht due.
               Laſte, auctoritee ye bringe in aſſiſtence.
               Thunhoneſt auctoriſed, therby tenſue,
               In woorſhip and credence. Ye (quoth he thatꝭ true.
               And in touching that firſt of theſe two caſes,
               I forgat this laſte, but both muſt haue their plaſes.
            
            
               As honor, or woorſhip, and credence do depend,
               Vpon all that are honeſt: by honeſtee,
               So woorſhip and credence: in lyke caſe to bend,
               On all in auctoritee, by auctoritee.
               Naie (quoth the flie) (quoth the ſpider) friende tell mee,
               Is not auctoritee, to be woorſhippid?
               Yes maiſter (quoth the flie) or els god forbid.
            
            
               
               All auctoritee: not againſt the great god,
               In ſpiders vnder him plaſte: as potentates:
               In them and their ſubſtitutes, that god hath bod:
               To be woorſhipt and obeide, in humble rates.
               But auctoritee: and auctoriſed ſtates,
               Cauſe of woorſhip due to both. differ as far,
               As Ierico and Ierſei, in ioining iar.
            
            
               Auctoritee, for it ſelfe, woorſhippid is.
               Thauctoriſed, for good vfe of auctoritee,
               Are duely reuerenſt▪ which good vſe if thei mis.
               Woorſhip or reuerence, to them geuen none ſhould bee.
               Yet there is (quoth the ſpider) we daily ſee.
               Before thauctoriſed: curtſy made as low,
               To the ill as to the good, and more low ſum trow.
            
            
               That curtſy. (quoth the flie (rightly directed,
               Runth to thauctoritee: in the auctoriſid.
               Not the auctoriſed perſon, reſpected:
               Thauctoritie in the perſon: here reuerenſid.
               Thauctoritie for the perſon, not woorſhippid.
               Nor the perſon for him ſelfe: lacking honeſtie,
               Becauſe he lackth honeſt vſe of auctoritie.
            
            
               Spiders in auctoritie: without honeſtie,
               No woorſhip in them ſelues (I ſaie) is tauouche:
               Flies in honeſtie, without auctoritie:
               By that honeſtie, woorſhip in them ſelues▪ doth couche.
               And credence in both theſe partes: is tride by like touche.
               Thus v
                     •
                  honeſt ſpiders: being auctoriſed,
               Be: (for them ſelues) woorſhiped, nor credited.
            
            
               
               Beet (quoth the ſpider) but then to this pu
                     •
                  ea
                     •
                  e
               One ſpider: and one flie, of one honeſtie are.
               Thoneſt ſpider plaſte: in auctoriſed place,
               Thoneſt flie not. Doth not that ſpiders ſtate declare,
               More woorſhip and credit: then that flie can compare:
               More woorſhip? yes: but more credence, no ſaie I,
               Profe wherof enſueth, (quoth the fly) by and by.
            
            
               Honeſtie (I ſaie as your ſelfe erſte here ſaide.)
               Is the roote: that credence and woorſhip: both twaine
                     •
                  
               
               Grow on. So that our woorſhip and credence waide,
               O
                     •
                   woorſhipfull auctoritee, do not remaine.
               But on our honeſt vſe therof: thus our chaine
               That lingth vs to credence: is not auctoritie,
               But good vſe of auctoritie: by honeſtie.
            
            
               Wherin I conclude: flies of moſte baſe degree;
               Hauing lyke honeſtie: to ſpiders moſte hie,
               Haue in lyke wiſe: lyke credence of equitee.
               Not lyke reuerent woorſhip (I ſaie) for whie,
               Spiders vſing auctoritee honeſtlie,
               For place and perſon both: where caſe ſo en
                     •
                  uſe,
               Flies: to ſpiders, humble reuerence muſt vſe.
            
            
               What is (quoth the ſpider) the diffrence in ſhow,
               Of one degre of credence: in theſe two tolde?
               This (quoth the flie.) By this exſaumple to know.
               Two ſpiders webs wouen: admit here to be ſolde.
               For ſtuffe and all thinge, both as one to beholde.
               Saue thone: aboue thother, more faire gloſſe doth bears.
               More pleſant to the eie, both one to the weare.
            
            
               
               Yet hath that gloſſy web eſtimacion more
               Then thother though both webꝭ of one weauing bee
               And ſo for one credence: in the two before
               Spiders auctoritee: vſed with honeſtee
               Thei ſhine: in bewtie: of a dowble degree.
               So that though credence ſelfe, be one in theſe both,
               Yet that gloſſe in that one, that other out goth.
            
            
               Then (quoth the ſpider) it ſerueth for ſumwhat,
               Honeſt ſpiders: in auctoritee to ſtande:
               Aboue honeſt flies, ye: but it ſerueth nat:
               (Quoth the flie) for your parte of the pointe in hande,
               To proue more credence, in honeſt ſpiders ſcande:
               Then in honeſt flies: for in equall honeſtee
               Standeth equall credits, on both ſides: ye ſee.
            
            
               Whiche: you (my maiſters) hauing ſeene; beeing wiſe,
               And that: which parte hath credence more: whiche hath leſſe,
               Of ſpiders or flies: is the thing to deuiſe,
               We praie you: your iudgement ther in to expreſſe.
               If we (quoth tharbiters) in this caſe adreſſe,
               Our ſelues to geue iudgement: will ye that abide?
               Ye ye (in pilates voice) all on both ſides cride.
            
            
               Let them all (to the butterflie ſaide the ant)
               Departe. while we herein ſeke an ende to finde.
               Contente (quoth the butter flie) at your inſtant:
               Trudge hence ye flies (quoth he) as ye are aſinde.
               At winke of the ant: awaie the ſpiders winde.
               Thei all here vpon being gon foorth foorthwith,
               Thei two: herein proceded as folowith.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ By thantꝭ prouocacion the butterflie repeteth thargument before made, in his groſe termes, not fer from full and thei twaine ſeeming to agre vpon the point herein, thei cōmaunde the ſpiders and flies backe againe. Cap. 39.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               VVill ye (quoth the ant) repete vs this talke laſt?
               I woulde: but I will not (quoth the butterflie)
               For I can not: though my harte for it ſhould braſt.
               I forbad here: all ſpouting in ſouoſtrie.
               Now thei ſpeut: in ſpeuting who may ſpent moſt hie
               Saue now a woorde and tan a woorde: here and tere,
               Vengeance the whit, I am for their woordes the nere.
            
            
               Tell (quoth the ant) as ye perceiue euen in groſe:
               What the pith is. As I (quoth he) had a glance,
               Beginning of their comnicaſhin aroſe,
               Wherin thei argde: and fell at arging ſtance,
               In comparſon, who ſhould haue moſt credance:
               Of ſpiders of flies. The flie. flies honeſt rate,
               Tooke more credable, than ſpiders woorſhipfull ſtate.
            
            
               The ſpider: then caſt a compas rownde about,
               That honeſtnes, is vertouſnes, and woorſhipfulnes,
               Due where honeſtnes: or vertuſnes, bearth rout.
               So that woorſhipfulnes: and honeſtnes,
               Do pende ech on other, by that ſpiders ges.
               Of ſpiders and flies: by his almaſhin geſt,
               Honeſt are woorſhipfull, woorſhipfull are honeſt.
            
            
               The flie to this: ſaid ſpiders: by honeſtie,
               Be woorſhipfull and credible to. And than,
               The ſpider brought in: a toy of toritie.
               Thunhoneſt ſpider therin: therby to ſcan,
               In credance and woorſhip: eche where and whan,
               More: then the flie: he being an honeſt one:
               Haning to that honeſtie, toritee none.
            
            
               
               The flie to this: for worſhip and credance: ſaide,
               Though toritee for it ſelfe: woorſhipfull bee,
               Yet winth it no woorſhip (in any wighte laide:)
               To him ſelfe: for him ſelfe, outſepted that hee:
               Vſe therin vſaſhin of ſaide honeſtee.
               But in miſuſe of toritee: the flie tolde,
               Woorſhip or credance: no wight ſelfe can holde.
            
            
               Then the ſpider legde, one ſpider: and flie one:
               Thei both, in one gree: of honeſtie beeing.
               That ſpider in toritee, that flie in none.
               Whether woorſhip: and credance were not greeing:
               More to that ſpider: then to that flie fleeing.
               More woorſhip, he graunted: bycauſe honeſtee,
               And toritee 
                     ••
                  inde. But more credance, no ſaide hee.
            
            
               For honeſtie: and not noritee, is roote,
               Saide he
                     •
                   wheron all branches of credance ſpring.
               Then no honeſtie, no credance: had in boote.
               Lyke honeſtie, lyke credance: in euery thing.
               The ſpider then axte, what diffrance: in ſhewing:
               Of one gree of credance: in theſe fore tolde twaine
               Whiche by a web ſaumple, the flie anſwered plaine.
            
            
               Two ſpiders webbes of one ſtuffe and woorkemanſhip:
               Saue thone aboue thother hath gloſſe more gaie:
               To the eie. but for weare, thei differ not a chip.
               Yet doth that gloſſie web: beare the bell awaie.
               And ſo the ſpider: to his honeſtie in ſtaie:
               Hauing toritee aboue lyke honeſt flie,
               Credance ſhinth in the ſpider, more bewteouſſie.
            
            
               
               Well ſaide (ſaide the ant) though theſe termes be but baſe:
               Yet aproue thei well: that you perceiue the pith:
               Which: concerning credence, concludth in this caſe:
               That the woorſte flie, and the beſt ſpider therwith:
               Where one degree of honeſtie concurith,
               There one degre of credence, concurth likewiſe.
               Wheron, harke here what a ſtrange caſe doth ariſe.
            
            
               Put caſe a duke of eſtate honorable.
               Affirming a tale, on his honour for trew:
               A duck ſtepth foorth: and ſaith it is a fable.
               Were it not a caſe (trow you) as ſtrange as new:
               That dewke: and that duck: of one credite to vew?
               The dewkes and duckꝭ honeſtie (quoth he) being one,
               Their credence is one: by graunted grownde erſt gone.
            
            
               From which grownd (maiſter ant) by my fatherkin.
               I will not ſtarte, but ſtande and ſticke euen faſt:
               As vnto this my bodie, ſticketh this ſkin:
               Well (quoth thant) being at this point: with this paſt,
               Furder to procede in this caſe: what way to caſt,
               Let vs haue theſe ſpiders: and flies: againe here.
               At bek of both, all before both did apere.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Thant telth them, that where theuidence for both ſides goth to one effect, and that in debating whiche ſide is moſt credible to awarde the window vnto, it is concluded, that credence ſtandth vppon honeſtie: and that as all ſpiders and flies are honeſt, ſo are thei credible: now muſt it firſt be 
                  •
               ride, whiche ſide is moſt honeſt, theron to iudge whiche ſide is moſte credible. Cap. 40.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               AT your laſt ſtanding here, (ꝙ thant) the caſe ſtood:
               On triall in credence: of ſpiders and fliſe.
               Theuidence for both: being one: and lyke good,
               On which part of both, moſt credence might ariſe.
               Wherin determinate triall to deuiſe,
               One cowple of you: one ſpider and one flie,
               Reaſoned (birlakin) pretily wittily.
            
            
               Bre
                     •
                  e pith, wherof (to preſent purpoſe,) was this.
               Honeſtie ye agrede: of credence is the grownd.
               Concluding for all: as ech wightes honeſtie is
               More or les, ſo more or les credence: is bownde.
               All ſpiders and flies, of one honeſtie fownde,
               Are of one credence. In that credence doth bende,
               All wholly vpon honeſtie to depende.
            
            
               Then: as theuidence: on which ſide to ley beſt:
               Where credence lith moſt, we thought beſt to haue tride,
               So muſt we now, for credence: ſee ſum wei geſt:
               Which ſide bringth moſt honeſtie teſtifide,
               And therby moſt credit. To this, or that ſide.
               Beit (quoth the butterflie) now let vs ſee ſurs:
               Who ſhall here win boote, in winning here his ſpurs.
            
            
               Another ſpider and flie, to the helme ſtood.
               A cumly cowple: as were of theſe two kinds,
               Their maner ſhowd their bringing vp? to be good.
               Curtſy low: to tharbiters, as curtſy binds.
               Behauir moſt deſent: in vttring their minds:
               As their talke was: of honeſtie: to deuiſe,
               So deuiſed thei their talke, honeſtly likewiſe.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ One ſpider and one flie reſoning which ſide is moſt honeſt, agreing in concluſion, that thoneſtie on both ſides apeereth to them two, to be one, that flie requireth tharbiters to ponder the caſe as thei ſhall thinke good. Cap. 41.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               TO ſpeake (quoth this ſpider) trewth honeſtly here,
               Brefely: in honeſtie: both partꝭ to compare,
               Equalitee doth therin: to me apere.
               As right many ſpiders: right honeſt there are,
               So right many flies: right honeſtie declare.
               As honeſtie (it ſelfe) is one qualitee,
               So both parts qualifide lyke, lyke honeſt bee.
            
            
               Sir (ſaide this flie) this is of you qualifide,
               Right honeſtly. Whervpon (with your aſſent,
               (Vnder reformacion) I wolde ſe here tride,
               One thing: herein to try: what diffrent extent,
               Standth in one degre, of honeſtie here ment.
               In both vs foreſaide partiſe, ſpiders and fliſe.
               Which: in few woordes, I ſhall now to you deuiſe.
            
            
               Flies: mo then ſpiders, twenty to one there are.
               Put then in eche one perſon, lyke honeſtee:
               In one ſpider, and ten flies: to compare.
               Showth not here: that moſt nomber: in quantitee,
               To ſhow here: the moſt ſhow of that qualitee?
               It ſhowth moſt (quoth the ſpider) and to ſhow how,
               Marke this ſhorte example that I ſhall ſhow you.
            
            
               One flowre: before two mirrours: being ſet here.
               Thone mirrour crakt: in ten peces ſundry:
               Thother whole. This flowre in theſe glaſſes ſhall apere,
               At the whole glaſſe, as it is: one flowre only.
               The crakt glas, ſhowth ten flowrs aparently.
               For of thoſe ten peeces of glaſſe euerychone,
               Ech one peece, (in it ſelfe) ſhowth one flowre alone.
            
            
               
               So: this feire flowre honeſtie: in one ſpider plaſte:
               And ten flies, eche one poſeſſed of lyke fame.
               For honeſtie ſelfe, there is no more purchaſte:
               In the ten flies, then in thone ſpider to name.
               The only diffrence (I ſay) in ſhow doth frame:
               Ten flowrs in the crackte glas: as thus to reſpekt:
               Ten flowrs in forme, and one flowr in effect.
            
            
               That whole glaſſe doth ſhow one flowr: and is no mo:
               That crackte glaſſe: making ſhow of flowrs: halfe a ſcore
               Thers yet but one flowr, at both theſe glaſſes lo.
               As in both theſe parts, one honeſtie: no more.
               Well (quoth the flie) yet as I haue ſaide before:
               One honeſtie: in one ſpider, and in ten fliſe.
               Moſt ſhow of that honeſtie: in thoſe fliſe riſe.
            
            
               Which ſhow ſhowth (thoneſtie in all being one)
               A bewty: ſhining of more exelenſy:
               In thoſe ten flies, then in thone ſpider alone.
               Sir (ſaid the ſpider) to ſpeake indiffrently,
               Euen ſo take it I: and euen ſo graunt it I.
               My maſters (to tharbiters) the flie then ſeide,
               Wey you: how honeſtie: is here to be weide.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Tharbiters commaunding all to go aparte againe, thei fall in talkyng ſomwhat at large touching both credence and honeſtie in both theſe ſides, which doone to ſhew therin their mindes, thei call all before them againe. Cap. 42.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               THarbiters: willing both partꝭ to ſtep backe ſtreight,
               Brother butterflie (ſaid the ant) here ye ſe:
               Honeſtie on both theſe partꝭ: to peiſe in weight,
               If mo honeſt flies then honeſt ſpiders be:
               Yet of both partꝭ: eche one lyke of honeſte,
               The nombre more and les: as theſe two declare,
               Both numbers: of one honeſtie, thei compare.
            
            
               For thoneſtnes ſelfe, (quoth he) to that thei grew.
               But thoneſtnes in thoſe flies: ſhewth more exalent:
               As twenty flowrs in the broken glaſſe: to 
                     •
                  ew:
               Show of thone flowre in the whole glas: far out went
               Ye, in ſhow (quoth thant) with you I do conſent.
               But by their equall degree of that qualitee,
               This ſpider, and theſe flies, equally honeſt bee.
            
            
               Well then good maiſter ant (quoth the butterflie,
               We gre: that the ſhow, of one honeſtnes here:
               Vpon the ten flies parte: ſhowth more ſhininglie:
               Then on the one ſpiders ſide: in ſhow can pere.
               And for thoneſtie ſelfe, to draw to ende nere,
               You anſwering one demaunde: demaunded by me,
               Beſt part to ſprinſpall purpoſe, we ſhall ſoone ſe.
            
            
               Is not this argnicaſhin of honeſtnes,
               Toſe who are moſt honeſt, ſpiders or flies?
               To try therby the ſide moſt credabill to ges,
               In thone euidence: that both ſides did deuiſe,
               Eche ſide for it ſelfe? yes (quoth thant that none deuiſe.
               But graunth it. Since (quoth the butterflie) thatꝭ trowth,
               Darke what proofe to purpoſe: vpon this caſe growth.
            
            
               
               Let vs here demit: one ſpider and ten fliſe.
               All lyke honeſt: who ſeing two ſew at law,
               That one ſpider, for thone ſide, a witnes liſe,
               Thoſe ten fliſe, to thother ſide: witneſſes draw.
               I neuer wiſt wight: that euer herde or ſaw:
               But ſuch ten flies euidance: more credably weide,
               Then ſuch one ſpiders euidance weide in eide.
            
            
               Not ſo (quoth thant) for put caſe this foreſaide ſorte:
               In witneſſing one woorde: in one tale erſt told:
               To them all: thone ſpider doth after reporte,
               That woorde was there and then ſaide. And flies hold,
               It was not ſaid: in this caſe knowth yong and old:
               This one ſpider muſt haue in t
                     •
                   afirmatiue,
               More credit then ten 
                     •
                  lies in the negatiue.
            
            
               Maiſter ant: Flies want of credance: ſtandth not here,
               In the weakenes of credance in the fliſe,
               But in weakenes of credance in the caſe clere.
               Negentiue, againſt firmentiue, weakely liſe.
               Forgetting, and remembring, thus this caſe triſe:
               We mai ſoner forget: that we herde laſt day,
               Then remember that we harde not, anyway.
            
            
               But for both parts here: put afirmentiue caſe.
               This one ſpider affarmth here: firmentiuely.
               That I lay (laſt night) in Northumberland place.
               Theſe ten flies ſaie: in Weſtmurland place lay I.
               In this affarmaſhin: deemaſhin to try,
               Which part hath here: moſt credance in your deming?
               The flies (quoth the ant) aparently ſeming.
            
            
               
               But ſince honeſtie and not credence: is now,
               The thing: to towch here in place and caſe preſent,
               And that (for thoneſtie ſelfe,) I proue to yow:
               One degree of honeſtie: in both ſides bent,
               That one: and thoſe ten: haue one honeſt extent.
               Agre we for that part: thus to reſolue.
               Which reſolucion, let me to them reuolue.
            
            
               Beit (quoth he) but when talke of credance cumth 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Ile arg as I did now: for credance againe.
               Do (quoth thant) if ye ſe therby ought to win,
               All oft erſt cald, thei cald again to them twaine.
               To whom the ant (as aptly did apertaine.)
               In woordes: for the matter brefly coucht and caff,
               Pronounſt to all, what thei two there paſſed laſt.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Thant telth them, that thei two determine honeſtie on both ſides to be one. Willing them to go foorth in the mattier, wherwith one tart taunting ſpider, and one ſharpe ſaucy fly, forbearing till this time (with much peine) ſpeaking or rather railing, ſtande now foorth (vpon tip toes) to chop logike ech with other in rude reaſoning of this caſe. Cap. 43.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               OF ſpiders and flies: which parte is moſt honeſt,
               The triall: is the thing: we now ſtand vpon.
               Wherin: for flies, one: his opinion expreſt.
               That as flies in nomber are twenty to one:
               Aboue ſpiders, all on both ſides euerychone:
               Being like honeſt, moſt honeſtie doth riſe,
               To the flies parte: where the moſt nombre liſe.
            
            
               To this one ſpiders tale: of the two glaſſes toucht,
               Thexample ſhowing more ſhow of honeſtee:
               In the more: then in the les nomber auoucht,
               Yet both parts being honeſt in one degree,
               Both partes of lyke honeſtie, thei toke to bee.
               And ſo to adiudge: we two hauing agrede,
               Agre you: how herein furder to procede.
            
            
               With this, before all theſe ſpiders and flies here flockt,
               Vp ſtoode and out ſtart: that cowple of hare breins:
               The ſpider and fly, that erſt there bragde and corkt.
               Vpon both their forheds: ſo ſwelled the veins:
               That their thus long ſilence: was ſene their great peins.
               In cockyng curriſh countenance: nowhit to ſeke,
               Staring ech on other, thei ſtode cheke to cheke.
            
            
               Auctoritee thei toke, none was to them geeuin,
               Of good maner voide: in taunting ſmarte ſmatrers.
               Plainnes: without honeſtie, thei vſed eeuin.
               Thei both: to ſide againſt ſide, weare no flatrers:
               But lyke Iaiſe: in cheritreſe ſuch chatrers,
               That being now bent to chat, their toonges to ſtop,
               With an are: as ſoone: their heds of, ye may chop.
            
            
               
               Their talke, whether to repete or to repreſſe.
               Rude railyng therin, brought me ſumwhat to dout,
               But finally, vpon my ſhow to profeſſe:
               The ſhow of this matter: thus fer gone about,
               I thought it meete: to ſhow the ſhow throughout,
               Namely the caſe framed no more fer nor hy:
               Then of a poore ſpider, and a more poore fly.
            
            
               Theſe all (I ſay) ſtanding before theſe two ſet,
               Both bending their browſe: in caſe reherſed erſt,
               This formoſt ſpider and flie: in furius fret,
               Frowning ech on other, this proſeſſe thei perſt.
               And vengeable venumly, ech other verſt.
               Before thei cam to end, how beit thei began,
               In cownterfet coldnes: this matter to ſkan.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Where another ſpider and flie reaſoned late before to proue which ſide of both is moſt honeſt, this ſaide quareling ſpider and cockyng flie, labour to proue which parte of boch is moſt diſhoneſt, in woordes and dedes. as vſurpacion in windowes and other miſbehaviour. at ende wherof in furious fumes, thence renth the ſpider one waie, and the flie flingth an other. Cap. 44.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               Maiſters (quoth the ſpider) without circumſtance:
               At reaſoning on which parte moſt honeſtie life:
               Of ſpiders or of flies, in continuance,
               Your iudgement: both partꝭ of lyke honeſtie triſe.
               Which honeſtie ſo tride, now contrariwiſe.
               For a pithy purpoſe: let vs here now ſee,
               On which ſide of both: lyth moſt diſhoneſtee.
            
            
               Diſhoneſtie: dare ye ſtir that, (quoth this fly?)
               What diſhoneſtie know you by flies ſur?
               More then flies know by ſpiders. Flie what know I?
               Woordꝭ and dedes. Such and ſo many will I ſtur,
               As ſhall: by diſhoneſtie, flies honeſtie blur.
               And firſt for woordes, honeſtie: honeſtly to ſcan,
               Honeſtie ſpeakth well. Ye (quoth the flie what than?
            
            
               This than (quoth the ſpider) take flies ten thowſande:
               Where ſo euer thei flee, go, ſtand, lie, or ſit.
               Few of the nomber haue taken vpon hande:
               To geue any good ſpider any good woorde yeet,
               Except in flattery: which woords ſhow euery whit:
               As much diſhoneſtie: in fals feire ſemblance,
               As ſhowth in fury, fowle woordes of more greuance.
            
            
               When flies flockt togither, vpon their ale benche
               Begin to hizs or bizs, in their kind of talke,
               No lordes, no lawſe, can their bizſing bable quenthe.
               And ſo many woordes, ſo many lies: ſtill walke.
               If one diuell with an other: for lies ſhould calke:
               Thei could neuer finde the like, oh (quoth the flie:
               Your maiſterſhip talkth wonderfoole honeſtlie.
            
            
               
               If ye gaue eare to your ſelfe, ye might ſoone know:
               Spider to flie: who ſpeakth moſt ill of vs twaine.
               Speake not ſpiders as ill of flies: as ye trow,
               As flies ſpeake of ſpiders: yes it ſhouth to plaine.
               Wherin theſe termes muſt we vſe: vpon great paine.
               When either of other papt: talke out of meaſure,
               The knaue fly 
                     〈…〉
                   ſpider ſpeakth his pleaſure.
            
            
               But graunt: diſhoneſt woordes ech part of other,
               Do ſpeake a like much: which ſhowth like diſhoneſtee,
               In both theſe parts: the tone parte to the tother.
               Of flies diſhoneſt woords, the cauſe is to ſee:
               The diſhoneſt deedes, of you ſpiders to bee.
               Example wherof: to proue this caſe moſt clere,
               Doth in this window (for all windowes) apere.
            
            
               All holes wherin: being ours in comon right.
               Late comonly ours, now ſeuerally yours.
               Looke where ye ſet in foote, by right or by might,
               Lyke as the diuell ſaith: ſo ſai you: all is ours.
               For: as this window ſhowth your vſurped pours:
               So: in all windowes where ſo euer ye cum,
               Ye graſpe vp all: and flies mai ſai nought: but mum.
            
            
               Thus when we ſpeake (I ſay) if our ſpech ill be,
               Of your ill deedes: cum our ill woordes: euerychone.
               Do you 
                     •
                  one ill deedes: to vs good ſir (quoth he?)
               Yes ſit (quoth the flie) flies to ſpiders do one,
               In our curtſy made to you: downe to grownd gone:
               Moſt ſinfully we commit idolatry.
               For we therin, woorſhip falſe imagery.
            
            
               
               Fals imagery (quoth he?) ye are a fals knaue.
               A right liuerey (quoth he) turnde on the wrong ſide.
               But liuerey and wages: that ſpiders vouchſaue:
               To geue flies, of one ſubſtance are verifide.
               Knaue vp: or take vp flie: thy wandring woordes wide.
               Truly to try: how truth the touch ſtone may touch,
               On whoſe ſide: moſt diſhoneſtie, is tauouch.
            
            
               All diſhoneſt woordes: in flies of ſpiders had,
               Cum of diſhoneſt deedes: in ſpiders to fliſe.
               Thus ſaiſt thou, which ſaiyng ſhowth thee drunke or mad,
               What ill or wrong deedes: do we to you deuiſe?
               Our owne windowes to vſe, as our owne will apliſe.
               Your dedes were not ill: were all windowes your own,
               But no woordes: ſaue your own, ſhow windowes ſo known.
            
            
               The tops: and top ſides: of all windowes all yours:
               We haue graunted and wold graunt: weare ye content,
               To graunt likewiſe all holes in all windowes ours,
               But ſpiders muſt haue all, ye may nought relent,
               And in your hauing all: marke thexperiment.
               How the worlde before went, and ſince how it goth:
               (For comon welth) in ſpiders: and in flies both.
            
            
               When you in toppes and ſides there: kept your eſtate:
               And we in the holes: as ſtood with our degre,
               Spiders and flies: in all windowes ſituate,
               Dweld ech by other in welth and vnite.
               But ſince (lyke a ſorte of rake hels as ye be)
               Ye lifte ech at other: and all at vs lifte,
               There is in you, nor vs: either loue or thrifte.
            
            
               
               But you: we: and our windowes to: all go to wrackè.
               By you couetous cutthrotes: the diuell choke ye.
               Wilt thou wrech (quoth he) ley all this on our backe?
               Growne by our ſtriues, nay flie and flies: Ile yoke ye:
               With more then halfe part of the ill: to ſmoke ye.
               It is and hath ben ſaid: thers no good accorde:
               In place, where as euery knaue will be a lorde.
            
            
               Which is terbox to your ſide: for out of dout,
               Your cockapert pride: and your couetous harts.
               Haue brought: more then three parts of our ils about.
               Your rude rebelins diſobedient parts:
               Much vnto our (and much more to your own) ſmarts:
               Ricking and wincing at euery good order,
               Hath diſtroide good order in euery border.
            
            
               Good order: loſt by pride and couetouſnes,
               In graunt. but how: loſt by vs? nay loſt by yow,
               Flies may be couetous, but as for riches:
               Flies get none: Except here and there one talow:
               Yes (quoth the ſpider) many flies are rich now:
               In occupiyng in windowes vnder vs,
               By price of things reiſde there: in fowle ouerplus.
            
            
               Whereflies: of ſpiders (by wrong quoth he) are dryuen:
               To hyre our owne: kept from vs (we ſaie) by might.
               Fines incums: and rents, ſo great and many gyuen,
               With ſuch ſtreight reſtreint: of our accuſtomed right,
               That one of thoſe or all, eat vp our geins quight.
               Which exacte exactions: in ſpiders began,
               Ere flies in ſale of any wares, from thold rate ran.
            
            
               
               As I am trew ientilman, thou liſte on vs.
               As ye are a trew ientilman: euen ſo I ly.
               But as ye are a fals ientil manto diſcus,
               Your falſhod and my truth, may ioine iolily.
               Ile proue ſtreight (quoth the ſpider) that thou lyeſt, I,
               For rentꝭ: and warſe reiſde, thou ſaiſt ſpiders begoon.
               But marke how vnhoneſtly that ly doth roon.
            
            
               Fiue foote to two: in windowes of this reme:
               Ye flies hold yet, in leaſe at vnreiſed rent.
               All holders wherof: ſell their wares: as extreme,
               As though their fermes at the moſt reiſed rent went.
               Now who beginth here: the firſt extort extent?
               The flies (quoth the flie) but yet ſpiders begun:
               To reiſe rentꝭ before: as leaſes did out run.
            
            
               And as leaſes fall ſtill, ſo reiſe thei rent ſtill.
               And ſtill (of their goodnes) will reiſe: I dout not.
               In new leaſes: of ſuch couenantꝭ to fulfill,
               As the flies geins: no great priui tithes ſhall lot.
               The lewd lords: their landlords: in reckning the ſhot,
               The lot of alowance: in both parts to ley,
               The ſpiders haue the creme, the flies haue the whey.
            
            
               But ſpiders: letting farms, and flies holding farms.
               Thone letting farms hie, thother ſelling vitels dere.
               And of all ware ſellers: ech ſhifteth from harms.
               By reiſing his ware, as other wares apere.
               But all that on their pencions (or pence) liue mere:
               In windowes: without lande to let, or ware to ſell,
               Where euer thei dwell: mai thinke thei dwell in hell.
            
            
               
               Well (quoth the ſpider) for leaſes not run out,
               Flie fermers holding fermes yet: as olde rent gaue,
               Why raiſe thei their wares: with thother polling rout?
               Thei take time (quoth the flie) while thei the time haue.
               For when your time cumth, you will ſo polle and ſhaue:
               By reiſed rentes: turning hed fermers to heardes.
               That thei know: ye will flit the fat from their beardes.
            
            
               And ye hie hed ſpiders: in a conſpiracie:
               Conſpire in all windowes, to kepe fermes at heith.
               Or kepe them in your own handes, to kepe thingꝭ hie:
               Where a flie (quoth the ſpider) doble rent peith:
               More than he hath paide. There experience ſeith:
               Looke what wares: at what price: that flies ſolde before,
               Thoſe or worſe wares he ſelth for treble price more.
            
            
               So that if ſpiders reiſe rentꝭ, two poundes from one.
               Three pounds frō one: at leſt flies reiſe their wares ſtreight
               Their which robry, hering any rumor vpone,
               Of the faute, on vs ſpiders thei ley the weight
               Roring: in raging: how we our landꝭ do height:
               Making them begers (when thei with that thei win,
               Are able to purchaſe the fermes thei dwell in.
            
            
               Well lide: well ſaide: (ſaid the flie) I wold haue ſaide.
               But now to our ground: on which our ſaying aroſe.
               For diſhoneſtie, on both partꝭ to be leide.
               Couetous and pride: being chefe grownds in groſe:
               To proue on which part: moſt diſhoneſtie goſe,
               Diſhoneſtie by couetuſnes doth riſe,
               At the leaſt: as much in ſpiders as in fliſe.
            
            
               
               And as much in flies, as in ſpiders ſay I,
               But what remedie flie: to remoue this grefe?
               Looke thei that liſt: thei ſhall for me (quoth the flie)
               We talke not now of grefe: to deuiſe relefe,
               By honeſtie, but by diſhoneſt miſchefe:
               To charge which parte moſt diſhoneſt we can ges
               In all ils, namely pride and couetuſnes.
            
            
               Wherin: as we in couetuſnes haue ſaide,
               Let vs now: ech part apoſe other in pride.
               The which vice for both our ſides vprightly weide,
               Diſhoneſtie therin, ſhalbe verifide.
               To lie altogither, on the ſpiders ſide.
               Spiders, are of flies: alway curtſy takers:
               And flies to ſpiders, alway curtſy makers.
            
            
               And yet (I ſay) in bending our knees to ball:
               Flies looking like lams: ſpiders lyke lions looke.
               As though poore flies, were made for rich ſpiders all.
               Of which: though fooliſh flies: the ſuffrance may brooke:
               Wiſe flies can not brooke it: for thei finde in booke:
               This demaund written. When Adam dolue and Eue ſpan,
               Who was in thoſe golden daies, a gentleman.
            
            
               None as who ſaie. And were there none now (ſay wee)
               The worlde ſhuld be as good now, as it was then.
               If yemen flies: were put in autoritee,
               We wold rule as well, as ſpiders gentlemen:
               Shall Iak ſauce rule now flie? ſir by theſe bones ten:
               We ſhall ſure be rulde: in all kinds of lawſe,
               As well by Iak ſauſe: as by maiſter Iohn dawſe,
            
            
               
               What wit: or what welth▪ winneth your eſtate ſtout,
               Looke
                     •
                  ily: ſpeake lordly: commaunde all, and do nought.
               Gai geare, goodly copwebs: to reuell with the rout,
               Without any houſholdes. For the poore flies wrought.
               But with diſſhes deinty: fer fet and dere bought.
               One fat ſpider: an other feedth in fine feaſt:
               More to ſet out him ſelfe, then to feaſt his geaſt,
            
            
               Theſe prowd pea
                     •
                  oks propertiſe: wholly remaine,
               In you prowde ſpiders. And not in vs poore 
                     ••
                  iſe,
               But moſt prowde, moſt foole. As flies prouerbes conteine.
               Flies (quoth the ſpider) in their prowde exerciſe,
               Are to fer vnlike lords: lords lookes tenterpriſe.
               Lordlyke to looke, flies countenance can not brooke:
               Bu though flies looke not lordlyke: knaue like thei looke:
            
            
               Shall we not finde a knaue flie: not worth two ſtrawſe:
               Looke more prowdly, the the beſt lord in a ſhere?
               Yes. And take vpon him in chop logik lawſe:
               To controll vs, and our houſholds fer and nere.
               So that by pride, les diſhoneſtie ſhowth here:
               In lordly looks: of ſpiders lordlike brauery,
               Then in flies knauiſh deeds, by knauelyke knauery.
            
            
               Of which ſorte of ſauſe malapert minions,
               Thou art captaine 
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  tif: againſt vs to kicke.
               And ſure: thou holdſt perillous opinions.
               Weare thou apoſed pithily to the quicke,
               I durſt ley my life, thou art an hereticke.
               I defie (quoth the flie) the wrech that ſo ſeith.
               Harke: I will euin in your eare: confeſſe my feith.
            
            
               
               The f
                     •
                  ie: blowing a while, in the ſpiders eare:
               The ſpider: that while: brething in the flies necke,
               Both cride out, as thei had ben ſtoong on a ſpeare.
               I am kilde (quoth the ſpider) death cumth at becke.
               This flie hath blown fliblowſe in mine eare a pecke.
               I am poiſond (quoth the flie, deth rydth in the rode.
               This ſpiders breth, makth me ſwell lyke a tode.
            
            
               Triacle cride thone, an eare pyke: cride thother.
               The flie flew, the ſpider crept, quight out of ſight.
               The flie flang one waie: the ſpider ran an other.
               Fewme of ſiry fury, in both was ſene right.
               But both being anone gone out of ſight quight,
               Thant: in reproch of their communicacion,
               Told them all, part of his imaginacion.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ After a few woordes, which thant ſpeakth to the reſt of both ſortes there, thei are aſſigned to ſtande backe againe, while tharbiters gather out of this railyng, ſuch reaſon as thei can. Cap. 45.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               IT is comonly ſaid, and comonly ſene.
               Where as any nomber: of any ſort be:
               Of all ſortes there be, and euermore haue bene.
               And as in moſt baſe ſort: ſum right good we ſe,
               So in the beſt ſort: as ill to decre.
               Example wherof: no better profe enſurth,
               In no one example, then this one procurth.
            
            
               Of you: both ſortes ſpiders and flies: preſent here:
               You vſe your ſelues honeſtly. Many and moſte,
               But yet therto ſ
                     •
                   we: that here doth apere,
               On ech one ſide: one ſo brimly brag and boſte,
               That thei proue on both ſides: ſum knaues in the coſte:
               I meane theſe twaine gone. Whom vpon inquering,
               Are: in honeſt audience, not worth the hering.
            
            
               Forſoth (ſaid a ſober ſpider) euen in deede:
               Thei are vnwoorthy hering: in any place.
               Trew (quoth a wiſe flie) but ſince it was agreede:
               By comon counſels on both ſides: to purchaſe:
               Or prouide: them to ioine with vs in this caſe,
               It ſemeth vnſemely for vs to reiect:
               Such: as our electors to vs haue elect,
            
            
               It ſemth ſo (ſaid the ant) and I take it ſo.
               Brother butterflie: will ye that thei depart:
               While we twaine, to groping of this matter go.
               Ye maiſter ant (quoth he) with all my hart.
               Thei all (once againe) from them twaine reuart.
               While thei two deuiſe: ſum way of availing,
               To gather right reaſon, out of rude railing.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Tharbiters conſider in this taunting talke, that ſo
                  ••
               ry d
                  ••
                honeſt abvſes there are in ſondry parties on both ſides. vpon their agrement of concluſion wherin, thei haue before them thoſe other ſpiders and 
                  •
               lies againe. Cap. 46.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               TO pas this laſt caſe (quoth thant) as in award,
               Which part is moſt diſhoneſt, the caſe erſt weid:
               Reſoning which is moſt honeſt part: to regard:
               Is a plaine plat: to proue this likekiſe leid.
               As honeſtie there is: equally diſpleid,
               To ſhow the tone part: as honeſt as the tother,
               So ſhow both here, like diſhoneſt: thone and t
                     •
                  other.
            
            
               What kinds of 
                     •
                  auts: we mai in the ſpiders find,
               The ſame (or the like) we mai find in the fliſe.
               So that (I ſay) as equitee hath aſinde,
               One degre of diſhoneſtie, in both liſe.
               Where our former talke (quoth the butterflie) triſe:
               Thoneſtie one: in both the ſides: yet ye know:
               That honeſtie in the flies, ſhinth moſt in ſhow.
            
            
               For that (which I told you I wold in mind bere)
               Flies: fer mo in nomber, then ſpiders apere.
               Trew (quoth thant) and as moſt nomber winth flies there,
               Moſt ſhow of honeſtie, ſo moſt nomber here:
               Moſt ſhow of diſhoneſtie: ſhowth in flies clere.
               As moſt nomber of thoneſt: ſhine moſt in fame,
               Moſt nomber of diſhoneſt, ſhine moſt in ſhame.
            
            
               Then (quoth the buterflie) as flies here nought get,
               So looſe thei nought: wherin let vs be content:
               To ſet the hares head, againſt the gooſe ieblet.
               Both ſides: to adiudge lyke honeſt: I aſſent.
               And I (quoth the ant) do geue the ſame iudgement.
               Herevpon thei cald all again to ſtand nere,
               To whom wherin, thant declard as enſuth here.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Thant declarth to thoſe ſpiders & flies, that the tales of the pearte ſpider and 
                  •
               lie before tolde, do charge ech others part in ſuch ſort, that thei can not ſai which ſide is moſt diſhoneſt: but thei two adiudge clerely in diſhoneſt thinges: both ſides of lyke diſhoneſtie. wherwith thei al auoided backe again, tharbiters talke to fal to a point betwene them ſelues what report finally and fully to make. Cap. 47.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               ALthough the railyng of thoſe railers late gone:
               For it ſelfe: or them ſelues, vnmeete may be thought.
               Either to be talkt vpon: or thought vpon.
               Yet ſince the matter of their talke: ſuch talke brought:
               That as one ground of our talke, talke hath it wrought,
               We haue wrought therto: conciderate conſent,
               To conclude therin, this extended extent.
            
            
               Diſhoneſtie in ſpiders and in flies both,
               Apereth aproued: ſo indiffrently,
               That on which ſide the moſt diſhoneſtie goth:
               We can not know: nor otherwiſe verify,
               But like diſhoneſtie, on both ſides doth ly.
               So that out of hande: to declare our decre,
               Both parts: in diſhoneſtie, haue one degre.
            
            
               But for as much: as diſhoneſtie here toucht:
               Was: to proue or diſproue honeſtie before:
               Which part of both: moſt or leaſt honeſtie auou
                     •
                  ht,
               And that diſhoneſtie: doth deſide no more:
               Then honeſtie did, leaue diſhoneſties lore.
               And by former talke: in honeſtie alone,
               Take honeſtie on both parts here, iudged one.
            
            
               The graue nombre on both ſides agrede to this.
               Whervpon: thant axt who had furder to ſey:
               Concerning euidence: in the premiſſis.
               Thei all ſaide: thei had to ſay no fuder, they,
               Well ſaid thei both: ye all yet again awey.
               Which done, thei both: ech to other their mindes brake,
               What end (now at end) thei finally might take,
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Tharbiters being agreed on their report, thei call to them againe the ſpiders and the flies. Cap. 48.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               BRother butterflie (quoth ſhant) how thinke ye now?
               What makth all this euidence for either ſide?
               All alich for both (quoth he) now how ſay you?
               I ſei the ſame (quoth thant) wherin is ſpecifide,
               To hard a triall: to iudge the beſt ſide tride.
               The beſt ſide of both: ſince doute hath thus drownd it,
               Letꝭ at laſt, leaue it, as we at firſt found it.
            
            
               Agrede (quoth the butterflie) by my good ſooth:
               Thei herewith cald againe, the ſpiders and fliſe.
               Ech hoping to here a tale, for his own tooth.
               But thant being (for an ant) lerned and wiſe:
               Otherwiſe weiyng, otherwiſe did deuiſe.
               Of this proces paſt, where to report the pith.
               For which (vnto them all,) he made wei forthwith.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Thant ſhewth them, that the butterflie and he are at point what to reporte, deuiſing it to be reported before the head ſpider and the flie in the copweb the two principall parties. and to haue with them to here and witnes their reporte, two ſpiders and two flies: witty and diſcrete. and the reſt to ſtaie there till their returne. Which being agreed, thei ſet foorth ſtreight to the ſaid copweb. Cap. 49.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               KNow ye all: that we two being full agreede:
               What we ſhall ſay, we muſt now full agre:
               Where we ſhall ſay. Which ſaiyng muſt be decreede,
               Before thoſe two: that did vs two decre,
               As friendes of truſt: in this autorite.
               The ſpider and flie (meane I) which two are,
               Chefe grownds in the caſe, that we muſt now declare.
            
            
               The butterflie: and all the reſt there: ſeide.
               For that report, that was the place moſt fit.
               Let vs, with vs, (quoth thant) haue forth in eide,
               Two ſpiders and two flies: of credence and wit.
               And all the reſt, till our returne here to ſit.
               Thei two with the two twoſe: folowing in order,
               Paſt on: till thei cam to the copwebs border.
            
            
               The flie in copweb ſtoode vp, and praier lefte.
               Longing for meede: of preier preide ere than.
               With deadly looke: as death had lyfe berefte.
               But when the ſpider: into place cam than,
               Alas poore flie: how he lookte pale and wan.
               All thoſe without: vnto the ſpider within.
               At their low curtſy done, thant did thus begin.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The ant aſſociate with the ſaide ſort pronounceth at length (to the ſpider and ſlie in the copweb) this brief effect; that in as much as on both ſides the euidence is one, and that the credence is one, by ſhoneſtie being one, they two can (in reaſon) no waie 
                  •
               rie, howe to ley thaccuſtomed right more on thone ſide then on thother: they finallie leaue the caſe euin at libertie, as they ſounde it: and ſo departe to the place of abitrement againe. Cap. 50.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               MY great good vncle, and litle good friend: 
                     ••
                  ie.
               Where you two: choſe vs two: your arbytres late,
               To adiudge (by reaſon) the cuſtome rightlie:
               Of ſpiders and flies, in all windowes ſituate,
               Which part ſhould haue all: or what part we ſhould rates
               To eyther part, what hath theron riſin ſith,
               And what in fine for fine doth riſe, here the pith.
            
            
               In the firſt talke betwene you tweyne: and vs tweine,
               Thiſſew to try was (as ye ſayde vnto vs,)
               How right in all windowes (I ſey) doth remaine,
               To both ſides, as reaſon may cuſtome diſcus.
               You: for you and all ſpiders, a leging thus.
               All parts in all windowes (none except) ſayde ye,
               Are yours: and all ſpiders, as in tenure fre.
            
            
               Wherin you flie, as ye then affirmed) heelde,
               All holſe in all windowes, are flies free of olde.
               Toys and ſides, being ſpiders hold free: to beelde.
               Hed houſes or tenantrees or what ye woolde.
               So that for the hoiſe only: is all the holde,
               Which (vpon furder euidence, to conſither,
               We (as ye wyld vs to go,) went to gyther.
            
            
               Where: ſpiders and flies, a certeyne nombre met.
               Before a pointed: euidence to diſcloſe.
               And firſt for all ſpiders, one to vs there ſet,
               Sayde. As report of ſpiders: hath gone and goſe.
               All holſe in all windowes: are theirs to diſpoſe.
               The 
                     •
                  lies then cald, one flie for all verifide,
               All holſe: by all flies woordes long to flies ſide.
            
            
               
               Theſe two: in their two tales: ſhowing diffrence none,
               In matter: nor in woordes, ſaue onely that thei:
               Leid the ſame: ech on the ſide: he ſtanth vpone,
               Thei both: and thei all: ſtrangers to vs (to ſey,
               This one ſentence: on which of both ſides to ley,
               Both ſhowing a lyke credible, to vs too,
               That was thing difficult: for vs two to doo.
            
            
               Whervpon: both partꝭ (before vs both) cald we.
               To try on which part, moſt credence might apere.
               Wherin one ſpider: and one flie: of grauitee.
               Reaſoning on which ſide moſt credence ſhuld ſhow here,
               Thei both: at laſt graunted this, for a grownde clere.
               As euery wights count: in honeſtie doth mount,
               So euery wights credence: amounth in acount.
            
            
               For: honeſtie agrede thei, to be the grownd:
               (Or grownded cauſe) of credence. Then were we dreuer▪
               
               To ſerch on which ſide, moſt honeſtie was fownd.
               Wherin (on both ſides) when all reſons were geuen,
               T honeſtie on both ſides, in our iudgement was euen.
               And ſo: for credence, (hit on honeſtie growing)
               One honeſtie, one credence: in both parts ſhowing.
            
            
               Thus: their euidence being one: wherunto:
               Their credence one: by being of honeſtie one,
               To try the wrong doers: which we cam to do,
               What wey can we (in reaſon) take? for ſooth none.
               Wherin lacking power, ſince our goodwill alone:
               Can do nought, honeſtly this charge to diſcharge,
               As we this caſe found here, we leaue here, at large.
            
            
               
               Friende butterflie (ſaid the ſpider) how ſai you?
               As maiſter ant hath ſaid (ſaid he) ſo ſai I.
               Then (quoth the ſpider) with thankꝭ to you both now.
               We both diſcharge you. Sir (quoth the butterfly)
               My poore kins
                     •
                  lie here: that in durance doth ly.
               For charge or diſcharge: in euery condeſhin,
               I beſech your maſhip handle him with ſcreſhin.
            
            
               I will (quoth the ſpider) vſe him no warſe.
               Then ſtandth with reaſon, law, cuſtom, and conſcience:
               If (quoth the flie) thoſe graunted grownds not reuarſe.
               As: till I ſe them reuerſt, in experience:
               I ſee no cauſe: to conceiue lack of credence,
               Then ſhall I (and all flies) lawde your equite.
               Vndoutfull truſt wherof, much comforteth me.
            
            
               Feare not that flie (quoth he) and the flie (of trowth)
               From dangerous dred: that he drooped in eare,
               Hoppeth now in hope: as all outward ſhow ſhowth.
               But yet for all thoutward brag: that he did beare:
               Me thought he ſemde inwardly, not without feare:
               Leaſt faire feithfull promiſe of preſent pleſance,
               Might haue fowle feithles diſpleſant performance.
            
            
               But betwene hope and drede, he lying there ſtill,
               Thant: and butterflie: the fowre ſpiders and fliſe,
               Tooke leaue and departed. The ſame place vntill,
               That thei laſt ram fro. Where their company life.
               To repete their doing, in this comprimiſe.
               The ſpider in copweb, gone that to declare,
               In thuper part of his howſe, where his flok are.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Thant and butterflie ſet where they had ſit, thant repeteth to thoſe ſpiders and flies the report made by him at the ſayde copweb, at end wherof the ſpiders and flies, ſeeing that time ſpent all in vayns, eche ſide amonge them ſelfes fall in mourmuring. Cap. 51.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               ¶THant and butterflie: ſet where they erſt had ſit,
               Thoſe ſpiders & flies: ſtāding where they erſt ſtood
               Thant repeting this, they perceyuing in it:
               Much time ſpent on all parts: and no part take good,
               They began generallie: to change their mood.
               The ſpiders, to gither cluſtring and cluttring,
               The flies, togither in murmering muttring.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            ¶ Vpon the ſpiders and the flies mutring murmering, ſodenlie there cum nie aboute them: a wonderfull nombre of all manner of flies: in theyr warlike manner. Wherat with twynke of an iye (as it were) the head ſpider (with a greate nombre of ſpiders,) hath builded a ſtrong caſtell in that copweb. With ordinaunce and weapons and ſpiders redie in order of defence. Cap. 52
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of flies
               
            
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of spiders
               
            
            
               
               HErewith (euin ſodenlie: at twink of aniye,)
               Cam ſuch a flight of flies: in ſcattred ray,
               As ſhadowed the ſonne: from thearth to the ſkie.
               No kind of flie a liue, but was there that day.
               Tag and rag, like lions: raging now rage thay.
               Fleſhflies, butterflies, land flies, water flies.
               Bees, humblebees, waſpes, hornets, gnats of all ſies.
            
            
               The graund Captaine, ſtanding: amid mong this rought,
               Was the flie, that flange from thence in fewrie erſt told.
               Seld hath bene ſeene ſuch a ſort. And all ſo ſtought,
               Except here and there one: temprate to beholde.
               Staues, bats, clubs, pichforks, moſt begerlie moſt bold.
               Wherwith the ſpiders that erſt gaue euidence,
               In the copweb, tooke ſentuarie for defence.
            
            
               Where: whether this proude ſpider gaue woord before:
               Who with that pert flie: had before there prated:
               Or that ſpiders: of ordinarie: haue ſtore:
               Of all municion: for warrs redie rated,
               I wot not. But without more time delated:
               Ordnance of all ſorts round the copweb was leyde,
               And all ſpiders with all weapons, preſt in eyde.
            
            
               Daggs, handgoons, hakſe, hagbuſſers, culuerins, ſlings:
               Potgoons, ſakirs, cannons, double and demie.
               Feeld peeces, of all ſewts, with al belonging things.
               Byls, bowes, partiſance, pikes, to puſh fer or nie,
               And to occupy all, ſpiders plaſte aptlie.
               Ech of them: harneſt meete for his properte,
               The reſt, all in bright harneſſe capa pe.
            
            
               
               The flies, of all ordnance were not deſtitute,
               Nor furniſhed: like as the ſpiders weare:
               Ruſtie rotten peeces: their terrour to brewte,
               They ſhat of, and ſhot wide, of marks euerie where.
               Drums, fi
                     ••
                  es, flags, and wi
                     ••
                  ers, none wanted there,
               Baners diſplaide on both ſides: all arms bearing,
               In harolds books a vowde, for both ſides wearing.
            
            
               The flies, in nomber, a boue the ſpiders far.
               The ſpiders, in order, fer better then thaie.
               The flies, will aduenture to make or to mar,
               The ſpiders, (not ſodenlie) ſobreli waie:
               To defend or offend, the flies as they maie.
               The ſpiders, in copweb wyll bide this ieobertie.
               The flies, in feeld wyll beſeege them at libertie.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            ¶ This huge heape of flies light aboute tharbiters. Apprehending thant, caſting a halter aboute his necke: drawing him to their tree of reformacion (as they call it) to hang him ſtreyght. But at his ſute to be hard ſpeake ere hedie, on fli fleeth into the tree, wher with the captaine commaundeth ſilence. Cap. 53.
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of flies
               
            
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of spiders
               
            
            
               
               THis innumerable flocke of flies: are now,
               Marcht vnto tharbiters. And they there lighted,
               They tooke thant priſoner: with an vnaduiſed vow,
               To ſpight the ſpiders, who had flies long ſpyghted,
               That he ſhould ſtreight be hangd, and then endited.
               Of ſelonie: againſt flies: as an adherent,
               To ſpiders, in their vſurpacion vrgent.
            
            
               Hang him vp (quoth one) with wilde woords and wide wit.
               A fals wretch he is. And well knowne eueri wheare.
               And wold be knowne no where: where euer he flit.
               He hath two names: one name here, an other theare.
               In this place cald ant. In that place cald piſmeare.
               And one ſuſſpected varlet: two names to haue,
               Is (in common iudgment,) iudged a falſe knaue.
            
            
               Then ſtept forth a ſort of fell flies, fewriouſlie.
               Who: hauing caſt a halter about thants neck,
               To their tree of reformacion ſtanding by,
               They fellie forſt him, with manie a chorliſh check.
               A ladder to that tree was ſet, at a beck.
               Where he in haſt halde vp: and the halter tide,
               Turne the theefe of the ladder: thouſands cride.
            
            
               Small was the maruaill: though thant were much abaſht:
               To ſe this ſore ſooden importable chaunce,
               Who liueth in nature: but he muſt be daſht:
               Both out of corage, and out of countenance.
               That ſhould ſtreyght: be daſht out of continuance,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   none (or few) being fore warnd of deaths howre,
               Can 
                     〈◊◊〉
                   feeling thought, of that ſharp ſhowre.
            
            
               
               Fight now in worſhip ſet hie: as a iudge:
               Euin now, ſtanding in ſhame to be hangd hie,
               It w
                     ••
                   to him, a feeling greefe of grudge:
               Vnknowne to all: that haue not felinglie:
               Felt of the ſame, in their experienſie,
               His looke and hew now, and late: ſo vnlike,
               I hat to the hart: a iew that ſight muſt ſtrike.
            
            
               In which agonie: calling to him his wit:
               One wiſe flie: at all formar talk preſent,
               Seming with all flies preſent in good credit,
               He preyd to perſwade all there: to be content,
               To here him ſpeak, ere he his life ſhould relent.
               But reaſon (quoth that flie) and therwithall, he,
               To get thant that grace, gat him in to that tre.
            
            
               The flie there bent to ſpeake, the captaine graund,
               By mouth of an harolo: at trompet ſownid,
               In proclamacion, did ſilence ſtreight commaund.
               Wherat: a few words here and there in ears rownid,
               To here that flie ſpeake, their ſpeche was all drownid.
               Whervpon the captaine bidding that flie ſay,
               Theſe or theſe like few words, he ſaide ſtreight way.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            ¶ The flie in the tree: to perſwarde the flies to here the ani ſpeake, wadeth honeſtlie, politiklie to a lewre them, to quiet heryng of the ant before they put him to death. His which tale tolde, he remoueth to his place agayne. Cap. 54.
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of flies
               
            
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of spiders
               
            
            
               
               BRothers (and brotherlie freends) all: I dout nat:
               Ye know me a flie: and take me ſuch a flie,
               As for ant: or ſpider: in anie what:
               Wyll not be falſe, to the ſtock that naturallie:
               I ought to be trew vnto: to liue or die:
               For this ant and all ants: what I ſhall ſay now,
               Shall approus me none of them, but one of you.
            
            
               Of whom: eche one: an other my ſelf to ſey.
               And ech one to other: (I hope,) likewiſe knit.
               Let vs all as one: entring this one iourney,
               Enter the path, as we may pas thorow it.
               One depe enduction wherto: iuged in my wif,
               Is to flee raſh deedes raſhlie done here. For ſuch,
               Haue vndone all: in our like caſe, verie much.
            
            
               One of which danngerous deedes (vnder correction,)
               We do in this deede: thant thus to death to draw.
               Without accuſacion or detection:
               Wherby might appere anie colour of law:
               To kill him. This lo doth my conſcience gnaw.
               And yet more: the nombre here in ire ſo ſturd,
               That they wold haue him hangd, and not ſpeake one wurd.
            
            
               Which deede: if we do, wheare are our like monſturs?
               Firſt to apprehend an ant vndetected:
               By any colour, that anie worde conſturs.
               To be eyther detected, or ſuſſpected:
               And not onlie ſtreyght vnto deth, directed:
               But dy, not ſuffrid to ſpeake, defame of vs:
               That perpetuall tromp, will blow: in ſhame of vs.
            
            
               
               Wherfor for vs (and not for him) as I ſeide:
               I ſew to you, as he hath ſewde to mee.
               To here him ſpeake, Which ſpeche of you herd and weyde,
               As you ſhalbe a grede, ſo ſhall I a gree.
               To hang him: or ſaue him, as we cauſe ſhall ſee.
               This tale thus told, downe the flie againe flitth,
               And where he erſt did ſit, theare he agayne ſitth.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            The flies former fine tale, nowhit ſturreth the groſe flies to the hearing of the ant. Whervpon the butterflie (that was an arbiter) fleeth into the tree: laboring the flies to haue the ant heard ſpeake ere he die. Cap. 55.
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of flies
               
            
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of spiders
               
            
            
               
               VVith this: a chirme in mumering there fell:
               Amonſt them all. They in flocks flocking anone,
               Here and there a flock: like ſort to like. To tell,
               Theyr minds. And ſum preyſde▪ ſum diſpreyſde the tale gone
               This tale ſhowth this flie honeſt and wiſe (ſaith one)
               He is a falſe flattring flie (ſeyth another)
               He ſayd well: but he ment ill (ſayde ſome other)
            
            
               Thant hath bribid him: (quoth one) he is corrupt ſewre.
               An ant bribe a flie (quoth an other) wherwith?
               With one of his eggs, that is a ſore alewre.
               To tempt a flie, naye▪ quoth one) this is the pith:
               He is a ſpie: for the ſpiders (I ſe euen ſith)
               I herd no worde (quoth one) to ſuſſpect him by.
               (Quoth one) all his wordes ſound ſuſſpiciouſly.
            
            
               So manie heds, ſo manie witts. There were ſene.
               Thoneſt flies: that flies tale, honeſtlie did broo
                     〈…〉
                  e.
               The contrarie tooke 
                     •
                  is tale contrarie clene.
               I herd by ſum 
                     〈…〉
                  s words: and ſaw by theyr looke.
               That thill ſort: the good ſort: againſt their wils tooke.
               Good flies wolde haue ſuffred: and haue ſit euin ſtill:
               Rather then haue riſin: by force of thyll,
            
            
               But forth he muſt (they ſay) that the deuill doth driue,
               Thinges are not wrought: by wyſdome in ſuch a rout:
               Will: and not wiſdom, muſt ſuch matters contriue.
               All ſuerte of ſafte, to bring in a dout.
               Or to ſet ſafte vndoubtedlie Quight out,
               In which ſafte: ſuch flies: as ſat faſt before,
               Muſt leaue hold: to take hold, on contrarie ſhore.
            
            
               
               They being now dreuen, they muſt do as they ſhall,
               And not as they wold, and for this caſe in hand,
               Hang the ant forthwith: cride the moſt nombre all.
               The blont butterflie: that arbiter had ſtand,
               Whipt into the tree: as feerſe as a fyre brand.
               And at ſilence had: vpon the trompets blaſt,
               He muſt blow his blaſt. Or els his hart muſt braſt,
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            ¶ The butterflie (to get thant to beheard) telth his tale in ſuch rude maner and matter, that anone he ſetth them all (welnie) together by the eares. But vppon his groſe tale groſely tolde, (much more lyked then the flies finer tale) thei graunt to here the ant ſpeake. Cap. 56.
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of flies
               
            
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of spiders
               
            
            
               
               VHhat a ſort of captayne coblers haue we here:
               Vnder our graund capteyne, I charge euerichone:
               Kepe ſilence, and obediance all in fere.
               In the circumſicion that we go vpone,
               Thinke you: the victorie lith on your hands, not one.
               Sharmyſh ye maie: and like capon cockers cock,
               But we butterflies muſt heare bide the ſhock,
            
            
               And why not we waſps (quoth one) as wel as you:
               Why not we dors as well as bothe (quoth one dor)
               Why not flies: and gnats? (quoth one) of ech ſort now:
               Being a hewge heape: exeding all nombor,
               To ouercum yonder ſpider ſenior:
               As well as fewer great luburs. Mark this mark:
               The old prouerbe ſayth, manie hands make light wark.
            
            
               So light wark theyr light heds, for light hands made:
               That ech wons light fiſt was bent to others eare,
               Sort agayne ſort: they anone entred ſuch trade,
               That I thought they wold all haue gone by thears theare,
               Til their captaine: with cap in hand, to forbeare:
               In beſeching entreated them. Which heate gone,
               Let the butterflie ſpeake: they cride euerichone.
            
            
               The butterflie blontlie thus entred agayne.
               What deuyll flies be you freends be you ſo haſtiſe?
               That your freends maie not ſpeake their wils: plat & pleine
               A deuils name (I ſaie) your chating toungs chaſtiſe.
               I wene you eate no ſkins meate but daw paſtiſe.
               Peace dawpates: while I tell a thing now reiounſt,
               An my head, which to vtter I am compounſt.
            
            
               
               Ye wold haue the ant hangd, before he be hard.
               For that thinke you moſt poliſie. As ſcons my dere:
               Ye maie not here him firſt: and hang him afterward:
               But euerie flie thinking him ſelfe ſtoode now here,
               Wheare this ant ſtandth, and at hanging euen as nere,
               Should it not ſting him like ſtang of an adder?
               To thinke to be turnd without ſpeech from this ladder,
            
            
               Wyſe flies ſaie: it is ſin to lie on the deuill
               Then here the trouth told, of this preſent poore ant.
               Who that can cauſe him, let him lege the euill.
               But my ſoule from ſauaſhin: ſlide to hell a ſlant:
               If he in our bitterment, ſhowd anie want:
               Of conſhinable diffrancie. In his woords dolt:
               But betwene both parts ſtood vpright as a belt.
            
            
               You all; weing this thing in ponderaſhin,
               In hering of him what equaltie ye ſhow:
               And in not hering him: what ſlaunderaſhin:
               To vs all: ſhall grow, that ſince ye all do know,
               Wey it quicklie, and your minds therin out blow.
               Downe he flew: whervpon the flies ſaide they wold,
               Here thant ſpeake And thervpon this tale he told.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            ¶ The ant prayth to be herd ſpeake thorowlie before anie part of his tale be adiudged. And then they to adiudge the whole as ſtandth with equite. Firſt alleginge better to cleare himſelfe from offending the flies. Finallie geuinge them (as it ſemeth) freendli counſell, (touchyng this ſtrife) grounded vpon this common ſaying: before thou ought begin, haue an iye to the ende, Cap. 57.
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of flies
               
            
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of spiders
               
            
            
               
               MY maſters flies here all in generall:
               And eche one perticulerlie: I humblie praie,
               What things I ſhall touch, generall or ſpeciall:
               To take to the beſt. And firſt that I maie:
               As remembrauncer of your remembraunce, ley
               One ſpeciall meane forth here: remembred to be,
               Drawing herers in all things to equite.
            
            
               And equite, in all things: to giue or to take:
               (Among other vertues) is a vertew pewre.
               Inequite, for wrong, no waie can make.
               Where equite, is ſet and ſetled ſewre,
               For equite in no wiſe may endure:
               Balance, to anie one ſide, caſt or dreuine.
               Equite, equallie: kepth the balance euine.
            
            
               Which meane: for which equite to be obteynde,
               Is: that herers: in hereing this mi caſe,
               Se: that diffinitiue iudgement be refreynd,
               In anie part therof: to take anie place,
               Tyll the whole be herd. Which hering to purchaſe,
               Is my great ſewt. Beſeching all to ſuſſpende:
               Iudgement in euerie part: till all parts take ende.
            
            
               Firſt for me: next for you and me: laſt for you:
               I ſew to be hard. And firſt for me, marke all.
               From all offence by me done: to you here now,
               Syns I cam, in this caſe that doth here fall,
               I am clearde. By one vnſpert for parſhall,
               I meane that worſhipfull maiſter butterflie:
               Who trieth me: to haue delt here indiffrentlie.
            
            
               
               He cleerth me ſins I cam. And before I cam,
               Yf any flie (Iuſtlie) to my charge can ley:
               In anie thing waying the weyght of a dram,
               By worde, or deede: either open or priuey:
               That euer I hurt flie: anie maner wey,
               Then let my poniſhment here: be ſo ample,
               That all ants may therby take an example.
            
            
               But being clere ſins I cam: and more tauow:
               Being clere till I cam: from woorde and deede ill,
               Alas: why will ye 
                     ••
                  ll me, who hurth not yow.
               Nor neuer did hurt you, nor neuer will.
               Nor neuer can: though will wold ill fulfill.
               This: for my ſelfe leyde, (as for my ſelfe proued,
               I hope my ſelfe ſure: from harme by you moued.
            
            
               Secondly: for you and me both, this meane I.
               Yf ye draw the blood of me: (thus innoſent,)
               As the los is ſmall, ſo naught wyn ye therby.
               But (as is ſaide) infamie of endles extent,
               Which paine fro me: and ſhame from you to preuent,
               The ſafe ſalue for both ſides: is this to decre,
               Saue you my life, and that ſaueth your honeſte.
            
            
               Third: and laſt poynt: nought for me, all for you:
               Prouyng me, not only: you no whit to hate,
               But much to loue: a tale Ile tell and a vow,
               Which: you hering and folowing: in ſtedie ſtate,
               Shall ſtedilie ſtey you, from harme in debate:
               That hangth ouer your heds: much more than ye ſe,
               Wherin for you and not for me, (I ſay) here me.
            
            
               
               Among many preſepts philoſoficall:
               Geuen to all perſons: to take profet by,
               For tyme: place: and caſe preſent, aboue all.
               One ſerueth in ſentence moſt ſingulerly.
               The woordes ſhort: the matter long: the reaſon hy.
               Which woordes and matter, on theſe woordes do depend
                     •
                  
                  ▪
               
               Ere thou ought begin, haue an eie to the ende.
            
            
               This pure preſept: as all oft in woordes ſey it:
               If all did do it, in effectuall deede,
               So that our deeds did it: as our woords wei it,
               Oh: what commoditee therby ſhuld proceede.
               Our full felicitee: ſhuld thervpon breede.
               As contrarily breedth: in contrary ſhow,
               Infelicitee: as we feelingly know.
            
            
               Who wold begin a fray: and his ſo therin kill?
               If he lookt to thend, that ſhuld hang him therfore.
               I wene all the world, ſhuld be kept from all ill:
               Kept we this leſſon well, in practiſed lore:
               To thend of beginning: to looke euermore:
               Before we begin, for when we haue begoon,
               The leauing of lightly, is not lightly woon.
            
            
               Small things begun: without looking to their end,
               Cum oft to ill end: great loſſe, and ieoperdee.
               Great things: begoon than: none Iie on thend tatend,
               At (or ere) their beginning: we muſt agree:
               To be our much more diſcommoditee.
               As things: greatter and ſmaller: differ in ſiſe,
               So diffreth here: diſcommoditee likewiſe.
            
            
               
               And of all our great thyngs: no one of more weyght,
               Nor therby more meete: thend therin to wey:
               At beginning, then is that bitter beyght:
               Of wrechid war. The very locke and key,
               That lacheth and lockth vs all, from quiet ſtey.
               Who that (in raſhe roofe) beginneth to contende,
               Be repenth beginning, ere he cum to ende.
            
            
               It is a thing: right far be yond an ants reche:
               To blaſe the plat of poyſon: generaly:
               Set a broche by war, but ſhort ſum to feche:
               Warres harme: and good, ſtand bothe vnſpeakably.
               Both are (I ſay) vnſpeable for why,
               War hath done more harme: then tale of toung can holde,
               War hath done no good, and nought can not be tolde.
            
            
               War hath wrought ſuch wo: that all flies comunly,
               And ſpyderseke. Of which two ſortes I ſpeake:
               Hauing in all times had experienſy,
               Of raſhe beginning of war: the peace to breake,
               They ſeeing (in their war) their winning weake,
               Wolde leeſe half the good they had: to peace to fall:
               Rather then ieberd in war: goods life and all,
            
            
               And of both ſortes in this caſe, weried in war,
               Flies haue had euer cauſe: to miſlike war moſte.
               When ſpiders and flies: haue falne at this lyke iar,
               For quarels: wherin flies, might moſt their ryght boſte:
               Who euer had the right, the flies the feeld loſte.
               To one ſcore ſpyders ſleyne, flies ſlayne, twentyſcore.
               And much of their ofſpring, loſt for euermore.
            
            
               
               Which ſhowth (as ſpiders calte, that no ſedicion:
               Can haue good ſucſes. In flies inferior:
               By ſtoburne war, but by humbyll peticion:
               For thing interior, or exterior.
               Flies muſt ſew: to the ſpider ſuperior.
               They take this as a full hold: not to be remiſt,
               Well framid flies, wyll ſuffre and not reſiſt.
            
            
               Flies wreks in wars: in time paſt: yf flies reuolue,
               How ſpiders copwebs: flies ſepultures haue beene,
               Your wiſe quiet retire, ſhall this war diſolue.
               But yf ſmart of time paſt: be forgoton cleene,
               Caſt Iye to parell, at Iye preſentlie ſeene.
               Uew yonder copweb caſtell: with endifrent iye:
               And marke whether ye be macht endifrentlye.
            
            
               Behold: the batilments in euerie loope:
               How thordinance lieth: flies fer and nere to fach.
               Behold: how euerie peece: that lith there in groope:
               Hath a ſpider gonner: with redy fired mach.
               Behold: on the wals: ſpiders waking ware wach.
               The wach ſpider: in the towre a larum to ſtrike,
               At a proch of any nomber, ſhowing war like.
            
            
               Se thenprenabill fort: in euery border.
               How euerie ſpider: with his weapon doth ſtand,
               So thorowlie harneſt: in ſo good order:
               The capitall ſpider: with weapon in hand.
               For that ſort of ſowdiers: ſo manfully mand.
               With copwebs: like caſting netts: all flies to quell,
               My hart ſhaketh at the ſight: be hold: it is hell,
            
            
               
               Againſt whoſe ſtrength there, your weaknes here behold.
               Sum haue harnes: moſt haue none: all out of rey.
               Capitaynes: practiſed: politike and bold,
               Few or none haue ye: this armie to conuey.
               But eche in others neck: as ſheepe ſtart a ſtrey.
               Ordinance meete for the ſhip, ye bring to the feelde.
               But force without order: winth victorie ſeelde.
            
            
               And put caſe: that of you fortie thouſand fliſe:
               Thirtie thouſand: ſhall ſcape, and his window win.
               Yet: if ech one of you: in him ſelfe ſurmiſe:
               That he ſhalbe one: that ſhall die entring in,
               What one flie (of all flies) wil thaſſaute begin?
               No one. but that one that from home now come,
               Shall thinke him ſelfe wiſeſt, that ſoneſt goth home.
            
            
               But to die all: and in this window nought geyne:
               Of that: ſayde practiſe of time paſt: aſſewrth ye.
               To venter life: and ſuffer deth, are thinges tweyne.
               Ventring of life, tobteyne right, oft ſe we.
               But to benter life: where deth hath certente,
               For theſe kinds of right: to die: while ye may liue,
               No wiſe flie will: but right rather ouer giue.
            
            
               But if your harms of time paſt: be forgoten,
               Warning of preſent harms: at preſent time take.
               Of which two meaſures: if none may be moten,
               Time paſt, nor time preſent, (of which two I ſpake,)
               Let the third: time to cum: be meane, thend to make.
               Weying that in time to cum. The end muſt cum:
               To one end of foure, which folow here in ſum.
            
            
               
               After this war begoon, either both parts ſhall:
               Take ende with condiſion: as both partꝭ can gre,
               Or continew in war, time perpetuall:
               Or the flies (by the ſpiders) conquered ſhalbe,
               Or the ſpiders conquered by the flies. Now ſe:
               How: in eche one end of theſe fowre: ſhall a riſe,
               Paynfull perelus penuries, to all flies.
            
            
               Firſt: if ye after a time had in conflickt:
               Take ende with the ſpider: by compoſicion,
               Beſide the flies: that to death ſhalbe addickt:
               The ſuruiuers: ſhall receyue ſuch condicion:
               At the ſpiders hand: as the diſtribicion:
               Shall make flies at end: bid fie on their winning,
               And after that end: repent their beginning.
            
            
               Second: this war: continuing continualy,
               Euery yere, moneth, weeke, day, howre, euery minute:
               Many flies ſhall die. and all may feare to dy:
               What flie can beſure: one howres life texecute:
               At poyntes of all weapons, euer had in purſute.
               In vndoughted death: and doughtfull deadly life,
               This ende ſheweth ſmall difrens, where reaſon is rife:
            
            
               Thirdly: yf the ſpider do conquere you fliſe,
               What ſo euer flie then: him ſelfe beſt be haues:
               The beſt and the worſte: all in one rate ſhall riſe.
               Now frank free franklin flies, then all vile bonde ſlaues.
               Now flie in light windowſe, then ſit in darke caues.
               Flies beginning war: ending thus, they ſhall clere,
               Their hell or purgatory, begin euine here.
            
            
               
               The fourth: yf you flies ſhall the ſpider conqueare,
               Then ſhall all ſpiders go to wracke firſt: no dout.
               And after ſhall the flies folow: eueri wheare.
               When flies haue kild ſpiders: that ſtey the rewde rout,
               Then flie againſt flie: comun cuthrote moſte ſtout.
               Foure endes: in this one war: ſhow (thone and thother,
               The laſt being worſte,) ech end wors then other.
            
            
               In time paſt: time preſent: and in time to coome:
               Sins ye haue woon: do win: nor ſhall win here ought,
               Beter wende your ſhip a loofe: and take ſea roome:
               Then roon here on rockes, and to ſhipwrak be brought:
               It is to fer fet: and ferder to dere bought:
               To fet: and bye thinges: with no les los in ſtriues:
               But with los: both of all your liuinges and liues.
            
            
               Here haue I ſayde my minde: vnder principles few.
               Firſt: deſiring you to here me thorowly.
               Ere ye iudge any part, of what I ſhould ſhew.
               And then to iudge me, by equite equaly.
               Whervnto: for hereing in this caſe ſewde I,
               Firſt for me, next for you and me, laſt for you.
               Of which proſes a brigde, brefe pith aprochth now.
            
            
               For me: the flies and butterflies tales: I weyde:
               To my diſcharge. Sins I cam: of all offence.
               And before I cam, my diſcharge my ſelfe leyde.
               Wherin: my caſe being giltles inoſence,
               For you and me, both in reſon and conſiens.
               To ſaue both ſides vpright, this counſell I gaue.
               You to ſaue my life, your honeſtie to ſaue.
            
            
               
               For you and not me: in your preſent quarell,
               On this principle, my hole talke did depende.
               Ere we ought begin: namelie thing of parell,
               Wiſdom wilth vs, to haue an Iye to the ende.
               In parelus quarelus caſe: to contende:
               Chieflie this: in time paſt: preſent: and to cum,
               How ye ſped: and be like to ſpede, I ſhoud the ſum.
            
            
               But to end at beginning: you caſting Iye,
               At this poore counſell: of poore Antonie ant,
               Of ſhap and good wit ſmall: of good will great and hye,
               I ſhall reioyſe. Hoping here ſhall be no want:
               Of equite: in my diſcharge this inſtant.
               Which I humbly pray: and ſo to end to fall,
               I ſay no more: but the great God ſaue you all.
            
            
               This done: a noyſe began of ſuch a huzzing,
               Ech one flie blowing in an other flies eare,
               As if ten milions of flies had ben buzzing.
               And all: by this tale ſo aſtonide in feare,
               That moſt of them: their weapons could ſcantly beare.
               Thants perſwaſions: in drede of deth: ſtrake them ſo,
               That hundreds cride oute, home a gayne let vs go.
            
            
               With this mounſer graund captayne the great bragger:
               Was much a maſed, and vengeably vext.
               To ſe theſe flies now: ſo vnſtedily ſtagger,
               So late ſo redie: to bring their fooſe perplext.
               This time (thought he) ſhould giue warning to the next.
               Yf he ſcaped this: at all times to be ware,
               With faint fond flies, to fiſke agayne a warfare.
            
            
               
               ☞ He be gan to caſt: that in commun knowne giſe:
               In all like tumults: that flies do thus procure:
               Of ſimple flies, moſt are pardned that thus riſe.
               But captaine flies (as he is now) are hangd ſure.
               Of which preſent daunger, to put delaie in vre.
               He wound into that tree: and ſilence woon,
               The flies tencorage againe, this he be goon.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            ¶ Thant hath ſet the flies in ſuch feare of the ſpiders, that moſt are redie to ronne awaie. whom to ſtaie, the captaine flie deuiſeth thant to ſet the ſpiders in like feare of them: by a tale tolde on the ſame grounde that he tolde this: in paine of hanging at his returne. Cap. 58.
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of flies
               
            
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of spiders
               
            
            
               
               SIrs: I ſe well this tale of this ant here told,
               To paſſe this ſeene parel, putth you in ſuch dreede,
               That manie are minded to leaue of their hold.
               As though leauing of now, ſhould your ſafgard breede.
               As it ſhould not. Nor for that it ſhould in dede,
               His tale is told nowhit. But all told for this.
               To ſaue him ſelfe, and thoſe ſpiders freends of his.
            
            
               He ſeeth what and whie he ſaith. Which you ſe nat.
               He foreſeeth: if feare driue vs to ronne awaie,
               That we ſhall not onlie leeſe this window plat,
               But in fleeyng, like fleaſe kild in chaſe from raie.
               Which ſhalbe (he knowth well) our leyſerleſſe daie:
               To be iaylers to ants, and he thervpon,
               (Being his owne Iayler) breakth iayle and is gone.
            
            
               This waie: our enemies win all, and we leeſe all.
               They laugh, and we wepe. They liue, and we die.
               They in fame, we in ſhame. Perpetuall.
               And without coſt, paine, or daunger, by and by,
               This ant at libertie, immediatlie.
               Thus: where thāts woords ſhow him to be your great frēde,
               Pyth of thants woords: proue him to be your great feende.
            
            
               Sum clarks (of whom this litle ant not leaſt clark)
               Can: fine lies: as finelie as fine trew tales, tell.
               Right ſide: or wrong ſide: they can turne in eche woork,
               And make flies take either ſide, trew as goſpell.
               Which turne in this tale: to appere in ſequell,
               I haue deuiſde a waie: (hauing your conſent,)
               Here it: and ſpeake to it as your breſts are bent.
            
            
               
               As this ant clarklie (or craftelie here,)
               Hath caſt manie maſing miſts before your iyſe:
               Of much dread by much daunger, here to a pere,
               So: vpon his life or deth, let him deuiſe,
               Vpon the ſame ground: that your feare doth a riſe,
               A ſpeech to the ſpiders. To ſhow what depe dreads,
               He can draw or driue, in to their harts and heads.
            
            
               Which ground is this. Ere anie wight ought begin,
               Haue an Iye to thend. The wiſe wight ſayth: (ſayth he,)
               Wherin: (to mach the feare that you be now in,)
               If he bring ſpiders: in as much feare of ye:
               As he hath brought you in feare of them to be,
               Then at returne pardon him. Goods, life, and land.
               Which if ye do not, then hang him out of hand.
            
            
               Be it ſo cried all: then ſayd this one that all leades,
               Chooſe fortie flies: to gard this ant that here ſtands.
               Twentie: whoſe hands we truſt more then their heades.
               And twentie: whoſe heades we truſt more then their hands.
               All of hart truſtie: both power and poliſis bands▪
               
               And for feare of fals meaſures: among all theeſe,
               Send ſum, that ſumwhat leaue behinde: loth to leeſe.
            
            
               This ſayd, and thant ſworne, his beſt here to be bent,
               An harold with trompet: and truce baner ſpleyde:
               For their ſafe conduckt, to the ſpider they ſent.
               The ſpider: warnd watch, to ſe their cuming ſteyde.
               It ſhould (to his honour,) be reproche he ſayde.
               To treate with traytors: in order of arms,
               But of grace, he graunth them to cum without harms.
            
            
               
               The harold and that reſte: to the captaine flie:
               And all flies, the ſpiders pleaſure did declare.
               Wherwith: to gard thant, they choſe out flies fortie.
               Whome: while they were chooſing, one cople thare:
               Two flies of byſie wit: as ſondry flies are,
               Fell to deuining: by coniecture to ſhow,
               What ſhould: in this meſage, and meſenger, grow.
            
            
               How ſeiſt thou my frende (quoth thoue flie) to this gere
                     •
                  
               
               What woldeſt thou giue to haue the Ants office now?
               Geue (quoth thother flie,) not paring of a Pere.
               Nor I (quoth he) but wolde rather make a vow,
               Toleaue all that I haue, and liue at the plow:
               Then take it. Whats thy minde therin (quoth thother?)
               That ſhalt thou here (hering this, quoth he) brother.
            
            
               If ſo fall: that thant bringe not ſpiders in feare,
               Then ſeth he him ſelf hanged: at cuming againe.
               And bringing ſpiders in feare: when he cumth theare,
               He is in daunger, of the head ſpiders diſdaine.
               Which is a nother death. And to ſcape both twaine,
               I take it to be, a biſie, peece of warke.
               And to ſhoote at, a croked crabid marke.
            
            
               For both theſe caſes (quoth thother flie) put caſe:
               In either caſe of both, thantꝭ deth do enſew.
               Yet in which caſe of both: deth ſhall firſt take place,
               That will thant labour, fyrſt and moſt, to eſchew.
               Whoſe firſt parell: in handes of vs flies to vew,
               It ſhall enfors the ant: in all the force he may,
               For feare of death by flies: the ſpiders to fray.
            
            
               
               Note (quoth thother flie) to this, this obiection,
               Nature in the ſpiders and the ant: ioyneth nie.
               Which: ſhall make thant ieperd much: by affection.
               In ſpightful woordes: to comfort ſpiders ſpightfully.
               Rather then diſcomfort them: thus fearingly,
               I haue ſeene ſum, that for this like cauſe vpſtood,
               Whoſe craftie coucht tales, haue done more harme thē good.
            
            
               They haue done ſo (quoth thother) and they do ſo.
               Where feare is ſmall, by penalte being ſmall:
               But where penalte (as here) to death doth go,
               In the ants like tales: few trip: or none at all.
               Manie ſay oft, honger perſeth the ſtone wall.
               But honger and feare: where both cum in like vre,
               Feare perſeth: as depe as honger, make ye ſewre.
            
            
               The father his ſonnne: and the ſonne his father:
               The wife her huſband: and the huſband his wife:
               The brother, his brother, all theſe we gather:
               To haue ſeene: (compeld by feare,) where feare was rife,
               Bewrey, and be trey echother. In feare of life,
               Seeld ſe we: ſo naturall a fooliſh kind elf,
               But he will hang his father: to ſaue him ſelf,
            
            
               Oft (quoth thother) tys ſo, ſum times otherwiſe.
               Of flies condemd, the father and ſonne, both haue:
               Vpon their knees: ſewde with flowing watred Iyſe:
               Ech him ſelf to be hangd: the other to ſaue.
               That ſute (quoth thother flie) is no comon ſlaue:
               But in his apparence: ſo ſtraunge a ſtraunger,
               That his preſence (this time) wyll bring no daunger.
            
            
               
               But contrarie: in theſe like ſtormes we ſe oft,
               Where Ants, ſpiders, or flies, thants like tale muſt tell,
               Or they in auctorite: forſt vp a loft,
               Not for that their ſetters vp: truſt their truths well,
               But (as this ant) made inſtruments at parell:
               There ſhall feare force them: for feare of ſuſpicion,
               To ſticke faſt, to their forſers diſpoſicion.
            
            
               They wet (or they weene,) that they be watched ſo,
               That if they be but ſuſpect: to wring a wrie,
               They be vndone: I would rather chooſe my fo,
               To be my iudge: in caſe iudiciallie:
               Then my freend. in this fearfull forſt ſtate: for whie,
               Feare of forcers ſhall force him: more eide to rate,
               To his foe: whome they loue, thē his friend: whom they hate.
            
            
               Yee ſay well (ſaide thother) but I ſey to this,
               Saide ſuſpected ſortes: in feare of auctorite,
               Not withſtanding: ſuſpition danngerus is:
               Yet ſum, in faction or affection we ſe,
               Or other corruption, ſo affected be,
               Though life lie vpon it: yet by meane direct,
               Or indirect, they woork their affections effect,
            
            
               And ſo for this ant: our ſoole cauſe of talk now.
               What euer othe in promiſe: he for feare make,
               To bring ſpiders in feare: to bring them to bow.
               Yet: either for natures: or affections ſake,
               I feare, he will wililie the wrong waie take.
               And I hope (quoth thother) his preſent parell,
               Shall ſtitlie ſtreine him, to ſtrengthen our quarell.
            
            
               
               ☜ But betwene you and me: in fine thus is it.
               You feare here the worſt, and I hope here the beſt.
               You in which feare: and I in which hope, let vs ſit,
               Silentlie tyll practiſe by profe haue expreſt,
               In what ſcope (for what ſcape,) the ants tale ſhall reſt.
               The other flie beyng a greede vnto this,
               To ſe this end, both attend as meete now is.
            
            
               This talke doone, fortie flies (and thant with them flew
               Streight to the ſpider: before whom thant now ſtandes.
               But how thant fleeth now, that ſhall eftſoone enſew.
               The ſpider was garded: round about with bandes.
               Sauing: a lane, made with tipſtaues: and other wande
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               That thant to the ſpider: in hering and ſhow,
               Myght ſaie (as he did ſaie) at curtſie made low.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            ¶ Thant after entre in talke (before the hed ſpider) he to hym, and all the ſpiders (vpon this ſaide grounde: ere thou ought begin: haue a iye to the ende,) inueyth what he can to ſet the ſpiders in feare of the flies. Cap. 59.
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of flies
               
            
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of spiders
               
            
            
               
               HOnorable ſyr maie it your honour like:
               To conſider: that in affaires meare mundeine,
               Poliſie: and powre: do not the ſtroke ſo ſtrike:
               That ſtrife (at ſtaues end) for victorie or geyne:
               Winth alwaie the ſtrong, on the weake tobteyne:
               But ſumtime we ſee: fortune, hap, or chaunce,
               The weaker: aboue the ſtenger, in ſtrife a vaunce.
            
            
               Wherof: my ſelfhere mirrour to behold,
               Sum poliſie, politike heads thinke I haue.
               And of your powre at hand. Might haue ben bold.
               But poliſie and powre: my ſelf now to ſaue,
               Chaunce wold not ſuffer: but chaunce both awaie draue.
               Sodenneſſe of chaunce: this chaunge in me hath wrought,
               From liking liuelie life, to dolefull death brought.
            
            
               With halter here about my necke, as ye ſe.
               Reſpight haue I woon, to ſe you ere I die,
               For two things. One to praie all to praie for me.
               An other, (as I am bound naturallie:)
               To warne all: of deepe daunger here preſentlie.
               At iye, in hand. But ye your heads draw nere,
               To here and vſe my counſell folowing here.
            
            
               This ſage ſaying, the wyſe haue ſaide and ſaie.
               Haue an iye to the ende, ere thou ought begin.
               Of this debate: begon then, thend here waie.
               What ſmall or no pleaſure, ye can therin win.
               And what great diſpleaſure, ye may be brought in.
               Prouing you: (at beſt) nought to win by this war,
               And prouing you: (at worſt) vtterlie to mar.
            
            
               
               One point of foure, this ſtrife cumth to of neede.
               Either: after ſtrife: tagree by a greement,
               Or euer to ſtriue and neuer be a greede,
               Or you to ſubdew the flies: by the ſwoords dent,
               Or the fllies to conquere you, by force feruent.
               Now: if this beginning. ſhall furder begin,
               Laſt a line to thend, and mete what ye ſhall win.
            
            
               Firſt: tagree after time of ſtrife taſted,
               In meane time: on both ſides the mortalitee,
               Your copwebs, theyr cotages, worne and waſted,
               All windowes vacant: of moſt fertilytee.
               All from good order, to ſinfull ciuilitee.
               The beſt end (for both ſides, being extented,
               The beginning (on both ſides) ſhalbe repented.
            
            
               Next: to continew in perpetuall ſtrife.
               Purgatorie that (nay that is hell ſay I,)
               Better deade. then euer liue in feare to looſe life,
               As both ſides ſhall liue: euermore dyingly.
               Still ſterting from ſleape, all ſleapt with waking iye.
               I better like mine end: looking for end ſtreight,
               Then thus vpon this endles end: ſtill to weight.
            
            
               Third: if you in ſubiection the flies ſubdew,
               Thacount bringth ſmall gaine: to that end wedded:
               All flies ye can not kill: What ſhall then enſew?
               As manie as ye keepe in dred, to be hedded,
               So manie you dread: then who is moſt dredded.
               One flie put in feare, putth you in feare of ten.
               Tell here your cardes, and tell what ye win then.
            
            
               
               Fourth: if the flies conquere you, oh dredfull daye.
               Dead in halfe a daye: ye ſhalbe euerie one.
               Of the three other wayes: in euerie one waye,
               Both ſides (in effect) like ill: end vpon.
               But in this fourth, (feare wherof is my moſt mone)
               Where all flies ſhall win all: and brauelie boſt all,
               All ſpiders ſhall leaſe all, and ſpiders be loſt all.
            
            
               If ye replie here: and ſaie flies (to this daie)
               Neuer wan this way: but euer in loſſe lapt:
               In reioyner: reioyning with you, this I ſaie.
               Hit hapth in one houre, that before neuer hapt.
               As it hapth me this houre: with flies to be trapt.
               And that this is more like to hap this preſent,
               Then it erſt hath bene, mark this preſent bend bent.
            
            
               See (I ſaie) echone his death here (as who ſaye.
               Fiue thouſand ſpiders: on thone ſide to fight,
               Againſt fiftie thouſand flies, (oh fearfull fraye)
               A heape to a handfull. The more ſide ſo light:
               The leſſe ſide ſo heuie: tis a heuie ſight:
               In ſondrie reſpectes. Wherin no one of anie.
               Fearthe me ſo much, as ſo few: to ſo manie.
            
            
               Were they all cowardes, as thei are hardie fliſe.
               Not the leaſt flie there: but he dare bite his bit,
               On the greateſt Oxe: that in the ſh
                     •
                  mbles liſe.
               No weapon but the flap, ſhall make him thens flit.
               Of the which weapon: ſpiders can ſkill no wit.
               But though flies: but cowardlie ſtacke to the helme,
               Yet muſt the numbre: this copweb ouerwhelme.
            
            
               
               
                  ❧ Ten to one (in war) an vnmeete matched match.
               They will marche on, as thick, as motes in the ſoon.
               Ten thouſand (in a moment) if ye dipache,
               Twentie thouſand mo, vpon ſpeare poinct will roon,
               The deſperate, dreadth: nother byll, bow, nor gon.
               And what gaine you? to kill flies thick as motes?
               The reſt entring on you ſtreyght, and cut your throtes.
            
            
               And though they geſſe: that manie of them ſhall die.
               Yet: if ech one think ſure that ſcape he ſhall,
               As I think, all ſo think: aſſewredlie.
               Then that perſwaſion, ſhall perſwade them all.
               Echone with other, ſtreight in ſtrife to fall.
               Who maie be formoſt flie: with corage hawte,
               Thonſet to giue, this caſtell to aſſawte.
            
            
               Your wiſdome: and your wiſdoms all: I know.
               Much more: can here conſider. Then I can
               How beit good will, wilth me: warning to ſhow,
               Of harme to cum: in this begoon to ſcan.
               Before the end, what thend maie be, and than,
               To flee the worſt, to fall (as you thinke beſt,)
               At ſum poinct with the flies, to be at reſt.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            ¶ Thāt hauing brought the ſpiders in great feare of the multitude of flies, the head ſpider takinge greate diſpleaſure with the ant for the ſame, he anſwereth thantes tale ſo that he bringeth all the ſpiders in corage agayne. Geuinge (in his owne name and all theyrs,) defiance to the flies. Cap. 60.
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of flies
               
            
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of spiders
               
            
            
               
               THe ſpiders at thants tale, weare muche abaſht.
               The flies (as thant ſet them out) feard the ſpiders ſore
               Their weapons fell from hand: they weare quight quaſht.
               Take peace with flies, they cride. At which rumorus rore,
               The head ſpider (with wheat tuſkes fomde like a bore)
               In that rage: had not his honour line therone,
               Had thant had a thouſand liues, he had bene gone.
            
            
               At this hurlie burlie, that ſpider le graund:
               In his cheyre fretting fewriouſlie he frownith.
               His looke was commiſſion: ſilence to commaund.
               Whervpon: ſtatelie and ſternelie he entrith:
               A diſcors. The ants laſt told tale to meetwith.
               But firſt: thant to diſcredit, to thants diſpreyſe,
               On thants properties, this ſpider thus inueyſe.
            
            
               Freendes: I perceyue the ants tale (more falſe then fine,)
               Makth you: your owne ſhadowes to dread (as it weare:)
               To proſede in war. But ſtey a litle tine:
               Lift vp your hartes all, and ech one lend one eare:
               Tyll ye haue hard: how I this tale ſhal anſweare.
               But ere I touch the pith: of thantes tale in this,
               Heare of what propertie, thant him ſelfe is.
            
            
               The Ant (cumne into the world out of the ſhell,)
               For a time (in his time) creepith on the ground.
               As we ſpiders creepe here: and his piſſe as fell
               In ſtinging as our poyſon (welny is found.)
               Which properties, woork him toward our nature wound.
               Wherby Antes be and haue bene taken: in all age,
               Our halfe coſins: a lide in ſide halfe linage.
            
            
               
               This time, is the Ant, the creping ant named.
               In time after this time, he to more time growne,
               Winges doth he gather. And thoſe in him framed,
               The flieing ant: thenſforth he is cald and knowne.
               Then diſperſth his nature, in two natures throwne.
               He pertiſipateth, with both theſe in this wiſe.
               A creper with ſpiders, and a flier with fliſe.
            
            
               When he crept hither firſt (at my requeſt heare,)
               I was diſeyued in his age. (As the deuill wolde.)
               I thought him to young to haue winges, by a yeare.
               But now, he wingd with flies, his flieing tale tolde,
               Doth ſhow him old ynough: and a yeare to olde.
               Marke this creeping Ant: ſins wings wownd him a loft,
               How he pleyth on both handes: as Iuglers do oft.
            
            
               He corageth the flies now, diſcoraging vs.
               But didſt thou not erſt, promiſe me otherwiſe?
               Here: is thant brought to a narow ſtreight, as thus,
               If thant tell the ſpiders: how he fraide the flies,
               Then ſeeth he his death, at flies handes: ſtreight a riſe.
               And if he ſaie he coragde the flies, that lie,
               Shall make the ſpiders hate him, without cauſe whie.
            
            
               Thant: hauing to this demaund: good anſwer none,
               None anſwere made he: but ſtoode ſtill ſilently.
               To (quoth the ſpider) is not thant a good one?
               Were he charged in law herwith: by and by,
               This obſtinate ſilence, ſhould ſhow him gilty.
               But thant him ſelfe now: thus fer forth diſcloſed,
               Go we now to thants matter: erſt prepoſed.
            
            
               
               His great ground is this: (wheron the whole dèpendth,
               Vew thend of all, ere the beginning be woon.
               Wherin: if he a ledge here charge: that extendth:
               To vs ſpiders, that we this war firſt begoon,
               That charge is wrong charged, for that charge muſt roon;
               Vnto the flies: for they enuaders here be.
               And we but defenders: as all iyes may ſe.
            
            
               And for the foure pointes: wherof one muſt thend make:
               In three of which: he laide loſſe indiffrentlie,
               To lot on both ſides a like: I vnder take,
               In few woordes: to proue that tale a lowde lewde lie.
               Firſt: war here taken vp condiſionallie,
               Flies neuer woon end of vs: after beginning,
               But flies (at end) euer bad fie on their winning.
            
            
               The ſecond: concerning war contiuuall:
               In weat open feelde they, in drie warme houſe we.
               Betweene theſe two plats, though the diſtance be ſmall,
               The biffrence is great. Of the yeres four partes: thre,
               Or two parts at leaſte,) they can not trouble ye.
               In winter, ſommer flies no windowes keepe.
               Vnder mens houſe eaues: like eauis droppers they creepe.
            
            
               The third point: in our conquering of the flies:
               For fearing of all flies: that we make a frayde,
               The foole, or the infant, that his ſhadow ſpies:
               Wyll oftimes crie out in feare: calling for eyde.
               But wiſer foolk weing this, thus is it weyde.
               Like feare to be had: on their conquered knaues,
               As hath the great Turke: feare of his galie ſlaues.
            
            
               
               Laſt, to the fourth: if flies ſhall ſpiders conquere:
               Then are all ſpiders loſt: as the ant ſaith ſure.
               And flies to (ſaie I) but as touching that feare:
               For time paſt, of practice: put memorie in vre.
               For time to cum, let liklihod you alure.
               To ſerch that kind of conqueſt: and ye ſhall ſe,
               It neuer was, nor is, nor neuer like to be.
            
            
               From the beginning: it is in bookes to ſhow.
               When flies (againſt ſpiders) haue thus rebelled,
               They: either had miſerable ouer throw:
               In rebelling, or ſtreight after refelled.
               Namelie one: the which generallie ſwelled.
               In flies againſt ſpiders, the time paſt ſir yeare,
               Which one (were there no mo) ſhowth this caſe cleare,
            
            
               This time: ſondrie. But chieflie, two flockes of fliſe.
               For religion: with ſum other thing to that,
               One ſort by eaſt, an other by weſt: did riſe.
               Of opinion, contrarie: as fer and flat,
               As in diſtance, ech far from other in plat,
               
                  
                     •
                  hone ſort of both: to be in right faith elect,
               All flies (faithfullie) did beleue or coniect▪
               
            
            
               Thoſe flies did much harme: ſix or eight weekes anoying▪
               
               Which time: ſpiders had ſmall reſt, and thoſe flies leſſe.
               Spiders copwebs: went to wrack. by diſtroying:
               And flies welth waſted: to begerie from richeſſe
               Foreſtore laſht out, in excreable exceſſe.
               Frutes then growne, much loſt for helpe to get them in.
               How lookte flies here? to thend ere they did begin.
            
            
               
               But what was the end of this? for ſoth euen this.
               The captayns, moſt hangd. Soldiers, many ſlaine.
               The reſt (ought worth) geuen in praie for pilagis.
               So that (to this daie,) they bid fie on the gaine.
               Thus were theſe two ſortes: of opinions twaine,
               One of the twayne: in the right way to be thought,
               Both brought to one end, and both brought to nought.
            
            
               Which ſhowth: that where flies in matter of moſt right:
               Atempt tataine mater right: in maner wrong,
               There: their wrōg maner, marth their right matter quight.
               For ſpiders agaynſt flies, great Gods law ſtandth ſtrong.
               Which law (in leading flies) hath willed this long.
               You baſe inferiors to woorke your lordes wyll,
               Obey your ſuperiours, be they good or yll.
            
            
               Thus: were their matter as good, as it is bad.
               And we as weake, as the ant hath made you deeme.
               Yet ſhould thill maner: in flies here now had,
               Set that God vpon them, to ſtrike ſtrokes extreeme.
               As by thexample told, the ſhow doth well ſeeme.
               Thus: for the flies conquering of vs this daye,
               Goddes eyde all dayes before: takth all feare awaye.
            
            
               But put caſe we had not (as we haue) the Godds eide:
               But both ſides: acording to force of our powers,
               Shuld conquere or be conquered, or (as thant ſaide)
               Hap hapth in one houre, as hath hapt in no houres.
               Which he laſt a leaged, to ſchape our ſharp ſhowres.
               With other his framd feares, of our confuſion.
               Yet: thant here to confute, here my concluſion.
            
            
               
               In the later part of his ſaing (I ſay)
               He ſaith we maie be diſtroide: as hap may fall.
               And it muſt be graunted: that hap ſo fall may,
               But graunt that hap ſo maie: ergo hap ſo ſhall,
               That argument hath ſtrength, like a paper wall.
               May fall: and ſhall fall, are fer diferent marks:
               To ſhote at. But when the ſkie faith we ſhall haue larks.
            
            
               For the feare, that his tongtromp (to you did ſowne:)
               By thus manie flies: to thus few ſpiders ſeene,
               Setten flies with ten axes, one oke to hew downe.
               That Oke ſhall be hackt at: a good while I weene,
               Ere it will ſhrinke for flies: be it ſeare or greene.
               And the leaſte twig: that out of that Oke can fall,
               (The Oke ſtanding ſtill:) ſhall ſlea thoſe ten flies all.
            
            
               And ſo we Oke ſpiders: againſt theſe twig fliſe.
               Were they all great flies: as moſt of them be gnatts.
               And to one of vs, fortie of them do riſe.
               Yet as the giantes pawes: pat downe dandipratts,
               So ſhall we put downe: theſe dandiprat brag bratts.
               Their moſt nombre: with our moſt ſtrength to compare,
               
                  
                     •
                  ooding prikes they, mylpoſts we: comparde are.
            
            
               And where he ſaith: though flies thinke manie ſhall dy:
               Yet: ech flie thinking him ſelf ſhall ſcape with life,
               They will ſtriue: who ſhall ſet on firſt: here ſaie I,
               At end of that ſtrife: they entred in this ſtrife,
               The foole hardie flies: now moſt redie or rife:
               To cum with the firſt: ſhall feele the taſte ſo tough,
               That: who cumth laſt: ſhall thinke he cumth time inough.
            
            
               
               Thants tale (from point to point) now full anſwered.
               All force of our feare here: it wiping a waie,
               Tenforce you from feare: furder encoraged,
               Heare: and beare a waie: what I ſhall herin ſaie.
               A few woords, hilie to your comfort this daie,
               Which ſhall ſet you all: as fer out of all feare,
               As the antꝭ tale ſet you all in feare: while eare.
            
            
               Mark: all you: that in marking your enemies,
               Their force (and not your owne) do onlie behold,
               A deadlie dreadfull ſight it is: in your iyes.
               But on your owne force: your iyes being round rold:
               The ſelfe ſight of this force: ſhall you ſo enbold,
               That had you no weapons here: but haſill wands,
               Yet might ye count, your enemies now in your hands.
            
            
               Mark more: that your foes: in beholding you:
               Are ſtrikin in as deepe dread: your force to vew,
               As you are of theirs: which ſetth both ſides euine. now:
               Marke yet more: they haue y• wrōg part, you haue the trew,
               Againſt godds and manns law: this wrong thei purſew.
               Both which: ſo ſtrike them: when they wold preuayle,
               That their atempt, euer hath quaild, and ſhall quaile.
            
            
               So coward a ſpider: where can be ſene one?
               That will not liue and die: in this his knowne right,
               Shuld all ſpiders die: (as few ſhall or none)
               Yet in this quarell, ſpiders go to bliſſe quight,
               And flies to bale, without reſpect of reſpight.
               Wherfore let the flies, the ants leſſon atend:
               At their this beginning, to haue iye to thend,
            
            
               
               ⋆ ♣ And now (at end) dere freends all, pluck vp your hartes.
               Take your weapons in hand: and ſtand vp againe.
               Sticke to your takling: in this plat on all partes.
               And as for the flies, (their fare to ſhow them plaine)
               When euer they cum, they ſhall cum to their paine.
               Stand ſtiffe to me, and ſtand ſtiffe to you I ſhall.
               Flies and flies kin, we defie you traytours all.
            
            
               The ſpider thus anſwering thants tale at length:
               From poynt to point: no poynt therof omitted,
               All ſpiders: agains in full coorage and ſtrength:
               Thoſe flies to their flock: with thant againe flitted.
               Two of them (to the captayne knowne well witted:
               Toſtie into the tree: he ſtreight commaundeth,
               And thant vnto the ladder againe, forthwith.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            ¶ Vpon defiāce geuin by the ſpider to the flies, the ant brought agayne to the flies, maketh full report of all ſayde at the copweb. At end wherof, two flies argue wether thant haue deſerued life or death. By keeping or breaking former comnant to bring the ſpiders in feare of the flies. Cap. 61.
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of flies
               
            
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of spiders
               
            
            
               
               THat Captaine wild one of thoſe flies to declare,
               What had (ſince they parted) paſſed in this caſe.
               And if he ought addid: or miniſhed thare,
               The Captaine wild thother, tentrupt him in place,
               That trewth: trewlie, might appere without deface.
               Whervpon the flie: aſſigned to ſaie than,
               In a ſolem order, the proceſſe began.
            
            
               Firſt: thants tale told the ſpiders: he did repeate.
               And the feare: that that tale brought the ſpiders in,
               Then in repeate, the ſpiders tale he did treate.
               And what recoorage that did the ſpiders win.
               With defiance giuen flies, their alie, and kin.
               The captayne then axt: you that went forth tell me.
               Is this tale trew and the whole treuth? all ſaide ye.
            
            
               Two thinges (quoth the captayne) are to touch here on.
               Firſt: whether thant haue deſerued to liue or die.
               The ſeconde, apeece of the ſpiders tale gon.
               Which I ſhall touch ſoone: but firſt thantes caſe lets trie,
               Vpon his life or death, ſtanding preſentlie.
               To ſe that caſe: by agrement fullie ſcande,
               It being (I ſaie) firſt caſe to take in hande.
            
            
               It is ſo in deede (quoth one flie) in the tree.
               Wherin: whſle memorie keepeth matter in minde,
               I praie you all pacientlie to here me:
               Vprightlie declare (as equite doth binde.)
               Without affection: anie wrong waie to winde.
               But enin as conſcience: to ſpeake: doth me compell,
               So ſhall I ſpeake this tale, which I ſhall now tell.
            
            
               
               Where I haue heard wiſe flies talke: I haue herd l
                     〈…〉
                  ,
               In weightie cauſe: weightie conſideraſion.
               And thers no matter: more weightie to be weide
               Then that: in which: vpon conſultaſion
               
                  
                     •
                  ithe life or death: in determinaſion.
               And preſentlie preſent this Ants caſe: meane I:
               To wa
                     •
                  e conſideratelie, and indifferentlie.
            
            
               Whoſe life: or whoſe death: before we determin:
               Which of both to determin: meete is to wey,
               Your late determind condicion, pith wherin,
               Mas: that thant ſhould bring ſpiders in ſuch like 
                     •
                  rey:
               Of vs, as he brought vs of them. and I ſa
                     •
                  e:
               Behath done ſo. So that in my conſcience,
               Life and liberte muſt he haue, to go hence.
            
            
               And I ſaie naie (quoth the flie) in the tree by:
               He hath not performed that condiſion at full:
               To haue his life, hath he not (quoth thother flie?
               To make profe a pere here: to witts quicke and dull:
               That performance will wee reaſon, if ye wull,
               Beet (quoth thother flie,) but all flies giue an eare,
               To one thing good for all: awaie to beare.
            
            
               My brother flie, (and I ſeeming here to varie:
               Both being on one part: ſeeming on parts twaine:
               In that in this one point, we are contrarie:
               Ech one to other: it maie make you retaine:
               And detaine a dout, whether we both remaine:
               Conſtant, on that part that we profeſſe: or no.
               But here me furder here: ere we furder go.
            
            
               
               Thargument of vs tweine, is onlie this one.
               Concerning the condiſion toucht formerlie:
               Either by performance: or performance none,
               How the ants deſert ſtandth, to liue or to die.
               Thant ſhould liue ſayth he, thant ſhuld die (ſay I.)
               Now conſider: that this preſent argument,
               Is: to principall caſe, but an incident.
            
            
               Our cheife cuming is: on ſpiders to make war.
               By cauſe we no way els, can obtaine our right.
               Wherin: we ioyne with you, without iote of iar.
               This remembre I you of: to ſcrape out quight,
               All doughtes of our trewth: in iudgement of heddes light.
               For this caſe: or like caſe in caſe: vſed thus,
               Showth miſtruſt in no wight: anie caſe to diſcus.
            
            
               And now we tweine to ſatiſfie (as we can)
               Our ſelues: and to ſe you the reſt ſatiſfide,
               Aleage brother flie: what ye can herin ſcan.
               Wherto, mine anſwere ſhall forthwith be applide.
               Thants life or death: in our iudgements to ſe tride.
               That ſhall (quoth the other flie without delay,
               Cum in vre: as brieflie, as it fullie may.
            
            
               Thant (in his charged tale) to ſpiders told erſt,
               Grounded thus: ere ought begin: haue iye to thend.
               At end of thants talke, ſpiders harts it ſo perſt,
               That it ſtagard and ſtonide all that hole bend.
               Weapons falne to ground. this out crie they extend.
               Shaking of their headdes: and caſting vp their iyes.
               Take peace with the flies, take peace with the flies.
            
            
               
               Thant made ſpiders of flies: as much a frayde tho,
               As he made flies of ſpiders, in tale erſt told.
               I graunt (quoth thother flie) in deede he did ſo.
               Wherto you muſt graunt: that that feare did not hold,
               For ſpiders (forthwith) were againe brag and bolde.
               Though they ſo were (quoth he) thant performde cumnaūt,
               That (quoth thother flie) for trew, I can not graunt.
            
            
               There is (in thants cumnant) further meaning ment:
               Then the verie wordes therin fullie expreſſe:
               To bring ſpiders: in feare of flies: by bond bent:
               Is not all, that all flies looke fore: in ſucſeſſe:
               But to bring and keepe them in that fearefulneſſe.
               Bringing them in feare: not keping them in feare,
               As fruitfull to flies, as paring of a peare.
            
            
               To anſwere this quidite (quoth thother flie)
               You can haue no more of the Fore but the ſkin,
               The ant hath done all that he can poſſiblie,
               To bring ſpiders in feare: and kepe them therin,
               Whoſe good will not wanting, though powre cannot win,
               Thing that good will wold win: yet is it not ill,
               Rather then blame lacke of power, to thank good will.
            
            
               Put caſe (quoth thother) thant outh you fortie pound,
               Bound in obligacion, to paie at a daie.
               At which daie, he cumth to you (as he is bound:)
               And where he ſhould bring powre: fortie pounde to paie,
               He bringth good will: and will paie you when he maie.
               Whether wold ye more: (in this caſe, of your)
               Accept thants good will, or blame thants lacke of pour.
            
            
               
               What I wold do (quoth the other) I know nat.
               But what I ſhould do, that right well I know.
               Thant ſhowing full good will, to paie me that:
               And that lacke of pour: without his faut did grow,
               I would in trobling thant: in conſciens ſhow:
               A rigur. ye (quoth thother flie) but in law,
               To what end: wold thants good will without pour draw:
            
            
               In this case (quoth he) commun law condemth thant.
               In that the woordes of the bond, are fulfild no whit.
               Performance wherof: in thants caſe, hath no want.
               Which maie a pere to flies, of moſt ſimple wit.
               In marking theſe wordes: of this cumnant here knit:
               Thant (paine of death) ſhall bring ſpiders in like feare:
               Of flies, as he brought flies, of ſpiders: here care.
            
            
               Theſe are (in thanis cumnant) the wordes in effect:
               Which bind the ant: the ſpiders in feare to bring:
               But to keepe them in feare, no woord runth direct.
               And commun law: commonlie in euerie thing,
               Conſtrewth woordes, in their common plaine ſe
                     〈…〉
                  lieing.
               And that thant made ſpiders a fraide, ye do graunt.
               Ergo, thant (by common law) hath kept cummant.
            
            
               Now: to bring this caſe in courte of conſience:
               Declaring our meaning in theſe woordes: to be:
               That thant ſhould kepe ſpiders in feareful ſuſpence,
               Thant anſwering to this: that neuer ment he:
               To be bounde: to that inconuenient decre,
               The iudge (in this caſe and place) muſt nedes aſſent,
               With thants meaning (againſt oures) to geue iudgement.
            
            
               
               ‡*‡ In law, conſcience, and reaſon, as thinkth me,
               The deſert of this ant, doth his pardon craue.
               Landes, goods, bag, baggage, life, and liberte.
               Freends (quoth thother flie) I haue a ſoule to ſaue:
               Whervpon I proteaſt: I no malice haue:
               To thant. But in reaſon, I thinke he ſhould die.
               This ſaide, thoſe flies to their place againe did flie.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            ¶ At ende of this laſt argument. The captayne axing the ant what he can ſaye? whye he ſhould not die, the ant after a few woordes ſubmitteth him to their order. Wherevpon the captaine goinge to the queſtion, the ant is condemde by the voyce of the moſt nombre. The captaine then willing hym to make his laſt prayers, he doth ſo. Cap. 62.
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of flies
               
            
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of spiders
               
            
            
               
               THe captaine (to this) axt thant how ſayſt thou?
               What haſt thou to ſaie, why thou ſhouldſt not die here
               The talke (quoth he) for me, by the flie had now.
               In reaſon, law, and conſcience, doth me clere.
               Whoſe which tale, doth much more pithilie appere.
               For my ſelfe, then if my ſelfe had told it.
               And as he told it, I pray all to hold it.
            
            
               Wherin: as I haue kept comnant at the full,
               So craue I of you, to kepe cumnant with me.
               Here ſtand I: to liue or die now, as ye wull.
               But in killing me (a poore ant) what win ye:
               Or what leeſe I: neither profite nor honeſte,
               Honeſt death, in honeſt fame, ſhall perſeuer.
               Vnhoneſt life, vnhoneſt ſhame ſhall haue euer.
            
            
               Then ſaide the captaine: freends though I now at will:
               Onlie by vertue of mine auctoritee:
               Might geue iudgement here: this ant to ſaue or ſpill:
               Yet will I not geue it: but graunt to agree,
               To ſe this caſe decreede, by comun decree.
               Which ſhalbe tride, by theſe two wordes: ye, and no.
               And ſtreight to the queſtion herein, let vs go.
            
            
               All you that will haue the ant liue, ſay ye.
               Ye, ye: (with a loude voice) cride a great nomber tho.
               Now (quoth the captaine) on thother ſide: lets ſee:
               All that will not haue the ant to liue, ſaie no.
               No, no: cride out manie, and ſhowde manie mo:
               Then weare on thother part. Then ſaide the captaine,
               Ant: of thine owne death, thou hereſt here iudgement plaine.
            
            
               
               I commit me (quoth thant) to the great gods will.
               Say thy prayers (quoth the captaine) ere thou dye.
               On the ladder, downe on knees half dead he fill.
               Forthwith ſaying his deuocion deuoutlie.
               In which while, two flies togither wondringlie:
               Thinking thant: to be wrongfullie caſt awaie,
               In talke betwene them ſelues, as folowith did ſaie.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            ¶ While the ant ſaith his prayers on the ladder, two flies thinking him to be wrongfullie caſt a waie, pitteing the caſe, they touche (in talke) three ſortes of flies ſeene there then. Wherin is toucht ſum parte of the properties of newter flies. Cap. 63.
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of flies
               
            
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of spiders
               
            
            
               
               OH freend (quoth the tone flie) what a chaunce is this?
               An innoſent ant: among fllies to be caſt:
               The deede in deede (quoth thother) damnable is.
               I thought ſure, we ſhould with thants life haue paſt.
               For where fortié flies irefullie: on thant fround faſt,
               Three ſcore, piteouſlie lookt: as they thant wold ſaue.
               And yet thant caſt by voyce, great wonder I haue.
            
            
               To the two ſortes, that ye ſpeake of (quoth the tother)
               Thone ſort geuen to ſaue thant: thother thant to kill,
               A third: ſort indiffrent to thone part or thother.
               Did here (and do els wheare) moſt part of all ill.
               Whoſe miſcheuous maners, partli ſhow I will.
               Cumming (comunlie) in practiſed exerciſe,
               Both among ſpiders, and alſo among fliſe.
            
            
               Theſe indiffrentes (or newters) that part moſt take,
               That ſtrongeſt is, or ſtrongeſt like to be.
               And which ſide they leane to, ſuch nombre they make,
               That they beare the bell awaie: and moſt apt we ſe,
               To cleaue to the ill part, euine of properte.
               Which properte proueth (in ſortes laſt or furſt,)
               That of all ſortes, this laſt ſaide ſort is wurſt.
            
            
               And yet oft: eſtemid with the beſt. For whie,
               They faſhion them ſelues: to folow euer more:
               Thoſe that be (or like to be (I ſaie the moſt hie.
               But to all: late a loft: now laide on low ſhore,
               To whom: they haue made curtſie moſt low before:
               They either ſe them not, or ouer looke them.
               If chaunce once imbaſe them, they maie not brooke them.
            
            
               
               Two buckets in a well, thoue vp and thother downe,
               They ſtand on the bucket, that ſtandth on the brim.
               Which bucket deſending, they begin to ſrowne.
               The bucket aſſending: midwaie they mete him.
               And bucket for bucket: ſtraight thexchange made trim,
               For among all buckets (take this a plaine matter)
               They bide with no bucket: thats driuen to drink water.
            
            
               They muſt haue wine: with fare and chere of the beſt.
               Which: where and while it laſteth: in anie place,
               Who maie ſhow gratitude in ſemblance fayreſt:
               Therin contend they: to geue gloſſe of good grace,
               To their viander: who maie him moſt imbrace.
               Where they may win ought: by fayre diſimilate ſhow,
               There they flickar, and flatter, in ſauer to grow.
            
            
               But their enterteinment once drawing to ende,
               They make none a count: of thanks from beginning:
               Thend of their chere, endth the thanks of that bend.
               Streight from that place: they are ſpeedilie ſpinning,
               To an other hoſt, good cheere: good cheape winning.
               But to paie for boord, where euer this flock boords,
               Their currant coine: is lowe curtſie, and fayre woords.
            
            
               Which coine (to them) not coſtlie: and yet ſo ſcant,
               That where and when ſoeuer their there faile,
               Then doth all curtiſie, and thanks for there had, want,
               And not onlie good woords: in moſt of them quaile,
               But ſome of the worſt ſort, that are geuen to raile,
               To turne recompence on the wrong ſide or ſhore,
               Geue ill wordes, for good decdes, of frendes had before.
            
            
               
               Theſe folike freendes: otherwiſe feendlike foſe,
               Are much like mermaides: thone halfe fleſh thother fiſhe.
               On all texts: for all ſides, they do giue ſuch gloſe,
               As maie ſeeme to ſerue all ſides, as wit would wiſhe.
               By which deſimulation double deuiliſhe,
               They wind: in and out: here and there: to and fro.
               As the Reede with the winde, euerie waie they go.
            
            
               And like as we ſe the Oke: in ſtought ſtorme of winde:
               Standing ſtiffe againſt the wynde: ouerthrowne,
               And the Reede: wauing with the winde, ſtill we finde:
               Sauing it ſelf, in all our blaſtes of winde blowne,
               So in ſpiders and flies: like lot oftims growne.
               Trew ſtiffe ſtanders againſt the winde: ouerthrowe,
               Fals ſtattring folowers with the winde, ſtand and growe.
            
            
               Of our open knowne freendes, we maie be ſure.
               Of our open knowne fooes, we maie be ware.
               But theſe vnnaturall neuters: here in vre,
               Neither ſure of, nor ware of, anie wightes are.
               Either flattring lies: they ſotlelie declare:
               Or when they ſaie trew (if euer they ſaie trew.)
               That ſale they: for falſe or ill purpoſe tenſew.
            
            
               They are freendes to no man. But in reſpect,
               Them ſelues to take good: or to avoide harme:
               Or to do harme: of reuenging effect,
               They will attempt: by corrupſion to charme,
               Thoſe: vnder whoſe winges, they maie ſit cloſe and warme.
               To coole and controle: ſuch as make anie ſhow,
               To bend anie waie: from the bent of their bow.
            
            
               
               
                  ♣ To regard a right, a dog hath deuocſon:
               As much as they. But be it right or wrong:
               For loue, hate, dreade, or meede, in promocion,
               If it ſerue theyr turne: to make the wrong part ſtrong,
               That part will they ſing, in all theyr ſung ſong.
               As theſe indiffrent newter flies: haue done here,
               Whoſe wrongfull cleauing to the wrong, kilth thant clere.
            
            
               This (quath thother (your ſaying hath made me ſe.
               Wherin: I praie to the great god hartilie,
               Be we ſpiders, be we flies, what euer we be,
               That we all maie (by his grace) cut of clerelie,
               All vnkindneſſe, of newterlike indiffrencie.
               Thant now at point: from the ladder to be rold,
               A file far of flinging toward them, cride holde hold.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            ¶ The ant hauing now made his prayers, beinge at poynt to be turnd from the ladder, a flie, a far of, crieth holde. Who (lighting in the tree) bringeth ſuche a meſſage from the hed ſpider, as the Ant (thereby) is repride, and caried to priſon. Cap. 64.
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of flies
               
            
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of spiders
               
            
            
               
               VPon lighting in the tree, this ſaide this flie:
               Being in ſcoutwatch: a ſpider ſpiyng me.
               In the head ſpiders name: wild me ſpeedilie.
               To tell this to you all: if ſo be that ye:
               But this ant to death: by curryſh crewelte,
               He proteaſtith: that his priſoner flies hed,
               Shall ſtand on a ſtake, before thant be all dead.
            
            
               The ſpiders fauour to thant, made ſum flies dout:
               How it came to paſſe, whether the ſpider then thought:
               In fearing ſpiders before. Thantes tale ſo ſtout,
               Was: more to ſaue his life, among flies then cought:
               Then to feare ſpiders: for which, the flies thant brought,
               And that the tauntes: that the ſpider thant gaue,
               Weare to cloke myſtruſt, that flies to thant might haue.
            
            
               Or that the ſpiders wife: pitteing thants caſe,
               Obteynd it by ſute, or that the ſpider wold:
               Vſe the occaſion, offered there then in place.
               To rid the flie, by that colour: and not hold,
               His bond. By promiſe made to the flie, erſt told.
               Which was: to charge and diſcharge him of offence,
               As ſtandth with reaſon, law, cuſtom, and conſcience.
            
            
               With this, a formall flie into the tree flew.
               Beginning thus: freendes: wiſe flies ſaie (and haue ſeide)
               Of two inconueniences, the worſt eſchew.
               The worſt of which two here: a ſide to be leyde,
               The beſt of theſe two: is here firſt to be weyde.
               To ſaue this poore ant: to ſaue that pure flie,
               Or to ſlea thant, and both ant and flie ſlaine therby.
            
            
               
               Conſideracions herin are ſo great,
               And ſo manie: and moſt of ſuch weight,
               That they are: in counſell more meete to treate:
               Then to make an alebench talke of: to bebeight:
               For babling tounges to babble on, wherfore ſtreight:
               Mine aduice is: that ſix or eight flies moſt wiſe,
               Cloſlie conſult here, the beſt waie to deuiſe.
            
            
               Nay nay, (cride a thouſand) we will none of that.
               We will be of counſell all. Yea will quoth he?
               That kind of counſell: is more meete to hallow at:
               Then to talke in. for if all of counſell be,
               Yecan in that counſell: haue no ſecreſe,
               But (in counſel) where ſecrets lacketh anie,
               There is (ant leaſt) one counſeler to manie.
            
            
               Werefuſe that waie: cride the groſe flies againe.
               Leſt great wiſe flies, by and ſell fooliſh flies ſmall,
               If ye (quoth he) take to counſell all this traine,
               Then: nought being ſecret: all your enemies ſhall,
               Be of your counſell: and bie and ſell you all.
               But ſins ye will haue counſell cride at the croſſe,
               I wyll diſcloſe: that I wolde haue had kept cloſſe.
            
            
               The flie in copweh: with the ſpider deteinde,
               We know what he is: we neede not here to boſte him.
               To kill thant: and haue that flie kild, what is gainde?
               That ſhall all flies feele: after we haue loſt him.
               But ſins the ſpider: in ſuch ſort will hoſt him:
               As we hoſt the ant, our beſt waie doth apere,
               To kepe thant (as gage for gage) priſoner here.
            
            
               
               For though thant (trewth being folde before his face)
               Be far to baſe: that fine flie to counterpeiſe:
               Yet if the ſpider eſteeme thant: in like caſe:
               Aboue the flie: as we him aboue thant preiſe,
               Then for deliuerie of both (without ſteiſe,
               The ſpider will (in exchaunge) chaunge as gladlie,
               The flie for thant, as we will thant for the flie.
            
            
               Brieflie: the beſt way is here (in my mynde)
               To kepe thant priſoner in ſtockes fetred faſt.
               Vnder gard of certeine flies, to be aſinde,
               I yll we ſe ſumwhat of this war, furder paſt.
               And if we ſe cauſe, we maie kill him at laſt.
               Or chaunge him, for ſum flie that ſpiders maie take,
               To this mine aduice, ſhow yours, an end to make.
            
            
               At this: much bumbling among them all: there was.
               Manie woords, litle matter, and to no purpoſe.
               Nombre of ſentences here, I maie let pas.
               As things not worth the hering here to diſcloſe.
               And pas they muſt: for neither in rime nor proſe:
               I can win memorie well to write with pen,
               The tenth ſentence geuin there, againſt that then.
            
            
               And though: memorie might the nombre, haue conteind.
               Yet was all confuſed ſo: in ſuch bibble babble,
               All a like lowde, and all to loude, in voyce conſtreind,
               That all parts of beſt wit: had bene vnable:
               To catch, kepe, and make, thacount explicable:
               Of all ſayings there ſaide, Wherfore (as I ſaie:)
               Not onlie they maie, but they muſt pa
                     ••
                  e awaie.
            
            
               
               
                  
                     〈☐〉
                   But finallie: all their that chatted: anon,
               To the flies laſt tale: they all did ſo agree,
               That thant (garded) went to priſon. Whervpon,
               Ouoth the captaine: ſins this is paſt by decree,
               Being one poynt of two: erſt moued by me:
               To be moued to you, in thother poynt now,
               Conſeiue, and reſeiue the thing I ſhall ſhow you.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            ¶ The captaine flie, inueith vpon matter before paſt: in ſuch ſorte ſo encoraging the flies againe, that anono thei all crying to the captaine to march forwarde, thei brauely ſet foorth. And laiyng their ordinaunce to the copweb caſtell, thei beſege it rownde. Cap. 65.
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of flies
               
            
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of spiders
               
            
            
               
               THis thing I meane which brought ſpiders in 
                     •
                  ere
               Thant moued all the ſpiders: to caſt their iyes,
               Vpon vs their enmies. Whoſe ſhow of ſtrength there,
               Showde ſo puiſant (by huge nombre of vs flies,)
               That they (much by that ſight) gaue vp thenterpries.
               Wheron the ſpider, thre inuencions inueide.
               Reuiuing the ſpirits of the ſpiders in eide.
            
            
               Firſt: the ſpider to this wild the ſpiders all,
               To caſt iye from our force. And behold their owne.
               Which ſight, ſuch ſtrength (he ſaide) to their harts muſt call,
               That a hartleſſe harted ſpider: ſhould be growne:
               Hardy to fight, till we flies be ouerthrowne.
               Haſill wands in their hands: to hawberds in ours,
               He macht: to ouer match vs, in our moſt powrs.
            
            
               Secondlie: he bad them thinke: that we do dreade:
               The ſight of them, as much as they do feare vs.
               Thirdlie: to ſet cocke on hope and run on heade,
               Their right ſeene (ſaith he) to fight in: to death thus,
               The moſt coward will fight. And by his diſcus,
               Streight to bliſſe go they, ſtreight to bale go wee.
               But: here me part the ſtake: in theſe caſis three.
            
            
               Firſt: we them beholding: and they vs vewing,
               The feare falth indiffrentlie: on eyther ſide.
               Next: ech ſide vewing it ſelfe hath enſuing:
               Of like coorage: to bothe ſides to be a plide.
               Thirdlie: he labring right by fight to be tride:
               With clere conſcience on their ſide, let that be weyde:
               Vpon this my next ſaying: when I haue ſeyde.
            
            
               
               The ſpider to thant: in this told tale: erſt ſaide,
               Laide to vs flies rebellion. He laying,
               Example of plages paſt. Where flies diſobaide,
               The great gods commaundement. Which diſobaying,
               Hath plaged ſuch flies, according to his ſaying.
               Vpon his which ſaying: here me ſomwhat ſaie,
               How caſe of rebellion from our caſe doth waie.
            
            
               All ſubiects: in violent varience growne:
               Againſt the hie powrs, they by that great god plaffe,
               His woorke hath ſhowd his wyll, to bring ouerthrowne.
               Suffre, and not reſiſt, that muſt be here enbraſ
                     •
                  e:
               And ſulfild. Or els as ſuch flies, in time paſte:
               Haue bene ſcourged: for reſiſting, ſo ſhall we.
               And ſo to be ſcourged, well woorthie we be.
            
            
               But perceyue: theſehie powrs: muſt take hie place,
               As ſtandth with law of the g
                     •
                  eat god: rightfullie.
               For otherwiſe, it falſifith in this caſe:
               Their ſaide defence at godds hand. and contrarie:
               Where extort pour: vſurpeth place wronfullie,
               The god doth right oft: in ſuch vſurpacion,
               Put miraculus poure, to thexturpacion.
            
            
               Oft: making thinffrumentes of the ouerthrow:
               As fer to compare: vnder the ouerthrowne,
               As flies vnder ſpiders: in compariſon ſhow.
               And how this ſpider hath vſurpedlie growne,
               To potentate ſtate, that is to vs vnknowne.
               Ineuer herd flie yet, that euer could tell:
               Ground of title, whie his ſtate ſhould thus exſell.
            
            
               
               And he: an vſurper: as I thinke he is:
               You thinking ſo to, can we thinke that he?
               Breaking the Gods law (as he doth doing this)
               Shall in thil deede: by good god, defended be:
               Whome he and his offend: offending his decre,
               Naie: haſell wands in our hands: the godds poure leads,
               To beate backe their hawberds, to breake their owne heads.
            
            
               And where he alegith: that the ſpiders right:
               I
                     •
                   a ſafe warrant: with ſafe conſcience to die,
               For all ſuch ſpiders: as ſhall die in that fight,
               And that flies diyng therin: die damnably,
               That loude luſtie lie: for a lie warant I.
               With ſafe conſcience (in this caſe) corage a riſe:
               To bale go all ſpiders: to bliſſe go all flies.
            
            
               The flies: vpon hering and doing of this,
               All ſtert vp, and ſtoode vp, moſt coragiouſlie:
               With one voice all cride: ſir captaine our mind is,
               To giue ſaute to the copweb euin by and bie.
               Wherwith: much more wilfullie then wittelie,
               (And yet not witleſſe) into a ray they got,
               Marching toward the copweb, within goon ſhot.
            
            
               The watch towre ſtrake a larum: thenmyes diſcrieng
               The goonners gaue fire: and firſt at raundon, thay:
               Shot of, the goonſtones among the flies flying.
               Which gald the flies curſtlie: cumming on the way.
               But foorth flying the flies now: as faſt as they may.
               Without trenching: or ſuch defenſife forſtalles,
               Ordnance they ley, to batter that caſtell walles.
            
            
               
               ¶ ‡ Great ſhot, and greuous ſlaughter of flies, there was
               Ere they could: anie peece of the walles batter:
               To make it ſawtable, but ſo cam to paſſe:
               That in ſhort time, that wall they did ſo ſhatter:
               That theyr waielaie playne, and ſtreyght to the matter:
               (For which they cam. (they went. To ſuch a fears fight.
               As neuer fought ſpiders and flies, in mannes ſight.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            ¶ The flies geue onſet in aſſawte vpon the caſtell: the ſpiders defending it in furious fighte. And vpon the ſlaughter on both ſides, the flies retire to their campe. The ſpiders wife and childerne on kneſe to him beſeching him to take peace with the flies. Cap. 66.
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of flies
               
            
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of spiders
               
            
            
               
               IN āli battred brackes: flies rageing in a ranke,
               Ferſtie flew in, all blacke as the cloudie ſkie.
               Spiders defending them. Spider nor flie ſhrancke,
               Hundreds ſtrikin with gou
                     •
                  es, in peeſes twentie.
               Theare a leg, here an arme, there a head doth flie.
               And peece from peece: by violence flowne round,
               A flight ſhoote a ſonder, and as fer from ground.
            
            
               Both ſides to ſe: ſo buſilie occupide,
               With polaxis, partiſans, hawberds, billes goons:
               Trompets on both ſides: ech tencoorage theyr ſide.
               The auoyans of the noiſe: thorough my head roons.
               The ſoonleſſe flies fathers: the fatherleſſe flies ſoons:
               With this thing, aboue all thing (a lacke alacke)
               Oh what wofull widow flies, go now in blacke.
            
            
               Thre quarters of an houre, this fight endewred.
               Which time, I imagined domes daie preſent.
               And that all the damd ſoules: had bene procured,
               To cum with the deuill thither: in his band hent.
               There to ſet vp hell, to ſuffer theyr tornment.
               For dewring the time, I thinke no worldlie ſight,
               More like hell, then was ſight of that hellie fight.
            
            
               Terrour wherof, was to be witneſſed well:
               To ſe ſo manie aliue ſo late, now dead.
               Thouſandes ſetting on that copweb (with hart fell)
               Hang now there (like hearings in nettes) by the head.
               And ſpiders for their part: not ſcorfree lead:
               Here ſum, and there ſum, ſnacht vp a mid the rour:
               That were within halfe a houre a fore, full ſtout.
            
            
               
               At end of this fraie, no part ſaw cauſe to boſt:
               Fiue thouſand flies, and fiue hundred ſpiders ſleyne.
               Wherwith the flies: ſeeing ſo manie flies loſt,
               And of theyr purpoſe: could yet no part obteyne,
               At retret of trompet, they retyred a meyne.
               Where they before had campt. There to take a breath,
               To ſaue their honeſti, and kepe them from death.
            
            
               The ſpiders were as glad to ſe the flies backes,
               As flies were to ſhow them. For what time thay:
               (Beholding dead ſpiders) ech ſeeth his freend lackes,
               Few ſpiders (or none) ſaw cauſe to ioye that daie.
               The ſpiders wife: and childerne: nere dead in fraie:
               On knees beſought him, in waie of petiſcion,
               With the flies to take peace, on ſum condiſcion:
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            ¶ The ſpider hauing compaſſion on his wyfe and childerne as on him ſelfe, he ſaith that he will: with the aduice of his councell, in their ſute do all that maie be done for the beſt, Cap. 67.
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of flies
               
            
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of spiders
               
            
            
               
               THe ſpider: in hering of this theyr requeſt,
               Seeing them in ſuch feare: as he ſaw them there,
               That ſight and hering, maie at firſt ſight: be geſt:
               In huſband, and fathers: that anie zele bere,
               To their deare wiues: and ſwete babes, at iye and ere:
               The ſight ſhowth, and hering ſoundth ſuch ſight and ſound,
               As maie their zelus harts, to death welnie wound.
            
            
               What kind harted huſband: can ſe his kind wife,
               In like carefull caſe, without wo at his hart.
               What naturall father can ſe: for his life,
               His naturall childerne, in dread quake and ſtart.
               Without his hart ſmarting, in moſt ſmartfull ſmart.
               I thinke, ye thinke none: and euin ſo thinke I.
               Meruell not then: though the ſpider be toucht nie.
            
            
               He tenderlie tendreth his childerne and wife:
               Refuſing to ſtand vp: when he bad them riſe,
               Till he wold graunt them (his grace) to ſtint this ſtrife,
               His ſight of feare in them: and furie in flies,
               Added his more perplexite: to deuiſe:
               To vſe pittie to them: as nature draue him,
               And poliſie to flies, as reaſon gaue him.
            
            
               To this: he ſaide my dere wife: and ſweet babes two.
               Great weare the thing: by you of me deſired:
               That I could denie, in what I can do.
               But for this treaſon, ſpightfullie conſpired,
               And ſo put in vre: by flies now retired,
               Your ſute therin: yf I ſhould graunt out of hand,
               As the caſe ſtandth: I dout how that graunt ſhould ſtand.
            
            
               
               This caſe: touching me and ill ſpiders moſt nie,
               In me and my counſell, ſhall forthwith be ſcand.
               Go in, and be cherfull: and feare not: but I,
               Wyll fauer and forder your ſute: as maie ſtand:
               With moſt ſafte of vs, and all our whole band.
               They raſe and made curtſie: forthwith whervpone,
               (They and he weeping) they (from him) thens are gone.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            ¶ The ſpider ſet with twelue of his counſaile, declareth his wiues and childerns ſute (adioyning therunto eocideracions of his owne) for peace to be taken with the flies. Requiring thoſe counſellers (while he departe and returne) to determine what waie he ſhall take. Cap. 68.
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of flies
               
            
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of spiders
               
            
            
               
               THe ſpider: with his counſell, to counſell gat.
               The flies: ſtocking togither, as was then neede,
               In conſultacion: full beſilie ſat,
               Eche ſide for them ſelues, beſt waie to ſe decreede.
               I gaue eare to both ſides: to here them proſeede,
               Stretching my memorie: to a double charge,
               To hold (vpon hering) both theffectes at large.
            
            
               And firſt: what I gathred on the ſpiders ſide.
               That ſhall ye haue: and then the talke of the fliſe.
               The ſpiders: at a bord: them ſelues did deuide,
               Sir on thone: ſix on thother ſide. To deuiſe:
               (And diſide, (ſuch matter as ſhould there ariſe.
               The head ſpider: in a cheyre at the boordes end,
               Entrith: as foloweth here after pend.
            
            
               Dere freendes: our preſent parell in wordes to dilate:
               It in deede: in hart felt: and at iye here ſeene,
               Should ſhow follie. Our caſe is now to debate,
               Our beſt waie: to winde out of this daunger cleene:
               To ſtey our ſtate, as before ſtayde hath beene.
               Wherin: betwene two things: I doutfullie dout,
               To which one: I ſhall vndoutedlie, ſtand ſtout.
            
            
               My wife and children: vpon their knees all three:
               With dead hartes: as death in their faces: did ſhow,
               As I loue theyr liues: humblie be ſought me,
               By ſome meane forthwith, to peace with flies to grow.
               For ſhould they (ſaid they) ſe the like ouerthrow:
               That they had ſene: betwene our enmies and vs,
               Of theyr preſent deathes, they felt feling diſcus.
            
            
               
               This perplexth me: what one waie to take of twaine:
               Nature prokth me (in pitteing thoſe three)
               To take peace with the flies, to ronne a maine.
               Reaſon prouokth me: politiklie to flee,
               The ſhow of deſire: in peace with flies to be.
               Which pittie to vſe: and policie to refuſe,
               How cruell flies will cock with vs, thats no newſe.
            
            
               Now: on thother ſide: if I pittie omit,
               Nought weyng my wife: and ofſpring in this caſe,
               But do bend vpon policie, euerywhit:
               To out face the flies: to ſtand face to face,
               And theſe three (by dread) to die in the meane ſpace,
               Then am I double dead. Thone: that they death haue,
               Tother to ſe them die, whome my ſelfe might ſaue.
            
            
               I praie this whole boorde: this caſe firſt to reuolue,
               Eche in him ſelfe, and then all togither ſpeake.
               Deuiſing your beſt. Wherin while ye reſolue:
               Your full minds, to me (at my returne) to breake,
               Ile go, to cheere my wife and babes, wo and weake.
               They praide him to do ſo: which rang in mine eare,
               That they were more glad, to haue him thence then theart.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            ¶ Straight as the ſpider is gone, the reſt ariſe withdrawing a ſonder in three plumpes fowre in a plumpe, no one knot knowing what the reſt ſaith, which done: thei all ſit downe again againſt the ſpiders returne. Cap. 69.
            
               
               THe ſpiders backe turnd, ſtreight theſe twelue a roſe
               By foure, foure, and foure, flocking into flockes three.
               Euerie flock talking, and ſtanding togither cloſe.
               Ech flocke vnto other (by ought I could ſe,)
               As ſtrange, and as loth that their talke herd ſhould be,
               As all could haue bene: that that ſpider that ſeaſon,
               Should haue heard theyr talke, had they all talked treaſon.
            
            
               All ſhowde one maner, which ſhowd them all meeuid:
               Beating their fiftes, bēding their brows ſhaking their heads
               In feare and fewrie, all were greatlie greeuid,
               Talke of two: of which three flockes: whereto it leades,
               I could not yet know: ſofte wiſpring, not fer ſpreades.
               But talke of the third flocke (ſtanding ſumwhat nere,)
               Harkning ſumwhat to them,) ſumwhat did I here.
            
            
               Freendes (quoth one of thoſe foure) we foure being one,
               We maie talke (and let vs talke) franklie our mindes.
               This ſpider (our ring leader) to his flocke gone,
               In debate of this caſe: to which he vs bindes,
               Is to me not vn geaſt: how he with vs windes.
               But firſt, not to teache: but to tell what he is,
               And then what he meanth here, here me ſaie in this.
            
            
               The ſpider is of wit, wonderus darke and deepe.
               And double as double, as he is deepe and darke.
               Loure where he loueth, laugh weare he hateth to creepe.
               To botum of boſum: for to ſpie what ſparke,
               Kindled: with or againſt him, he maie there marke.
               Much for which purpoſe: he giueth vs now a bone,
               Of pittie: and polliſie, to gnaw vpon.
            
            
               
               But exepf: we ſpice pittie and poliſie both:
               As the ſeſoning maie ſauer in taſte to ſtand:
               As in his taſte and ſauer: ſauerlie goth,
               He will gnaw our bones out of taſte: out of hand.
               Which ye ſhall ſe: when I this ſcantlin haue ſcand,
               Betwene his politikeleſſe pittie (erſt ſaide)
               And his pitteles poliſie, (here erſt laide)
            
            
               This dought: to bring out of dout, he hath vs ſet.
               Whether (by pitie) to ſaue his babes and wife:
               He ſhall ſeeke to flies: ſum peace of them to get,
               Or by poliſie: to ſtand ſtiffe ſtill in ſtrife,
               And leeſe: both his babes, and alſo his wiues life.
               Firſt caſe: ſhowing our daunger in generall,
               Laſt caſe: ſhowing his daunger in ſpeciall.
            
            
               This trap (not for mice) for ſpiders is baighted.
               To ſe what bit we bite: or on what ſtring we harp.
               If his pittie here: be reſtreynd or ſtraighted,
               And that (on his poliſie) our tounges do earp:
               More to ſaue our ſelues: from daunger of deth ſharp:
               Then to ſaue him and his, we plaing thoſe parts,
               He wyll ſure ſuſpect, that we haue traytors harts.
            
            
               And if we leaue poliſie: and pittie take:
               Concluding: that we will bide all Ieoberdie:
               Rather then ſee: of him or his: one finger ake,
               Ile hold a hunderd pound (to an halpenie)
               That he will take all that talke: for flatterie.
               Though his iye on vs therat pleaſantlie pinke,
               Yet will he thinke, that we ſaie not as we thinke,
            
            
               
               Theſe two: two edged caſes: take I for ſuch,
               That they maie be taken: a two edged ſwoord.
               Ech ſide of both cutteth, where euer it touch.
               But when we ſhall reſolue: at yonder boord,
               Leauing theſe two waies: I haue deuiſde a thoord.
               Wherwith, a tale he told them: ſo ſilently,
               That (tyll he told it at boord,) no woord herd I.
            
            
               But in taking end, I herd him to them ſaie:
               The ſpider will: our minds, ſeuerallie know.
               And I the yongeſt, ſhall ſpeake firſt, (no naie.)
               And ſo ech other folowing: ſitting a row.
               Wherin: as you in coorſe to ſpeake (after me) grow:
               Saye you: in this deepe caſe: vpon depe waying,
               Ye haue nought to ſaie, but taffirme my ſaying.
            
            
               And ſo ſhall we (ſayde he) ſaue our four liues.
               They agreede. And to touch the ſecond ſort now,
               Auncients to the firſt, one of them four contriues:
               To conclude. In matter what: or maner how,
               From hearing I was yet kept (as I told you)
               But the talker to that flocke at end, ſpake out:
               Theſe woordes. This way ſhal ſaue our four liues: no dout.
            
            
               Of the third and moſt auncient flocke likewiſe,
               One at end of his talke: theſe woords a loude ſpake.
               This waie ſhall ſaue our four liues. Or at leaſt ſiſe:
               Our honeſties, and honeſt ſpiders vndertake:
               Life much rather: then honeſtie, to forſake.
               Ye ſaie truth (ſayde the three) and we three a gree,
               With you to leſe life, rather then honeſtee.
            
            
               
               
                  
                     〈☐〉
                   With this, they all at the boord ſat downe againe.
               That they (at the ſolders returne) might appere,
               Set as he left them: all as one to remaine.
               (While he went to (and came fro) his ſtock moſt dere.)
               Who (ſo finding them,) with ſad and ſobre cheere:
               Sat downe in his cheyre: Whare he had ſit erſt.
               And this proſeſſe to his purpoſe, promptlie perſt.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            ¶ The ſpider ſet againe with his counſaſle, in thoſe three ſaid ſorces, ariſe thre diuers waies to take herin. The be
                  〈…〉
                one wher of to chooſe, the ſpider departeth to deuiſe vpon. Willing them to cauſe all corners of that caſtell to be clenſed and all 
                  •
               attred places made ſtronge againe. Cap. 70.
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of flies
               
            
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of spiders
               
            
            
               
               AS I told you I wold go, ſo haue I gone
               To comfort my wife and mine: in your names all.
               Aſſuring them: of your good hartes euerichone:
               To pittie and releue their dread. As may fall:
               In your moſt portable parell, cum what cum ſhall.
               Which hath (and nought els could (comforted them ſo,
               That quiet they harke to here, how thend ſhall go.
            
            
               Now: in caſe of pittie and pollici: erſt leyde,
               Touching the two doughtes: which I was, and am in,
               I require fullie to here: what ye haue weyde.
               Wherin: your ſentences ſeuerallie to win,
               You ſhall ſeuerallie ſpeake: and the yongeſt begin.
               Wherewith that yongeſt (as he erſt ſaide he wold,)
               In woords next folowing here, his tale he told.
            
            
               In theſe two caſes: bulted, ſifted, and fand,
               To ſew for peace: in pittie of you and your,
               Or (by poliſie) to war ſtiflie to ſtand,
               The doubtes debated here, in moſt might of our,
               Require this demaund: iudged in my moſt pour.
               Whether to take no peace, or what peace to take.
               Labor wherin, I thinke veyne: all that we make.
            
            
               If I be worthy in your counſell to liue,
               My counſell is: that all your ſtudie ſhalbe:
               Not what peace ye ſhall take, what peace ye will giue:
               The flies being fraide: as much or more then we,
               Wyll not they ſeke for peace▪ yes I warant ye:
               Truſt not my wit: except ye haue out of hand,
               Flies, ſewing to take peace, as your wyll ſhall ſtand.
            
            
               
               Wherin: what your wyll ſhalbe ere the flies cum,
               Good is to dreme: to what point in peace to wade.
               And not when they cum: to ſtand muet or mum:
               In larke of an anſwere (by you or yours made.)
               Nedefull haſte in this caſe, doth me full perſwade:
               From nedles haſtie deuice: in thother caſes:
               Both which (this taking place) they take no places.
            
            
               This (vnder your correction,) is my full mind.
               And mine (quoth the ſecond) and mine (quoth the thurd.)
               And mine (quoth the fourth: quoth the fift) I am enclind,
               Of an other mind: then this tale hath now ſturd.
               For two cauſes. thone: for that this touchth no wurd:
               Of the caſe proponde, which is our charge to touch,
               Thother, for that I haue other matter tauouch.
            
            
               The pith of theſe two caſes: I take to conſiſt,
               Whether (by pittie: your fearfull flocke to ſaue,)
               We ſhall take peace with the flies: as the flies liſt,
               To our common daunger: by pride of flies braue)
               Or politicklie ſhow: that we no peace wyll haue.
               To feare flies, and ſaue vs: yours and you: in parell,
               By their feare of warres continuall quarell.
            
            
               I hold: the beſt one waie of theſe both: to be,
               To ſaue your wife: and children: your ſucſeſſion.
               And therby you. For lacking you, what are we?
               Who can (like you) ſaue vs: from oppreſſion?
               Our benefites (by you) enforce confeſſion:
               For notable gouernance in gouernours,
               Neuer was felt our like gouernance: to yours.
            
            
               
               Your ofſpring ſo toward: to rule after you:
               As you rule before them: to their erudicion:
               For our ineſtimable welth now, and after now.
               No ſpider hath the contrarie ſuſpicion:
               But all ſpiders, in moſt humble ſubmicion:
               Submit them whole to you: ſo loued or drad,
               As neuer was ruler, that euer ſpiders had.
            
            
               Our commoditees: woon by you: being huge,
               Huge were our loſſe likwiſe: by your being loſt.
               You: and yours: appering here our whole refuge,
               Pittie: or policie: which ſhalbe the poſt:
               In this caſe to ſticke to: my ſentence bendth moſt,
               Ere daunger (by bread): to you or yours ſhall riſe,
               To cleaue here to pittie, and take peace with fliſe.
            
            
               So ſay I (ſayth ſecond) of that ſecond ſort.
               And we ſaide the third (and fourth) which ſayd: a none,
               The firſt of moſt auncient foure: his report
               Beginth. but fyrſt: this tale laſt gone,
               He ſeemeth to commend (in part) where vpon,
               He ſhowth his mynde. But fyrſt (I ſaie) in woords fayer,
               He ſaith as foloweth next, of thys laſt ſayer.
            
            
               Sayd (this ſaide auncient ſpider) this tale told laſt.
               Sumwhat to touch (vnder pardon) I entend.
               The tellers mind, I diſpreyſe in no part paſt.
               But in ſondrie parts, I can hys minde commend.
               Namely: in that his mind is bent to defend:
               You and yours, from the death: as he ought to do.
               As fer as deutie deulie drawth, and we to.
            
            
               
               But as theſe two doutful daungers touch our ſtate:
               From top to toe, (as wo ſaie: hie, meane, and low.)
               So: from brim to botom: them both to debate,
               In faithfull playne maner: (as in hert maie grow:
               All darke diſſimilaſion, to ouerthrow.
               Sotellie ſounding to ſence depraued,
               That trace ſhall I treade, vnder pardon craued.
            
            
               In theſe two toſt termes: pitie, and policie,
               To turne and toſſe, recitall: of this whole caſe,
               No nede. After recitall ſo ſondrilie,
               The termes but namd, where memorie is moſt baſe:
               Remembraunce of the whole, thoſe termes bring to place.
               Which pitie: is here aplide, to ſaue you and yours,
               And policie: here aplide, to ſaue vs and ours.
            
            
               Beſeching you: and all you before I ſaie,
               Till all my ſaying be ſaide: iudge therin no part.
               But throughlie here me without ſtop or ſtaie,
               And take in good part, my plaine trew meaning hart.
               Good tales: ill taken, may make the teller ſmart.
               But here, I praie hering. And hauing expreſt,
               In folowing the effect, do as ſemth you beſt.
            
            
               But firſt: theſe two termes: pittie, and policie,
               (As I vnderſtand them) here me, them define,
               Pittie: is an affect of all clemencie
               That doth alway: moſt clementlie encline,
               To haue regard, to remittible diſipline.
               In matter of Iuſtice: or anie caſe els,
               All diſpleaſant ſuffrance, pitie it expels.
            
            
               
               Policie: is the thing that circumſpectly weith
                     •
                  .
               Wiſelie (and warelie) to put things in vre.
               As reſons ferdeſt fetch: in foreſight purueithe,
               An ouer: rech aboue the weake wittes cure.
               So to put things in vre, that they maie endure:
               As no light blaſt of winde: do ouer blow them,
               Nor lacke of firme foundacion, ouer throw them.
            
            
               And policie: (right taken (as I take it)
               In good part is taken, and conſtrued euer.
               Policie: is not as ſum ſpiders make it:
               Wittie wreched wile, that doth all indeuer:
               In wrongfull ill, to inuent to perſeuer:
               The name of policie there, is to be laft:
               And to be namd falſhed: otherwiſe falſe craft.
            
            
               Pittie: wrong named, and wrong vſed alſo:
               Maie be and hath bene. As where it is aplide,
               To help one: or few, to the hurt of manie mo.
               The pittide part: being depe offenders tride,
               Thother part innoſent. This (clere to diſſide:)
               Is either not pittie: or peuiſh pittie:
               Which (as thold ſaying ſayith) marth the cittie.
            
            
               But the right vſe of pittie is (as I geſſe)
               To pittie part, as pittie maie pittie all:
               Without wrongfull hurt, anie one to oppreſſe.
               This meane I: in vſe of pittie generall:
               But touching caſe (namelie yours) eſpeciall,
               How it and ſuch, from this generall caſe ſwar
                     ••
                  ,
               Shalbe touchit anone: as my meane wit maie ſarue,
            
            
               
               But: policie, and pittie, pictured thus,
               I take man and wife. and temperance (as who ſa
                     ••
                  )
               Miniſter in this mariage, I diſcus.
               Knitting this cupple: in ſtedie ſtinted ſtaie,
               Policie to commaunde, and pittie to obaie.
               Policie her huſband: and pittie his wife,
               Politicklie to kepe al, from pitteleſſe ſtrife:
            
            
               Where policis maie bring pittie: promptlie plaſte,
               That huſband will not keepe that wife: out of place:
               And that wife (that huſbands aſſent not purchaſte,)
               Will not preſume to take place, both to diſgrace:
               Her huſband: and alſo her ſelf to deface:
               Thus policie and pittie: in caſe generall,
               Ioyne (for common welth) in common gouernall.
            
            
               But now: to grow toward ſpecialitee,
               Where I laide miſuſe of pittie before:
               To ſtand: in not pitteing generalitee:
               By pitteing the leſſe nombre before the more,
               Though that rule: leane rightlie to the right ſhore:
               In caſe of pittie: much miſuſde generallie:
               It maie (and doth) feyle: in ſum caſe ſpeciallie,
            
            
               Sum thre or four: are in pittie to be weide:
               More, then ſum other three or four thouſand are,
               In ſondrie caſes: which policie doth eide.
               Namelie, and properlie, new here to declare:
               In perticuler caſe, of your preſent care.
               To ſaue vs and ours, and leeſe you and yours,
               Or leeſe you and yours, and ſaue vs and ours.
            
            
               
               The loſſe of foure thouſand of meane ſpiders now:
               Touching daungerous diſturbance of theſtate,
               Were leſſe loſſe then were you foure: and chieflie you.
               But the loſſe of the whole corps, of vs to rate:
               With loſſe of you four: the moſt loſſe to debate.
               This caſe: to our caſe: preſentlie directed,
               Is nedeleſſe: or booteleſſe, to be reſpected.
            
            
               Needleſſe I take the talke: as in this reſpect.
               Fyrſt our caſe rechith not: determinatelie:
               To deth of you, or vs, but it doth direct:
               A dread of deth in yours: and in you therby.
               Or daunger of death in vs: not deth clerly:
               But dread: or daunger of deth: and deth out right,
               Are oft (and now I hope) fer diſtaunt in ſight.
            
            
               Yours in dread, and we in daunger, of deth much:
               All may be brought: and deth yet folow no whit.
               Neither in yours, nor ours. And this caſe is ſuch,
               As if ye will therin: policie admit.
               To out face flies, the corps of ſpiders to knit:
               In coragious countenance, then ſhall ye ſe,
               The flies in feare, and your feare nedleſſe to be,
            
            
               As the talke is nedleſſe: to compare the loſſe:
               Of vs all, with you four: for none ſhalbe loſt.
               And otherwiſe, booteleſſe, in this talke to toſſe:
               In matter on this ſide or that ſide to boſt.
               The moſt or leaſt loſſe: for all leaſt and moſt:
               Shall die. yf ye ſhrinke and ſeke peace, flies will none.
               Then we being fyrſt ſlayne, you and yours are gone.
            
            
               
               Will they flea vs and ſaue you, ſeeing this war:
               Againſt you: is chieflie or onlie begon?
               Naye make ye ſure. Ye are the principall bar:
               Or beame, in their iyes: as the quarell doth roon,
               Wherin, I perceyue no way: ought to be woon,
               But politiclie tencorage all our whole rout,
               A freſh a gainſt the flies, in ray to ſtand ſtout.
            
            
               We in corage, out of corage the flies are.
               And we out of corage, in corage are they.
               We ſpiders preſing forward, back the flies bare.
               Spiders drawing back, foorth preſe flies without ſtey.
               Thus ye ſe: policie here muſt make the waie,
               If anie way maie be made, by poſſible pours:
               To preſerue all, both you and yours, vs and ours.
            
            
               This: vnder pardon of you and yours: erſt praide:
               Is: both my conſcience, and my counſell playne.
               And mine (quoth the next of the three) with him ſteide.
               And like wiſe ours alſo (quoth thoſe other twayne.)
               The ſpiders outward wordes, ſhowd ſhow to retaine:
               All their ſayings: and all a like: to like well.
               But how he likte inwardlie, I could not tell.
            
            
               But: on theſe three diuers tales: a part to muſe,
               Which one to take: or which to leaue of all three,
               He ſaid he wold (and did) depaxt to peruſe.
               Willing them in meane time, an order to ſee.
               That caſtell in warlike caſe, againe to bee.
               Wherevpon he: to his inner manſion gone,
               To the ſoudiers ſpiders, they went a none.
            
            
               
               To whom, that moſt auncient ſpiders repeated:
               Such part hereof, as was meete for them to here.
               But firſt, he inuented in that he treated:
               To encorage them all, to be of good chere.
               And pluck vp their harts, if flies againe march nere.
               Matter of which rule ſuch: and the tale ſo told,
               That it brought the ſpiders againe, brag and bold.
            
            
               Then entred he: into repeticion,
               Of cōmaundement giuen, for that ſort renuing.
               For clenſing and ſtrengthing: in ech condicion,
               As it was, before former ſaute in vewing,
               The parell of a ſecond ſaute, eſchewing:
               To ley downe their wepons: and ſet to their hands,
               To ſcour: and to repeire, all there, that in nede ſtands.
            
            
               The whole nombre (ſauing reſerued to watch)
               The watch in the watch towre: and vpon the walls,)
               Ley by their weapons: ech one his place to catch:
               To ſtrengthin weake places, ech one to worke falls.
               Stronglie they ſtop vp, al goon hole galls.
               All places ſpide: in anie kinde of fauting,
               Made ſtronge in defence of a ſecond ſauting.
            
            
               The dead ſpiders they buried: in the caſtell cloſſe.
               The dead flies hangd out in Iebets openlie.
               But to ſe the ſpiders: how they turne and toſſe:
               Sum making of graues: ſum the ſpiders burie:
               Sum making iebets: ſum hangin flies on hie:
               Sum ſpinning threeds: to repeir that caſtell wall.
               Xneuer ſaw the like, nor I think neuer ſhall.
            
            
               
               ¶ ¶ Which: while they bring in pre eſtate, now to here:
               What the flies (in commun counſell (not priuate)
               Be in deuiſing: what waie maie beſt a pere:
               On their part, eche partie to ſaue his owne pate.
               They: being ſet in counſell: it to debate:
               In a troope: be ſide the reformacion tree,
               Thorder and thend folowth here, to here and ſe.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            ¶ The flies in campe be at cownſell: deſirouſly deuiſing: by what meane to get peace beſt. Whervpon the captaine inuenting a meane to driue thāt to ſew for peace if thei will be ruled by him, thei thervnto agree. And thervpon the ant is brought before the flies. Cap. 71.
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of flies
               
            
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of spiders
               
            
            
               
               THe flies diſcoragid (as erſt diſcloſed,)
               They all cride to take peace ſum maner of waie,
               A warfare to fare: that fare them diſpoſed:
               Rather to faſt, and to fare full hard (that day:)
               Then ſharp ſauts, with ſowre ſawſe: to taſte more in ſaie,
               Their bumbling buzing: at their capteyns crie ſeſt,
               This aduiſed aduice, to them he expreſt.
            
            
               Freendes all: that ye all wolde haue peace, ye all ſhow.
               But what waie to cum to peace, none of you tell.
               Two pleyne waies theare be, to prouoke peace to grow.
               One: to ſubmit vs on knees (to our foes fell,)
               An other, to offer them talke, war to expell.
               By taking peace: vnder condiſcion ſuch,
               As maie extinkt (in both partes) all cauſe of gruch.
            
            
               But firſt: yf we ſubmit vs, all are vndoone.
               Meane mercie, nay mayne miſerie: ſhalbe our end,
               Flies knees: to furious ſpiders, win no boone.
               The ſeconde, and the beſt waie is, to extend:
               Sum talke as I tolde: which if ye condiſend:
               To folow, we muſt enter talke in the ſame:
               By ſum other bye meane: then in our owne name,
            
            
               If we ſew directlie, ſpiders wilbe prowde.
               And we eyther get no peace: or ſuch a peace,
               As betwene war and that peace, ſmall choyſe a vowd
                     •
                  .
               Exactions, raunſums, or fines, ſhall neuer ceaſe.
               Bonds of good abearing: ſhall haue no releaſe.
               Flies lands, flies goods, flies liues, and flies liberte,
               Manie clearlie loſt, and all in ieoberde,
            
            
               
               But you folowing (as ye ought) my counſel,
               I wyll driue thant to make ſute: this ſute to ſew:
               By a tale told to him here. Which I will tell:
               If ye will here it and ſoth it, the flies grew:
               To a gree. Wherewith certaine flies for thant flew,
               Who: fet and ſet at ladder foote by the fliſe,
               The Captaine (to thant:) did this tale deuiſe.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            ¶ The captaine telth the ant that the flies haue retired from thaſſaute: (wheare manie ſpiders are ſlayne) to ſe whether the ſpiders wyll ſew for peace, for which ſince they ſew not, the flies will aſſaute them agayne, But the ant they wyll hang ſtreyght before they go, Cap. 72
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of flies
               
            
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of spiders
               
            
            
               
               ANt (pleyne and trew, ſhort and ſharp) a tale of me:
               Told to thee, thou muſt here. Thus ſtandith the caſe.
               A great conflict (euin now) the ſpiders and we,
               Haue had: which ſlew ſpiders a piteous pace.
               Tyll pittie wrought our retire, to ſe what grace:
               Might a pere in them: to ſew to vs for peace,
               In giuing vs our right, this war to ſurſeaſe.
            
            
               And: that they do vs wrong intolerable,
               I durſt make thee (their frend) our iudge (for my part)
               The abhominacion is enſcrewtable:
               To pronounce at full, how they (by will peruart,)
               Haue wrongfullie wroong vs, to wronges of moſt ſmart.
               Which we haue borne: and neuer theron wrokun,
               Till the burden, our backs and necks hath brokun.
            
            
               And when we hope (if we at anie time hope:)
               That our breakbacke burdens: ſhall cum to ende,
               Then ſhowth thencreſe of our burdens: ſo large ſcope,
               That they ſeme but be goon. None end ſene tentende.
               Wherin, their force forſith vs, to band in bende.
               Rather: then bide their perpetuall ſhakling,
               To ſtand agaynſt them, and ſtick to our takling.
            
            
               As we haue ſtikt now here (I ſaie) to their payne.
               And to avoide their more payne (I ſay and ſayde:)
               Being loth: to ſet a broch their blood againe,
               We haue traynd a long time (endiffrentlie weyde:)
               To kepe them: from thextreme extremite ſtayde,
               To ſe their ſewt for peace: vs to peace tatempt.
               Which: thorow their owne faut, (we ſaie) is exempt.
            
            
               
               But ſince they ſew not, we will ſet on a gayne.
               To leaue no ſpider (or els no flie, (a liue.
               But ere we go: we haue made decre certaine:
               To hang thee ſtreight. Ant: it booteth not to ſtriue,
               Get a goſtlifather: that can ſhortlie ſhriue.
               Diſpatch hangman. Sum flie go: ſum bell to toule.
               That ſpiders and flies, may praie for thants ſoule.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            ¶ The Ant vpon ſoden ſhorte warning of his death: beynge much diſmayde, laying all that he can for his life, and yet can get no grace, he prayth reſpight: while he be brought to the ſpider to ſe whether he wyll grow to anie peace to ſaue the antes life. Whiche graunted, the ant is brought before the ſpider. Cap. 73.
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of flies
               
            
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of spiders
               
            
            
               
               NEuer was there ant, (I wene) ſo aſſonſde:
               As was this ant vpon this chiefe flies tale told:
               Had he bene an ant plenteouſlie 
                     ••
                  onide,
               He wold haue geuen ſacks full of ſiluer and gold:
               To haue bene ſafe thens, but he preide them to hold:
               And heare him ſpeake once againe before he die.
               Which graunted, this began the ant by and bie.
            
            
               Maiſter Captaine (and all (my maiſters) here fliſe:)
               I beſech you conſider, conſideratlie.
               Not onlie: that none enmite doth a riſe:
               In me to ward you: proued aprobatlie,
               Before nor ſince my ſuffrance, captiuatlie:
               But frendſhip in aduiſing you peace to kepe,
               Wheare war hath ſins, brought manie flies in dead flepe.
            
            
               Alſo to vewe: I humblie you inſtant,
               What time ye haue hangd me, what thing ye haue woon.
               The carcas of a poore wretched ſeelie ant.
               Not worth the rope that it hangth by: in the ſoon.
               Way well (with your ſelues) what a threede this were ſpoo
                     •
                  
               
               An innoſent: by tiranie: to death to draw,
               No ſtie therby winner, the worth of a ſtraw.
            
            
               Note more: this thing once done, can neuer be vndoone.
               And till it be doone, maie be doone when ye will.
               Which being now doone: and repented as ſoone,
               To late cumth that repentaunce: to auoyde thill.
               Marke more. If you in this furie: me here kill,
               Then the feyre flowre of flies (as ye take him) dieth,
               As from the ſpider, thretning therin erſt lieth.
            
            
               
               Quoth the captaine turne the ladder: thant cride ſtay.
               If all this afore ſaide: my life will not ſaue,
               Here this deuice: deuiſed an other way.
               That is: it maie like you: I your graunt to haue:
               Of one poore petiſſion, which I laſt here craue.
               Let me go: gardid to the ſpiders againe,
               To proue: what peace I can for my life, obtaine.
            
            
               Beete ſo cride the flies: who made a harold go:
               To make moſt humble ſute: in behalfe of thant,
               That he and (ſaue fortie flies with him) no mo,
               Might be admitted to his ſpeche: that inſtant.
               The ſpider (ſeming to graunt it: hard and ſcant,)
               Bad him cum. Wherwith awaie the harold went,
               Showing the flies and ant, the ſpiders aſſent.
            
            
               Fortie flies garding the ant, flew forth brauely.
               The ſpiders fort, renewde and furniſht agayne.
               The hed ſpider in the mids: ſtanding grauelie:
               And (for terror) on Iebets and galows remaine,
               Flies thouſands hanging: ſum in rope ſum in chaine.
               Thant: being brought before the ſpider to ſpeake
               His minde (as folowith) forthwith he did breake.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            ¶ Thant (in waie of peticion) ſewinge to the ſpider for peace laying conſideracions to prouoke him the rather therto, the ſpider doth attentiuelie, geue the ant hering, Cap. 74.
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of flies
               
            
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of spiders
               
            
            
               
               RYght exelent hunkill, if I wofull wretche:
               To call you mine vnkill: may here be ſo bold,
               Two things: to pronounce playnlie without fer fetche,
               Is my preſent purpoſe. Firſt of which doth hold:
               Thankes, for ſauing my life. Seconde to be told,
               Standth vpon a requeſt by petiſcion:
               For parell, like the firſt in condiſcion.
            
            
               As thus: of life: I am in like daunger now,
               As I was then▪ (except your mercifull eyde:)
               The flies: being bent to liue and die on you,
               To ſawt this caſtell a freſh, they haue purueyde.
               And had bene here ere this: ſauing that they ſteyde:
               To hang me firſt, which hath no longer ſtay:
               But till I (of peace) bring them word, yea, or nay,
            
            
               Nowhit at their ſute: but all togither at mine.
               They reſpight my life: till my returne: to trie,
               What good lucke: your good loue, to me may a ſine:
               By enclinacion to peace, charitablie:
               At my ſute, for my ſake. Both to ſaue therby,
               My life: and as manie of yours: as ſhall,
               In this feerce force, be clapt in the necks withal.
            
            
               And ſince: your owne eſtate ye can better wey:
               What waie is beſt: (for you and yours) then I can,
               And that ye know: the worſt peace: (as wiſe wights ſey:)
               Is better then is the beſt war, to ſcan,
               As profe ſhowth partlie here, ſince this war began:
               This conſidered: conſidering of your part here,
               I leane of to conſider mine owne part clere.
            
            
               
               Fyrſt: beſeching you with me, and for me now.
               To conſider: I am in this parell brought,
               By my ſelfe, for my ſelfe, naie by you for you:
               Without my ſeeking: by your owne requeſt wrought.
               And ſtinted reward, coruptlie to be bought,
               None ye offred, none I axid, nor none I haue:
               Nor none I ſought: but your fauer to vowſaue,
            
            
               Secondar
                     •
                  lie: your caſe erſt arbitrated:
               I forthered: (as fer as my wit might force pour:)
               Which ſhowde ſo, when I the ſame Iterated,
               That I had woordes of thanke: from the mouth of your,
               Thirdlie: where chaunce of war: was to me ſo ſour:
               That I (for you) was captiue and ſhould haue dide,
               What (and how) things grew theron, here them ſpecifide.
            
            
               At the flies firſt approch: toward this aſſa
                     •
                  t,
               To a tree they drew me: ſtreight to hang me there.
               Axing of me, or laying to me: no faut,
               But that I was your freend. In which deadly fere,
               One flie: erſt at tharbiterment (as other were.)
               I prayd to ſpeake, that I might ſpeake ere I dide.
               Which was at laſt graunted: but fyrſt long denide.
            
            
               My tale there, ſtood on two entents in effect.
               One: to ſaue mie ſelfe, an other to ſaue you▪
               
               And yours. And therin to ſcape vnſuſpect.
               Fyrſt for my ſelfe, I layde that no flie could ad
                     〈…〉
                  :
               That euer I offended flie: ere naw or now.
               Praing them (thervpon) to here and adiudge m
                     •
                  
               
               As might moſt equallie ſtand with equite.
            
            
               
               And for the ſaftie of you: and of yours here:
               To qualifie the feerce furie of the flies,
               All trembling terror: that I could make apere,
               That might diſcorage the flies: in anie wiſe,
               That did I at the full: to the flies deuice.
               Which wrought ſuch effect: and did their harts ſo pall,
               That they cride for peace: and wold haue fled ny all.
            
            
               But the cheefe flie ſteying them: then againſt me,
               Spake his pleaſure theare, as you did after here.
               He ſaw and ſaide to the flies: that they might ſe:
               My counſell giuen them, was againſt them clere.
               And that I put them in feare to cum here mere:
               Onlie for the loue: that I to ſpiders bare,
               And to ſet my ſelfe at liberte, from flies ſnare.
            
            
               Whervpon he moued, and they did conſent:
               That I ſhuld be ſent hither as ſent was I,
               To tell a tale, to abate your furie bent.
               Wherin: if I brought you all as fearefullie:
               To feare them: as I had brought them formerly:
               To feare you, then ſhould I be ſet frank and free.
               Or els (at my returne,) hangd ſtreyght ſhould I bee.
            
            
               Here: to prolong my life, nature prouokt me:
               To make you afraide of them, ſumwhat to ſaie.
               But yet againe to that: affection yokt
               To reaſon ſo fayntlie, when that I did inuey,
               That you (by reaſon) ſtreight wiped that feare away.
               For which, I was no ſoner returnd vnneth,
               Ere I had (at the flies handes) iudgement of deth.
            
            
               
               ☞ ☜ Fyrſt at your requeſt, for you: and not for me:
               I cam: crauing no reward: but your good will.
               Second: in tharbitrate caſe I wrought decre,
               To the beſt for you. As fer as I could ſkill,
               Thirdlie, for your ſake: to death moſt vile or ill,
               I was then drawne: and am now drawing againe,
               Except my greefe: ſum grace, of you obtaine.
            
            
               That is: that it maie like you, to flies to graunt,
               Peace. Such as diſpaire giue no cauſe to refuſe,
               And pride giue no cauſe, it proudlie to auaunt.
               But as meſurable meane: meaſure endewſe:
               So (of your grace) graciouſlie them to vſe.
               This loue toward my life: pleaſe it you to ſhow,
               No reward els (at your handes) craue I to grow.
            
            
               This endid: the ant made curtſey to the ground.
               At which the ſpider gaue him a beck low boude.
               But: before he anie woord: to thant did ſound,
               He pawſde ſolemlie, as any ſpider coude.
               Which doone: verie louinglie: but not verie loude,
               In maner aſſewred. And in woordes right graue,
               Firſt thentre: and then thend of anſwere he gaue.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            ¶ The ſpider (vpon thants tale colde to him) alegith certaine thinges by which he ſemeth in doubte much to graunt peace to the flies. Wherin the ant and he trauerſing ſum what: anon he graunteth peace to them vnder condicion expreſt, wherewith thant is brought to the flies agayne. Cap. 75.
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of flies
               
            
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of spiders
               
            
            
               
               COſin ant: a long matter in ſhort ſpeeche here,
               Ye haue (as ye can) right wiſelie declared.
               Which: as ye grounded on three things to apere,
               To draw me to pittie you, in caſe thus ſnared,
               So: this mine anſwere to thoſe three prepared:
               Hath in it: other three thinges. Two of which three,
               Stand ſore agaynſt ye: and the third ſtandth with ye.
            
            
               Firſt the harme (by wrong) that flies haue doone me.
               Second: my will to be reuengde on the ſame.
               Third: the pittie I haue of you. I promiſe ye:
               Of two thinges: betweene theſe three: which one to name,
               I can (as yet) no determinacion frame.
               Which is: one of theſe two: to determin at eende,
               Whether to ſlea all my foes, or ſaue one freende:
            
            
               Naie: whether to ſlea or to ſaue: foes and freend both,
               And whether to ſlea or ſaue: both you and yours,
               On this queſtion (quoth thant) this caſe rightlie goth:
               But peace ſauith them and theirs: vs and ours.
               War ſleath (or daungerth) all: in ſhort ſharp ſhowrs.
               Ye ſaue all: in pitteing me: the leaſt one,
               Not pitteing me, ye ſlea (as ſemth euerychone.
            
            
               But two of your three points laſt toucht: here me touch.
               Omitting the third, till I them haue touched.
               Of your harme: your will to reuenge: as ye a vouch:)
               To thone ill paſt: thother ill to cum, couched:
               When all is reuoluid, that can be a vouched.
               Your reuengement to cum: of the flies ill paſt,
               May bring you more harme: and the flies away caſt.
            
            
               
               Yea: caſt you and yours awaie to, (I ſay) it may:
               And (vnder your pardon) to ſpeake my minde plaine,
               Your deſire of furder reuengment: to way,
               Declarth much crewelte: in you to remaine.
               The leaſt flies raunſum hath bene loſſe of his braine,
               That in time paſt hath toucht here: and now in ſight,
               Thouſands of flies ſlaine, and hangd in preſent fight.
            
            
               Thus for their yll, and your will: thill to reuenge:
               Your pointing of thoſe two points: diſpoynted be.
               In that quarell: charitee doth you chalenge:
               In deadlie defiance: of all enmite.
               Then paſſing theſe two points, to this thyrd pas we.
               Pittie: wherby charitee here to enbraſe,
               A boue all caſes, pittie this pitefull caſe.
            
            
               And pittie: in you ſhowde here now vnto me,
               Commodite is your ſelfe: I thinke ſhall gaine.
               If you (in this reſpect of pittie) agre:
               To take peace with the flies, though ye loſſe ſuſtaine:
               My life to ſaue: in recompence of my payne:
               Hands and harts of Ants: old and yong: great and ſmall,
               To ſerue you in your neede, ye are ſure of all.
            
            
               And contrariwiſe: if I here now go to wracke,
               Where you ſhall me flea: in that ye maie me ſaue,
               Not onlie freendſhip: of all ants ye ſhall lacke,
               But all creaturs liuing: ſhall you depraue:
               And abhor. where they: ſpeech or thought of you haue:
               Agaynſt you (in this caſe) leaſt mite in a cheeſe,
               In his moſt might: will fight, in blood to his kneeſe.
            
            
               
               To this (all that I can ſaie) what ye will do,
               I humblie beſeche you (foorthwith) to declare.
               Life, or death, which one of two to truſt vnto,
               Is my deepe deſire. That I maie now prepare,
               My ſtomacke redie, according to my fare.
               My minde I meane to die: or els to liue,
               As your pleaſure is, my death or life to giue.
            
            
               Coſin ant (quoth the ſpider (pittie toward you:
               And anger toward them, wreaſtleth in me ſore.
               The flies ſpight to ſpiders: to ſhow what and how:
               They haue ſpighted vs: from long before:
               Laying their fauts on our backs. and euermore:
               By clayming our commons and ſuch other like,
               Slaundring our titles: quarels ſtill they pike.
            
            
               Sir (quoth the flie) fauts on both ſides I haue herd,
               Which on both parts, I wiſh to be mendid.
               The next waie wherto, is peace to be preferd.
               By war, no part mended, all parts offended.
               War waſteth all things: where war is thus bendid.
               In pittie wherof, by peace all ils to mende,
               Peace to all parts: I wiſh ſtill an ende.
            
            
               Well coſin: cheefelie: yea onlie for your ſake:
               In recompence of your pains: at my deſire,
               Pardon I geue flies: and peace thus ſhall they take,
               I will all flies, out of hand hence to retire.
               And that they in tumult, no furder conſpire.
               But that they cleare diſſolue this conſpiraſie,
               And euerie flie flee home, to liue peſablie.
            
            
               
               
                  
                     〈☐〉
                  ‡
                     〈☐〉
                   They ſhal now: ſet you at liberte alſo
               Bag, and bagage: to go ſtreight home franck and free.
               And in this window and all, (wheare my powrs go:)
               Half the hooles for theirs, I graunt to them fro me.
               And the flie that this began, ſtill here to be.
               Standing vpon his triall in conſequence,
               As ſtandth with reaſon, law, cuſtome, and conſcience.
            
            
               Which (as I promiſed him, (I will performe.
               This is your end. And flies warne your felowes fliſe:
               To be ware henceforth, of theſe deeds enorme.
               And by their harme here preſent, to war ſo wiſe:
               That thei neuer atempt more, thus to ariſe:
               Againſt their beggers or betters: ſuch as bee,
               Placed thus, aboue files in auctoritee.
            
            
               Great god ſaue you (quoth thant) quoth thoſe flies amen.
               Low curtſie they made, and awaie they flew:
               To the camp of flies: and there and then,
               Preſenting thant to them, aboute thant they drew.
               With panting harts. To perceiue, what wold enſew.
               Wherewith: the ant at curtſie with knees low boude,
               Theſe ſweete wordes he began, in voyce right loude.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            ¶ Thant declaring peace: as it is graunted, the flies in muche iove ſet the ant thankfullie at libertie, and home goeth he. Whervpon the captaine commaundeth all flies to draw nere to here him ſpeake ere they depart. But they flee all awaye a few excepte. Cap. 76.
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of flies
               
            
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of spiders
               
            
            
               
               PEace: and pardon: I bring now into your laps.
               Vpon theſe wordes ſpokē, there was ſuch a ſhril ſhowte
               Holding vp their hands: caſting vp their caps,
               Such ioying and reioyſing: the whole campe aboute:
               As ſelde hath ben heard and ſcene, in ſuch a route.
               Long was it: ere ſilence wold fullie be woon.
               But at laſt it was woon: which doone thant begoon.
            
            
               Peace to pronounce, in forme as it was graunted.
               And that it was graunted onlie for his ſake.
               When he at end (to them) had it a vaunted,
               And that he: of his gard thither: did witneſſe take:
               They all of the ſame: affirmacion did make.
               Streight waie: the halter taken from the ants necke,
               The captaine flie gaue thant, a louelie low becke.
            
            
               Praying him: to let all hard handling paſt, pas.
               And to conſider: that in nombre ſo greate,
               All be not one flies broode: and we he was,
               That he had ſhowde him ſelfe ſo ill: him tentreate.
               Deſiring him, it to forgiue, and forgeate.
               (Sir quoth thant) forgiuen and forgotten, all is:
               For my part, and euer ſhalbe after this.
            
            
               And ſuch flies as erſt, had frowninglie faſte him:
               Louinglie they then, on him did ſmothlie ſmile.
               The captaine and cheef flies: hauing embraſte him,
               They geuing him thankes, in wordes of pleaſant ſtile:
               Diſcharging him thence, I let him paſſe a while:
               Moſt 
                     •
                  ocund and ioyfullie: homward to flee,
               While ye: the flies concluſion haue by me.
            
            
               
               The ant being gone, the captayne forthwith:
               Made proclamacion, to be herd there ſaie.
               But thouſands (after hundreths) are gone euin ſith.
               Till all: within fortie, weare nowne quight awaie.
               The reſt, moſt agaynſt their will: forſt to this fraie,
               Gathering aboute the captayne: to heare him ſpeake,
               He to them: and they to him, their minds did breake.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            ¶ Vpon a litle talke had betweene the captaine and the few flies there lefte, touchinge the rewdneſſe and lightneſſe of the common ſort of flies, miſliking their former light l
                  •
               wde demenure, they depart. The campes on both ſides, clere brooken vp. Cap. 77.
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of flies
               
            
            
               
               
                  depiction of the army of spiders
               
            
            
               
               HOw like ye this rudeneſſe of theſe flies (quoth he?)
               As yll as anie ſight I haue ſeene (quoth one)
               Well (quoth an other) it is no nouelte:
               Common ſort of flies (in maner euerichone)
               As gidds cum and go, ſo flies cum and are gone.
               Oitimes when ſtriuis are (by wrangling flies) begoon,
               In the mids of the matter, awaie they roon.
            
            
               Leauing flies in the briers: whom they forſt therto,
               As they forced me. But I am this time tought:
               Agaynſt an other time: what I ſhall do.
               And we (quoth other) thither forſiblie wrought.
               My mind (quoth the captaine) was to haue brought:
               Our campe in order diſolued. Sir (quoth one)
               Ye know they that know none order, can keepe none.
            
            
               I told at firſt (thoſe flies that forſt me out)
               Though I tooke (as I tooke and take) our clayme right:
               Yet agaynſt our ſuperiors, to be ſtout:
               To attayne our right: by force of furious fight,
               A blinde flie might ſe that out of the waie quight.
               Which wold not be heard: but ere I agayne ſtur:
               As I uow ſturd, I le be hangd at mine owne dur.
            
            
               And we (quoth the reſt). Freendes (quoth the captaine)
               I was not forſt at beginning: to cum foorth.
               I rather foreced other: but to be plaine,
               The gayne in this io: ney ſeene: what it is woorth,
               And what daunger this and like enterpriſe ſtoorth
               Ile not ſtur thus agayne, if I maie ſit ſtill:
               And foorſt to ſtur thus, Ile ſtur with an ill will:
            
            
               
               Better ſnioth woordes to geue: then ſmart ſtripes to take.
               Namelie where ſtripes win nought: & wordes maie will all,
               Againſt the ſtreme, ſtrife againe I will not make.
               But take at ſpiders hands, as in peace may fall.
               I ſe what it is: to ſpurne againſt the wall,
               Home will I in peace. and in peace a bide there,
               Wiſhing peace thinſtrument, right to trie eche where.
            
            
               We wiſhe the ſame (ſaide the reſt) all taking flight:
               From thence: nothing theare left: but themptie place,
               Wherevpon: the ſpider, brake vp his camp quight.
               Which done, I ſterted vp a ſpeedie pace.
               Looking out at the window: there to purchace:
               A ſight (yf I could) of the ant: cume home new,
               What ſolem ſalutaſions, ſhould there enſew.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Thant being cum to his molehill: ſolemlie reſeiued of hys wife, and childerne, and a great numbre of ants, he telth (to them all a tale diſcoorſinge theffect of all his trouble, had amonge the ſpiders & flies, willing them diligentlie to marke, what he ſayth. Cap. 78.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               OVt at a lates hole, caſtinge mine iye,
               A molhill I ſpide: as the emerod greene.
               The graſſe low leyde: and vnto the window nie,
               Thant new entring the ſame: who when he was ſeene,
               On ſo ſoden warning, neuer was (I weene)
               Such a nombre of ants, as were on that hill.
               To ſhow outward tokens, of inward goodwill.
            
            
               At thants firſt entre, a lane of ants was made.
               Euerie ant by the waie, ſhaking that ants fiſt.
               And ſumwhat more then the midwaye of that glade,
               His wife met him: whom he full ſweetlie kiſt.
               His babes fell on knees. Whom he deuoutlie bliſt.
               Whervpon: all ants hauing that ant imbraſte,
               Theſe wordes ſaide he to them: amid mong them plaſte,
            
            
               Dere kinſfolkes: and alies manie: and freendes all.
               What ye haue herd of me: ſins I from you went,
               That know I not. But my ſelfe here report ſhall:
               Of my trobulus tragidie, theffeet feruent.
               In telling which tale, mine effectuall entent:
               Is: that ye all ſhall now marke much: what I ſaie:
               And all marke much more, whie I ſaie: that I ſaie.
            
            
               But what I ſaie: mark firſt. I thinke ye know all.
               That my yong coſin ſpider was with me here:
               To cum to his father: my hunkle: at call,
               But the cauſe wherfore he wild me to appere:
               Whether ye know or not: that know I not clere.
               My knowledge wherof: to witnes that ye know,
               In full and few woordes, (as I can) I ſhall ſhow.
            
            
               
               A notable flie: hath late chaunſed to light,
               In that ſpiders copweb. the ſpider by that,
               Charging the flie: with deſert of death: by right.
               The flie: to deſerue to die, denying flat.
               Beſeching the ſpider, to here him ſpeake ſumwhat.
               He graunting him ſpeeche. and to iudge his offence,
               Standing with reaſon, law, cuſtome, and conſcience.
            
            
               The ſpiders chalenge to the flie, gaue great charge.
               Wherto (as fer as I could there vnderſtand,
               The flies defence, was very luſty and large.
               In whith chalenge and defence: when all was ſcand,
               To cum to ende, they two could not take in hand.
               But being dreuen to chooſe arbiters tagre,
               The flie chooſe a butterflie, the ſpider cheſe me.
            
            
               This one: of their manie matters tarbitrate.
               At triall (by cuſtom) on which ſide to lay,
               All holes, in that and all windows in eche ſtate.
               The flies claiming freehold: for free paſſing way.
               The ſpiders for ſpiders ſaide: ſo, all hold they.
               Wheron: we hering all ſides what could be leide,
               We could not agree, how the caſe might be weide.
            
            
               To anie one ſide of both: ſo that at ende,
               In our report, (to that ſpider and that flie,)
               The caſe as we firſt founde, we left it to depende.
               The ſpider and flie in copweb: thend to trie,
               Whervpon the flies: in a fume by and bie,
               Were ſodenlie vp: in a rought, on a rore.
               Such a flock, as I haue neuer ſeene before.
            
            
               
               Nonede to aſke them wherfore their cuming was,
               Their warlike faſhin: ſhowde them bent to fight:
               But in a moment, a bout me they compas.
               And withoutworde of cauſe declarde, wrong or right.
               They drew me to a tree: ſtanding nie in ſight.
               Wheare: with halter aboute my neck: on ladder ſet,
               Turne the ladder they cride, none other glace to get,
            
            
               Sauing the forſayde arbitter butterflie,
               Vpon great and longe ſute, at laſt obteynde.
               Of them to here me ſpeake: before I fhoule die.
               But ere I ſpake (what to ſpeake) ſeeing vnfaynd
               Life or death lie before me,) I was conſtraind:
               (As that ſhort time wolde ſerue) to premeditate,
               How to conſerue my ſelfe, and the ſpiders ſtate.
            
            
               As affection naturall: moued me more:
               To leane to the ſpiders: then toward the flies,
               And of my tale: the verie carnell or core,
               Muſt ſtand on two points (me thought in anie wiſe.
               Thone, to perſwade no faute in me to ſurmiſe:
               Againſt them. Thother to make them to relent,
               By enforſing the force, of ſpiders force bent.
            
            
               In firſt part of which tale, my fautes I clered:
               That they (to touche me with) could anie waie late.
               And where: by the reſte of my tale, appered,
               Their deaths plaine: (as I there fooes force did diſplaſe.)
               They thervpon all: weinie ronning awaie
               I handling the tale ſo, from firſt part to eende,
               That the moſt part (ſimple flies) tooke me their freende.
            
            
               
               But the craftie flie: capitall captiteyne,
               Opening (to the flies) my politik intent,
               Vnſeene to the flies: till he made them ſe it plaine,
               Him ſelfe ſeeing his daunger aboue all bent,
               If the flies did flee, their flight then to preuent,
               He inueyde ſuch matter to them: that a none,
               He coraged them to ſtand, all former feare gone.
            
            
               Whervpon: with their conſent, he awarded,
               That I: before the ſpiders, a tale to tell,
               Should be ſent forwith, with fortie flies garded.
               Wherin: if I made ſpiders feare flies: as well:
               Or as much (in my ſaying ſerius or fell:)
               As I brought flies of ſpiders before in feare,
               I ſhould go quight. Yf not, at returne hang theare.
            
            
               I ſayde I wolde do my beſt. and therwithall,
               Standing on the ladder, my two winges ſtert out.
               As in a time of our time, is naturall.
               Which had: I flew garded with this garded rout,
               Before the ſpider, hauing looke ſtraunge and ſtout.
               But what of that: my curtſie ons low made,
               I vſed wordes: my matter to perſwade.
            
            
               Where: although I wolde haue told an other tale:
               Yet who maie not as he will, muſt as he maie.
               Life was ſweete, death was ſowre: nature did me hale
               To ſaue my life, while my life in my tounge laie:
               Short tale to make, in tale ſo did I there ſaie:
               That ſpiders in feare of flies, had agony
               As much, as flies of ſpiders had formerly.
            
            
               
               Wherwith: the hed ſpider fell in fell furie.
               I feard he wold (with his wepon) haue kild me:
               And ſuer: all my frendes from Ierſey to Iurie:
               Had not ſaued my life: but he wolde haue ſpild me:
               Had not his fore graunt: waranted and wild me:
               To cum and go ſafe, but this paſſing ouer.
               He entred a talke, the ſpiders to recouer:
            
            
               And encorage agayne. Which in fine he did.
               Bringing me in much diſdayne, and more diſtruſt.
               He ſaide, that one both thoſe parts, I diſemblid.
               Creeping with ſpiders: at times when I luſt,
               And flieng with flies: othertimes, euine as Iuſt.
               Where I to him, ment nothing but honeſtlie.
               He reported my meaning, cleane contrarie.
            
            
               Enſampled, by my creeping with ſpiders furſt:
               And laſt exampled: by my fleeing with fliſe.
               In reſte of his tale told, he telling the wurſt:
               Againſt me and my tale: that he could deuiſe,
               He ſuch matter layde, and layde it in ſuch wiſe,
               That in corage (I ſaie) were the ſpiders agayne.
               We with his defiance, returning a mayne.
            
            
               To the flies: by one flie: all paſt repeated,
               Which: declaring me: the ſpiders to haue frayde,
               As I was wild to do, ſtreyght was it treated:
               (Vpon demaund) whether in that I there ſaide,
               I ſhould haue my life or not. which to be waide:
               Betwene two flies: a ſerius argument:
               Whether I ſhould liue or die, was biglie bent.
            
            
               
               The one ſaide: that I by cumnant, ought to line.
               Nai ſaide thother: by cumnant he ought to die:
               The firſt ſaide: as wordes of cumnant do giue:
               To bring the ſpider in feare, euine ſo did I.
               Thother ſaid, that feare heeld not permanentlie
               And: the woordes fulfild: the meaning not fulfild,
               The cumnant is not kept, In iudgement well ſkild,
            
            
               This argument they turnd and toſt till at laſt,
               The freend, quight ouerthrew thaduerſarie.
               And yet againſt me, the moſt nombre ſtreight paſt.
               As though thargument had ron, cleane contrarie.
               On the ladder I ſtoode, ſtreight to miſcarie:
               From which: at turning of, by the flie hangman,
               Hold: cride a flie fer of, flinging toward vs than.
            
            
               Which flie ſaide: the ſpider had made a decree:
               The flie in cloſe priſon with him deteynde:
               Should ſtreyght leeſe his life, if the flies did kill me:
               Whervpon they repryede me to priſon cheynde.
               With harneſt flies watcht: and in ſtocks remeinde.
               Betwene hope and dread, whether to liue or die,
               As this ſide, or that ſide, ſhould win victorie.
            
            
               Forthwith herewith, on the ſpider they gaue ſaute.
               Where fiue hundreth ſpiders: and fiue thouſand flies,
               Weare ſlaine. Abating on bothe ſides corage haute,
               The flies retired: peace ſum waie to deuiſe.
               The ſpiders: weare deſirus of peace, likewiſe.
               But which part ſhould begin ſute: that peace to moue,
               Both parts ſhowde as much curtſie, as litle loue,
            
            
               
               The flies had me before them braging in boſt.
               That ſins ſpiders to them: for peace wold not ſew,
               Spiders: or flies one part of both ſhould be croſt:
               Quight out of this life, none left a liue to vew.
               And ſtreyght to the ladder, agayne they me drew.
               Proteſting that I ſhould die: ere they marcht thence,
               I praying them, my lyfe might hang in ſuſpence,
            
            
               While I weare garded againe, to the ſpider.
               To ſew to the ſpider, all in mine owne name.
               To ſee: of what peace, hap might be prouider.
               At mine humble ſute: vnto him for the ſame,
               They graunted, and ſent me. to whome when I came,
               I ſewde for peace. beſeching it the rather,
               For certeine reſpects, which I then did gather.
            
            
               Such as ſhowd then: hie time: peace to giue and take.
               As: daunger to him and his: and then for me:
               Moſt Innoſentlie caſt awaie, for his ſake.
               Hauing, or looking, for no comodite:
               But onlie his fauer: and hereupon he:
               (Seming loth to graunt: and glad to graunt in deede,
               Graunted peace, in forme as forwith ſhall proſeede.
            
            
               Vnder generall pardon: for all fautes paſt,
               The flies muſt all awaie: and all war ſurſeaſe.
               I: ſet at liberte: no longer to lie faſt.
               Flies in windowes, to haue halfe the holes in peaſe,
               The flie with him in priſon, not to releaſe:
               But to take an end at his hands. theare or thence,
               As ſtandth with reaſon, law, cuſtom, and conſcience.
            
            
               
               But note: I muſt take this done all for my loue.
               In recompence of paine and parell had theare:
               This done, I and the flies theare, as did behoue:
               Geuing thankes: and taking leaue, thence gone we weare:
               To the flies. who flockt about me geuing eare:
               To here of peace. Which when I theare had declarde,
               With thanks I was diſcharged, of all captiue garde.
            
            
               From whens I am (as you ſe) hether now cum.
               The one halfe of my whole tale: hauing diſplayde.
               For: of what I haue to ſaie: this is the ſum.
               But now wherfore this what (now ſaide) is ſaide:
               As I: at beginning wild this what: well waide,
               So wyſhe I this wherefore: to be wayd as well.
               For ſaftie of all ants, which I ſhall now tell,
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Than thauing ſaid: what he wolde ſaie, willeth all ants to note whie he ſaid, that he ſaide. Whiche is to warne them by his armes to beware, how they meddle in matters betweene ſpiders and flies. Cap. 79.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               VVyſe ants are warnd: by other ants harmes (ants ſay)
               And you: auoiding your harms: by harms of mine,
               The whie: of my former tale, ye then well way.
               For of the what, that is the whie: in fine.
               Your heareing and folowing: of which diſpline
               (With heareing and folowing: my next wordes here ſet,)
               Defence fro my like harms, I hope ye ſhall get,
            
            
               My which harms: though they ſhow outwardlie to grow:
               By warres froward chaunce: without faut of mine owne.
               Yet the high god knowth, and my conſcience doth me ſhow:
               That theſe my harms, of theſe my two fauts are growne,
               Pride, and couetouſneſſe: by corrupt blaſt blowne.
               Into my hart inculked: by fancie fonde,
               Which to warne you of, Ile make you vnderſtonde.
            
            
               Though the ſpider ſent for me: ere I hence went,
               Yet when I was ſent fore, proude was I to go:
               Wheare: I thought to grow: in ſtate more exelent,
               Then anie ant before had growne, and ſo:
               Pearking with ſpiders: in top of the windo,
               I thought there: with the ſpiders equall to be,
               And here, in anthils, ants a god ſhould take me.
            
            
               And for the mayntenance: of that proude eſtate,
               I couetouſlie caſt, what way to ſinde meane.
               Being aboue all ants, in place ſituate,
               By preſerment (at the ſpiders hand, (to gleane.
               Office, fee, all that I could, to gather vp cleane.
               Low curtſie, great riches, mirth, eaſe, loue, and laude.
               I thought all ſhould be offred, me to a plawde.
            
            
               
               But in fine, this was the frute of this vaine hope:
               Loue, or laude, on no ſide: on all, hate and blame.
               For goldin cheine at my necke, an hempen rope.
               For reuerence and prayſe, diſdayne and defame.
               Looking to win much, leaſe all. As in the ſame:
               Showd my reward: at end of all, at hands all.
               Namlie at ſpiders hands, who did me thither call.
            
            
               As he: in graunting peace to the flies, ſhowde plaine.
               Which peace he ſaide, (I ſaie) with flies he did take,
               To ſaue my life, and to recompence of my payne.
               And for no cauſe els. But let vs here make,
               As it in deede: had bene done all my ſake.
               Yet: the hed and taile of this tale: Ioyned nie,
               Shall ſhow: that I right nought did win therby.
            
            
               What yf: to ſaue my life, that peace he then gaue:
               My life was out of parell: till I came theare,
               Brought by him: for him, to the brinke of my graue,
               Had I kept me here, neither parell nor feare:
               Had my hart wounded, as it did theare while eare,
               This gift is like as if a theeſe (by falſe traine,)
               Robo me of my good, and gaue it me againe.
            
            
               I loſt my time theare, and I loſt my thrift here.
               In ſomer (ye know) we ants worke buſilie:
               For winter to prauide, our foode euerie yere.
               But: lack of this ſomers dayes diligentſie,
               May make me faſt two dayes in winter (happlie,)
               And driue me (per haps) ere winter all done be,
               To beg of ants, that might els haue beggde of me.
            
            
               
               In all my which puniſhment: at all whoſe hands,
               I take them: but as the great gods inſtruments.
               His iudgement are ſecret: he vſeth his wands,
               Sum times: in apparence of outward intents,
               To one purpoſe. when his high wiſdome aſſents,
               To vſe them for an other. And ſure,
               I thinke he now put ſo, my trouble in vre.
            
            
               For my two ſaide fantes. willing you to beware,
               Of all ambitius: and couetus deſire.
               In a voiding (for my like offence) my like rare.
               Which if ye do, fleeing deſire to aſpire,
               Then can ye this leſſon: as I wold require.
               And not doing it: vpon this warning geeuene,
               Ye will therto (by my like plage) to be dreeuene.
            
            
               And did we conſider, but this preſent life.
               Yet muſt we liue in an order here (perde:)
               The god hath plaſte vs all: to liue out of ſtrife:
               Spiders, flies, and ants, ech ſort in their degre.
               Spiders, in head parts of windows: the heads be.
               Flies, in the mids: the bodie as it weare.
               Ants at the low part: the feete, acounted theare.
            
            
               And as a ſpider: ouer matcheth a fli,
               So is a flie, as fer to big for an ant.
               Which ſemeth wrought by deuine prouidence (thinke I,)
               As our degrees (are in order) diſtant,
               So the degrees of our ſtrengths, are diſcrepant.
               And where all three ſorts: kepe quietlie their plaſe,
               All liue together, in quiet welthy caſe.
            
            
               
               But if they (for change of place) begin to ſtriue,
               As ſpiders and flies (two parts of thre) did now,
               They maie haſtelie ſtriue, and ſloulie thriue.
               And to the ſpider: in our alegeant vow:
               In all lefull things, all we ants alwaie bow.
               Without greefe or gruge. but if war againe riſe,
               What ſhould ants medle: betwene ſpiders and flieſe.
            
            
               Be warnd here againe (by my harme) of medling.
               Medle we in things, of our vocation.
               One flies finger thruſth ten ants, downe hedling.
               Ants are not made: to walke in warres ſtacion:
               Nor to medle in ſeuere conſultacion.
               Medle we in our molehils: at the windows feete:
               And let ſpiders and flies do: as they thinke meete.
            
            
               They ſhall for me, (quoth he) and for vs cride thaie.
               And to their buſines, buſilie they went.
               Wherwith cum foure flies fleeing, faſt as they maie.
               And at low part of the window: by aſſent,
               They lighted. and the ſpider then him ſelfe bent,
               From his houſe to his theire: and I forwith,
               Set in my place: of their woords, to note the pith.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Foure flies (in the name of al flies) at the copweb, thanking the ſpider for pardon and peace, declaring the condicions and the performance on their part) ſew to the ſpider on his part, to performe his graunt, in laying out & poſſeſſing them of theyr limitts with halfe the holes in the window, which he graunteth bidding them a litle time ſtaie, in which while: he ſendth the yongeſt ſpider of his twaine to the ant, praying him to cum to him againe. To deuide and deliuer the holes to the flies as the ſpider will apoinet them. Cap 80.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               ONe flie of thoſe foure (made the mouth for all,
               At curtſie to the ſpider had) theſe woords had.
               Framed in maner (to the matter) formall.
               Right honorable ſir: moſt dere and moſt drad.
               All flies, (thei of your proſperus eſtate moſt glad,)
               Haue commaunded vs: to commend them: to you,
               Humblie, and dewlie as deutie bidth them bow.
            
            
               So thanking your gifts to them, perdon and peace.
               Vpon theſe conditions: as they vnderſtand,
               Warres: and conſpiracies, on their part to ſeace.
               Than tto be ſet free, out of their captiue band.
               The flie here in priſon: to haue end at your hand,
               As ſtandth with reaſon, law, cuſtom and conſcience.
               Halfe holes in windowes theirs: all times from hence.
            
            
               Which cumnants they receyue, and put in vre.
               In what they ſhould do, and in what they ſhall haue,
               They thervpon ſend vs, to know your pleaſure.
               What time: and what waie: ye will take to vouchſaue,
               To poinct and poſſeſſe them, in that ye them gaue.
               Binding them: (by indifferent deuided rate,)
               To wiſh contenuance, of your preſent ſtate.
            
            
               At their curtſie made, to this: the ſpider ſaide:
               This ſute I graunt: tarie my returne againe.
               In he went: and herin to haue the ants aide,
               To thant, he ſent the leaſt ſpider of his twayne.
               Praying thant to cum to him: and take the payne,
               To be his deputie: tenfette the flies in fine,
               With halfe the holes wheare as the ſpider wold a ſine.
            
            
               
               Thant ſpying his coſin cumming, likte it not.
               Sum thankleſſe office was toward againe (thought he:)
               Thorow the window, I ſaw he quicklie gat:
               One leg, and his waſte, in ſwadeband rold to be.
               And crutches by his ſide, a two or a three,
               That ſpider cumming to thant: where as he laie,
               Theſe: or theſe like words, that ſpider did firſt ſaie.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Vpon this meſſage done, thant feind a let of his cūming: by a hurt miſchanſing him that morning. with which anſwere, the yongeſpider returneth to the olde. Cap. 81
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               Coſin ant, reſt you mery. Coſin (quoth thant)
               Ye be welcum. what good tidings do ye bring.
               My father prayeth you (quoth he) at this inſtant,
               To cum to him: and for the holes deliuering,
               Which he in windows graunted: at warres ending,
               To be therein, his deputie of truſt:
               To ſe flies poſſeſt, of their nombre iuſt.
            
            
               Good coſin (quoth the ant) it will not be.
               In a dark houſe (right now) where candle was light,
               The light daſling mine iyes: it ſo blinded me,
               That agaynſt the ſnuf of a candle: burning bright,
               I flew▪ force of which fyre and ſnuf: in which flight,
               Miſchaunce (that all miſaduentours alwaie brings,)
               Brake one of my leggs, and burnd one of my wings.
            
            
               So that I now: can neither creepe nor fli.
               The which: for mine owne harme greeueth me right ſore.
               And as ſore for his ſake: that now can not I
               In this caſe, ſerue him as I haue done before.
               Thus commend me coſin: I can ſaie no more.
               That ſpider tooke his leaue: and to his father ſtreight,
               Told what anſwere he had, at thant in reſeight.
            
            
               Who ſeeing the ant did not cum. forth he went:
               With a long rod in his hand: taking his cheyre.
               Which when I ſaw, to ſe furder what he ment,
               To my cheyre in my place: I did then repeyre.
               The foure flies before him, ſtoode in order feyre.
               Whearwith (in few woords) a briefe tale there told he,
               Which done he poſſeſt them, in plat here to ſe.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The ſpider after a few woords to the foure flies, aſſineth to them al the ſmal holes beneth. Halfe the holes in numbre: but ſcant the ſixt parte of the roome. At whiche they ſumwhat grudge. But they muſt take them or none. Cap. 82.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               FReends ſties: freends I ſaie: if ye freendlie vſe me,
               You foure, and all flies: your frend ſhall finde me.
               And to make you vnable to accuſe me,
               In lacke to performe: as promiſe doth binde me,
               Vpon your preſent ſute, I haue enclinde me:
               To aſſine and poſſeſſe you: here and els wheare,
               Of halfe the holes in windows: wheare I pour beare.
            
            
               Exampled: by theſe holes: iuſt halfe, as they ſtand.
               Them: and none but them: to haue and to hold.
               Wherwith: he pointed benethe with his wand,
               To all the ſmall holes▪ ſaying what flie that wold:
               Touch anie hole theare: but thoſe to them then told,
               He ſhould die therfore: which plat thus diſpoſed,
               One flie (to the ſpider) theſe words diſcloſed.
            
            
               Sir (maie it like you) the meaning of all flies,
               Was to haue: with halfe the holes, halfe the plat here.
               And I flie (quoth the ſpider) ment otherwiſe.
               Without furder pleding: take as doth appere.
               And think your ſelues well handled: for this is clere.
               I might (yf I wold,) my graunt againe withdraw.
               And that withdrawing, Juſtifie well by law.
            
            
               At time of this graunt, I was (as who ſay.)
               Streſſed by you: you priſoner (as it weare)
               And all bonds ſo forced, of no force are they:
               Be anſwerd: and warnd, rebellion to for beare.
               As euerie flie: had had a flea: in his eare,
               At curtſie low made, from the ſpider they ſlank.
               They meruelus blank, and the ſpider as crank.
            
            
               
               What haue we woon now, (quoth one) as they tooke wing.
               Wiſe flies ſaie: as good ſit ſtill: as riſe and fall.
               But what a fall haue we now: by our riſing?
               Before, we had ſum part: now we haue loſt all.
               In effect, yea (quoth one) this hath bene and ſhall.
               Wheare flies (with ſpiders) in this kinde of ſtrife ſtriue,
               We win nought but wrechidneſſe, the craft will not thrine.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The foure flies flowne thence, the ſpider to the flie in priſon leith: that in all kinds of triall that daie on both parts laide, he thinketh his owne part aproued beſt. as he thinketh the flie wolde thinke were he a ſpider contrarie iudgement wherof. the flie thinketh in the ſpider were he a flie. wherupon they agree to change places (eche for the time) to imagin and ſet foorth others part the beſt they can. Cap. 83.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               THey being thus gone: the ſpider ſitting ſtill,
               The flie faſt before him: as he erſt had bene,
               To draw to end, in hand with the flie he fyll.
               Flie (quoth he) now haſt thou in this matter ſene,
               All kinds of triall, that can be ſene I wine.
               Reſon, law, and cuſtom, full reſoned and caſt.
               Arbiterment, and rebellion at laſt.
            
            
               Which rebellion (I think) thou didſt deuiſe,
               When thou didſt rowne the butterllie in the eare.
               Naie (quoth the flie) the trewth is clere otherwiſe.
               I praide him to praie flies: all war to forbeare,
               Which he will ſaie. flie (quoth he) ſaie he or ſweare:
               I truſt none of you. This trithe trewth like in preefe,
               As to axe my felow, whether I be a theefe.
            
            
               But weare it ſo: or not: I forgiue it thee.
               In all this bybble babble: had here this daie:
               What haſt thou woon therby: that let vs ſe.
               All caſes paſt here: indifferentlie to waie:
               Waie more on my ſide: then on thine, I dare ſaie.
               I ſaie and think naie (quoth he) and ſo think wold you:
               Weare ye a flie, in caſe as I am here now,
            
            
               And weare thou a ſpider: as I am bere pla
                     ••
                  e,
               I think thou wouldſt think as I think: and to grow:
               Sum waie to end, one triall mo to taſte,
               Leſt vs change places a while: for to know,
               What change of oppinion, that change maie ſhow.
               I
                     •
                  maginning my ſelfe, to be a 
                     •
                  ie.
               Thou: thinking thy ſelfe, a ſpider vnfaynedlie.
            
            
               
               Thou the ſpider: and I the flie: to be namde.
               Thou reſoning for the ſpider, all that thou maie.
               And I for the flie: in like caſe will be framde.
               This take I (quoth the flie) a verie good waie.
               Place and caſe (in apparence) forthwith chaunge thay.
               The flie: ſolemlie ſet in the ſpiders cheyre,
               The ſpider: to the flies baſe place did repeyre.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ They hauing Chaunged places: they alege eche for his diſſembled ſide. Wherin the flie anone is ſo alured to pride and ambyſſyon in occupying (for the while) the ſpiders ſtatelie place, that he at laſt with an othe affirmeth that ſpiders are owners of all windowes. The ſpider graunting it trew, ſterteth to the flie, ſeeming to take end vpon the flies owne iudgement. Cap. 84.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               THe flie: being once ſet in the ſpiders place,
               Aduaunſt him ſelfe, ſetting hands vnder his ſide.
               The ſpider croucht in countenance milde and baſe:
               Looking pale and wan, as though he ſhould haue dide.
               Which change (vpon this ſoden) when I eſpide,
               It prinnted in me: a wonderfull wunder,
               To ſe partiſe (from their parts) ſo a ſunder.
            
            
               New matter they laide ſmall. But that moſt touched:
               That had bene erſt alegde. Both parts growing:
               Litle and litle, ſtoughtlie to be couched,
               Ech to others: againſt his owne part now ſhewing.
               Namlie the flie: for the ſpiders part crowing.
               With ſpiderlike: ſpightfull woords: as hote and hie,
               As he had bene the ſpider, and thother the flie.
            
            
               He was from the flies part: ſo caried a waie,
               By being ſodenlie: there thus eliuate,
               That: all cleyme leyde by the ſpider there: that daie,
               The flie ruld, for right of moſt lawfull right rate.
               So ferforth he forgat: where and how he ſate:
               That vpon the cheyreboll: hard beating his fiſt,
               Spiders owe all windows, he ſware by gods bliſt.
            
            
               The ſpider graunted it trew ſterting out ſtreyfe:
               To the flie. ſaying ſyr ye haue ſaide right well.
               We neede no longer (for iudge or iudgement) weyte.
               Our cheefe point in iudgement, your ſelfe doth here tell.
               Oh ſir (quoth the flie, and flat to ground he fell.
               I beſeche you here how (by pride here now had)
               I was ſtriken beetill blind, and bedlem mad.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The flie out of that chaier falne flat before the ſpider, perſeyuing his ouerſight and daunger therin, he declareth howe change of place changed his affection. In diſcoorſing of which caſe, he partlie toucheth the commoditie of aduerſitie, and the diſcommoditie of proſperitie. Beſeeching the ſpider to relinquiſhe all aduauntage therin to be taken againſt him. Which the ſpider graunteth. Cap. 85.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               THe ſpider leaning to his cheyre, ſaide: ſaie on.
               Syr (ſaide the flie) by veynglorious pride,
               It ſtealing: ſlie and ſodenlie: me vpon,
               I was ſo puft vp here: ſo blindlie my ſelfe to gide,
               That I neither ſaw yours, nor yet mine owne ſide.
               I: once but ſet, in place of your auctorite:
               Tooke my ſelfe ſtreight, in caſe of your proſperite.
            
            
               Which place and caſe: how they mai right iudgement blinde,
               That ſe I now, and neuer till now could ſe.
               Whearin: I being but a ſhadow aſſinde:
               For this time to ſit. yet marke (I beſeche ye,)
               How from a flies ſtate, to a ſpiders degre:
               I (at moment) avaunſt my ſelfe to proſeede.
               Not with flies, but with ſpiders: all I decreede.
            
            
               My which blindneſſe (in ſum reſpect) doth ſtreche,
               To thoſe: in places paſte, as debiteeſe.
               They keping countenance: of my like high reche:
               Looking ech as high, when he his ſuter ſeeſe,
               As his head maſter, offer higher degreeſe.
               Which flock (as I am now) where euer it flocks.
               All made (in reaſon,) reaſons mocking ſtocks.
            
            
               Se more: how beaſtlie blindneſſe, did my bent bende:
               Life, and liberte of me, and of all flies.
               Here lying and bleding, except I it defende,
               All that not withſtanding: pride blearde both mine iyes,
               Agaynſt them and my ſelfe, ſentence to deuiſe.
               I was a ſpider I. I tooke flies as fleaſe.
               Pride goth before, ſhame cumth after: me to ſeaſe.
            
            
               
               But pride had here, a ſotell flie a lurer.
               Which, the countenance of proſperite was.
               Veyne liking of which ſtate: was my procurer,
               To pride and blindneſſe therby, that here did pas.
               Which pride to preſent, proſperite is a glas.
               As doth (on the other parte (aduerſite,
               Fyrſt procure: and then preſent, humilite.
            
            
               Proſperite (we ſe) made me forget clere:
               My ſelfe, my matter, al flies, and alſo you.
               Which in aduerſite, I heeld in minde here.
               To you, as deutie required: I could there bow:
               Reaſons for me: and all flies: I could a vow:
               Our parfight ſight: from blindneſſe: ſtandth not (I ſe)
               In proſperite, but in aduerſite.
            
            
               Which ſhowth in this one change: of our two places,
               My place of aduerſite: gaue you ſuch ſight,
               That: in our reaſoning of both our caſes,
               Your ſaying ſhowde you, to ſe the verie right.
               Your place of proſperite, blinded me quight.
               As I perceiue) it doth blinde all (in like caſe.
               Saue ſuch as therin, haue eſpeciall grace,
            
            
               In lack wherof: I (thus graceleſſe a minion,
               Thus loudlie and lewdlie to lie,) humblie praie:
               Neither my iudgement, nor yet mine opinion.
               Anie woord to be iudgde, that I here did ſaie.
               But (as all lies ſhould) let theſe vaniſh awaie.
               Thou art (quoth the ſpider) a monſter now woxe.
               In myne iye a flie, and in mine eare a foxe.
            
            
               
               Like a foxe: wililiſe thou doſte here deuiſe,
               For helping of thy part: and hurting of mine,
               To take my life trew tales, and thy trew tales life.
               And furder ſlaundring me: and my ſtate: in fine,
               Thou haſte here ſet forth, this deuilſh diſſipline.
               Pride hideth knowledge (ſaiſt thou) by proſperite,
               Humilite ſhowth knowledge, by aduerſite.
            
            
               As though captife caitifs: ſaw all in miſerie,
               And proſperus princes, ſaw nought. But I ſe:
               Thou art in a wrong boxe: for caſe preſentlie,
               The flie (ſeeing rightnought woon herby wold be,
               But daunger of diſpleaſure, thervpon he:)
               Paſt ouer this argument: and vpon that,
               Said this to the ſpider, at his foote laide flat.
            
            
               Sir: I beſech you: my blindneſſe ſhowde here laſt,
               For giue: and none aduauntage on me take.
               In anie woord of mine, againſt me theare paſt.
               Flie (quoth he) I forgiue thee: for pitties ſake.
               To chaunge places againe, a ſonder they brake.
               Wherewith the ſpider: in form
                     •
                   formall and colde,
               Theſe woordes folowing, to the flie forthwith tolde.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The ſpider vpon a glaunce geuen at his deſert of thanke to be had at the flies hand, alegeth cuſtom to be hys warrant to diſtroy the flie. Which the flie can not denie. Whervpon he deſireth that the caſe maie be reaſoned in conſcience. Which the ſpider now graunteth. Cap. 86.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               F
                     •
                  ie: if thou canſt vſe the reaſon that th
                     •
                  n haſ
                     •
                  e,
               Thou canſt (and wilt) thanke me in manie reſpect
                     •
                  
               
               Neuer was there flie: in copweb thus plaſte,
               That 
                     •
                  ad the like fauour: in the like effects:
               That thou haſt had: but neſeſſite directs,
               This to be 
                     •
                  rew: in the daie moſt long here paſt,
               Yet they (euermore) ring to euenſong at laſt.
            
            
               As who ſaie: things moſt long after beginning:
               Yet muſt they (at laſt) ned
                     •
                  e cum to an ende,
               Which (after long time) wrought to haue in winning,
               We now ſhall win which ende ſhall brief
                     •
                  ie depende,
               Vpon one briefe reaſon that I ſhall ex
                     •
                  ende.
               Which reaſon to confute thee, ſhalbe ſo plaine,
               That ſtreyght to yeeld thee, reaſon ſhall the conſtraine.
            
            
               Which lurkth (and I all this time haue let it lurk:)
               In cuſtom: one principle of the four,
               On which pillers, I promiſde ſhould ſtand all this wurk.
               Which in vinſible reaſon: I (to this hour)
               Haue kept: to here (as I haue herd) bran and flour:
               Of all that thou couldſt (this daie) for thy part laie.
               Which (for full concluſion, here me to thee ſaie.
            
            
               Cuſtom: one cheefe poſt principall (as erſt ſaide)
               Declarth: and hath declarde this ſix thouſand yere,
               All flies (or anie ſ
                     ••
                  e) 
                     〈◊〉
                   copwebs (or copweb) ſtaide:
               How euer they cum theare, if they theare appere:
               No reaſon: in reaſon and law: aledge here:
               Could diſcharge thē thence, but ſtreight there cūth a maine,
               A ſpider: who ſleath him and ſuckth out his brai
                     •
                  e.
            
            
               
               Here ſeeſt thou thy life loſt: to begin with all:
               By cuſtome: and for windows claimd in entreſ
                     •
                  e:
               For flies generall, agreement generall.
               (With theyr reſceiuing it) an end hath expreſ
                     •
                  e.
               Thend had I meane, vpon rebellion ſe
                     ••
                  e.
               But for thy life (by cuſtom) canſt thou ought ſaie:
               Why thou ſhould by cuſtome liue? ſyr (ſaide he) naie.
            
            
               Well (quoth the ſpider) thou ſeeſt reaſon and law:
               So yeeld to cuſtom here, that in anie triall:
               Thoſe tweyne to conquere cuſtom here: we neuer ſaw,
               I haue to this (quoth the flie) no deniall.
               What thing (quoth the ſpider) haſt thou in ſepciall:
               To help thee: by ſide law, cuſtom, and reaſon:
               Conſcience (quoth the 
                     ••
                  ie) I hope cumth in ſeaſon.
            
            
               Trew (quoth the ſpider) now at end it hath place.
               What haſte thou (in conſcience) for thy life to lay:
               Againſt accuſtomed cuſtom in this caſe.
               Inough (quoth he) if conſcience beare ani ſway,
               Yes (quoth the ſpider) be bold of that ye may:
               That fourth: ſhall haue full place, as firme as thoſe three,
               I thanke you (quoth the 
                     ••
                  ie) this ſhowth charite.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ They both laie ſundrie ſharpe reaſons inconſcience for the ſpiders life and death. But the ſpider in concluſion draweth theſe foure principles (reaſon, law, cuſtom, and conſcience, which he at beginning graunted to trie all by) ſo to combine that he maketh therby an aparence, to ſhow the flie conuinſt & ſtreight by cuſtom: he geueth iudgement of the flies death to which the flie yelde
                  •
               h. Praying to ſpeak with twelue flies before he die. And it is graunted. Cap. 87
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               BY conſcience I clayme here now (quoth the flie)
               In this place (till now place of mine inpriſonment,)
               Not to be in priſon, but in ſeyntuarie.
               Wheare as charged parties be inoſent,
               Of all ſuch charged crimes: as to them are bent,
               Theare doth conſcience in euerie place defende,
               Thoſe charged parties: diſcharging them at ende.
            
            
               If (quoth the ſpider) theare were no difference:
               Betwene a flie inoſent: and arogant,
               Then muſt I diſcharge thee (euin of conſcience.)
               But if innoſenſie on your part here want,
               Then is this clauſe (for your diſcharge) no warant,
               But go to: make profe approbatlie appere:
               How ye proue your ſelfe, an inoſent now here.
            
            
               Sir: prof: that I inoſentlie hither cam,
               Appeerth in my knowne cūming, againſt my will.
               And ſins I came, that I an inoſent am,
               I hope your conſcience: and I know your ſkill,
               Will iudge: my fact here not ill: or not ſo ill:
               Wherby ye (with conſcience) can rightfullie:
               
                  
                     •
                  ither kill me, or kepe me here thus to lie.
            
            
               What haue I done: in conſcience ſtrayte or large:
               To make reaſon, law, or cuſtom, bight or bark.
               I leie and leide (quoth the ſpider) to thy charge,
               Brech of my houſe: not made with a thouſand mark,
               No (quoth he) but one quarter of one hours wark,
               Without one penie coſt: or one pins worth paine,
               Reaedifithe your houſe, in prime ſtate againe,
            
            
               
               Which your ſelfe maie do: and muſt naturallie.
               That woorke, is your talent: giuen for exerciſe.
               In lack wherof, (by idileneſſe) ye ſtreight die.
               But put caſe cuſtom, my fact a wrong here triſe:
               Yet how can conſcience: death or payne deuiſe.
               To me, for that I to you: occaſion giue,
               To woorke the woork: lacking which, ye can not liue.
            
            
               Though (quoth the ſpider) by nature woork we muſt.
               Yet iſt neither conſcience, nor our auaile:
               To woork in copwebs: haue we luſt or no luſt,
               At wagging (in copwebs) of euerie flies taile,
               So doth it (quoth the flie) conſcience likewiſe quaile.
               To hang a flie: by the neck or by the neb,
               For wagging his tayle, in a ſpiders copweb.
            
            
               This caſe is (in conſcience) very much like,
               As a fyſh breaking a fiſhers ſet net:
               It ſet to take the fiſſhe. and the fiſſher did pike,
               A quarell to him: and wold conſcience ſet,
               To kill the poore fiſſhe. This were fer and foule fet,
               And no fouler fet: then conſcience ſet to be:
               To kill me. for brech of this net: ſet for me,
            
            
               But did I (maliciouſlie, do you much wrong:
               And ſum harme: as harme (or wrong) here ye haue none.
               Yet ſhall your reuengment, ſhow malice more ſtrong:
               If ye both deteyne: and kill me thervpone:
               Cum that wrong here in vre: conſcience is gone:
               As for from you: as from him: that had now ſworne
               The death of an inoſent, but laſt might borne.
            
            
               
               You not offended (as ye will not I hope)
               This laſt principle of theſe foure: conſcience:
               (It geuing me (aboue thother three) full ſcope)
               Of aduantage: as cuſtom giueth aſſiſtence.
               To your part, in preſent charge of mine offence:
               I muſt make my ſhoote anker: to make my waie,
               As you make (and I graunt) cuſtom yours (no naie.)
            
            
               Spare not (quoth the ſpider) that anker ſhoote ought:
               The beſt thou canſt therwith to take ankerhold.
               I thanke you (quoth he) and wold craue (if I mought,)
               Your anſwere in conſcience: full to vnfold,
               To one queſtion of me: in few woordes told.
               Thy queſtion (quoth the ſpider) propone thou,
               And mine anſwere to it, thou ſhalt haue euin now.
            
            
               This is then ſir: I put caſe quoth the flie:
               My yong maiſter ſpider your ſon: went a ſtraie:
               Wandring here and theare (at aduenture meane I,)
               Wherwith: ſlilie: one laide a thing in the waie:
               Wherat the babe fell, and it thus brought to bay,
               Thother: for falling theare, kild it out of hand.
               Thinke ye: conſcience wold warrant this deede to ſtand?
            
            
               Naie (quoth he) conſcience is the doer of right.
               Mittigacing ferce force of extremitees,
               That geueth or taketh right: by rigorus might.
               Conſcience (quoth the flie) my iudgement ſo decrees.
               And my caſe: with this caſe: in all points a grees.
               No difference betwene them: to be loſt or woon,
               Sauing: that I am not your maſterſhips ſoon,
            
            
               
               For in like caſe put: I wanderid aboute here:
               Inoſentlie, as that inoſent there did.
               And by theſe copwebs: caſt in my waie thus nere,
               In this babe exampling, I am examplid.
               Inoſentlie as he was, I am maſkid.
               Think if I weare your childe: what ye could think than:
               Conſcience, or no conſcience this to ſcan.
            
            
               In ſaith flie (quoth the ſpider) to tell the trouth,
               No conſcience (or hard conſcience) I take this.
               Nay no conſcience (quoth the flie) trouth ſo ſhowth.
               So that conciens, on my ſide clerlie is:
               As cuſtom is of yours: and ye know I wis:
               That cuſtom a lone: doth oft, and maie euer:
               Vſe iudgment of abuſe: and conſcience neuer.
            
            
               Well ſaide flie (ſaide he) had I no more to ſaie:
               To this that thou now ſeiſt: then I haue yet ſaide,
               Then hadſt thou here woon the victorie this daie.
               But reaſon, law, cuſtom, and conſcience, erſt leide:
               How I graunted thee hering: in thoſe four weide,
               Thou ſhalt here in few woords, and we there vpone,
               Shall the more clerli, conclude this caſe anone.
            
            
               The woords of my graunt tadiudge thee: thus they draw.
               As ſtandth with reaſon, law, cuſtom, and conſcience,
               Not with reaſon, cuſtom, conſcience, or law:
               This, and, and this or, flie: make much difference.
               That and, implith all foure plaſte: in aſſiſtence.
               That or, importh one: or ante one of all.
               And here is the gap flie: wherein lith the gall,
            
            
               
               And a pointe for flies learning: at ſpiders hand.
               Though ye: flies learning aboue ſpiders compare:
               But here learne of me flie: this contunctiue and,
               Conioynth: theſe four ſaide terms: ioyntlie to prepare,
               Triall in this caſe: as they all maie declare:
               The tone with the tother: all in properte,
               Knit beſt in knot, of conioyned vnite.
            
            
               Well (quoth the flie) then concience ſhalbe one,
               Ye (quoth the ſpider) and cuſtom another.
               Syr then will thoſe two, fall at a fraie a none.
               Yf they do: reaſon ſhall ſtikill them brother:
               To make them a gree. Where ech impoungth other:
               But bring conſcience: thy champion armd compleete:
               How conſcience chalength cuſtom: let vs weete.
            
            
               Sir: I cuming (as I cam) vnwillinglie,
               And none offenſife harme: in me doth appere,
               Conſcience chargeth cuſtom, with tirranie.
               In killing (or keping) me: inoſent here.
               Which caſe, reaſon recordith for caſe clere.
               This charge (quoth the ſpider) to diſcharge plaine,
               Here what cuſtom ſaith, to concience againe.
            
            
               Cuſtom ſaith: all windows are ſpiders of right.
               Then conſcience muſt ſaie: that flies haue done wrong,
               Through windows (without leaue) to take theyr flight,
               To make conſcience graunt this, reaſon is ſtrong.
               Till ſpiders (quoth he) time preſent, and paſt long.
               Do proue windows theirs: as they neuer did yeet,
               Conſcience and reaſon, denith this eueri wheet,
            
            
               
               But admit we: that all windows were your owne:
               Flies (without your leaue) paſſing offenſiflie.
               Though cuſtom a lege: for thoffence: death here growne.
               yet conſcience (in this caſe) ſethe death tirrannie.
               Reaſon graunting it, to ſhow tiranniouſlie.
               It weare to much here: to fine by the purs.
               But to fine by the polle, what feend could polle wurs?
            
            
               Thou thinkſt (quoth the ſpider) conſcience thinkth it ſtraūge:
               That flies: by cuſtom, ſhould die for this offence.
               But conſcience: with reaſon raunging in raunge,
               In cauſe of cuſtoms vſage: as conſcience:
               Maie haue with reaſon herein: full conference,
               Reaſonablie reaſoning: this preſent caſe,
               Conſcience (by reaſon) ſhall giue cuſtom plaſe.
            
            
               I ſay (as I erſt ſaide) when a flie or flies:
               In this: or anie window: in copwebs light,
               Anie ſpider: that within that window lies,
               Shall kill him, and ſuck out his (or their) braine quight.
               Which: begoon by nature, cuſtom folowth right.
               Nature conſeiuing: but for this her ſharp law,
               Flies wold haue mard all: for lack of orderlie aw.
            
            
               And as nature in ſpiders: wrought this defence,
               So reaſon in man: was driuen to woork the ſame.
               Caims generation making reſiſtence:
               Againſt all men: that quiet order wold frame,
               (as you againſt vs do) then thoſe men to tame:
               And defende the quiet: in their quiet cauſe,
               Reaſon to thvnquiet, gaue our like ſharp lauſe.
            
            
               
               But reaſon to them wrought not this: to thentent:
               To catch them: and kill them: tixanioufly,
               But to ſaue them: by terror in their iyes bent:
               To prouoke them to flee thoccacion: wherby:
               They might flee theyr ill, felt therby formerly.
               Which: as reaſon in man did (and doth) conſither,
               So did nature in vs, both concur togither.
            
            
               Nature in vs, reaſon (I ſaie) ſo lowde,
               That this law of nature in vs, laide on flies,
               Reaſon: to man: for order in man, hath vowde,
               For breaking a wall bi night: man as ſone diſe,
               As flies for copwebs brech by daie, which exerſiſe:
               Conſcience (by reaſon) not kicking at: for man
               Conſcience (by reaſon) kickth not at. for flies than:
            
            
               Reaſon in man: woorkth man to woorke (quoth the flie)
               Sharpe lawes: more to ſaue the good: then to ſlea thill,
               Nature in ſpiders, woorkth ſharpe lawes: cruellie:
               Not to ſaue the good, but good and ill to kill,
               Onlie killing all: on all, to feede their fill.
               Thou lieſt (quoth he) we woorke copwebs euerie wheare,
               To ſaue flies by feare, copwebs to for beare.
            
            
               Thus: reaſon hath concience and cuſtom agrede.
               Wherto: law not repungnant, all the world knowes.
               Whervpon (without more parting) to proſede,
               Concordance of theſe principles: here ſo ſhowes,
               That here, here thine end flie: for here thine ende growes.
               By cuſtom (it eidid with theſe other ſaid three,)
               Thy preſent death, I preſentlie here decree.
            
            
               
               The flie farde as thongh he wold haue ſpoken more.
               But: his hart wunderlie faynted, and fayled.
               His iudgment of death: aſtonide him ſo ſore,
               (In that he ſew his ſpeech: right nought preuayled:
               To be (from death) deliuered or bayled,)
               That downe he ſank vpon his knees and hands.
               Requeſting the ſpider, in caſe as next ſtands.
            
            
               Good maiſter ſpider: ſins the caſe ſtands thus,
               That die I muſt, follie were it for me here:
               To pleade this caſs furder: it paſt by diſcus:
               All pleading: or reaſoning, I geue ouer clere.
               Submitting and committing: my life moſt dere,
               Into your hands. beſeching you ere I di,
               To graunt me: one petiſſion: mo craue not I:
            
            
               That is that I (before you) my minde maie ſaie,
               To twelue flies, which ſpeech I promiſe faithfullie:
               Eyther with you, or not againſt you ſhall waie.
               I graunt (quoth the ſpider) and by and bie,
               I know not whether by chaunce, or purpoſtie.
               A doſen flies: aboute the copwebs ſide plaſte weare,
               To whom: this folowing, the flie ſaid then and theare.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The flie (to twelue graue flies for all flies) geueth his aduice for a voiding their parels by their ſ
                  •
               rife had in windowes againſt ſpiders. the great gronnde of which tale ſtandeth moſt vpon conſideration of theſe three things. wherfore they ſtriue, with whom they ſtriue, and how they ſtriue Cap. 88.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               COſins and contrie flies: ech one of you all,
               Another my ſelfe: as ech of all flies are.
               I haue (at ſute) obteind, you hither to call,
               Minding: my conſcience to you to declare,
               In ſuch a time: and ſuch a thing, to prepare,
               As the time, moſt meete to make you credit me,
               And the thing, moſt meete to you: told to be.
            
            
               Firſt: as touchinge time, no time in my time paſt.
               When I was more proſperous (and ſo more fraile:)
               Then I this time am: yet all times firſt and laſt:
               Your truſt in my trewth, did not anie time faile.
               But what time ſhould credence: ſet vp ſo his ſaile?
               As this time: when life time ſhall no more time hold.
               But till time this my tale (to be told) be told.
            
            
               In all ſorts of ſeckts: of ciuile diſſipline:
               Of all times in life: of anie flie I trow,
               In time of his knowne death: cumming ſtreight like mine,
               Credence of his woord (he feende nor foole in ſhow)
               To credit his matter: muſt that time moſt grow.
               What vanite weare this: in ought to deuiſe:
               
                  
                     •
                  ieing now a dieing, to lie and deuiſe liſe.
            
            
               Of all times: for credit (I ſaie none like this.
               And ſecondlie: touching the thing, here to tell:
               Hering therof, no dout moſt meete for you is.
               Which thing, is the ſtrife of furius force fell:
               Betwene ſpiders and flies. wherin to exepell:
               And kill all occaſions in time to cum,
               Of my laſt will (in my laſt woords) here the ſum.
            
            
               
               What waie is herein beſt: for ſpiders to take:
               That can them ſelues tell: much better then can I,
               I am a flie: no ſpider nor ſpiders make:
               To controle the ſpiders part, but hartily,
               I pray the great God: their harts to molify:
               As temperance maie temper their cleime: touching this,
               To geue right, and take right, as moſt rightfull is.
            
            
               But: in right of either part: to determin ought:
               What thei for their part: or you for yours ſhould haue,
               Shift that among you: for it forſith me nought.
               Me ſemth, I here the matok digging my graue.
               The crowne of the whole world: who it me now gaue.
               His good will muſt I thanke: but for ought to win,
               I take not the gift, worth the point of a pin.
            
            
               And wheare you (and all flies) are as ſure to die,
               As am I now: your times to you vnknowne ſure.
               Aduantage of you: in my knowne death haue I,
               In hauing ſome time of remors: to procure,
               Forgeueneſſe of former life, led in lewde lure.
               Wheare you maie (without remors) ſodenlie go:
               And where the tree faith, theare lithe it: clarks ſay ſo.
            
            
               But: for profitable purpoſe toward you:
               In purpoſe purpoſed to you here by me,
               Your imaginaſions: I praie: to draw you now,
               Into my perſon: as in my caſe to be.
               To woork affection: to win effect in ye:
               To conſceiue and reſceiue things: that I ſhall moue.
               Which: to your behofe, behouinglie behoue.
            
            
               
               Thre principles, Whereon my tale to contriue:
               And to proſeede vpon, are theſe to prepoſe.
               Wherfore we ſtriue: with whom we ſtriue: how we ſtriue.
               Wherfore we ſtriue: ye know the cauſe therof goſe,
               For hooles in windows. which quarels to diſcloſe:
               Our cumming to them: and going from them ſought,
               Shall ſhow our winning ſmall: or rather rightnought.
            
            
               Firſt for our cumming to them: who can diſſcriue:
               How manie flies haue preaſte: poſſeſſion to win,
               That neuer could get poſſeſſion a liue.
               But maimd and kild downe right: at their entre in.
               And ſuch as do cum in (where ſpiders do ſpin)
               Moſt wiſe flie: deuiſing to ſit there moſt faſt,
               Maie thinke his firſt hour (or ech hour) there: his laſt.
            
            
               Few flies (I thinke) haue ſcapt longer here then I,
               My which time being ſpent: betwene hope and feare,
               Yet at laſt (for all my ſhifts) lo where I lie.
               Where no raunſum: my redemption, maie reare.
               But my life, remedileſſe I muſt forbeare.
               Cum with daunger, bide with feare, depart with deth.
               To haſtie a iorney to take with one breth.
            
            
               In this ſaide firſt principle: what we ſtriue fore,
               Commodite therin: profe doth thus witneſſe:
               The more flies haue of it: flies daunger the more.
               The leſſe flies haue of it: flies daunger the leſſe.
               Then is nowhit beſt: for who doth ought poſſeſſe:
               Ech peniworth of pleaſure: of ſuch poſſeſt ware,
               Bringth more then counterpaiſe: of daunger and care.
            
            
               
               Beggers flies: before theeuis flies maie 
                     〈◊〉
                   (we ſaie)
               Rich flies before tr
                     •
                  w flies here, do weepe (we ſee)
               The richeſt winning flie: in windows to waie:
               If anie winning there: anie riches be,
               As the beſt thing woon theare is but flies liberto
               What is the winning: woon and kept with ſuch ſtrife,
               That hourlie winth deth: or deadlie feare of life.
            
            
               It is a winning: better loſt then woon.
               And ſo: theſe windows are: wherefore we ſtriue.
               With whom we ſtriue now: ſecondli to roon:
               With our biggers to contend: we here contriue,
               A mach: as much vnmeete for vs to thriue,
               As maie be macht. for two things here to trie.
               Firſt thing their pour, moſt thing their polliſie,
            
            
               To their much pour: our pour oftimes thought more▪
               
               By nomber: manie ſmall making a greate.
               There polliſie (keping their pour in ſtore:)
               Hath moſt times erſt, brought vs our ſelues to beate.
               What winning is in this macht mache to geate?
               None. Wherfore with whome we ſtriue (I thinke it beſt;)
               To leaue of ſtrife: and liue by loſſe in reſt.
            
            
               Now: thirdlie: how or in what maner we ſtriue:
               To tell plaine trouth: in my worſt time to lie,
               Spice of rebellion our ſtrife ſhowth to contriue
               Spiders are plaſte a boue ſuperiorlie
               And flies beneth them plaſte inferiorlie.
               Then maie it ſeme, as they aboue vs haue plaſe,
               So haue they aboue vs like rule in like caſe.
            
            
               
               Which caſe graunted: in ſtriuing ageinſt them thus:
               Our matter: ſtanding in ſtate of moſt right:
               Yet is our maner wrong: and ſedicius.
               No law alowth flies: to win their right by fight,
               Betwene priuate flies. and law inibbitih quight;
               Anie flies to fight: againſt their hygh heades,
               But rather ſuffer, as obedience leades.
            
            
               Wherefore we ſtriue: ye ſe trifils thei are.
               With whom we ſtriue: their polliſie paſſeth our pour.
               How we ſtriue: doth ſedicion declare.
               Three parts without melodie, in the part of our.
               Our part hath a face here: no crab more ſour.
               To moue flies (hens forward) to turne their fares,
               From ſtrife with ſpiders, in quareling caſes.
            
            
               To which: you drawing your imaginacion:
               As though ye ſtood in my ſtate: at this preſent,
               Your owne conſent muſt giue confirmacion:
               My woords herin paſt, to haue a trew extent.
               And furder the ſhoote anker: experiment:
               What ye loſt at ſpiders hands: late before this,
               A full ratificaſion, of my tale: that is.
            
            
               And if that anie flie: will demaunde of me:
               What meane flies maie vſe beſt: their right to obtayne,
               Myne anſwere is: not in harnes capa pe:
               Beſeeging (ſted of beſeeching) to conſtraine:
               Nor ſtur: with euerie flie: ſturd by bedlem braine,
               Sturdilie ſtanding: with bills in foull fighting,
               But humblie ſewing, with bills of faire wrighting.
            
            
               
               By ought (in anie law) that euer I wiſt:
               Thus may flies ſew, for right and not onlie male,
               But ſew ſo: flies muſt: forbiddin to reſiſt:
               Their higher powrs: by violence (anie waie)
               Which waie not helping flies: their waie is to praie:
               Vnto the great god. To woorke ſpiders conſent,
               To geue and take right: in right rated extent.
            
            
               But furder (in this caſe) wheare anie flies go:
               Of long time: of late time: and this time is ſeene:
               Yea: ſene, hard and felt: in our preſent wrought wo:
               That we are wrong doers, and euer haue bene.
               Our woorks herin witneſſing ſo: that I wene:
               No flie ſo fooliſh: but he doth vnderſtand,
               Our harme: for wrong woorking: we haue at gods hand.
            
            
               This to be trew I thinke and haue thought
               Which (maſter ſpider) maie ſuſpicion clere,
               In your ſuſſpecting me, for late tumult wrought,
               But on my deth I take (which I ſhall take here)
               I neuer a vowde (nor a lowde) to draw nere:
               Anie nombre: by lawles vſurped powrs,
               But as peaſablie ſtoode, with gods peace and yours.
            
            
               But for fine: friends: in your beholding my deth:
               As thimage of your owne deths: pleinly to purport,
               In that: one howrs quarter: ye are ſure vneth:
               To ſcape the ſame: to get ought by pour extort,
               Or get or kepe ought: in anie wrongfull ſort,
               That ſight: with thinking of my woords in the reſte,
               Maie: henſforth of ſtrife here: bring your ſide ſurfeſte.
            
            
               
               Behold your deths in me, by vncerteine life.
               Behold your dread in me: your liues a count: to make.
               Behold wherefore ye ſtriue: and that doth endth your ſtrife,
               Behold with whom and how ye ſtriue: (as I ſpake.)
               Behold the looſing gaine, that winth loſſe to take,
               Beholding theſe winnings: with the i
                     •
                  berdees,
               Showth holes in windows (to behold) vanitees.
            
            
               And: ſo all holes in windows: to take and vſe:
               That none offenſife ſtrife: flies abuſe procure,
               But peaſablie: as dew obedience enduſe:
               To put (hauing or crauing of right) in vre,
               This craue I of you: for loue to you moſt pure.
               And thus (paying you to praie for me at ende,)
               To the almightie lord, my ſprit I commende.
            
            
               The flies (vnto theſe woords) no woord could ſpeake.
               But yeelded teares: like drops in Aprill ſhowrs.
               Sauing in
                     •
                  outerie: as they thence did breake,
               They cride farewell: (of flies) the flour of flowrs.
               But well: the laſt hour hath no folowing howrs
               The hour is cum: wherin the flie muſt die.
               For which: he weitth, at ſpiders foote proſtratlie.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ As the ſpider is about to kill the flie, the mayde of the houſe commeth in and ſtriketh downe the copweb and the ſpider to the ground. Cap. 89.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               THe ſpider toward the flie, furiouſlie drawſe.
               And being ſtept to the flie: ſtaying in ſtep,
               As he wold haue perſt the flies hed: with his pawſe,
               The maide of the houſe, to the window did chop.
               Setting her brome, hard to the copwebs top.
               Where: at one ſtroke with her brome: ſtriken rounde,
               The copweb and ſpider, the ſtrake to the grounde.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The maide being at poinet to treade the ſpider to death: the ſpider praieth her to here him ſpeake ere he die: and then to adiudge him iuſtlie. the maide graunting to vſe him (as he dyd vſe the flie) as maie beſt ſtand with reaſon, law, cuſtum, and conſcience. She at his requeſt (for the time) withdrawing hyr foote, they fall to reaſoning of the caſe. Cap. 90.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               THe maide (by mine abſence) to be the more bold,
               To woorke her will, as ſhe cam in, I went out.
               And lookte in at the window: her to behold.
               She ſwept downe the copweb: the flie flew about
               The parler round. Neuer more luſtie nor ſtout.
               The ſpider on the grounde: vnder the maides foote,
               To treade him to death, and was aboute to doote.
            
            
               But the ſpider (on knees (lift vp his hands hie.
               Beſeching her (of milde maidenlie pittie,
               To be concent to here him ſpeake ere he die:
               And to declare. Firſt what he had doone, and then whie:
               He did theſe deedes: and ſo to iudge him iuſtlie.
               And that ſhe wold (in meane time) her foote withdraw,
               Sight wherof: made his hed ake, and his ſtomock gnaw.
            
            
               To baniſh (quoth the maide) all perſhall pretence,
               Ile heare and iudge thee, as thou didſt the flie heert.
               As ſtandth with reaſon, law, cuſtom, and conſcience,
               So ſhalt thou haue good, bad, hie, low, fer or neere.
               And ſince: feare of my foote: abateth thy cheere,
               Leaſt thou mightſt take harme: of thine owne conceight,
               That I withdraw: and ſo withdrew it ſtreight.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ In reaſoning of both ſides, the maide driueth the ſpider to graunt him ſelfe conuinſt (by cuſtom eyded with the other prin ciples erſt ſaide) as he conuinſt and adiudged the flie before. Whervpon ſhe (by cuſtom) decreth the ſpider to die. He then deſiring to ſpeake with his ſonne and his counſell. Which the mayde graunteth. Cap. 91.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               FEyre and good maiſtres maidinlie maide (quoth he)
               Leauing the brim: to the botum to wade,
               What deedes I haue done here: you haue ſene and ſe.
               Which are: the copwebs in windows here made.
               Of all ſpiders, the naturall traſe to trade.
               Which to be impungde, we neuer herde nor ſaw,
               In reaſon, cuſtom, conſcience, nor law.
            
            
               Spider (quoth the maide) know ye that I hard:
               All: this daie betwene you and the flie here ſaide.
               Wherin I ſaw: the cauſe wherfore ye iard:
               Was not for that ye: copwebs here wrought and laide,
               But for the place ye wrought them in: as thus waide:
               You: to beelde in top and top ſide: the flie heelde,
               You heelde the whole yours: in all places to beelde.
            
            
               The flie heelde: that all flies hold all holes in freeholde.
               You (for all ſpiders) heelde that frehold all yours.
               In reaſon, law, and cuſtom, ech to other told,
               Your minds in this matter: (at leaſte) fiue long hours.
               At end wherof, it paſt both your witts and pours:
               To take end your ſelues, but weare driuine to deuiſe,
               Arbiters: to take an end by comprimiſe.
            
            
               Which matter: as both ſides writhed it and wounde it,
               Your arbiters theare: the ant and butterflie,
               Weare driuen to leaue it, at large as they founde it.
               Whervpon ye finalli: burdenuſlie:
               Burdend the flie, with cuſtom: therby to die.
               Which he could not denie: and for his defence,
               He gat the caſe to be reaſond, in conſcience.
            
            
               
               Wherein (by nature in you: and reaſon in man,)
               Ye fet a diſcoorſe: reaſonabli ſounding,
               With reaſon: and conſcience: that cuſtom to ſcan.
               Whearvpon appeerde: infallible grounding,
               To bring the flie iuſtlie, to his confounding.
               And: had not bene your vſurping: in this plaſe,
               Conſcience: with cuſtom: had ſtand in this caſe.
            
            
               Cuſtom graunteth: and conſcience not denithe:
               Diſturbing your copwebs: wrought in top poſte,
               The flie (for thoffence) accuſtomable dithe.
               But copwebs vpon copwebs: pirld in ech coſte:
               All parts of windows to be ſo enboſte:
               That no flie can paſſe: without deths entrupſion.
               Conſcience conſtruth that cuſtom: corrupſion.
            
            
               In taking the flies part here: I take myne owne.
               I: being mayde of the houſe, my charge it is:
               To ſe copwebs corrected. Thus ouer growne,
               And ſo will I do (ſpider) be ſure of this,
               Well (quoth the ſpider) yf I haue done a mis,
               Redreſſe mine ill doing: and let me go free.
               Naie naie ſpider (quoth the maide) that maie not be.
            
            
               Swept I theſe ſuperfluus copwebs now hence:
               
                  
                     •
                  etting thee paſſe: in this window to remaine,
               Cuſtom: hath ſo corrupted thi conſcience:
               That wheare is now one copweb, there ſhould be twaine.
               Well (quoth he) ſins ye like not (as apperth pleine)
               What I haue done, yet here why: I haue done it.
               Which ſhall (I hope) appeaſe your Ire eueriwhit.
            
            
               
               The whi (or wherfore) I did that I haue done,
               Was: that flies (beyond nombre) did here reſort:
               Blowing meate here (raw and roſte) beyond the mone.
               Which wrought your maſter and maiſtres in ſpeech ſhort:
               To rebuke you ſore, to your deepe diſcomfort.
               Which to redres: I, in pitteing of you,
               Set nets to catche flies: as I do now.
            
            
               Here is (quoth the maide) one trewth told, and one lie,
               That flies haue my meate here outrageouſlie blowne,
               That is trulie ſaide: and it for trew graunt I.
               But that thou didſt ſet nets here: all ouergrowne:
               Ought for my pleaſure: and not all for thine owne,
               Thats a falſe tale. To which: polliſie thee drawſe,
               To win fauer at my handes, clere without cauſe.
            
            
               But weare it as trew as it is fals: yet thou:
               And thy familie: do me diſpleaſure more:
               Then pleaſure in this: for your nie approch now,
               Is: to my maſter and maiſtres: an iye ſore.
               Aboue the flies blowing: by degreeſe a ſcore.
               They both: lothe leſſe to haue (be it fleſh or fiſh,
               Ten flies in their meate, then one ſpider in their diſh.
            
            
               And in their diſh woldſt thou and thine ſureli be:
               If I (rather to late then in time dew)
               Tooke thee not vp: as is my charge in dewte:
               Executing mine office, did I eſchew:
               To correct ſuch pride in thee: as neuer grew:
               In ſpider erſt, then my maſter and maiſtres:
               Of my rebuke, had iuſt cauſe of encres.
            
            
               
               And haſte thou bene neuer ſo ſeruiſable:
               In doing thy dewtie: in manie things right.
               Yet: this thy vſurppacion abhominable,
               Hath drowned thy thanke of thoſe dew done deedes: quight.
               Which is to be witneſt, in all the worlds ſight.
               All reaſons: in law, cuſtom, and conſcience weide,
               Againſt the flie, are now againſt thy ſelfe leide.
            
            
               And as thou madeſt cuſtom thi ſhootanker cheefe,
               (Conioyning thereto: reaſon, law, and conſcience,)
               Of the flies death (by right) to make perfight preefe,
               From firſt age of the world: had in conſequence,
               So bring I cuſtom: fet like fer time from hence.
               Cuſtom: is thi warrant: to ſuche the flies braine,
               Whereto: marke how cuſtom warrantth me againe.
            
            
               From the beginning: it is thaccuſtomd gies.
               When ſpiders in windowes their copwebs ſo make:
               That they to fer o
                     ••
                  ende: their beholders iyes,
               The maide of the houſe with her brome: at a ſtrake,
               Swepth downe thoſe copwebs, and thoſe ſpiders take.
               Vnder her foote. And for anie interſeſſe,
               Thoſe ſpiders (with her foote) to doth ſhe doth preſſe.
            
            
               Which cuſtom is vnderpropped (as I ſaide)
               With reaſon, with law, and with conſcience: for me,
               As ſtronglie in my caſe, as for thee in thine laide.
               Now ſpeake ſpider canſt thou deni this (quoth ſhe?)
               Nay for ſoth: I can not denie it (quoth he)
               But am driuen to graunt it: and euin ſo I do.
               Your mercifull hands, I commit me into.
            
            
               
               Thou ſhalt haue (quoth ſhe) mercie euin as much:
               At my hands, as the flie ſhould haue had at thine.
               Caſt of all veine hope: ſins thy fortune is ſuch,
               Thy ſelfe framing fortune: to thy this ruine,
               Make pacience thy ſalue, for this ſore in fine.
               And make thee redie ſpider: for finallie,
               I aſſuredlie aſſure thee, thou ſhalt die.
            
            
               The change of his chere at theſe woords made me ſe,
               How the dread of deth, could lambs of lions make.
               This lionlike ſpider: erſt feerce as could be,
               Feare, did all his furie: full fer then aſlake.
               His hart: in a purſnet was eaſie to take.
               Change (by chance) brought him) at twinke of an iye,)
               From twig top of the tree, at the rote to lie.
            
            
               Theſe two things are meete things (as me thinkth) to note.
               The ſpider right now ſo hie: euin now ſo low.
               The flie right now at eb, euin now a flote.
               The tromp of his fame, neuer ſo hie did blow.
               Thothers tromp of ſhame, as hie in ſounde doth ſhow.
               Which blaſts of which tromps (in mine eare) blew this blaſt:
               Fickill fortune, will neuer leaue her old caſt.
            
            
               But to the matter: the ſpider praide the maide,
               To ſpeake with his ſon and heyre: before he dide:
               And with his counſell. She was content (ſhe ſaide)
               Chaunce being meſſenger, chaunce thither ſtreight hide:
               His ſon: and twelue councellers, hard by his ſide.
               Wherevpon: he theare and then diſcoorſt his minde,
               In matter ſuch, as ye next this maie finde.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The ſpider to his ſonne and twelue ſpiders giueth his beſt abuiſe for moſt quiet and beſt gouernance. His tale ſtandinge moſt vpon theſe three terms, firſt a decleracion of him ſelfe, ſecond an exhortacion to them, the third a ſubmiſſion for him ſelf, whervnto he deſireth licēre to take his child in his armes: now at their departing, which the maide graunteth. Cap. 92.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               MY dere chſlde, my nere freendes, and councellors late:
               My ſhort time: not a lowing long talke with you,
               When I wold moſt long: and moſt deeplie debate:
               (Mine eſtate paſt and preſent) with you all now:
               My talke moſt ſhort: and therby moſt ſleight talow:
               I muſt: and (ſins I muſt) will deuice to tell.
               Charging my child: and praing you, to waie it well.
            
            
               This ſhort tale: ſhortned by ſhort time (as I ſey,)
               For a ground: of ferme framed foundacion:
               Vpon theſe three principles, I will here ley.
               The firſt: of my ſelf, a declaracion.
               The ſecond: to you, an exhortacion.
               The third, for my ſelfe: a ſubmiſſion:
               For remiſſion, of my ill condiſſion.
            
            
               Firſt: I declare and confeſſe my former life,
               Cheefe: in time and place of mine auctorite:
               To wring to the worſe (by right or wrong in ſtrife)
               All flies or ſpiders: that wold ſtand againſt me:
               Their diſtruction, was my felicite.
               My diſpleaſure: (as I vſde it in quarell,)
               Was: as iudgment of death. or dethlike parell,
            
            
               Mine ambicius deſire, here to declare:
               In winning in windows, no one ſo nie all.
               (Which I might haue kept: quietlie to my ſhare.)
               When my winning was moſt, I thought it to ſmall.
               The ſhooting at all: was my marke principall,
               And now: ſhooting at all, I haue loſt all quight.
               The meane: is the merie part: being ſoong right,
            
            
               
               And of the two extreme parts: (as I take it)
               The baſe: is better then the treble: to ſing.
               Treble proſperite, reaſon doth make it:
               Worſe then baſe aduerſite, it approuing:
               In the flies baſe: and my treble ſtate: erſt mouing.
               Proſperite, (as that flie ſaide) makth vs blinde.
               Aduerſite, (I feele) giueth ſight by kinde.
            
            
               When I had all: that could welnie begof,
               Reſtreint of libertie, had bene my hell paint.
               Now I haue nought, I weare content with lot:
               To ſit and beg: faſt locked in a chaine.
               I neuer to obtaine: more eſtate or gaine:
               But onlie life and liuing: ſuch as wold,
               Mainteine a beggers life, baſelie to hold.
            
            
               But life, liberte, lands and all, muſt I looſe.
               And I confeſſe me to leeſe all, worthili.
               Euerie wight is worthie to haue: as he dooſe.
               Lands, life, and goods, of manie flies: had haue I.
               And now muſt I leaue life, lands, and goods, ſemblablie.
               This long learnd leaſon, I late had forgottun.
               Our meſurs mette to other, ſhal to vs be mottun.
            
            
               But in this meaſure, here me meaſure right.
               How wrong iudgers, wrong iudgements: in this text laie.
               Sum expounde it ſo largelie, that in their ſight:
               Wheare aucthoriſed iudges: poniſhment waie:
               Meſuring harme: to harme doers: thill to ſtay:
               If anie ill: cum to thoſe iudges: eft ſone,
               That iudge thill to be done, for thill to them done.
            
            
               
               But: thoſe iudgements grow of this condiſſion:
               Malice arogant, or ingnorance inſolent.
               Mothers: of erronius expoſiſſion.
               This text hath a limit: how fer it hath bent:
               Such harms as chance iudges: or ſuch as aſſent:
               To procure poniſhment: to ſuch as are nought,
               Thoſe harms: vnto them: for that, are not wrought.
            
            
               Iudgements of the great god, are ſecret (we know:)
               A iudge vſing iuſtice: of iuſt trew dealing:
               The god maie poniſh, for other things that grow.
               Which he knowth, and we know not: (by reuealing)
               And oftimes the good: (their glorie enſealing:
               He poniſhth ſum here, as ſtandeth with his will.
               Whoſe meſures he knowth, (of mans meſurs) leaſt ill.
            
            
               But: for ſuch falſe meſurers: as I haue bene:
               This meſure is made, and dewlie put in vre.
               At hands of the great god, oft directlie ſene.
               Right meſure motun, for wrong motun meſure.
               And (oftimes) he doth his inſtruments procure
               As now this maide: right meſurer to me is,
               As I to other, haue meſurde wrong ere this.
            
            
               This declaracion: one part of theſe thre,
               What I haue partlie bene, hath made you here.
               Whereby: what caſe I am in, here you ſe.
               Which ſight and hereing, maie be mirror clere:
               To looke in: all times of the daie and the yere.
               For ſpiders hie: and ſpiders vnderneth.
               To kepe with life, that I haue loſt with deth:
            
            
               
               And ſo to do, I ſhall you all exhort.
               And firſt my ſonne, mark mine aduice to thee,
               (That ſhall ſuccede me ſtreight in place of ſuch port,
               As I firſt began: in ſuperiorite.)
               In few woords (which ſmart ſmall time limitth me.
               For the which while (my child to me moſt dere:)
               Thy weeping leaue, and ley thine eare to here.
            
            
               Thoſe things: that thou haſt herd me here declare,
               By which: thou ſeeſt thy father caſt awaie,
               To ſaue thy ſelfe (my child) ſe thou prepare:
               To flee the ſame: by temperate ſtedie ſtay.
               The contrarie of my demenure ay:
               Shall ay defend thee ſo in euerie caſe,
               As thou both loued and drad, ſhall kepe thi plaſe.
            
            
               Againſt my ſotletee, vſe thou ſimplicitee.
               Againſt my wrong vſurping, vſe thou right.
               Againſt my pride, vſe thou humilitee.
               Againſt my wrath, vſe charite: in ſight.
               Againſt my hate, in loue haue thou delight.
               Againſt theſe ills: and other folowing mee,
               Note theſe next ills: not to folow, but to flee.
            
            
               Wheare truth is taken treaſon: and traitors in truſt:
               Wheare faith is framd fancie: and fancie feind feith:
               Where loſels ouer lords: ley lawes at their luſt:
               Where witleſſe: as wiſeſte: the wittie out weith:
               Where mercie to the meeke: meare malice diſmeith:
               Where dawcocks: in doctrine: haue dominacion,
               There doth deuiſion, bring deſolacion.
            
            
               
               Let truth be the vage, in whom thou truſt doſt take.
               Let not firme faith be left: for fikill fancie,
               Let rewld lords: rewle rewleſie loſels, when they crake.
               Let wiſe wiſdom, ouer wey witleſſe follie.
               Let malice paſſe: vſe meſurable mercie.
               Let thunlearnd: in doctrine: to the learnd: giue plaſe.
               Let paſtors be plaſte, as I place them in caſe.
            
            
               In place of a ſhepherd, place not a ſhepe.
               In place of a ſhepe, place not a ſhephard.
               In no place: place a wolfe, the flocke to kepe:
               The ſheepe or the wolfe, to the ſhepherds place prefard:
               By faintneſſe: or ferceneſſe, the flocke muſt be mard.
               Place thou thy ſhepherds: ſuch ſhepherds to be,
               As from the ſheepe: and wolfe, vſe the meane decre.
            
            
               Offenders penitent (for offences paſt,
               Sauing of whom: offendth not the ſtanding ſtate,
               Nor encorageth other: to offend the more faſt)
               Correct, as mercie maie rigor moderate.
               But to this, make this a ground inuiolate.
               Vpon ſturdie ſtif ſtanders: in violenſie,
               Draw thy ſword of iuſtice, ſharpned ſharplie.
            
            
               And marke (my ſon) theſe points that I now cum to:
               In commun order, of thy gouerning.
               Who: honeſtlie doth, as other honeſt do:
               And ſaith as thoſe honeſt ſaie: or ſaith nothing,
               Are him not what he thinkth, for marke this othing:
               Whoſe deede and his thought: repungnantlie varie,
               His woord and his thought: iar likewiſe contrarie.
            
            
               
               Loue to be loued, and hate to be hated.
               Of thoſe that loue good: and hate ill, otherwiſe,
               Hauing hate of thill: for iuſtice iuſtlie rated,
               Hate ſo, be thou glad to haue, and by iuſtice,
               Continew that hate: in inſeſſant ſiſe.
               In whom (by their fauts) to thee fautleſſe it drawſe:
               To continew: by their continewed cauſe,
            
            
               Touching right or wrong: of both muſt thou chooſe one,
               As thus: eyther to do wrong: or to take wrong,
               Rather take it then do it: ſe thou do none.
               The wrong that I haue done (the flies here among)
               Of myne ill: their ill: hath bene partlie a long.
               Anſwere mine ill all (alas) ſtreight muſt I do.
               And as much of theirs, as mine hath forſt them to.
            
            
               Of ſpider or flie: ſewde to: for ought in grant,
               Ere thou graunt, loke what, where, & why thou graunteſt it
               But graunts once paſt thee (at ſuters ſutes inſtant,)
               Performe them full: without reſtreint anie whit.
               Performance of promiſe, perfitelie doth knit:
               Such credence: to all: (they performing the ſame)
               As winth them faſt freendſhip, and perpetuall fame.
            
            
               Thy councell chooſe, in theſe condiſcions bent.
               Few, wiſe, ſecret, expert, temperate, and trew.
               Satiffide with ſufficiencie, and diligent.
               All ſale of iuſtice: and all offers teſchew:
               That ſhall to thee, or commun welth hindrance brew.
               Their taking wherof: ſeming winning to bee:
               May leeſe them with all theirs, and all thine with thee.
            
            
               
               Here haue I geuen thee ſon: ſuch exortacion,
               As weake wit: and ſhort time will ſuffer in mee.
               Which: if thou vſe, at thy fathers contemplacion,
               Behold then (my ſon) thyne owne proſperitee.
               Yfnot, behold thy fathers aduerſitee.
               As rightlie and rightfully on thee to light,
               As on thy father, thou ſeeſt it now light right.
            
            
               Now: to you of his counſell: marke what I deuies.
               In you, lithe the putting in vre of all this.
               You are his hands, his feete, his eares, and his iyes:
               Hering, feeling, or ſeeing, in him ſmall is:
               To walke or to woorke with: you woorking amis:
               You are the myrrors: that all lookers looke in.
               As you woorke, they woorke: but you muſt firſt begin,
            
            
               In which woorke, this walke, I exorte you to take.
               Walke in amite, woorke in vnite.
               The anſwere of ſuters, expeditelie make.
               Serch their ſubieſtions: how they maie agree:
               To be graunted, with honorable honeſte.
               Offenders againſt you, when ye will chalenge,
               Neuer draw his ſword: your quarels to reuenge.
            
            
               Theſe be the great grounds: preſentlie brought in minde,
               They paſſing two parts: of my promiſed thre.
               Me to declare, you to exort, in ſuch kinde,
               As maie ſhow cauſe of repentance in me,
               For ils paſt: and for thills to cum: in ye,
               Warning to a voide. thirdli and laſtlie now,
               To witneſſe my ſubmiſſion, I ſhall pray you.
            
            
               
               Firſt to the great god, I humblie and wholie:
               Submitte me: euine ſo beſeching his mercie:
               For all my great ſin: and all offenſife follie:
               Againſt him committed. Secondarilie:
               Of all the whole worlde here: I generallie,
               Are forgeueneſſe. Where: and in what: mine offence:
               To craue forgeueneſſe: chargith my conſcience,
            
            
               Thirdlie (and ſpeciallie) good maiſtres maide:
               Your diſpleaſure toward me: to bring appeaſed,
               I praye: your beningnite to be diſplaide,
               To forgiue my gilt: which hath you diſpleaſed.
               And not onlie diſpleaſed, but diſeaſed.
               Namelie now: in ſtreyning your arms long and ſmall,
               To clenſe your window, of vncumlie copwebs all.
            
            
               Fourthlie and finallie, remiſſion ſought:
               By ſubmiſſion, to all ſpiders and fliſe:
               That I in this window haue offended ought:
               In taking or geuing the hooles in ſuch ſiſe:
               Or ſtretched my copwebs here: in ſuch wide wiſe:
               As ſtreightned anie part: of their lawfull right,
               Of them, on knees: I praye forgeueneſſe in ſight.
            
            
               Here end I: ſauing ſix woords here to be ſaide:
               Vnto my child: I: (him in mine arms haning:)
               Pronounſed in your hering (good maiſtres maide:)
               Your liſence wherto, is mine humble crauing.
               Without woord of anie ill, in deprauing.
               Content (quoth ſhe) whet with in arms he tooke him,
               Saying theſe woordes, while ſhe did ouer looke him.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ After a few wofull woordes of the ſpider had to his ſonne (they bothe claſpynge eche other in armes verie naturally) he 
                  •
               yſſeth and bliſſeth him. Wherewyth that ſonne with all the twelue ſpiders dolefullie departe from the ſpider. Cap. 93.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               OH depe deſired ſight, of thee my childe dere:
               Behold thy father, how he beholdeth thee.
               To thy mother, and brother, thou ſhalt appere:
               After this weeping time: worne out of you three,
               To your comforts oftimes: but no time more to me,
               Our departings differ, nothing more (vnneth)
               You fro me to life, I from you to death.
            
            
               Now here in ſight, as I ſhould neuer be hence.
               Streight hence from ſight, as I had neuer bene here.
               Well: farewell: vſe to thy mother obedience.
               To thy brother, let brotherlie loue appere.
               Commend me to them both (my Iuels dere)
               I bliſſe thee: kiſſe thou me: they did ſo: and ſo,
               Lothlie he loſed his arms, and leete him go.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The mayde (appeering as woe to diſtroye the ſpider as he is to be dyſtroyde) wyth her foote preſſeth hym to death. Cap. 94.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               The water ran downe the cheekes, of them both two:
               The maide pitteing both, wept as faſt thaie.
               But for that ſhe muſt do: more then ſhe wold do,
               The ſpider had bene forgeeuen, and gone his waie.
               But they gone weeping awaie, (without delaie:)
               The ſpider laying proſtrate: ſhe thervpon,
               Seiting her foote on him, he was foorthwith gon.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The mayde hath before her the twelue ſpiders and the twelue flies that had bene before in place. And vpon her ſhow that all harms doone by thoſe generacions is growne by myſorder, ſhe fynally deuiſeth full redreſſe in poynting them to grow to order. Cap. 95.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               VPpon this execucion done, ſhe hath now:
               Before her, theſe twelue ſpiders with thoſe twelue 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               That erſt weare there: they erſt menſioned to you.
               Vnto which nombre, ſhe did the are deuiſe,
               Certaine precepts geeuen: in woords weightie and wiſe,
               Which to repeate: as rightlie as I can,
               I will. And in this wiſe her tale began.
            
            
               To traine the time and tarie you (quoth ſhe)
               In talke of your forefauts, folli it weare.
               The ſmart: both doth and will, ſtill tell it ye.
               But what thing brought that ſmart: eche when and wheare)
               That: heare to here, eche one ley to his care.
               Which thing brieflie to tell: brief end to forder,
               Was onlie in you all, this thing: miſorder.
            
            
               As god orderlie created creatures all:
               So weare they treated, to orderlie entent.
               To vſe them ſelues, ech creature in his call.
               Of which created ſort: the creator ment,
               Spiders and flies twayne, to order to relent.
               The lacke wherof on your ſides: witneſſeth weele,
               To haue wrought diſpleaſure on all ſides, euerideele,
            
            
               On all ſides I ſaie: meaning theſe ſides therby.
               Your ſides, my ſide, my maſter and maſters ſide.
               Firſt for your ſides: the ſmart ſhowth feelingly.
               On my ſide: 
                     •
                  uch rebukes as I a bide,
               Of them for you, ſeeming your fauts to hide.
               And on their ſides: their moſt diſpleſaunt ſight,
               To ſe ſpiders and flies, out of order quight.
            
            
               
               Spiders ſpinning in windows welnie, in their faris.
               Spightfullie haue ſponne. And flies innumerablie:
               To blow their meate: haue made their commun tracis,
               Thus: lacke of order on your two ſides proue I:
               To haue brought all ſides: to liue diſpleſantlie.
               To my maſters and maiſtres greefe, greatli growne.
               Whoſe which greefe: to me, is more then mine owne.
            
            
               By whoſe appointment vnder them as now:
               I (hauing here the cure,) muſt haue the care.
               To aſſine redreſſe: for which I ſent for you.
               To you: and to all yours in you, to declare:
               Order, to eaſe all ſpiders and flies that are.
               And all other: ſuch as haue bene anoide,
               By lacke of order, which ye ere this diſtroide.
            
            
               That ſpiders and flies: are the creatures of god,
               And all his creatures: in their creacion good,
               I know and aknowledge. Or els gods forbod.
               I hate neither the ſpiders: nor the flies brood.
               I loue all: as behoueth maidenlie mood.
               All his creatures in an order, we muſt loue:
               That orderlie vſe them ſelues: as doth behoue.
            
            
               And ſuch as be ill: yet maie we not hate:
               The perſons, but the ill in the perſons ſeene.
               This learnd I of a preacher: that preached late:
               And of my ſelfe (I thanke god) I haue not beene:
               So much giuen to hate (anie perſon I meene
               Be they ſpiders: be they flies: what euer they be:)
               But I can vſe all, as ſtandth with charite.
            
            
               
               And charitablie ſuch an order to ſet:
               To ſet you in reſt: and the ſayde reſt therby,
               All fauts in all paſt: to forgeue and forget,
               That will I you all to do. And orderly:
               Ethone to vſe him ſelfe ordinarilie:
               And eche vſe other: in euerie kind of cauſe,
               As thold knowne well ordered cuſtome, dewli drawſe.
            
            
               And that is this: ye ſpiders in tip of top:
               Or in top ſides of windows: copwebs ſhall make
               Aboue the rech of my broome: to cruſh or crop
               Anie part therof: not ſet like an ale ſtake,
               Proudlie to brag your ſelues: and bring flies in brake,
               But in place to lie: moſt hie and moſt hiddin.
               Spiders thus plaſte, cuſtoms order hath biddin.
            
            
               Flies in the bodie of the window ſhall paſſe.
               Not by thouſands at once: ſediciouſlie,
               But thorough hooles of lattes: or broken glaſſe:
               Not blowing henſforth (ſo ſawſmalapertlie:)
               My maſters and maiſtres meate: as yeares latlie:
               They haue dane, but paſſe and repaſſe in nombre
               And vſage ſuch as ſhall no houſe accombre.
            
            
               This auncient order (in few woordes) here geeuene,
               Is all that I axe: in you to be vſed.
               In lacke wherof, in all ſorow you are dreeuene,
               In vſe therof, in ſolace you in cluſed.
               Myſorder: bringing you thus confuſed,
               Let order: by your leauing of miſorder,
               Quietneſſe on your ſides, and all ſides forder.
            
            
               
               By order (from miſorder) you to redeeme,
               (From ſorowes of all ſorts to ſolace ſo ſorted,)
               Is cauſe of my cuming. Not by meanes extreeme,
               But by moſt milde meanes: that maie be imported:
               In order to ſet you: and ſe you comforted
               To kepe order. Wherin you obeying mee,
               We may liue in loue all: eche in his degree.
            
            
               Eche in his degree (I ſaie) mark that point well.
               Your lacke of liuing ſo, (ye ſee) mard you all.
               Cheeflie you ſpiders: vſurping to excell:
               In gouernance: out of your place naturall.
               Which for few yeares paſt, brought and kept flies ſo thrall,
               That you (welnie) brought flies: to graunt to agree.
               You: as head gouernous generall bee.
            
            
               In which vſurpacion: ye offended,
               Nature, reaſon, my maſter, maiſtres, and me.
               Gouernours, nature hath commonlie bended:
               Ouer ſuch kinds to gouerne, as them ſelues be.
               Beaſt ouer beaſts, foull ouer fowls, as we ſe
               Man ouer men. And in feare and aw is than,
               Thunreaſonable beaſte, to reaſonable man.
            
            
               Nature ye offend: in planted plaine profe here,
               To take rule of other kinds, then your kind is,
               Reaſon: ye offend, in that ye here appere,
               To take vpon you, the vſe of mine offis.
               Me: ye offend in the ſame: and vnto this.
               My maſter and maiſtres ye offend. As thus.
               Hed rule here, is their gift by cuſtoms diſcus,
            
            
               
               But leaue this, and take that: mine order erſt told.
               Keepe you your places, and let me keepe mine.
               As nature: and cuſtom: willeth you of old.
               While reaſon: and cuſtom: do me clere encline:
               My maſters and maiſtres will: to woork in fine:
               As I vnder them: and you vnder me,
               May louelie liue (I ſaie) ech in dew degree.
            
            
               The ſpiders and flies: perceyuing by her ſtaie:
               That ſhe (in this matter) had ſaide what ſhe wold,
               All reioyſing, one ſpider aſſinde to ſaie:
               In ſuch maner: as good maner: might him bold,
               This effect in theſe woords, to this maide he told.
               At beginning of whoſe talke ſhe ſet her iye,
               And layde her eare toward him diligentlie.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The twelue ſpiders and twelue flies hauyng herde theyr order ſet by the mayde, they thankefullie receyue it. And vpon her commaundement to them, to put thys order in vre amonge all ſpyders and flies, they ioyfullye departe that commaundement to fulfill. Cap. 96.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               MOſt excelent maide, and maiſtres of ours.
               Your milde and motherlie precepts: geuen vs thus,
               In order old: reuiued now: at hand of yours,
               Lack wherof (as ye ſaide) the ſorowes in vs:
               Haue witneſt that, of them, the cauſe in diſcus.
               Your woords wherin told: to our deedes therin felt,
               Do inſtruct vs, with a doble witneſſe delt.
            
            
               And double or freble (yea quatreble) cauſe:
               With manie cauſes mo: then I can now tell:
               Haue we: to kepe order as your will vs drawſe,
               Spiders and fllies haue liued, like as in hell.
               Sins new miſorder: did thold order expell,
               Thus: our bound dutie obaiyng your precept,
               Is your pleaſure, but our profits, to ſe kept.
            
            
               Which: I promiſe for vs, and all ſpiders els:
               To be obſerued. As ferfoorth as we maie,
               And I (quoth one flie) for all flies as he tels:
               Promiſe: for order to walke the ſame waie.
               Reioyſing all, that euer we ſaw this daie.
               Praying the great god: for you now and euer,
               In proſperus proſperite, to perſeuer.
            
            
               Well freends (quoth the maide) to enter order now:
               Depart. And plant this in all ſpiders and flieſe.
               In top of windows, ſpiders exerciſe you.
               And flies the hooles: moderateli excerciſe.
               In moſt ioyfull ioy, that both ſorts can deuiſe.
               From thence moſt ioyfullie: they all flang and flew,
               While the mayde vſde her will there, as doth enſew,
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The ſpiders and flies beynge now abſent, The mayde ſweepyth the wyndow cleane in euerie place. As far as her brome and arme wyll ſtretch, which doone ſhe departeth. Cap. 97
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               THe ſpiders and flies (for the time) being gon,
               The maide ſwept that window, cleane in all places.
               In all corners: that her broome might light vpon,
               Ech copweb (with her broome) ſhe full defaces:
               No wem ſeene: in caſemunds, nor caſemund caſes.
               Vpon her cleare clenſing wherof: out went ſhe,
               And in cam I, her woorkmanſhip there to ſe.
            
            
               
                  ornament
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The maide being gone, the auctor cūmeth in. And vpon hys beholding the wyndow fayre and cleane ſwept wythoute anie comberus copwebs or exceſſiue flockes of flies he departeth. Cap. 98.
            
               
                  depiction of spider and fly story
               
            
            
               
               BEholding the window: ſeeing euerie roome:
               Cleane and emptie, ſaue three flies amid that plat:
               And in the top (without reche of the maids broome)
               Corners of copwebs vnneth ſene, and to that:
               All thinges in quiet caſe: ſo that I could nat
               Of anie matter: be anie furder winner,
               I went from the window, to the boorde to dinner.
            
            FINIS.

                  depiction of the author beholding flies
               
            
         
         
            
            The concluſion with an expoſiſſion of the Auctor touching one peece of the latter part of this parable.
            
               I Haue, (good readers) this parable here pende:
               (After olde beginning) newly brought to ende.
               The thing, yeres mo then twentie ſince it begoon.
               To the thing: yeres mo then ninetene, nothing doon.
               The frewte was grene: I durſt not gather it than,
               For feare of rotting: before riping began.
               The loſſe, (it on the frewterers hande lying:)
               Had (in that miſtery) mard his occupying.
               This worke (among my poore workes) thus hath it paſt:
               Begon with the firſt, and ended with the laſt.
               At ende wherof (as at beginning) I pray.
               All readers that reade it (in al that we may.)
               Ech one reader: to ſcan this parable ſo,
               As our moſt ſcanning: diligently may go:
               (In ſpeech of ſpiders and flies fautes: here ſhowne:)
               To conſiderate weying, of fautes of our owne.
               And them (by grace) tamend, for concord growing,
               As ſpiders and flies: grow to, here in ſhowing.
               But, fauts and fauters: erſt repented, and paſt,
               Which fauts (I hope) none: on him ſelf can now caſt:
               Figured here in the ſpiders cruelte:
               Touching deedes and deathes of thoſe: that ſo paſt be:
               Let vs rather (when memorie them to mind calls,)
               Lament their falſe facktes: then reioyce their foule falls,
               And praie for them, as we hope they pray for vs,
               That they and we: by goddes mercifull diſcus,
               May (after ſtrife together in life carnall,)
               Liue and loue together: in life eternall.
               
                  
And for the chief ſpider and flie: vnderſtand:
               Spider that dide: and flie that ſcapte, at maydes hand,
               As in that figure: both: moſt charitablie:
               Thone in deede dieing: thother redie to die,
               So ſhould we: not onlie die, but alſo liue.
               As gods preſeptes, (paine of endeleſſe deth) do giue.
               Ye ſe alſo: that this fygure here implies,
               For ſtrife in windowes: betweene ſpiders and flies,
               The plat of all the world, and people therin.
               In which world: which people: if all now begin:
               And henſforth: endeuer them deuring theyr liues:
               By counſell of thoſe two: to cut of all ſtriues:
               By cuting of: all cauſe of ſtrife: in all parties:
               As they both: (eche in his laſt tale) did deuiſe,
               The firſt tale: in chapter four ſcore and eight here:
               The ſecond: in foure ſcore and twelue; doth a pere:
               Thaduice in both turnd to: it to here and hold:
               Turning their perſons to oures (in thoſe tales told,)
               Then ſhall we firſt ſe, and after feele: what frewte,
               Our right doing (againſt wrong) ſhall execute.
               Which: ſince ye maie turne: and behold as a glaſſe,
               Tedius Iteracion therof I let paſſe.
               As I (for tediouſneſſe and other cauſes,)
               Omit (to remit) the nombre of clauſes.
               To thoſe: learnd and geuen (in enterpretacion,)
               More them am I, vnto moraliſacion.
               I leaue to the learnd: the corps of this matter:
               How beete (as I can) I craue leaue to ſmatter:
               In vttring my fancie: vnder ſubmiſſion,
               Touching the taking of one expoſiſſion:
               
                  
In one peece herof: one ſence tenterpretate:
               Of apt aplication to ſence literate:
               In this the laſt ſaide part, of this ſaide fygure.
               That maide I meane: putting her office in vre.
               Sweping downe copwebs in euerie border,
               That ſhe (in that window) ſaw ſet out of order.
               Setting all flies at their lawfull libertie,
               And ſpiders alſo, tavoyde all ieobertie.
               They bilding in windowes: without her broms rech,
               (Where bilding within it: brought much of this brech)
               Keeping them ſelues within their boundes: as they ought,
               Harme ſhe none did them, none ſaide, nor none thought.
               But ſpiders: hauing paſt their boundes: as they had,)
               And flies: hauing flowne more brode: then order bad,
               Thone: to nie her maſters and maiſtres iye ſhowing:
               Thother: her maſters and maiſtres meate blowing:
               She thought it her dutie: it being her charge,
               To do ſum execucion: for warning large:
               Both to ſpiders and flies: the flockes euerichone,
               By executing of ſpiders, onlie one.
               And: ſaue cuſtom of iuſtice: forſt her therto,
               Both was ſhe: execuſion on him to do.
               Her brome not ſword of rigor, (doble edgid blade)
               But the branche of mercie: that milde maiden made.
               Finallie: vpon her benigne behauer:
               Appeaſing all this furie: with all this fauer,
               In ſpiders and flies: without ſtripes to ſtint ſtrife,
               All plaſte in right place: to place proſperus life,
               Ech one in him ſelfe: in moſt ioyfull ioy ioyde,
               And eche one to other, their ioyes they imploide.
               
                  
All loying in her: as their redempſion,
               Of reſt, long erſt had in exſempſion.
               All bent (as all weare bounde) in all that they maie,
               That maide (in her office) to loue and obaie.
               Wherwith: as this parable here taketh ende,
               So I: (with a few wordes therin) an ende intende.
               Of this laſt peece: pleine interpretacion,
               Lighteth in the lap of imaginacion.
               Which: of force, in weying the ſence literall,
               Clerelie conueithe the ſence alligoricall,
               To our ſufferaigne Ladie, Queene Marie, and maide.
               At gods bringing whom to her crowne, may be laide:
               Our lyke ſtrife riſſen: and more then like to riſe,
               Then ſhowth here riſen: betweene ſpiders and flies.
               Whoſe ſworde like a brome: that ſwepth out filth cleane:
               Not a ſword that fileth the houſe: by blodie meane,
               This mercifull maiden tooke in hand to ſweepe,
               Her window: this realme. Not to kill, but to keepe:
               All in quiet. On her bringing vs therto,
               As that maide (all ſpiders and flies) ſhowth to do.
               And as vnder that mayde: ſpider dide but one,
               So vnder this maide: ſaue one, (in effect) none.
               And as that one: vnder that one maide did die:
               Repentaunt, ſo this other repentauntlie:
               Vnder this other maide: the deth meeklie tooke.
               All ſin: with all ſinfull errours, he forſooke,
               Of god: crauing forgiueneſſe principallie,
               And then of the world. And moſt ſpeciallie:
               Of this mayde his maſtres. Who (clerlie) him forgaue,
               As that maide did that ſpider, when he did craue.
               
                  
And as that maide: lothlie forſt by iuſt cuſtum:
               Was dreuin to bring that one: texcucion to cum,
               So this maide: ſaue like that maide: by force was dreuine,
               Was with that maide: (for pitie) more then euine.
               And as that maidins moſt quarell was addikt:
               For that: ſpiders and flies: in that window kikt:
               Againſt the will of her maſter and maiſtres,
               So did this maide: her cheefe quarell addres:
               To vs (or to ſuch of vs) as the preſept:
               Of her maſter and maiſtres: had not kept,
               And as that maide tooke thoſe fautes much more to hart:
               In reſpect of her maſters and maiſtres part:
               Then for her owne part, (her part being not ſmall:
               In that the redres: ſhe was charged with all,)
               So: vnder her maſter and maiſtres, this meyde:
               Being theyr like inſtrument: to ſe thinges weyde,
               She weyde that. With more greefe to ſe them offendid,
               Then for ought: that on her owne part dependid.
               Her maſter Chriſt, the head maſter principall.
               Her maiſtres, mother hollie church catholicall.
               And as that one maide: with that one ſtroke of her broome:
               Clenſed her window clere in euerie roome:
               Setting flies at liberte: in their right rate:
               Plaſing ſpiders likewiſe in accuſtumd ſtate:
               Poynting both partes: path of direct direction:
               To trace and treade in: as welthes protection,
               So this one mayde: with this one ſtroke of her ſword:
               From long thrall thraldom, hath ſet vs clere a bord.
               Poynting vs our places (and pathes) of old knowne:
               Great gides, both to goſtlie and worldlie welth growne.
               
                  
Thus fer goth this figure: and this expoſiſcion:
               Betweene that mayde, and this maide. The condiſcion,
               On her part fulfild. Whervpon let vs here
               Plaie our parts in this part: all parts to apere:
               To this maide, as ſpiders and flies to that maide.
               Let our baners of obedience be diſplaide.
               Of loue, the bage. of reioyſing, the right roote.
               And of our owne welthis, the right and full boote.
               Loue we her, and obey we her, as we ought:
               And alſo our ſuffrayne Lorde: Philip: to her brought:
               By god: as god brought her to vs. Which twaine:
               Conioyned one: in matrimoniall trayne:
               Both one alſo: in auctorite regall:
               Theſe two thus made one: bothe one here we call.
               Which two thus one, reioyſe we eueriechone.
               And theſe two thus one, obey we all as one.
               Effectuallie: as thoſe ſpiders and flies,
               Figuratiuelie, that one recongnies,
               Beſeching god that brought them, to keepe them here:
               In long proſperus raigne. And of his mercie mere:
               So to bliſſe vs: that on this bleſſed ſtocke,
               He bring ſuch impes: as ouer their faythfull flocke:
               As their progenitors do raygne preſentlie,
               They (after them) maie raigne perpetuallie.
               And for gift of theſe two thus one: to vs geuine,
               
                  
                     •
                  o yeld the three and one thankes: (as we are dreuine,
               And alſo them, conclude we this euen thus.
               Thanke we god for them, and god and them for vs,
            
            FINIS,
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ♣ IMPRINTED AT LONDON ♣ IN FLETESTRETE, BY THO. POVVELL. ♣ Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
            
         
      
   