
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧The play of the
wether.
¶A newe and very mery enterlude of
all maner wethers made by
Iohn Heywood.
            
               ¶The players names.
               ☞Iupiter a god.
               ☞Mery reporte the vyce.
               
                  ❧The gentylman.
               ☞The marchant.
               
                  ❧The ranger.
               ¶The water myller.
               ☞The wynde myller.
               ¶The gentylwoman.
               ☞The launder.
               ☞A boy the leſt that can play.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               ¶Iupyter,
               
                  
                     RYght farre to longe as nowe were to recyte
                  The anciēt eſtat wherin our ſelfe hath reyned
                  What honoure what laude gyuen vs of very ryght
                  What glory we haue had duty vnfaīd
                  Of eche creature which duty hath cōſtrayned
                  For aboue all goodes ſyns our fathers tale
                  We Iupyter were euer princypale.
               
               
                  ☞Yf we ſo haue ben as truth it is in dede
                  Beyonde the compas of all comparyſon
                  Who coulde preſume to ſhewe for any mede
                  So that it myght appere to humayne reaſon
                  The hye renoume we ſtande in at thys ſeaſon
                  For ſyns that heuen and erthe were fyrſt create
                  Stode we neuer in ſuche tryumphant eſtate.
               
               
                  
                     ❧As we nowe do where of we wolde reporte
                  Suche parte as we ſe mete for tyme preſent
                  Chefely concernynge your perpetuall conforte
                  As the thynge ſelfe ſhall proue in experymente
                  Whiche hyely ſhall bynde you on knees lowly beute
                  Soolly to honour our hyenes day by day
                  And nowe to the mater gyue eare and we ſhall ſay.
               
               
                  ☞Before our preſens in our hye parlyament
                  Bothe goddes and goodeſſes of all degrees
                  Hath late aſſembled by comen aſſente
                  For the redres of certayne enormytees
                  Bred amonge them thorowe extremytees
                  Abuſede in eche to other of them all
                  Namely to purpoſe in theſe moſte ſpecyall.
               
               
                  
                  ¶Our foreſayde fathers Saturny and Phebus
                  Eolus and Phebe theſe foure by name
                  Whoſe natures nat onely ſo farre contraryous
                  But alſo of malyce eche other to defame
                  Haue longe tyme abuſed ryght farre out of frame
                  The dewe courſe of all theyr conſtellacyons
                  To the great damage of all yerthly nacyons.
               
               
                  ¶Whiche was debated in place ſayde before
                  And fyrſt as became our fether moſte aunciente
                  With berd e whyte as ſnowe, his lockes both cold & hote
                  Hath entred ſuche mater as ſerued is intent
                  Laudynge his froſty manſyon in the fyrmament
                  To ayre and yerth as thynge moſte precyous
                  Pourgynge all humours that are contagyous.
               
               
                  ¶Howe be yf he alledgeth that of longe tyme paſte
                  Lyttell hath preuayled his great dilygens
                  Full oft vpon erthe his fayre froſt he hath caſt
                  All thynges hurtfull to banyſhe out of preſens
                  But Phebus entendynge to kepe him in ſylens
                  When he hath labored all nyght in his powers
                  His glarynge beames maryth all in two houres,
               
               
                  ☞Phebus to this made no manere anſwerynge
                  Where vpon they bothe then Phebe defyed
                  Eche for his parte leyd in her reprouynge
                  That by her ſhowres ſuperfluous they haue tryed
                  In all that ſhe may theyr powers be denyed
                  Where vnto Phebe made anſwere no more
                  Then Phebus to Saturne had made before.
               
               
                  ☞Anone vpon Eolus all theſe dyd fle
                  
                     
Complaynynge theyr cauſes eche one a rowe
                  And ſayde to compare none was ſo euyn as he
                  For when he is dyſpoſed his blaſtes to blowe
                  He ſuffreth neyther ſonne ſhyne, rayne nor ſnowe
                  They eche agaynſte other, and he agaynſt all thre
                  Thus can theſe foure, in no maner agre.
               
               
                  ¶Whiche ſene in them ſelfe and further conſyderynge
                  The ſame to the redres was cauſe of theyr aſſemble
                  And alſo that we euermore beynge
                  Beſyde one puyſant power of deite
                  Of wyſedome and nature ſo noble and fre
                  From all extremytees the meane deuydynge
                  To peale and plente eche thynge attemperynge.
               
               
                  ☞They haue in concluſyon holly ſundryd
                  Into our handes as muche concernynge
                  All maner of wethers by them engendryd
                  The full of theyr powers for terme euerlaſtynge
                  To ſet ſuche order as ſtandeth with our pleaſynge
                  Whiche thynges of our parte no parte requyred
                  But of all theyr partes ryght humble deſyred.
               
               
                  ☞To take vpon vs whereto we dyd aſſente
                  And ſo in all thynges with one voyce agreable
                  We haue clerely fynyſhed our foreſayde parleamente
                  To your great welthe whiche ſhalbe fyrme and ſtable
                  And to our honour farre ineſtimable
                  For ſyng theyr powers as ours addyd to our owne
                  Who can we ſaye knowe vs as we ſhulde be knowne.
               
               
                  ☞But nowe for fyne the reſt of our entente
                  Wherfore as nowe we hyther are deſcended.
                  
                     
Is onely to ſatyſfye and content
                  All maner people whiche haue ben offendyd
                  By any wether mete to be amendyd
                  Vpon whoſe complayntes declarynge theyr grefe
                  We ſhall ſhape remedy for theyr relefe.
               
               ¶And to gyue knowledge for theyr hyther reſorte
               We wolde this afore proclaymed to be
               To all our people by ſome one of this ſorte
               Whome we lyſte to choſe here amongeſt allye
               Wherfore eche man auaunce and we ſhall ſe
               Whiche of you is moſt mete to be our eryer.
            
            ☞Here entreth Mery reporte
            
               ☞Mery reporte.
               
                  ❧Brother holde vp your torche a lytell hyer
               Nowe I beſeche you my lorde loke on me furſte
               I truſt your lordſhype ſhall not fynde me the wurſte.
            
            
               ☞Iupyter.
               ☞Why what arte thou that approcheſt ſo nye.
            
            
               ¶Mery reporte.
               ¶Forſothe and pleaſe your lordſhype it is I.
            
            
               ¶Iupyter.
               ¶All that we knowe very well, but what I.
            
            
               ☞Mery reporte.
               ☞What I, ſome laye I am I perſe I
               But what maner I ſo euer be I
               I aſſure your good lordſhype I am I.
            
            
               ¶Iupyter.
               ¶What maner man arte thou ſhewe quyckely.
            
            
               ☞Mery reporte.
               ☞By god a poore gentylman dwelleth her by.
            
            
               ☞Iupyter.
               ☞A gentylman thy ſelfe bryngeth witnes naye
               
                  
Bothe in thy lyght behauour and araye
               But what art thou called where thou doſt reſorte.
            
            
               ☞Mery reporte.
               
                  ❧Forſothe my lorde mayſter Mery reporte.
            
            
               ¶Iupyter.
               ¶Thou arte no mete man in our beſynes.
               For thyne apparence is of to muche lyghtnes.
            
            
               ¶Mery reporte.
               ☞Why can not your lordſhype lyke my name
               Myne apparell nor my name nother.
            
            
               ¶Iupyter.
               ❀To none of all we haue deuotion.
            
            
               ¶Mery reporte.
               ¶A proper lycklyhod of promocyon
               Well than as wyſe as ye ſeme to be
               Yet can ye ſe no wyſdome in me
               But ſyns ye diſprayſe me for ſo lyght an elft
               I praye you gyue me leue to prayſe my ſelfe
               And for the fyrſte parte I wyll begyn
               In my behauour at my commynge in
               Wherin I thynke I haue lytell offendyd
               For ſewer my curteſy coulde nat be amendyd
               And as for my ſeure your ſeruaunte to be
               Myght yll haue ben myſt for your honeſtie
               For as I be ſaued yf I ſhall nat lye
               I ſawe no man ſewe for the offyce but I
               Wherfore yf ye take me nat or I go
               Ye muſt anone whether ye wyll or no
               And ſyns your entente is but for the wethers
               What ſkyis our appyrell to be fryſe or fathers
               I thynhe it wyſdome ſyns no man forbad it
               With this to ſpate a better yf I had it
               And for my name reportynge all waye truely
               
                  
What hurte to reporte a ſad mater merely
               As be occaſion for the ſame entente
               To a certayne wedowe this day was I ſente
               Whoſe huſbande departyd without her wittynge
               A ſpeciall good louer and ſhe his owne ſwettynge
               To whome at my commynge I caſte ſuche a fygure
               Mynglynge the mater accordynge to my nature
               That whan we departyd aboue all other thynges
               She thanked me hertely for my mery tydynges
               And yf I had nat handled it merely
               Perchaunche ſhe myght haue take it heuely
               But in ſuche facyon I coniured and bounde her
               That I lefte her meryer then I founde her
               What man may compare to ſhewe the lyke comforte
               That dayly is ſhewed by me Mery reporte
               And for your purpoſe at this tyme ment
               For all wethers I am ſo indyfferent
               Without affeccyon ſtandynge ſo vp ryght
               Son lyght, mone lyght, ſter lyght, twy lyght, torche lyght,
               Colde hete moſt drye, hayle rayn froſt ſnow, lightnīg thūd
               
               Cloudy, myſty, wyndy, fayre, foule aboue heed or vnder
               Temperate or diſtemperate what euer it be
               I promyſe your lordſhyp all is one to me.
            
            
               ☞Iupiter.
               
                  ❧Well ſon conſyderynge thyne indyfferency
               And partely the reſt of thy declaracyon
               We make the our ſeruaunt and immedyatly
               Well wolde thou departe and cauſe proclamacyon
               Publyſhynge our pleaſure to euery nacyon
               Whiche thynge ones done with all deligens
               Make thy returns agayne to this preſens.
               ❀Here to receyue all ſewters of eche degre
               
                  
And ſuche as to the may ſeme moſte metely
               We wyll thou brynge them before our maieſte
               And for the reſte that be nat ſo worthy
               Make thou reporte to vs effectually
               So that we may here eche maner ſewte at large
               Thus ſe thou departe, and loke vpon thy charge.
            
            
               ¶Mery reporte.
               ¶Nowe good my lorde god our lady be with ye
               Frendes, a felyſhype let me goo by ye
               Thynke ye I maye ſtande thruſtynge amonge you there
               Nay by god I muſte thruſte aboute other gere
            
            ☞Mery reporte goeth out.
            ¶At thende of this ſtaf the god hath a ſonge played
in his torne or Mery reporte come in.
            
               ☞Iupyter.
               ¶Nowe ſyns we haue thus farre ſet forthe our purpoſe
               A whyle we woll withdrawe our godly preſens
               To enbolde all ſuche more playnely to diſcloſe
               As here wyll attende in our foreſayde pretens
               And nowe accordynge to your obediens
               Reioyce ye in vs with ioye moſte ioyfully
               And we our ſelfe ſhall ioye in our owne glory
            
            ☞Mery reporte cometh in.
            
               ☜Mery reporte.
               ¶Nowe ſyrs take hede for here cometh goddes ſeruaūt
               Auaunte cartely keytyfs auaunt
               Why ye dronken horeſons wyll it nat be
               By your feaythe haue ye nother cap nor knee
               Nat one of you that wyll make curteſy
               To me that am ſquyre for goddes body
               Regarde ye nothynge myne authoritie
               No welcome home nor where haue ye be
               Howe be it yf ye axyd I coulde nat well tell
               
                  
But ſure I thynke a thouſande myle from hell
               And on my faythe I thynke on my conſcience
               I haue ben from heuen as farre as heuen is hens
               At Louyn, at London, and in Lumbardy
               At Baloocke, at Barforde, and in Barbary
               At Canturbery, at Couentre, at Colcheſter
               At Wanſworth, and at Welbecke, at Weſtcheſter
               At Fullam, at Faleborne, and at Fenlowe
               At wallyngeforth, at wakefelde, and at waltanſtowe
               At Tawcon, at Typtre, and at Totnam
               At Glouceter, at Gylforde, and at Gotham
               At Hartforde, at Harwyche, at Harcowe on the hyll
               At Sutbere, at Suthampton, at ſhoters hyll
               At Wallyngham, at wittam, and at werwycke
               At Boſton, at Bryſtowe, and at Berwycke
               At Grauelyn, at Graueſende, and at Glaſtenbery
               Ynge Gyngyange Iabyerde the paryſhe of Butlbery
               The deuyll him ſelfe without more leaſure
               Coulde nat haue gone halfe thus muche I am ſure
               But nowe I hane warned them let them euen choſe
               For in faythe I care nat who wynne or loſe.
            
            
               ❧Here the Gentylman before he cometh in
bloweth his horne.
            
               ¶Mery reporte.
               ☞Nowe by my trouth this was a goodly herynge
               I wonte it had ben the gentylwomens blowynge
               But it is nat ſo as I nowe ſuppoſe
               For womens hornes ſoundes more in a mannes noſe.
            
            
               ¶Gentylman.
               ¶Stande ye mery my frendes euerychone.
            
            
               ☞Mery reporte.
               ❀Say that to me and let the reſte alone
               Syrye he welcome and all your meyny.
            
            
               
               ¶Gentylman.
               ¶Nowe in good ſothe my frende god a mercy
               And ſyns that I mete the here thus by chaunce
               I ſhall requyre the of further acqueyntaunce
               And preuely to ſhewe the thys is the mater
               I come to ſewe to the great god Iupiter
               For helpe of thynges concernynge my recreacyon
               Accordynge to his late proclamacyon,
            
            
               ☞Mery reporte.
               ☞Mary I am he that this muſt ſpede
               But fyrſte tell me what be ye in dede.
            
            
               ¶Gentylman.
               ¶Forſothe good frende I am a gentylman.
            
            
               ¶Mery reporte.
               ¶A goodly occupacyon by ſaynte Anne
               On my fathe your maſhype hath a mery lyfe
               But who maketh all theſe hornes your ſelfe or your wyfe
               Nay euen in erneſte I aſke you this queſtion.
            
            
               ¶Gentylman.
               ¶Nowe by my truth thou arte a mery one.
            
            
               ¶Mery reporte.
               ☞In fatyhe or vs bothe I thynke neuer one ſad
               For I am nat ſo mery but ye ſeme as mad
               But ſtande ye ſtylt and take a lytell payne
               I wyll come to you by and by agayne
               Nowe gracious god yf your wyll ſo be
               I praye ye let me ſpeke a worde with ye,
            
            
               ¶Iupyter.
               ¶My ſonne ſay on let vs here thy mynde.
            
            
               ¶Mery reporte.
               ¶My lorde there ſtandethe a ſuter euen here behynde
               A gentylman in yonder corner
               And as I thynke his name is mayſter horner
               
                  
A hunter he is and cometh to make you ſporte
               He wolde hunte a ſow or twayne out of this ſorte.
               ¶Here he pointeth to the women
            
            
               
                  ❧Iupyter.
               ☞What ſo euer his mynde be, let him appere.
            
            
               ☞Mery reporte.
               ¶Nowe good mayſter horner I praye you come nere,
            
            
               ¶Gentylman.
               
                  ❧I am no horner knaue I wyll you knowe it.
            
            
               ¶Mery reporte.
               ¶I thought ye had, for when ye dyd blowe it
               Harde I neuer horeſon make horne ſo go
               As lefe ye kyſt myne ars as blowe my hole ſo
               Come on your way before the god Iupyter
               And there for your ſelfe ye ſhalbe ſewter.
            
            
               ☜Gentylman.
               ¶Moſte myghty prynce and god of euery nacyon
               Pleaſeth your hyghnes to vouchſaue the herynge
               Of me whiche accordynge to your proclamacyon
               Dothe make apparaunce in way of beſechynge
               Nat ſole for my ſelfe but generally,
               For all came of noble and auncient ſtocke
               Whiche forte aboue all doth moſte thankefully
               Dayly take payne for welth of the comen flocke
               With delygent ſtudy alway deuyſynge
               To kepe them in order and vnyte
               In peace to laboure the encres of theyr lyuynge
               Wherby eche man may proſper in plente
               Wherfore good god this is our hole deſyrynge
               That for eaſe of our paynes at tymes vacant
               In our recreacion whiche chefly is huntynge
               It may pleaſe you to ſende vs wether pleaſaunte
               Drye and nat myſty the wynde calme and ſryll
               
                  
That after our houndes yournynge ſo merely
               Chaſynge the dere ouer pale and hyll
               In herynge we may folowe and to comforte the cry
            
            
               ¶Iupyter.
               ¶Ryght well we do perceyue your hole requeſt
               Whiche ſhall not fayle to reſte in memory
               Wherfore we wyll ye ſet your ſelfe at reſt
               Tyll we haue harde eche man indifferently
               And we ſhall take ſuche order vnyuerſally
               As beſte may ſtande to our honour infynyte
               For welth in cōmune and eche mannes ſynguler profyte
            
            
               ¶Gentylman.
               ¶In heuen and erthe honoured be thy name
               Of Iupyter whome of his godly goodnes
               Hath ſet this mater in ſo goodly frame
               That euery wyght ſhall haue his deſyre doubtles
               And fyrſt for vs nobles and gentylmen
               I doute nat in his wyſdome to prouyde
               Suche wether as in our huntynge nowe and then
               We may bothe tayſe and receyue on euery ſyde
               Whiche thynge ones had for our ſayde recrearyon
               Shall greatly preuayle you in proferrynge our helth
               For what thynge more nedefull then our preſeruacyon
               Beynge the weale and heddes of all comen welth
            
            
               ¶Mery reporte.
               ❀Nowe I beſeche your maſhype whoſe hed be you.
            
            
               ¶Gentylman,
               ¶Whoſe hed am I, thy hed what ſayſt thou nowe.
            
            
               ¶Mery reporte.
               ☞Nay I thynke it very true ſo god me helpe
               For I haue euer ben of a lyttell whelpe
               So full of fanſyes and in ſo many fyttes
               So many ſmall reaſons and in ſo many wyttes
               
                  
That euen as I ſtande I pray god I be dede
               If euer I thought them all mete for hede
               But ſyns I haue one hed more then I knewe
               Blame nat my reioyſynge I loue all thynges newe
               And ſure it is treaſour of heddes to haue ſtore
               One feare can I nowe that I neue coulde before.
            
            
               ¶❧Gentylman.
               ☜What is that.
            
            
               ¶Mery reporte.
               ¶By god ſyns ye came hyther
               I can ſet my heed and my tayle togyther
               This hed ſhall ſaue mony by ſaynt Mary
               Frome hensforthe I wyll no Potycary
               For at all tymes when ſuche thynges ſhall myſter
               My newe hed ſhall gyue myne olde tayle a glyſter
               And after all this then ſhall my hedde wayte
               Vpon my tayle and there ſtande at receyte
               Syr for the reſte I wyll not nowe moue you
               But yf we lyue ſhall ſmell howe I loue you
               And ſyr touchynge pour ſute, here departe when it pleaſe you
               For be ye ſure as I can I wyll eaſe you.
            
            
               ☞Gentylman.
               ☞Then gyue me thy hande that promyſe I take
               And yf for my ſake any ſute thou do make
               I promyſe thy payne to be requyred
               More largely than nowe ſhall be recyted.
            
            
               ¶Mery reporte.
               ¶Alas my necke, goddes pyty where is me hed
               By ſaynte Yue I fere me I ſhall be ded
               And yf I were me thynke it were no wonder
               Syns my hed and my body is ſo farre a ſonder
               Mayſter perſon nowe welcome by my lyfe
               I praye you howe doth my mayſtres your wyfe
            
            
            ¶Entreth the Marchaunt.
            
               ¶Marchaunt.
               ☜Syr for the preſthode and wyfe that ye alledge
               I ſe ye ſpeke more of dotage then knowledge
               But le pas ſyr I wolde to you be ſuter
               To brynge me yf ye can before Iupyter.
               ☜Yes mary can I, and wyll do it in dede
               Tary and I ſhall make way for your ſpede
               In faythe good lord yf it pleaſe your gracyous godſhype Mery re.
               I muſt haue a worde or twayne with your loldſhyhe
               Syr yonder is another manin place
               Who maketh greate ſute to ſpeke with your grace
               Your pleaſure ones knowen he cometh by and by.
            
            
               ☜Iupyter.
               ¶Brynge him before our preſens ſone hardely
            
            
               ¶Mery reporte.
               
                  ❧Why where be you ſhall I nat fynde ye
               Come away I pray god the deuyll blynde ye.
            
            
               ¶Marchaunt.
               ☜Moſte myghty prynce and lorde of lordes all
               Ryght humbly be ſecheth your maieſtie
               Your marchaunt men thorowe the worlde all
               That it may pleaſe you of your benygnite
               In the dayly daunger of our goodes and lyfe
               Fyrſt to conſyder the deſert of our requeſt
               What welth we brynge the reſte to our great care & gryfe
               And then to rewarde vs as ye ſhall thynke beſt
               What were the ſurpluſage of eche comodyte
               Whiche groweth and encreaſeth in euery lande
               Excepte exchaunge by ſuche men as ye be
               By way or entercours that lyeth on our hande
               We fraught frome home thynges wherof there is plents
               And home we brynge ſuche thynges as there be ſcant
               
                  
Who ſhulde afore vs Marchauntes accompted be
               For were nat we, the worlde ſhulde wyſh and want
               In many thynges, which nowe ſhall lack reherſall
               And preuely to conclude we beſeche your hyghnes
               That of the benefyte proclaymed in generall
               We may be parte takers for comen entres
               Stably ſhynge wether thus pleaſynge your grace
               Stormy nor myſty the wynde meſurable
               That ſauely we may paſſe frome place to place
               Berynge our ſelles for ſpede moſte valeable
               And alſo the wynde to chaunge and to turne
               Eaſt, Weſt, North, and South, as beſt may be ſet
               In any one place nat to longe to ſoiourne
               For the lengthe of our viage may leſe our market.
            
            
               ¶Iupyter.
               Ryght well haue ye ſayde and we accepte it ſo
               And ſo ſhall we rewarde you or we go hens
               But ye muſt take paciens tyll we haue harde mo
               That we may indifferently gyue ſentens
               There maye paſſe by vs no ſpot of neglygence
               But iuſtely to iudge eche thynge ſo vpryght
               That eche mans parte may ſhyne in the ſelfe ryght
            
            
               ☜Mery reporte.
               ☜Nowe ſyr by your faythe yf ye ſhulde be ſworne
               Harde ye euer god ſpeke ſo ſyns ye were borne
               So wyſe to gelitelly his wordes be ſhowd.
            
            
               
                  ❧Marchaunte
               ☜I thanke his grace my ſewt is well beſtod.
            
            
               ¶Mery reporte.
               
                  ❧Syr what vyage entende ye nexte to go.
            
            
               ☜Marchaunte.
               ☜I truſte or inydlent to be at Syo.
            
            
               ¶Mery reporte.
               
                  
¶Ha ha is it your mynde to ſayle at Syo
               Nay then when ye wyl, by lady ye may go
               And let me alone with this, be of good chere
               Ye may truſte me at Syo as well as here
               For though ye were fro me a thouſande myle ſpace
               I wolde do as muche as ye were here in place
               For ſyns that from hens it is ſo farre thyder
               I care nat though ye neuer come agayne hyther.
            
            
               ❀Marchaunt.
               ¶Syr yf ye remember me when tyme ſhall come
               Though I requyte nat all, I ſhall deſerue ſome.
            
            Exeat Marchaunt.
            
               ¶Mery reporte,
               ¶Nowe fare you well & god thanke you by ſaynte Anne
               I pray you marke the faſſhyon of this honeſte manne
               He putteth me in more truſte at this metynge here
               Then he ſhall fynde cauſe why this twenty yere.
            
            ¶Here entreth the Ranger.
            
               ¶Ranger.
               ¶God be here, nowe Chryſt kepe this company.
            
            
               ¶Mery reporte.
               
                  ❧In fayth ye be welcome euen very ſkantly
               Syr for your comynge what is the mater.
            
            
               ☜Ranger.
               
                  ❧I wolde fayne ſpeke with the god Iupyter.
            
            
               ¶Mery reporte.
               ¶That wyll nat be but ye may do this
               Tell me your mynde I am an offycer of his
            
            
               ¶Ranger.
               ¶B ye ſo, mary I cry you mercy
               Your mayſterſhype may ſay I am homely
               But ſyns your mynde is to haue reportyd
               The cauſe wherfore I am nowe reſortyd
               
                  
Pleaſeth it your mayſterſhype it is ſo
               I come for my ſelfe and ſuche other mo
               Rangers and kepers of certayne places
               As foreſtes, parkes, purlewes and chaſes
               Where we be charged with all maner game
               Smale is our profyte and greate is our blame
               Alas for our wages what be we the nere
               What is fourty ſhyllynges or fyue marke a yere
               Many tymes and ofte where we be flettynge
               We ſpende fourty pens a pece at a ſyttynge
               Nowe for our vauntage whiche chefely is wyndefale
               That is ryght nought there bloweth no wynde at all
               Whiche is the thynge wherin we fynde moſte grefe
               And cauſe of my commynge to ſewe for relefe
               That the god of pyty all this thynge knownuge
               May ſende vs good rage of bluſterynge and blowynge
               And yf we can not get god to do ſome good
               I wolde hyer the deuyil to runne thorowe the wood
               The rootes to turne vp, the toppes to brynge vnder
               A myſchyefe vpon them and a wylde thunder.
            
            
               ☜Mery reporte.
               
                  ❧Very well ſayde I ſet by your charytie
               As muche in a maner as by your honeſtie
               I ſhall ſet you ſom what in eaſe anone
               Ye ſhall put on your cap when I am gone
               For I ſe well ye care nat who wynne or leſe
               So ye may fynde meanes to wynne ȳour fees
            
            
               ¶Ranger.
               ¶Syr as in that ye ſpeke as it pleaſe ye
               But let me ſpeke with the god yf it maye be
               I pray you let me paſſe ye.
            
            
               ¶Mery reporte.
               ¶Why nay ſyr by the maſſe ye
            
            
               
               ☜Ranger.
               ¶Then wyll I leue you euen as I founde ye.
            
            
               ¶Mery reporte.
               ¶Go when ye wyll no man here hath bounde ye.
            
            
               ❧Here entreth the water myller and the
Ranger goeth
out.
            
               ¶Water myller.
               
                  ❧What ye deuyll ſhulde ſkil though al ye world were d
                     •
                  
                  ̄
               
               Syns in all our ſpekynge we neuer be harde
               We crye our for rayne the deuyll ſped drop wyll cumme
               We water myllers be nothynge in regarde
               No water haue we to grynde at any ſtynt
               The wynde is ſo ſtronge the rayne can nat fall
               Whiche kepeth our myldams as drye as a flyn
                     •
                  
               
               We are vndone we grynde nothynge at all
               The greatter is the pyte as thynketh me
               For what auayleth to eche man his corne
               Tyll it be grounde by ſuche men as we be
               There is the loſſe yf we be forbonre
               For tourhynge our ſelues we are but drudges
               And very beggers ſaue onely our tole
               Whiche is ryght ſmall and yet many grudges
               For grynden of a buſſhell to gyue a quarte bole
               Yet were nat reparacyons we myght do wele
               Our mylſtons, our whele, with her kogges, & our tryndyl
               Our floodgate, our mylpole, our water whele
               Our hopper, our extre, our yren ſpyndell
               In this and muche more ſo great is our charge
               That we wolde not recke though no water ware
               Saue onely it toucheth eche man ſo large
               And eche for our neyghbour Chryſt byddeth vs care
               
                  
Wherfore my conſcience hath prycked me hyther
               In this to ſewe accordynge to the cry
               For plente of rayne to the god Iupyter
               To whoſe preſence I wyll go euen boldely.
            
            
               ☜Mery reporte.
               ¶Syr Idoute nothynge your audacite
               But I fere me ye lacke capacite
               For yf ye were wyſe ye myght well eſpye
               Howe rudely ye erre frome rules of curteſye
               What ye come in reuelynge and reheytynge
               Euen as a knaue myght go to a beare beytynge.
            
            
               ¶Water myller.
               ¶All you bere recorde what fauoure I haue
               Herke howe familearly he calleth me knaue
               Doutles the gentylman is vniuerſall
               But marke this leſſon ſyr you ſhulde neuer call
               Your felowe knaue nor your brother horeſon
               For nought can ye get by it when ye haue don.
            
            
               Mery reporte.
               ¶Thou arte nother brother nor felowe to me
               For I am goddes ſeruaunte mayſt thou nat ſe
               Wolde ye preſume to ſpeke with the great god
               Nay diſcrecyon and you be to farre od
               Byr lady theſe knaues muſt be tyed ſhorter
               Syr who let you in, ſpake ye with the porter.
            
            
               ¶Water myller.
               ¶Nay by my trouth nor with none other man
               Yet I ſawe you well when I fyrſt began
               Howe be it ſo helpe me god and holydam
               I toke you but for a knaue as I am
               But mary nowe ſyus I knowe what ye be
               I muſt and wyll obey your authorytie
               And yf I may nat ſpeke with Iupyter.
               
                  
I beſeche you be my ſolyciter,
            
            
               ☜Mery reporte?
               ¶As in that I wyll be your well wyller
               I perceyue you be a water myller
               And your hole deſyre as I take the mater
               Is plente of rayne for encres of water
               The let where of ye affyrme determynately
               As onely the wynde your mortall enemy.
            
            
               ☜Water myller.
               ¶Trouth it is for it bloweth ſo alofte
               We neuer haue rayne or at the moſte nat ofte
               Wherfore I pray you put the god in mynde
               Clerely for euer to banyſhe the wynde.
            
            
               ❧Entreth the wynde myller.
            
               ¶Wynde myller.
               ¶Howe is all the wether gone or I come
               For the paſſyon af god helpe me to ſome
               I am a wynde myller as many mo be
               No wretche is wretchydnes ſo wretchyd as we
               The holde ſorte of my crafte be all marde at ones
               The wynde is ſo weyke it ſturrerh nat our ſtones
               Nor ſkantly can ſhatter the ſhytren ſayle
               That hangeth ſhaterynge at a womans tayle
               The rayne neuer reſteth ſo longe be the ſhowres
               Frome tyme of begynnynge tyll foure and twenty houres
               And ende whan it ſhall at nyght or at none
               Another begynneth as ſone as that is done
               Suche reuell of rayne ye knowe well ynough
               Deſtroyeth the wynde be it neuer ſo rough
               Wherby ſyns our mylles be come to ſtyll ſtanddynge
               Nowe may we wynde myllers go euyn to hangynge
               A myller with a moryn and a myſchyefe
               Who woulde be a myller, as good be a thefe
               
                  
Yet in tyme paſt when gryndynge was plente
               Who were ſo lyke goddes felowes as we
               As faſte as god made corne we myllers made meale
               Whiche myght be beſte forborne for comone weale
               But let that gere paſſe for I feare our pryde
               Is cauſe of the care whiche god dothe vs prouyde
               Wherfore I ſubmyt me entendynge to ſe
               What comforte may come by humylitie
               And nowe at this tyme they ſayde in the crye
               The god is come downe to ſhape remedy.
            
            
               Mery reporte.
               No doute he is here euen in yonder trone
               But in your mater he truſteth me alone
               Wherin I do perceyue by your complaynte
               Oppreſſion of rayne doth make the wynde ſo faynte
               That ye wynde myllers be elene caſte awaye.
            
            
               ¶Wynde myller.
               ¶Yf Iupyter helpe nat it is as ye ſaye
               But in fewe wordes to tell you my mynde rounde
               Vpon this condicion I wolde be bounde
               Day by day to ſay our ladyes ſauter
               That in this worlde were no drope of water
               Nor neuer rayne but wynde continuall
               Then ſhulde we wynde myllers be lordes ouer all.
            
            
               ¶Mery reporte.
               ¶Come on and aſſay howe you twayne can agre
               A brother of yours a myller as ye be.
            
            
               ❀Water myller.
               ¶By meane of your crafte we may be brothers
               But whyles we lyue ſhall we neuer be louers
               We be of one crafte but nat of one kynde
               I lyue by water, and ye by the wynde.
               ¶Here Mery reporte goeth out.
               
                  
And ſyr as ye deſyre wynde continuall
               So wolde I haue rayne euer more to fall
               Whiche two in experience ryght well ye ſe
               Ryght ſelde or neuer togyther can be
               For as longe as the wynde ruleth it is playne
               Twynty to one ye get no drope of rayne
               And when the Element is to farre oppreſt
               Downe commeth the rayne and ſetteth the wynde at reſt
               By this ye ſe we can nat both obtayne
               For ye muſt lacke wynde or I muſt lacke rayne
               Wherfore I thynke good before this audiens
               Eche for our ſelfe to lay or we go hens
               And whome is though weyken when we haue fynyſht
               Leue of his ſute and content to be banyſht.
            
            
               ☜Wynde myller.
               ¶In fayth agreed but then by your licens
               Our mylles for a tyme ſhall hange in ſuſpens
               Syns water and wynde is chiefly our ſute
               Whiche beſte may be ſpared we wyll fyrſt diſpute
               Wherfore to the ſee my reaſon ſhall reſorte
               Where ſhyppes by meane of wynde try frome port to port
               From lande to lande in diſtaunce many a myle
               Great is the paſſage and ſmale is the whyle
               So great is the profyte as to me doth ſeme
               That no mans wyſdome the welthe can exteme
               And ſyns the wynde is conueyer of all
               Who but the wynde ſhulde haue thanke aboue all.
            
            
               ¶Water myller.
               ¶Amitte in this place a tree here to growe
               And therat the wynde in great tage to blowe
               When it hath all blowen this is a clere caſe
               The tree remoueth no heare bred from his place
               No more wolde the ſhype blowes the beſt it coude
               
                  
All though it wolde blowe downe bothe maſt & ſhrowde
               Excepte the ſhype flete vpon the water
               The wynde can ryght nought do a playne mater
               Yet may ye on water without any wynde
               Rowe forth your veſſell where men wyll haue her ſynde
               Nothynge more reioyceth the maryner
               Then meane cooles of wynde and plente of water
               For commenly the cauſe of euery wrache
               Is exceſſe of wynde where water doth lacke
               In rage of theſe ſtormes the peryll is ſuche
               That better were no wynde then ſo farre to muche.
            
            
               
                  ❧Wynde myller.
               ¶Well yf my reaſon in this may nat ſtande
               I wyll forſake the ſee and lepte to lande
               In euery churche where goddes ſeruyce is
               The organs beare brunt of halfe the quere I wys
               Whiche cauſeth the ſounde of water or wynde
               More ouer for wynde this thynge I fynde
               For the moſte parte all maner mynſtrelſy
               By wynde they delyuer theyr ſounde chefely
               Fyll me a bagpype of your water full
               As ſwetly ſhall it ſounde as it were ſtuffyd with woll.
            
            
               ¶Water myller.
               ¶On my fayth I thynke the moone be at the full
               For franty ke tanſyes be then moſte plente full
               Whiche are at the pryde of theyr ſprynge in your hed
               So farre from our mater he is nowe fled
               As for the wynde in any inſtrumente
               It is no percell of our argumente
               We ſpake of wynde that cometh naturally
               And that is wynde forcyd artyfycyally
               Whiche is nat to purpoſe but yf it were
               And water indede ryght nought coulde do there
               
                  
Yet I thynke organs no ſuche comodite
               Wherby the water ſhulde banyſhed be
               And for your bagpyppes I take them as nyfuls
               Your mater is all in fanſyes and tryfuls.
            
            
               ☜Wynde myller.
               ☜By god but ye ſhall nat tryfull me of ſo
               Yf theſe thynges ſerue nat I wyll reherſe mo
               And nowe to mynde there is an olde prouerbe come
               One buſhell of marche duſt is worth a kynges raunſome
               What is a hundreth thouſande buſhels worthe than.
            
            
               ☜Water myller.
               ¶Nat one myte for the thynge ſelfe to no man.
            
            
               ¶Wynde myller.
               ¶Why ſhall wynde euery where thus be obiecte
               Nay in the hye wayes he ſhall take a effecte
               Where as the rayne doth neuer good but hurt
               For wynde maketh but duſt and water maketh durt
               Pouder or ſyrop ſyr which lycke ye beſte
               Who lycketh nat the tone may lycke vp the reſte
               But ſure who euer hath aſſayed ſuche ſyppes
               Had leuer haue duſty eyes then durty lyppes
               And it is ſayde ſyns afore we were borne
               That drught doth neuer make derth of corne
               And well it is knowen to the moſte foole here
               Howe rayne hath pryced corne within thi. vii. yere.
            
            
               
                  ❧Water miler.
               
                  ❧Syr I pray the ſpare me a lyteell ſeaſon
               And I ſhall preuely conclude the with reaſon
               Put caſe on ſomers day without wynde to be
               And ragious wynde in wynter dayes two or thre
               Muche more ſhall dry that one calme day in ſomer
               Then ſhall thoſe thre wyndy dayes in winter
               Whom ſhall we thanke for this when all is done
               
                  
The thanke to wynde nay thanke chyefly the ſon
               And ſo for drought of corne therby encres
               The ſon doth comfort and rype all doutles
               And oft the wynde ſo leyth the corne god wot
               That neuer after can it rype but rotte
               If drought toke place as ye ſay yet may ye ſe
               Lytell helpeth the wynde in this commoditie
               But nowe ſyr I denye your pryncypall
               If drought euer were it were impoſſybyll
               To haue any grayne for, or it can growe
               Ye muſt plowe your lande harro we and ſowe
               Which wyll not be excepte ye may haue rayne
               To temper the grounde and after agayne
               For ſpringyng and plumynge all maner corne
               Yet muſt ye haue water or all is forlorne
               If ye take water for no commoditie
               Yet muſt ye take it for thynges of neceſſitie
               For waſhynge for ſhowrynge all fylth clenſynge
               Where water lacketh what beſtly beynge
               In brewynge, in bakynge, in dreſſynge of meate
               It ye lacke water what coulde ye drynke or eate
               Without water coulde lyue neyther man nor beaſt
               For water preſerueth both moſte and leaſte
               For water coulde I ſay a thouſande thynges mo
               Sauynge as nowe the tyme wyll not ſerue ſo
               And as for that wynde that you do ſewe fore
               Is good for your wyndemyll and for no more
               Syr ſyth all this in experience is tryde
               I ſay this mater ſtandeth clere on my ſyde.
            
            
               Wynde myller.
               ¶Well ſyns this myll not ſerue I wyl alledge the reſte
               Syr for our wyll I ſay myne is the beſte
               My wyndmyll ſhall grynde more corne in one houre
               
                  
Then the water myll ſhall in thre or foure
               Ye more then thyne ſhulde in a hole yere
               If thou myghteſt haue as thou haſt wyſhed here
               For thou deſyreſt to haue exceſſe of rayne
               Whiche thynge to the were ye worſt thou coudeſt obtayne
               For yf thou dydeſt it were a playne induccion
               To make thyue owne deſyre thyne owne deſtruccion
               For in exceſſe of rayne at any flood
               Your mylles muſt ſtand ſtyll they can do no good
               And whan the wynde doth blowe the vttermoſt
               Our wyndemylles walde a mayne in euery coſt
               For as we ſe the wynde in his eſtate
               We moderour ſayles after the ſame rate
               Syns our mylles grynde ſo farre faſter then yours
               And alſo they maye grynde all tymes and houres
               I ſay we nede no water mylles at all
               For wyndemylles be ſufficient to ſerue al.
            
            
               ¶Water myller.
               ¶Thou ſpekeſte of all and conſydereſt nat halfe
               In boſte of thy gryſte thou art wyſe as a calfe
               For thoughe aboue vs your mylles grynde farre faſter
               What helpe to thoſe frome whome ye be muche farther
               And of two ſortes yf the tone ſhulde be conſerued
               I thynke ye mete the moſt nomber be ſerued
               In vales and weldes where moſte commodytie is
               There is moſte people ye muſte graunt me this
               On hylles and downes whiche partes are moſt varain
               There muſt be fewyt can no mo ſuſtayne
               I darre well ſaye yf it were tryed euen nowe
               That there is ten of vs to one of you
               And where ſhulde chefely and neceſſaries be
               But there as people are moſte in plente
               More reaſon that you com. vii. myle to myll
               
                  
Then all we of the vale ſhode clyme the hyll
               Yf rayne came raſonable as I requyre it
               We ſhulde of your wynde mylles haue nede no whyt.
            
            ¶Entreth Mery reporte.
            
               ☜Mery reporte.
               ¶Stop folyſhe knaue, for your reaſonynge is ſuche
               That ye haue reaſoned euen ynonght and to muche
               I harde all the wordes that ye bothe haue hadde
               So helpe me god the knaues be more then madde
               Nother of them bothe that hath wit nor grace
               To perceyue that bothe mylles may ſerue in place
               Betwene water and wynde there is no ſuche ſet
               But eche myll may haue tyme to vſe his fet
               Whiche thynge I can tell by experiens
               For I haue of myne owne not farre from hens
               In corner togyther a couple of mylles
               Standynge in a marres betwene two hylles
               Nat of wherytaunce but by my wyfe
               She is feofed in the tayle for terme of her lyfe
               The one for wynde the other for water
               And of them bothe I thanke god there ſtandeth nother
               For in a good houre be it ſpoken
               The water gate is no ſoner open
               But clap ſathe the wyndemyll euyn ſtreight behynde
               There is good ſpedde, the deuyll and all they grynde
               But whether that the hopper be duſty
               Or that the mylſtones be ſomwhat ruſty
               By the mas the meale is myſcheuous muſty
               And yf ye thynke my tale be nat truſty
               I make ye true prompſe come when ye lyſte
               We ſhall fynde meane ye ſhall taſte of the gryſte
            
            
               ¶Water myller.
               ¶The corne at receyt happely is nat good
            
            
               
               ¶Mery reporte.
               ¶There can be no ſweter by the ſwete rood
               Another thynge yet whiche ſhall nat be cloked
               My water myll many tymes is choked.
            
            
               ¶Water myller.
               ☜So wyll ſhe be thought ye ſhulde bruſte your bones
               Excepte ye be perfyte in ſettynge of ſtones
               Fere nat the lydger beware your conner
               Yet this for the lydger or ye haue wonne her
               Perchaunce your lydger dothe lacke good peckynge
            
            
               ¶Mery reporte,
               ¶So ſayth my wyfe and that maketh all our checkynge
               She wolde haue the myll peckt, peckt peckt euery daye
               But by god myllers muſt pecke when they maye
               So ofte haue we peckt that our ſtones wax ryght thynne
               And all our other gere nat worth a pynne
               For with peckynge and peckynge I haue ſo wrought
               That I haue pecke a good peckynge yron to nought
               Howe be it yf I ſtycke no better tyll her
               My wyfe ſaythe ſhe wyll haue a newe myller
               But let it paſſe and nowe to our mater
               I ſaye my mylles lacke nother wynde nor water
               No more do yours as farre as nede dothe requyre
               But ſyns ye can nat agree I wyll deſyre
               Iupyter to ſet you bothe in ſuche reſte
               As to your welthe and his honour maye ſtande beſte.
            
            
               ¶Water myller.
               ¶I pray you hartely remember me.
            
            
               ☜Wynde myller,
               
                  ❧Let nat me be for gotten I beſecheye
            
            ¶Bothe myllers goeth forth.
            
               ¶Mery reporte.
               ¶If I remember you nat bothe a lyke
               
                  
I wolde ye were ouer the eares in the dyke
               Nowe be we ryd of two knaues at one chaunce
               By ſaynte Thomas it is a knauiſh ryddaunce.
            
            ¶The gentylwoman entreth.
            
               ¶Gentylwoman.
               
                  ❧Nowe good god what a foly is this
               What ſhulde I do were ſo muche people is
               I knowe not howe to paſſe into the god nowe.
            
            
               ¶Mery report.
               ¶No but ye knowe howe he maye paſſe into you.
            
            
               ¶Gentylwoman.
               ¶I praye you let me in at the backe ſyde.
            
            
               
                  ❧Mery report.
               ¶Ye ſhall I ſo, and your forſyde ſo wyde
               Naye nat yet but ſyns ye loue to be alone
               We twayne wyll into a corner anone
               But fyrſt I praye you come your waye hyther
               And let vs twayne chat a whyle togyther.
            
            
               ¶Gentlwoman.
               ☜Syr as to you I haue lyttell mater.
               My commynge is to ſpeke with Iupyter.
            
            
               
                  ❧Mery report.
               ¶Stande ye ſtyll a whyle and I wyll go proue
               Whether that the god wyll be brought in loue
               My lorde howe nowe loke vp luſtely
               Here his a derlynge come by ſaynt Antony
               And yf it be your pleaſure to mary
               Speke quyckely for ſhe maye nat tary
               In fayth I thynke ye may wynne her anone
               For ſhe wolde ſpeke with your lordſhypen alone.
            
            
               ☜Iupiter.
               ☜Sonne that is nat the thynge at this tyme ment
               Yf her ſute concerne no cauſe of our hyther reſorte
               
                  
Sende her out of place, but yf ſhe ve bent
               To that purpoſe, he are her, and make vs reporte.
            
            
               ☜Mery report.
               ☜I counte women loſt yf we loue them not well
               For ye ſe god loueth them neuer a dele
               Mayſtres ye can not ſpeke with the god.
            
            
               ¶Gentylwoman.
               
                  ❧No, why.
            
            
               
                  ❧Mery report.
               ¶By my fayth for his lordſhyp is ryght beſy
               With a peece of worke that nedes muſt be doone
               Euen nowe is he makynge of a newe moone
               He ſayth your olde moones be ſo farre taſted
               That all the goodnes of them is waſted
               Which of the greate wete hath ben moſte matter
               For olde moones be lyke, they holde no water
               But for this newe moone I durſt lay my gowne
               Excepte a fewe droppes at her goynge downe
               Ye get no rayne tyll her aryſynge
               Without it nede and then no mans deuyſynge
               Coulde wyſhe the faſhyon of rayne to be ſo good
               Not guſhinge out lyke gutters of Noyes fludde
               But ſmall droppes ſprynklynge ſortely on the grounde
               Though they fel on a ſponge they wolde gyue no ſounde
               This new moone ſhal make a thynge ſprynge more in this whyle
               Thē a old moae ſhall whyle a man may go a myle
               By that tyme the god hath all made an ende
               Ye ſhall ſe howe the wether wyll amende
               By ſaynt Anne he goeth to worke euen boldely
               I thynke hym wyſe ynough for he loketh holdely
               Wherfore mayſtres be ye nowe of good chere
               For though in his preſence ye can not appeare
               Tell me your matter and let me alone
               
                  
May happe I wyll thynke on you when you be go en
            
            
               ¶Gentylwoman.
               ¶Forfoth the cauſe of my comynge is this
               I am a woman ryght tayre as ye ſe
               In no creature more beaute then in me is
               And ſyns I am fayre, fayre wolde I kepe me
               But the ſonne in ſomer ſo ſore doth burne me
               In wynter the winde on euery ſyde me
               No parte of the yere wote I where to turne me
               But euen in my houſe am I ſayne to hyde me
               And ſo do all other that beuty haue
               In whoſe name at this tyme this ſute I make
               Beſcchynge Iupyter to graunte that I craue
               Whiche is this that it may pleaſe hym for our ſake
               To ſende vs wether cloſe and temperate
               No ſonne ſhyne no froſt nor wynde to blowe
               Then wolde we get the ſtretes tryme as a parate
               Ye ſhulde ſe howe we wolde ſet our ſelfe to ſhewe.
            
            
               ¶Mery reporte.
               ☜Yet where ye wyll I ſwere by ſaynte Quintyne
               Ye paſte them all both in your owne conceyt and myne
            
            
               ☜Gentylwoman.
               ¶If we had wether to walke at our pleaſure
               Our lyues wolde be mery out of meaſure
               One parte of the day for our apparelynge
               Another parte for eatynge and drynkynge
               And all the teſte in ſtretes to be walkynge
               Orin the houſe to paſte tyme with talk ynge.
            
            
               ¶Mery reporte.
               ¶When ſerue ye god.
            
            
               ¶Gentylwoman.
               ¶Who boſteth in vertue are but dawes.
            
            
               Mery reporte.
               
                  
Ye do the better namely ſyns there is no cauſe
               Howe ſpende ye this nyght
            
            
               
                  ❧Gentylwoman.
               ¶In daunſynge and ſyngynge
               Tyll mydnyght and then fal to ſlepynge.
            
            
               
                  ❧Mery report.
               ¶Why ſwete harte by your falſe fayth can ye ſynge
            
            
               ☜Gentylwoman.
               ☜Nay nay but I loue it all thynge.
            
            
               
                  ❧Mery report
               ¶Nowe by my trouth for the loue that I owe you
               You ſhall here what pleaſure I can ſhewe you
               One ſonge I haue for you ſuch as it is
               And yf it were better ye ſhulde haue it by gys.
            
            
               ☜Gentylwoman.
               
                  ❧Mary ſyr I thanke you euen hartely.
            
            
               ¶Mery report.
               ¶Come on ſyrs but nowe let vs ſynge luſtely.
            
            ¶Here they ſynge.
            
               ¶Gentylwoman.
               ❀Syr this is well done I hartely thanke you
               Ye haue done me pleaſure I make god a vowe
               Ones in a nyght I longe for ſuche a fyt
               For longe tyme haue I ben brought vp in it.
            
            
               
                  ❧Mery report.
               ¶Oft tyme is ſene both in court and towne.
               Longe be women a bryngynge vp & ſone brought downe
               So fete it is, ſo nete it is, ſo nyſe it is,
               So trycke it is, ſo quycke it is, ſo wyſe it is
               I feare me ſelfe excepte I may entreate her
               I am ſo farre in loue I ſhall forget her.
               Nowe good mayſtres I praye ye let me kys ye
            
            
               ☜Gentylwoman.
               Kys me quoth a why nay ſyr I wys ye.
            
            
               ¶Mery report.
               
               ☜What yes hardly kys me ones and no more
               I neuer deſyred to kys you defore.
            
            ¶Here the launder commeth in.
            
               ❀Launder.
               
                  ❧Why haue ye alway kyſt her behynde
               In fayth good ynough yf it be your mynde
               And yf your appetyte ſerue you ſo to do
               By lady I wolde you had kyſt my ars to.
            
            
               ¶Mery report.
               ¶To whome doeſt thou ſpeke foule hore canſt thou tel.
            
            
               ❀Launder.
               ☜Nay by my trouth I ſyr not very well
               But by coniectour this ges I haue
               That I do ſpeke to an olde baudy knaue
               I ſawe you dally with your ſymper de cocked
               I rede you beware ſhe pycke not your pocket
               Suche ydell huſyfes do nowe and than
               Thynke all well wonne that they pycke from a man
               Yet ſuche of ſome men ſhall haue more fauour
               Then we that for them dayly tayle and labour
               But I truſt the god wyll be ſo indifferent
               That ſhe ſhall fayle ſome parte of her entent
            
            
               
                  ❧Mery report.
               ☜No doubte he wyll deale ſo graciouſly
               That all folke ſhall be ſerued indifferently
               Howe be it I tell the truth my offyce is ſuche
               That I muſt report eche ſute lytell or muche
               Wherefore with the god ſyns thou cauſt not ſpeke
               Truſt me with thy ſute I wyll not fayle it to breke.
            
            
               ¶Launder.
               ¶Then leane not to muche to gender gyglet
               
                  
For here deſyre contrary to myne is ſet
               I herde by her tale ſhe wolde banyſhe the ſone
               And then were we poore launders all vndone
               Excepte the ſonne ſhyne that our clothes may dry
               We can do ryght nought in our laundry
               Another maner loſſe yf we ſhulde mys
               Then of ſuche nyreby ceters as ſhe is.
            
            
               ¶Gentylwoman.
               
                  ❧I thynke it better that thou enuy me
               Then I ſhulde ſtande at rewarde of thy pytte
               It is the guyſe of ſuche groſe queynes as thou art
               With ſuche as I am euermore to thwart
               By cauſe that no beaute ye can obtayne
               Therefore ye haue vs that be fayre in diſdayne.
            
            
               
                  ❧Launder.
               ¶When I was as yonge as thou art nowe
               I was within lyttell as fayre as thou
               And ſo myght haue kepte meyf I had wolde
               And as derely my youth I myght haue ſolde
               As the tryckeſt and fayreſt of you all
               But I feared parels that after myght fall
               Wherfore ſome belines I dyd me prouyde
               Leſt vyce myght enter on euery ſyde
               Whiche hath tre entre where ydylneſſe dothe reygne
               It is not thy beauty that I diſdayne
               But thyne ydell lyfe that thou haſt reherſed
               Whiche any good womans herte wolde haue perced
               For I perceyue in daunſynge and ſyngynge
               In eatynge and drynkynge and thyne apparelynge
               Is all the ioye wherin thy herte is ſet
               But nought of all this dothe thyne owne labour get
               For haddeſt thou nothynge but of thyne owne trauayle
               Thou myghteſt go as naked as my nayle
               
                  
Me thynke thou ſhuldeſt abhore ſuche ydelnes
               And paſſe the tyme in ſome honeſt beſines
               Better to leſe ſome parte of thy beaute
               Then ſo ofte to ieoberde all thyne honeſte
               But I thynke rather then thou woldeſt ſo do
               Thou haddeſt leuer haue vs lyue ydylly to
               And ſo no doute we ſhulde yf thou myghteſt haue
               The clere ſonne banyſht as thou doſt craue
               Then were we launders marde and vnto the
               Thyne owne requeſt were ſmale commodytie
               For of theſe twayne I thynke it farre better
               Thy face were ſonne burned and thy clothes the ſwetter
               Then that the ſonne frome ſhynynge ſhulde he ſmytter
               To kepe thy face fayre and thy ſmocke be ſhytter
               Syr howe lycke ye my reaſon in her caſe.
            
            
               
                  ❧Mery reoorte.
               Suche a raylynge hore by the holy mas
               I neuer harde in all my tyfe tyll nowe
               Iu dede I loue ryght wel the tone of you
               But or I kepe you bothe by goddes mother
               The deuyll ſhall haue the tone to fet the other.
            
            
               ¶Launder.
               ¶Promyſe me to ſpeke that the ſonne may ſhyne bryght
               And I wyll be gone quyikly for all nyght.
            
            
               
                  ❧Mery reporte.
               
                  ❧Get you bothe hens I pray you hertely
               Your ſutes I perceyue aud wyll reporte them truely
               Vn to Iupiter at the nexte leaſure
               And in the ſame deſyre to knowe his pleaſure
               Whiche knowledge had euen as he dothe ſhewe it
               Fere ye nat tyme ynough ye ſhall knowe it.
            
            
               
                  ❧Gentylwoman.
               
                  ❧Syr yf ye medyll remember me fyrſt
            
            
               
               ❀Launder.
               ¶Then in this medlynge my parte ſhalbe the wurſt.
            
            
               ☜Mery report.
               ¶Nowe I beſeche our lorde the deuyll the burſt
               Who medleth with many I holde hym accurſt
               Thou hore can I medle with you bothe at ones.
            
            ¶Here the gentylwoman goeth forth.
            
               ☜Launder.
               ¶By the maſſe knaue I wolde I had bothe thy ſtones
               In my purs yf thou meddel not indifferently
               That both our maters in iſſue may be lykely.
            
            
               ☜Mery report.
               ¶Many wordes lytell matter and to no purpoſe
               Suche is the effect that thou diſcloſe.
               The more ye byb, the more ye babyll.
               The more ye babyl, the more ye fabyl
               The more ye fabyl, the more vnſtabyl.
               The more vnſtable, the more vnabyll
               In any maner thynge to do any good
               No hurte though ye were hanged by the holy rood.
            
            
               ❀Launder.
               
                  ❧The leſſe your ſcilence, the leſſe your credence
               The leſſe your credence, the leſſe your honeſtie
               The leſſe your honeſtie the leſſe your aſſiſtence
               The leſſe your aſſiſtence the leſſe abylyte
               In you to do ought wherefore ſo god me ſaue
               No hurte in hangyng ſuch a raylynge knaue.
            
            
               
                  ❧Mery report.
               ¶What monſter is this I neuer harde none ſuche
               For loke howe muche more I haue made her to muche
               And ſo farre at laſte ſhe hath made me to lyttell
               Where be ye Launder I thynke in ſome ſpyttell
               Ye ſhall waſhe me no gere for fere of fretynge
               
                  
I loue no launders that ſhrynke my gere in wettynge
               I praye the go hens and let me be in reſt
               I wyll do thyne errande as I thynke beft.
            
            
               ¶Launder.
               ¶Nowe wolde I take my leue yf I wyſte howe
               The lenger I lyue the more knaue you,
            
            
               
                  ❧Mery reporte.
               ¶The lenger thou lyueſt the pyte the gretter
               The ſoner thou be ryd the tydynges the better
               Is nat this a ſwete offyce that I haue
               When euery drab ſhall call me knaue
               Euery man knoweth not what goddes ſeruyce is
               Nor I my ſelfe knewe it not before this
               I thynke goddes ſeruauntes may lyue holyly
               But the deuyll ſeruauntes lyue more merely
               I knowe not what god gyueth in ſtandynge fees
               But the deuyll ſeruauntes hane caſweltees
               A hundreth tymes mo then goddes ſeruauntes haue
               For thoughe ye be neuer ſo ſtarke a knaue
               Yt ye lacke money the deuyll wyll do wurſe
               But brynge you ſtreyght to another mans purſe
               Then wyll the deuyll promote you here in this worlde
               As vnto ſuche tyche it doth moſte accorde
               Fyrſt Pater noſter quies in celis
               And then ye ſhall ſens the ſtryfe with your helys
               The greateſt frende ye haue in felde or towne
               Sandynge a typ to ſhal nat reche your crowne.
            
            
               ❧The boy cometh in, the leſte that can play.
            
               ¶This ſame is euen he by allycklyhod
               Syr I pray you be not you maſter god.
            
            
               
                  ❧Mery reporte.
               ¶No in good fayth ſonne but I may ſay to the
               I am ſuche a man that god may nat myſſe me
               
                  
Wherfore with ye god yf thou woldeſt haue ought done
               Tell me thy mynde and I ſhall ſhewe it ſone.
            
            
               ¶Boy.
               ¶Forſothe ſyr my mynde is this at fewe wordes
               All my pleaſure is in catſynge of vyrdes
               And makynge of ſnow bailes and throwynge the ſame
               For the whiche purpoſe to haue ſet in frame
               With my god father god I wolde fayne haue ſpoken
               Deſyrynge him to haue ſente me by ſome token
               Where I myght haue had greate froſt for my pytfalles
               And plente of ſuowe to make my ſnowe balles
               This ones had boys lyues be ſuche as no man leddes
               O to ſe my ſnowe balles lyght on my felowes hedes
               And to here the byrdes howe they ſlyckere there wynges
               In the pytfale I ſaye it paſſeth all thynges
               Syr yf ye be goddes ſeruaunte or his kynſman
               I pray you helpe me in this yt ye can.
            
            
               ¶Mery reporte.
               ¶Alas poore boy who ſente the hether.
            
            
               ¶Boy.
               ¶A hundred boyes that ſtode togyther
               Where they herde one ſay in a cry
               That my god father god almyghty
               Was come frome heuen by his owne accorde
               This nyght to ſuppe here with my lorde
               And farther he ſayde come whoſe wull
               They ſhall ſure haue theyr bylles full
               I fall wethers who lyſte to craue
               Eche ſorte ſuche wether as they lyſte to haue
               And when my felowes thought this wolde be had
               And ſawe me ſo prety a pratelynge lad
               Vpon agrement with a great noys
               Sende lytell Dycke cryed all the boys
               
                  
By whoſe aſſent I am purueyd
               To ſewe for the wether a foreſayde
               Wherin I pray you to be good as thus
               To helpe that god may gyue it vs.
            
            
               ¶Mery report.
               Gyue boys wether quoth a nonny nonny.
            
            
               ☜Boy.
               ¶If god of his wether wyll gyue nonny
               I pray you wyll ye ſell ony
               Or ſende vs a buſhel of ſnowe or twayne.
               And poynt vs a day to pay hym agayne.
            
            
               
                  ❧Mery report.
               ¶I can not tell for by this lyght.
               I chepte nor barowed none of hym this nyght
               But by ſuche ſhyfte as I wyll make
               Thou ſhalt ſe ſoone what way he wyll take.
            
            
               ☜Boy.
               
                  ❧Syr I thanke you then I may departe.
            
            ❀The boye goeth out.
            
               ¶Mery reporte.
               ❀Ye farewell good ſonne with all my harte
               Nowe ſuch an other ſorte as here hath bene
               In al the dayes of my lyfe I haue not ſene
               No ſuters nowe but women knaues and boys
               And all theyr ſutes are in fanſyes and toys
               If that there come no wyſer after this crye
               I wyll to the god and make an ende quickely
               Oyes, yf that any knaue here
               Be wyllynge to appeare
               For whether foule or clere
               Come in before this flocke
               And be he hole or ſyckly
               Come ſhewe his mynde quickly
               
                  
And yf his tayle be nat lyckly
               Ye ſhall lycke my tayle in the nocke
               All his tyme I perceyue is ſpente in waſt
               To wayte for mo ſuters I ſe none make haſt
               Wherefore I wyll ſhewe the god all this proces
               And be delyuered of my ſymple offes
               Nowe lorde accordynge to your commaundement
               Attendynge ſuters I haue ben diligent
               And at begynnynge as your wyll was I ſhulde
               I come nowe at ende to ſhewe what eche man wolde
               The fyrſt ſuter before your ſelfe dyd appere
               A gentylman deſyrynge wether clere
               Cloudy, nor myſty, nor no wynde to blowe
               For hurt in his huntynge and then as ye knowe
               The Marchaunte ſude for as of that kynde
               For wether clere and meaſurable wynde
               As they maye beſte bere theyr ſayles to make ſpede
               And ſtreyght after there came to me in dede
               Another man who named hym ſelfe a ranger
               And ſayde all of his crafte be farre brought in daunger
               For lacke of lyuynge whiche chefely is wynde fall
               But he playnely ſaythe there bloweth no wynde at all
               Wherfore he deſyreth for encreaſe of theyr fleeſes
               Extreme rage of wynde trees to tere in peces
               Then came a water myller and he cryed out
               For water and ſayde the wynde was ſo ſtout
               The rayne coulde not fall wherfore he made requeſte
               For plenty of rayne to ſet the wynde at reſte
               And then ſyr there came a wynde myller in
               Who ſayde for the rayne he coulde no wynde wyn
               The water he wyſht to be banyſhe all
               Beſechynge yout grace of wynde continuall
               Then came there another that wolde banyſhe all this
               
                  
A goodly dame an ydyll thynge ywys
               Wynde, rayne, nor froſt, nor ſon ſhyne wolde ſhe haue
               But fayre cloſe wether her beaute to ſaue
               Then came there another that lyueth by laundry
               Who muſt haue wether hote and clere here clothes to dry
               Then come there a boy for troſt and ſnowe continuall
               Snow to make ſnow balles and froſt for his pytfall
               For whiche god wote he ſueth full gredely
               Your fyrſt man wolde haue cooles to blowe meanly
               The ſeconde the ſame ſaue wether clere and nat wyndy
               The thyrde deſyred ſtormes and wynde moſt extermely
               The fourth all in water and wolde haue no wynde
               The fyfte no water but all wynde to grynde
               The ſyxte wolde haue none of all theſe nor no bryght ſon
               The ſeuent extremely the hote ſone wolde haue woone
               The eyght and the laſte for the froſt and ſnowe he prayd
               By lady we ſhall take ſhame I am afrayd
               Who marketh in what maner this ſort is led
               May thynke it impoſſyble all to be ſpede
               This nomber is ſmale there lacketh twayne of ten
               And yet by the maſſe amonge ten thouſande men
               No one thynge coulde ſtande more wyde frome the other
               Nat one of theyr ſuters agreeth with an other
               I promyſe you here is a ſhrewe pece of warke
               This gere wyll trye wether ye be a clarke
               Yf ye truſte to me it is a great foly
               For it paſſeth my braynes by goodes body.
            
            
               ☜Iupiter.
               
                  ❧Son thou haſt beſt diligent and done ſo well
               That thy labour is ryght muche thanke worthy
               But be thou ſure we nede no whyt thy counſel
               For in our ſelfe we haue forſene remedy
               Whiche thou ſhalt ſe but fyrſte departe hens quyckly
               
                  
To the gentylman and al other ſuters here
               And commaunde them all before vs to appeare
            
            
               ☜Mery report.
               ☜That ſhall be no lenger in doynge
               Then I am in commynge and goynge
            
            ❀Mery reporte goeth out.
            
               ¶Iupiter.
               
                  ❧Suche debate as from aboue he haue harde
               Suche debate beneth amonge your ſelues ye ſe
               As longe as heddes from temperaunce be defarde
               So longe the bodyes in diſtemperaunce be
               This perceyue ye all but none can helpe ſaue we
               But as we there haue made peace concordantly
               So wyll we here now gyue you remedy.
            
            
               ❧Mery report and all the ſuters entreth.
            
               
                  ❧Mery report.
               ¶If I had caught them
               Or euer I taught them
               I wolde haue taught them
               To be nere me.
               Full dere haue I bought them
               Lorde ſo I ſought them
               Yet haue I brought them
               Suche as they be.
            
            
               ¶Gentylman.
               ☜Pleaſeth it your maieſtie lorde ſo it is
               We as your ſubiectes and humble ſuters all
               Accordyng as we here your pleaſure is
               Are preſed as your preſens beynge pryncypall
               Hed and gouernour of all in euery place
               Who ioyeth not in your ſyght no ioye can haue
               Wherfore we all commyt vs to your grace
               As lorde of lordes vs to peryſhe or ſaue.
            
            
               
               ☜Iupyter.
               
                  ☜As longe as diſcrecion ſo well doth you gyde
                  Obediently to vſe your dutye
                  Dout ye nat we ſhall your ſauete prouyde
                  Your greuys we haue harde wherefore we ſende for ye
                  To receyue aunſwere eche man in his degre
                  And fyrſt to content moſt reaſon it is
                  The fyrſt man that ſude wherfore marke ye this
                  Oft ſhall ye haue the wether elere and ſtyll
                  To hunte in for recompence of your payne
                  Alſo you marchauntes ſhall haue muche your wyll
                  For oft tymes when no wynde on lande doth remayne
                  Yet on the ſee pleaſaunt cooles you ſhall obtayne
                  And ſyns your huntynge may reſt in the nyght
                  Oft ſhal the wynde then ryſe and before day lyght.
               
               
                  ❀It ſhall ratell downe the woode in ſuche caſe
                  That all ye rangers the better lyue may
                  And ye water myllers ſhall obtayne this grace
                  Many tymes the rayne to fall in the valey
                  When at the ſelfe tymes on hylles we ſhall puruey
                  Fayre wether for your windmilles wt ſuch cooles of winde
                  As in one inſtant both kyndes of mylles may grynde.
               
               
                  ☜And for ye fayre women that cloſe wether wolde haue
                  We ſhall prouyde that ye may ſuffyciently
                  Haue tyme to walke in and your beautie ſaue
                  And yet ſhall ye haue that lyueth by laundry
                  The hote ſonne oft ynough your clothes to dry
                  Alſo ye prety chylde ſhall haue both froſt and ſnowe
                  Nowe marke this concluſyon we charge you arowe.
               
               
                  ¶Muche better haue we nowe deuyſed for ye all
                  
                     
Then ye all can perceyue or coude deſyre
                  Eche of you ſude to haue contynuall
                  Suche wether as his crafte onely doth requyre
                  All wethers in all places yf men all tymes myght hyer
                  Who coulde lyue by other what is this negligence
                  Vs to attempt in ſuch inconuenience.
               
               
                  ¶Nowe on the other ſyde yf we had graunted
                  The full of the ſome one ſute and no mo
                  And from all the reſt the wether had forbyd
                  Yet who ſo had obteyned hadde wonne his owne wo
                  There is no one crafte can preſerue man ſo
                  But by other craftes of neceſſitie
                  He muſt haue muche parte of his commoditie.
               
               
                  ¶All to ſerue at ones and one deſtroy an other
                  Or elles to ſerue one and deſtroye all the reſt
                  Nother wyll we do the tone nor the other
                  But ſerue as many or as fewe as we thynke beſt
                  And where or what tyme to ſerue moſt or leſt
                  The dyrectyon of that doubtles ſhall ſtande
                  Perpetually in the power of our hande.
               
               
                  ❀Wherfore we wyll the hole worlde to attende
                  Eche ſorte on ſuche wether as for them doth fall
                  Nowe one nowe other as lyketh vs to ſende
                  Who that hath it ply it and ſure we ſhall
                  So gyde the wether in courſe to you all
                  That eche with other ye ſhall hole remayne.
                  In pleaſure and plentyfull welth certayne.
               
            
            
               
                  ❧Gentylwoman.
               ☜Bleſſed was the tyme wherein me were borne
               Fyrſt for the blyſfull chaunce of your godly preſence
               
                  
Next for our ſute was there neuer man beforne
               That euer harde ſo excellent a ſentence
               As your grace hath gyuen to vs all arowe
               Wherin your hyghnes hath ſo bountyfully
               Diſtrybuted my parte that your grace ſhall knowe
               Your ſelfe ſoole poſſeſſed.
            
            
               ☜Merchant
               ☜Lykewyſe marchauntes ſhall yelde vs holy
               Onely to laude the name of Iupyter
               As god of all goddes you to ſerue ſoolly
               For of euery thynge I ſe you are noryſher.
            
            
               
                  ❧Ranger.
               ¶No doute it is ſo for ſo we nowe fynde
               Wherin your grace vs rangers ſo doth bynde
               That we ſhall gyue you our hartes with one accorde
               For knowledge to knowe you onely as our lorde
            
            
               ¶Watermyller.
               ☜Well I can no more but for our water
               We ſhall gyue your lordſhyp our ladyes ſauter
            
            
               ☜Wynde myller.
               ¶Muche haue ye bounde vs for as I be ſaued
               We haue all obtayned better then we craued.
            
            
               ¶Gentylwoman.
               
                  ❧That is true, wherfore your grace ſhall truely
               The hartes of ſuche as I am haue ſurely.
            
            
               ☜Launder.
               ¶And ſuche as I am who be as good as you
               His hyghnes ſhall be ſure on I make a vowe.
            
            
               ❀Boy.
               ¶Godfather god I wyll do ſomwhat for you agayne
               By Chriſt ye may hap to haue a byrde or twayne
               And I promyſe you yf any ſnowe come▪
               
               When I make my ſnowe balles you ſhall haue ſome
               
            
         
      
   