
      
         
            
            
            ¶A balade agaynſt malycyous Sclaunderers.
            
               ¶Heue aud how rumbelow thou arte to blame
               Trolle into the right way agayne for ſhame.
            
            
               TRolle into the way / trolle in and retrolle
               Small charyte and leſſe wytte is in thy nolle
               Thus for to rayle vpon a chriſten ſoule
               Wherfore men thynke the worthy blame
               Trolle into the way agayne for ſhame.
            
            
               ¶Thou makeſt a trollyng hyther and thyther
               Somtyme thou trolleſt thou canſt not tell whyther
               But if all thy trollynges were gathered togyther
               Thy trollynge might trym the and tourne the to blame
               Wherfore trolle thou nowe into the way for ſhame
            
            
               
                  ❧Although lord Crumwell a traytour was
               yet dare I ſaye that the kynge of his grace
               Hath forgyuen him that gret treſpas
               To tayle than on dead men / thou arte to blame
               Trolle now into the way agayne for ſhame.
            
            
               
                  ❧In that that he the law hath offended
               By the lawe he is iuſtly condempned
               This mortall lyfe / full godly he ended
               Wherfore to rayle thus / thou art to blame
               Trolle into the way agayne for ſhame.
            
            
               ¶For all his offences in euery thyng
               He aſked god mercy and grace of the kynge
               And of all the wyde world / for his trāſgreſſyng
               Thou nor no man can ſay nay to the ſame
               Trolle into the way than agayne for ſhame
            
            
               ☜Thou takeſt his treaſon for thy ſubtyll defence
               Which nowe is departed and gone from hence
               But men ſpye the pricke of all thy pretence
               Thy owne ſayenges folowyng declare the ſame
               Trolle into the way / for fere or for ſhame
            
            
               ¶Thou ſayeſt he was with the church to quycke
               Fauouryng none but of the new trycke
               But nowe thou ſpurneſt agaynſt the prycke
               And thou of force / muſt confeſſe the ſame
               Trolle into the way agayne for ſhame
            
            
               ☜For byſſhops haue now as they haue had
               If preeſtes wold complayne / they were to mad
               Wherfore thou appereſt to be a popyſſhe lad
               For vſyng thy popery / thou arte to blame
               Trolle into the way agayne for ſhame.
            
            
               
                  ❧For here thou vpholdeſt both monkes and fryers
               Nunnes and noughty packes / and lewed lowſy lyers
               The byſſhop of Rome / with all his rotten ſquyers
               To buylde ſuch a church / thou arte moche to blame
               Trolle nowe into the way agayne for ſhame.
            
            
               
                  ❧May not men thynke now in the meane ceaſon
               That thou haſt deſerued by ryght and by reaſon
               As moch as he hath done for clokynge thy treaſon
               For he was a traytour / and thou arte the ſame
               Trolle away papyſt / god gyue the ſhame.
            
            
               ¶The ſacrament of the aulter / that is moſt hyeſt
               Crumwell beleued it to be the very body of Chrieſt
               Wherfore in thy writyng / on him thou lyeſt
               For the kynge & his counſell wyll wytneſſe the ſame
               Trolle into the waye / than agayne for ſhame
            
            
               ☜Although that he of byrth were but bace
               yet was he ſet vp of the kynges noble grace
               Wherby it appereth that thou woldeſt deface
               The kynges royall power / diſpyſyng the ſame
               Trolle away traytour / god gyue the ſhame.
            
            
               ¶Is it thy facyon thus craftely to ſaye?
               Let vs for the kynge / and his lordes praye
               And than at the laſt / to trolle them awaye
               With heue and how rumbelow / thy wordes be the ſame
               Both written and printed / to thy great ſhame?
            
            
               ☜Haſt thou no man els / thou dronken ſoll
               But the kynge and his nobles / away for to troll
               It were ynough for to coſt the thy poll
               Both thyne and all other / that wold do the ſame
               Trolle away traytoure / god gyue the ſhame.
            
            
               ¶A prety wyſe printer belyke he was
               Which of his printyng / ſo lytell doth pas
               To print ſuch pylde poetry / as this ſame was
               Lyke maker / lyke printer / two trolles of the game
               A payre of good papyſtes / ye be payne of ſhame
            
            
               ☜God ſend all traytours their hole deſa
                     •
                  tes
               God ſend ſmall toye / to all popyſſhe hartes
               And euyll hap to as many as do take their partes
               God ſend their purpoſe neuer to frame
               But trolle them away with ſorow and ſhame.
            
            
               ¶I pray god thou be not fownde one of thoſe
               That peruarteth the people / as I ſuppoſe
               From redyng of gods worde / that goodly roſe
               Where the counſell commaundeth to occupy the ſame
               Thou traytor allureſt them this fayre floure to defame.
            
            
               
                  ❧God preſerue and kepe the kynges noble grace
               With prince Edwarde his ſonne / to ſuccede in his place
               God kepe them amonge vs / longe tyme and ſpace
               Let all his true ſubiectes / ſay Amen to the ſame
               And they that wold otherwyſe / god ſend them ſhame.
            
            ¶Finis.
         
      
      
         
            ☜Prentyd at London in Lombard ſtrete nere
vnto the Stockes market at the ſygne
of the Mermayde by Iohn
Gough.
            Cum preuilegio Ad imprimendum ſolum
            O domine in uirtute tua letabitur Rex, &c.
         
      
   