
      
         
            
            To the Maior, Aldermen, and Inhabitants of N.
            
               THat which heretofore I haue propounded to you (right Worſhipfull and beloued) in teaching, I do now publiſh to all men by printing, to wit,
mine opinion of the vnlawfulneſſe of games conſiſting in chance. My deſire is either information, if I erre in iudgement, or reformation of ſo
leud a practiſe. But whether I erre or no (which yet I would gladly vndeſtand,Rom. 3. 7. for I ought not to teach an vntruth, though to Gods glorie) yet
there is none, zealous indeed againſt ſinne, deſirous from the heart to reclaime ſinners, and who deepely conſidereth the grieuous abuſes, which
accompanie dicing and carding (as horrible ſwearing, dangerous quarelling, loſſe (I ſay not of good houres, but) of nights and dayes, and the
pittifull vndoing of too too manie) but will remembe that1. Cor. 6. 12. all things are not expedient, which are lawfull, and therefore abſtaine from ſuch
Heatheniſh paſſe-times, that, if by their example they cannot reforme, they may be ſure1. Cor. 8. 9. they do not confirme gameſters in their inordinate walking. Which
reſpect, the 7. Iniunction forbidding Miniſters to vſe theſe vnlawfull games, may be ſuppoſed to haue. Now that which authoritie exacteth of Miniſters, doth Religion
require of all true Profeſſours. For as the one are to be1. Tit. 5. 3. enſamples to the flocke, ſo the other are to bePhil. 2. 15. lights in the world. And therefore as PAVL ſaith.
1 Cor. 8. 10. 13 If meat offend my brother, I will eate no fleſh while the world ſtandeth. So euerie true Chiſtian ſhould ſay, and that with more reſolution (for Play is not ſo neceſſarie
as meat.) If play offend my brother, who ſeeing me hauing knowledge, play, is boldned to follow gaming, I will not play while the world ſtandeth. Which
care vnto edification if all, who haue thePſal. 50. 1
                     •
                  . 17. word in their mouthes, and would not be thought to hate to be reformed, would manifeſt in their ſincere conuerſation
and if Magiſtrates, who ſhould notRom 13. 4. carie the ſword in vaine would do what they may by33 H. 8. c. 9 5. 
                     〈…〉
                   25. law, to baniſh theſe forbidden paſt-times, or rather loſt-times, I doubt
not, but that preaching and writing againſt them would more mightily preuaile, and this good would come of it, manie would applie themſelues to better exerciſes,
there would be leſſe time miſpent in Alehouſes, and God leſſe prouoked to diſpleaſure againſt vs. But theſe things I referre to the conſideration of the wiſe
and this my Dialogue to the iudgement of the Godly, chiefly to you, whoſe good I wiſh eſpecially. Farewell.
         
      
      
         
            A Dialogue againſt playing at Cardes and Tables.
            
               Profeſſor
               
                  SIr howſoeuer I am perſwaded by that which I reade in the common places of Peter Martir, Par. 2. pag. 525. b. that Dice (condemned
both by the Ciuill lawes, and by the Fathers) are therfore vnlawfull, becauſe they depend vpon thaunce: yet not ſatiſfied with
that which he writeth of Table-playing, pag. 526. b. I would craue your opinion concerning playing at Tables and Cards.
            
            
               Preacher.
                Sauing the iudgement of ſo excellent a Diuine, ſo far as I can learne out of Gods word, Cards and Tables ſéeme to
me no more lawfull (though leſſe offenſiue) the dice. For Table playing is no whit the more lawfull becauſe Plato compares the
life of man therunto, then a théefe is the more iuſtifiable, becauſe Chriſt compareth his ſecond comming, to Burglarie in the night,
Matt. 24. 43. 44. Againe, if Dice be wholly euill, becauſe they wholly depend vpon chance, then Tables and Cards muſt néedes bée
ſomwhat euill, becauſe they ſomwhat depend vpon chance. Therfore conſider well this reaſon, which condēneth the one aſwelas ye
other: Lots are not to be vſed in ſport, but games cōſiſting in chance, as dice, cards, Tables, are lots, therfore not to be vſed in ſport.
            
            
               Profeſ.
                For my better inſtruction, proue that Lots are not to be vſed in ſport.
            
            
               Preach.
                Conſider with regard theſe thrée things: Firſt, that we read not in the Scriptures that Lots were vſed but only in ſerious matters both by the
Iewes.Ioh. 8. 48. 1. Cor. 11. 16 
                  Ioſ. 18. 10. and Gentiles Ion. 1. 7. Secondly, that a Lot in the nature thereof doth as neceſſarily ſuppoſe the ſpeciall prouidence and determining
preſence of God as an oth in the nature thereof doth ſuppoſe the teſtifying preſence of God. Yea ſo, that (as in an oth) ſo in a Lot prayer is expreſſed or to be
vnderſtood, 1. Sam. 14. 41 Thirdly, that the proper end of a Lot (as of an oth, Heb. 6. 16.) is to end a controuerſie and therefore for your better inſtruction examine
theſe reaſons. Whatſoeuer directly, or of it ſelfe, or in a ſpeciall maner, tendeth to the aduancing of the name of God, is to be vſed religiouſly, Mal. 1.
6. 7. and not to be vſed in ſport: as we are not to pray or ſweare in ſport. Exod. 20, 7. Eſa. 29. 13. Ier. 4. 2. but the vſe of Lots, directly of it ſelfe and in a ſpecial
maner tendeth to aduancing of the name of God, in attributing to his ſpeciall prouidence in the whole and immediate diſpoſing of the Lot. and expecting
the euent, Pro. 16. 33. Act. 1. 24, 26. Therefore the vſe of Lots is not to be in ſport. Againe, we are not to tempt the Almightie by a vaine deſire of manifeſtation
of his power and ſpeciall prouidence, Pſal. 78. 18. 19. Eſa. 7. 12 Matt. 4. 6. 7. But by vſing Lots in ſport we tempt the Almighty, vainly deſiring the manifeſtation
of his ſpeciall prouidence in his immediate diſpoſing, Therfore, &c. Laſtly, whatſoeuer God hath ſanctified to a proper end, is not to be peruerted
to a worſe, Matt. 21. 12 13. But God hath ſanctified Lots to a proper end, namely to end controuerſies, Num. 26. 55. Pro. 18. 18. therefore man is not to
peruert them to a worſe: namely to play, and by playing to get away another mans money, which without controuerſie is his owne. For the common
ſaying is, Sine lucro friget luſus, no gaining, cold gaining.
            
            
               Profeſ.
                God hath ſanctified Pſalmes to the praiſe of his name, and bread and wine to repreſent the body and bloud of our crucified Sauiour, which be
holy ends: and the children of God may ſing Pſalmes to make themſelues merie in the Lord, and feed vpon bread and wine not onely for neceſſity but to
cheare themſelues why then may not Gods Children recreate themſelues by lottery notwithſtanding God hath ſanctified the ſame to end a controuerſie?
            
            
               Preach.
                Becauſe we find not in the ſcriptures any diſpenſation for recreation by lotterie as we do for godly mirth by ſinging. Iam. 5. 13. and for religious
and ſober chearing our ſelues by eating and drinking, Deut. 8. 9. 10. And therefore (it being withall conſidered that the ends you ſpeake of, be not proper,
though holy) it followeth, that God who only diſpoſeth the Lot touching the euent, and is therefor a principall actor, is not to be ſet on worke by lottery
in any caſe but when he diſpenſeth with vs, or giueth vs leaue ſo to do: But diſpenſation for recreation by lottery cannot be ſhewed, Therefore, &c.
            
            
               Profeſ.
                Lots may be vſed for profit in a matter of right, Num. 26. 55. why not for pleaſure?
            
            
               Preach.
                Then others may be vſed for pleaſure, for they may for profite, in a matter of truth, Exod. 22. 8. 11. But indéed lots (as othes) are not to be vſed
either for profite or pleaſure, but only to end a controuerſie.
            
            
               Profeſ.
                The wit is exerciſed by Tables and Cards, therefore they be no lots.
            
            
               Preach.
                Yet Lotterie is vſed by caſting Dice, and by ſhufling and cutting, before the wit is exerciſed. But how doth this follow? Becauſe Cards & Tables
be not naked Lots, conſiſting only in chance (as Dice) they are therefore no lots at all. Although (being vſed without cogging, or packing) they conſiſt
principally in chance, from whence they are to receiue denominatiō. In which reſpect a Lot is called in Latin Sors, that is, chance or hazard. And Lyra
vpon Prou. 16. ſaith, To vſe Lots, is, by a variable euent of ſome ſenſible thing, to determine ſome doubtful or vncertaine matter, as to draw cuts, or to caſt
Dice. But whether you will call Cards and Tables Lots, or no, you play with chance or vſe Lotterie. Then conſider whether exerciſe of wit doth ſanctifie
playing with lotterie, or playing with lotterie make ſuch exerciſing of wit a ſin, Hag. 2. 13. 14. For as calling God to witnes by vaine ſwearing is a ſinne,
2. Cor. 1. 13 ſo making God an vmpier, by playing with lotterie muſt néeds be a ſin: yea, ſuch a ſin as maketh the offender (in ſome reſpects) more blame-worthy. For there be mo occaſions of ſwearing then of lottery. Secondly, vaine othes moſt cōmonly ſlip out at vnawares, whereas Lots cannot be vſed
but with deliberation. Thirdly, ſwearing is to ſatiſfie other wheras this kind of lottery is altogether to fulfill our own luſts. Therfore take héed, that you
be not guilty of peruerting the ordinance of the Lord, of taking the name of God in vaine, & of tempting the Almighty, by a gameſome putting off things
to hazard, and making play of lottery, except you thinke that God hath no gouernment in vaine actions, or hath diſpenſed with ſuch lewd games.
            
            
               Profeſ.
                In ſhooting there is a chaunce by a ſodaine blaſt, yet ſhooting is no lottery.
            
            
               Preach.
                It is true: for that chance commeth by accident, and not of the nature of the game, to be vſed.
            
            
               Profeſ.
                Lots are ſecret, and the whole diſpoſing of them is of God, P
                        •
                     o. 16. 33. but it is otherwiſe in Tables and Cards.
            
            
               Preach.
                Lots are caſt into the 
                     〈◊〉
                  , man, and  
                     〈…〉
                   ſhould be ſuſpected: but the diſpoſing of the chance is ſecret, that it may be
chaunce indeed, and wholly of God, who directeth all things, Pro. 16. 13. 9. 33. So in Tables, man by faire caſting Dice truly made, and in Cards, by ſhuffling
and cutting, doth openly diſpoſe the Dice and Cards ſo, as whereby a variable euent may follow: but it is onely and immediatly of God that the
Dice be ſo caſt, and the Cards ſo ſhuffled and cut, as that this or that game followeth, except there be cogging and packing. So that in faire play mans
wit is not exerciſed in diſpoſing the chance, but in making the beſt of it being paſt.
            
            
               Profeſ.
                The end of our play is recreation and not to make God an vmpire: but recreation (no doubt) is lawfull.
            
            
               Preach.
                It may be the ſouldiers had no ſuch end when they caſt lots for Chriſt his coat, Matt. 27. 25. but this ſhould be your end when you vſe lottery,
as the end of an oth ſhould be, to call God to witneſſe. Therfore as ſwaring, ſo lottery, without due reſpect is ſinne. Againe, howſoeuer recreation be your
pretended end, yet remember that we muſt not do euill that good may come of it, Rom. 3. 8. And that therefore we are to recreate our ſelues by lawfull recreations.
Then ſée how Cards and Tables be lawfull.
            
            
               Profeſ.
                If they be not abuſed by ſwearing or brawling, playing for too long time, or too much money.
            
            
               Preach.
                Though I am perſwaded that it is not lawfull to play for any money, conſidering thanks cannot be giuen in faith for that which is ſo gotten,
Deut. 23. 18. Eſa. 61. 8. Gameſters worke not with their hands the thing that is good, to be frée from ſtealing, Ephe. 4. 28. and the looſer hath not an anſwerable
benefite for his money ſo loſt, Gen. 29. 15. contrarie to that equitie which Ariſtotle by the light of nature hath taught long ſince, Eth. l. 5. c. 4. yet I
grant that Cardes and Tables ſo vſed as you ſpeake, be leſſe ſinfull, but how they be lawfull I ſée not yet.
            
            
               Profeſ.
                Good men and well learned vſe them.
            
            
               Preach.
                We muſt liue by precepts, not by examples, except they be vndoubtedly good. Therefore examine whether they be good, and well learned in
ſo doing or no. For euerie man may erre, Rom. 3. 4.
            
            
               Profeſ.
                It is not good to be too iuſt, or too wiſe, Eccl. 7. 18.
            
            
               Preach.
                It is not good to be too wicked or too fooliſh, Eccl. 7. 19. in deſpiſing the word of God. Pro. x. 22. and not regarding the weakneſſe of other, Rom. 14
21. Let vs therefore beware that we loue not pleaſure more then Godlineſſe, 2. Tim. 3. 4.
            
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London for Richard Boile.
         
      
   