
      
         
            
            
            A SHORT DIALOGVE
CONCERNING
THE PLAGVES
INFECTION.
            Publiſhed to preſerue bloud,
through the bleſſing of God.
            
            
               Pſal. 91. 11.
He ſhall giue his Angels charge ouer thee,
to keepe thee in all thy wayes.
            
               Matth. 4. 7.
Thou ſhalt not tempt the Lord thy God.
            
               ANCHORA. SPEI.
            
            
               LONDON,
Printed for Richard Boyle, and are to be
ſold at his ſhop in Blacke-friers. 1603.
         
         
            
            
            TO HIS VVELBELOVED
IN CHRIST,
THE PARISHIONERS
OF SAINT OLAVES IN
Southwarke, IAMES BAMFORD wiſheth
increaſe of Grace and knowledge
of our Lord and Sauiour
Ieſus Chriſt.
            
               IT is written in the 33.
of Ezechiel: That, if
the people of the land
take a man of their
coaſts, and make him
their watchman, if when he ſeeth
the ſword come vpon the land, he
blow the trumpet, and warne the
people: then he that heareth the
ſound of the trumpet and will not
be warned, if the ſword come and

take him away, his bloud ſhall be vpon
his owne head. But if the watchman
ſee the ſword come; and blow
not the trumpet, and the people be
not warned, if the ſword come, and
take any perſon from among them,
he is taken away for his iniquity, but
his bloud will I require (ſaith the
Lord) at the watchmans hand. So
you (my beloued) haue choſen
me to be your watchman. Therefore
it concerneth me to giue, and
you to take warning of mortall
danger, as we wil be free from bloudguiltineſſe.
But I haue publickly giuen
you warning of that bloudy errour,
which denieth the Peſtilence
to be contagious: maintained, not
onely by the rude multitude, but by
too many of the better ſort; you are
therefore to take warning. That ye
may the rather take heed to the ſiluer
trumpet, which hath ſoūded in your
eares, I haue thought it neceſſary to

ſet downe in writing all that I haue
publickly taught, together with
whatſoeuer elſe, I perceiue, by priuate
conference to be appertaining
to that queſtion, that yee may take
time, better to conſider that which
is either miſunderſtood, or not well
remembred, becauſe it was but once
deliuered, and the common ſort are
not acquainted with, and therefore
hardly capeable of Scholaſticall diſputations.
And yet I endeuoured
to ſpeake as plaine as I could. But
now I haue contriued al in the forme
of a Dialogue, which is a more familiar
maner of teaching; hoping that
now yee will more readily both
perceiue, and receiue the truth herein
contained. I humbly and earneſtly
deſire you (at your leiſure) diligently
to examine the quotations: but
firſt to reade ouer the Dialogue it
ſelfe. If any deſire a more learned diſcourſe,
I referre them to that worthy

Treatiſe written by that reuerend father
(the light of our age) Maiſter
Beza, and tranſlated by that faithfull
and profitable ſeruant of Chriſt,
Maiſter Stockwood. Furthermore, as
I deſire you to reade this Dialogue
with good reſpect: ſo I pray you
do not thinke, that I haue any purpoſe
to traduce you as maintainers
of errour, and gainſayers of your
teacher. For howſoeuer (indeed) I
was occaſioned by that I ſaw and
heard amongſt our ſelues, to preach
this doctrine, and haue committed
it to writing for your ſpeciall good,
yet knowing that bloudy errour
(which I impugne) to be commonly
maintained in London, I thought
it conuenient to publiſh this Dialogue
in print, for a more generall
good. As for your ſelues, I am ſo far
from traducing you, that I do (with
ioyfull thankes to God the father, in
the name of Ieſus Chriſt) giue you

this teſtimony; that notwithſtanding
the iudgement of ſome be not well
informed in this point, yet I haue
much comfort in my Miniſtery amongſt
you: for in ſundry things ye
ſhew the obediēce of faith. Amongſt
the reſt, ye attend the Sacrament of
Baptiſme, from which in moſt places
people runne away moſt contemptuouſly;
Ye frequent Friday Lecture
as diligently (euer ſince the Plague
was kindled) as in winter nights:
wheras many in & about Londō are
winter hearers, attending the word
when they haue nothing elſe to do:
and ye fill Gods houſe vpō the daies
of humiliation, & holy reſt, notwithſtanding
there haue died in our pariſh
from the 7. of May to this day
2640. Wheras before the Plague our
Church was partly filled by ſtrāgers,
both on Sondayes & Fridayes. Theſe
things I take knowledge of, as to ſignifie,
that in this Dialogue I do not

taxe you, or any of you, more than
other, ſo, to incourage you to go forward
(& not backward) in your holy
profeſſion, ſeruing God, and ſanctifying
his Sabboths as religiouſly
hereafter, as ye do now while God is
preſent with you in this his grieuous
viſitation. For it is a good thing (ſaith
one Apoſtle) to loue earneſtly alwayes
in a good thing:Gal. 4. 18. And it is better
(ſaith another Apoſtle) for you
not to haue taken the way of righteouſnes,2. Pet. 2. 21
than after ye haue taken it to
forſake it. Therfore (good brethren)
take heed that ye coole not in your
deuotion, becauſe the number of the
buried in our pariſh is fallen (bleſſed
be God) frō 305. to 51. in one weeke,
and from 57. to 4. buried in one day.
Shall our loue coole, whē Gods loue
is kindled? God forbid. O remember
that when Moſes lifted vp his hands,Exod. 17. 11. 12.
               Iſrael preuailed: but when his hands
were heauy Amalech preuailed. And

when it ſhall pleaſe God to remoue
this heauy iudgement, let vs neuer
forget this viſitation, according to the
doctrine we haue learned out of the
title of the 38.Pſal. 78. 34. 35. 36. 37. 57. Pſal. Let vs not turne
backe like a deceitfull bow, and let vs
ſin no more, leſt a worſe euill come
vntovs, according to the ſaying of
Chriſt himſelfe to a man deliuered
from a grieuous diſeaſe. Conceiuing
good hope that yee will hide the
words of exhortation in honeſt and
good harts to bring forth fruite with
patience, I commend me to your fauour,
my Dialogue to your reading,
and your ſelues to God, and to the
word of his grace, which is able to
build further. From my ſtudy this
13. of October. 1603.
            
               Yours in the Lord aſſured
and readie to do all the
ſeruice he may,
IAMES BAMFORD.
            
         
         
            
            The Contents of this Dialogue.
            
               1 THE occaſion of this Dialogue, and
chiefe points to be diſcuſſed. page 2.
               2 People muſt heare well, before they preſume
to iudge their teachers. pag. 2, 3, 4.
               3 Magiſtrates may and ought to ſeuer
the ſound from the infected, and the infected
from the ſound. pag. 5, 6, 7, 8.
               4 How the poore infected may go abroad
for neceſſarie reliefe, which otherwiſe they
ſhould want. pag. 9.
               5 The infected who want no neceſſarie
releefe ſhould keepe in, and they, withall ſuppoſed
to come about them, are to forbeare the
Church for a while. pag. 10, 11, 12, 13.
               6 The Plague may be in a garment. pag.
13, 14, 15.
               7 The Plague may be taken by feare,
whereof we are therefore to take heede. pag.
15, 16, 17.
               8 How Miniſters are to viſite the ſicke.
18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
               9 How the ſicke are to be viſited by other.
pag. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.
               
                  
10 The ſicke of the plague are not to deſire
the vnneceſſary preſence of their friends.
pag. 28, 29, 30.
               11 Thronging at the burying of the infected,
is to be taken heed of. pag. 31, 32, 33.
               12 The law of Lepers proueth ſeparation
betweene the ſound and the infected. pag. 3,
34, 35, 36, 37.
               13 Great care is to be had of that bloudy
errour, which denieth the Plague to be contagious.
pag. 38, 39, 40.
               14 The true cauſe and effects of inordinate
feare. pag 41, 42, 43.
               15 Magiſtrates are to be reſident. pag.
43, 44.
               16 The eſcaping of ſome conuerſant with
the infected, is not a good argument againſt
the infection. pag. 44. to 59.
               17 Cauſes why ſome eſcape, though conuerſant
with the infected. pag. 49. to 54.
               18 An abſolute faith touching deliuerance
from the Plague, is not required. pag.
54. to 57.
               19 Why godly men die of the Plague. pa.
57, 58, 59.
               20 The Plague is contagious, notwithſtanding
there die none but by the ſpeciall appointmeot

of God. pag. 59, to 69.
               21 Who may flie into the country from the
Plague, and with what cautions. p. 70. to 74.
               22 Gods people are to come to Church, notwithſtanding
the plagues contagion. pag. 75,
76, 77.
               23 The Plague is contagious, though the
Scripture doth not expreſly affirme ſo much.
pag. 78.
               24 The contagion of the plague may be
concluded out of the word. pag. 79. 80.
               25 The vſe which is to be made of this
Dialogue. pag. 81, 82.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A ſhort Dialogue concerning
the Plagues
infection.
            
               Profeſſor.
               
                  SIR, I make bold to trouble
you, and to deſire your reſolution
in a point wherewith I
finde the minds of manie honeſt
men (better acquainted with the
Scriptures than I am) much cumbred and
perplexed: I cannot be quiet till I be reſolued;
therefore pardon my boldneſſe I
pray you.
            
            
               Preacher.
               Neighbour, you are very
welcome: for I take you to be of that
diſcretion, that you will not (as manie
do) trouble your ſelfe and others with
friuolous, or curious queſtions. And
therefore if I were as able as willing,
you ſhould not go away vnreſolued:

but you ſhall haue mine opinion with
all faithfulneſſe, and then iudge therof
in the ſobrietie of wiſedome. Tell me
then: What is the matter?
            
            
               Prof.
               May it pleaſe you: We heare
your ſelfe, and other faithfull Preachers
in this Citie, reproue ſuch as (for the cō
                  fort
of their ſoules) come to Church, either
with plague ſores, or out of infected
houſes. As alſo thoſe, that of charitie viſite
ſuch as haue the plague, and accompanie
the diſeaſed of that diſeaſe, vnto
the graue. In all which duties we thinke
(with your fauor) that Preachers ſhould
rather incourage then diſcourage vs.
Now becauſe I am vnder your miniſterie,
and you haue publikely willed vs to
reſort to you for ſatisfaction, if we either
vnderſtand not, or approue not any
thing by you deliuered: I am bold to
come and craue your ſatisfaction accordingly.
            
            
               Preach.
               You do well, & I thank you:
for there be too many that runne counter
in a contrarie courſe. For whereas
they ſhould be ſwift to heare and ſlow
to ſpeake,Iam. 1. 19. they haue heauie eares,E
                        •
                     a. 6. 10. and

readie tongues to ſpeake euil of things
they know not,2. Pet. 2. 12 and ſo ſcandalize (that
is,Ro. 14. 13. ſtumble) themſelues and other, in
hearing the word,1. Theſ. 2. 13. which is to be heard
not as the words of men, but as indéed
the word of God. But I pray you tell
me, in what ſenſe, and for what reaſons
haue you obſerued me and other
Preachers to reproue the offendors
you ſpeake of?
            
            
               Prof.
               Truely Sir, ſith you put me to
it, I muſt acknowledge mine infirmitie:
for aſſoone as I heare you or other begin
to checke Pietie and Charitie, (ſo ſeeming
to me) I am preſently ſo troubled,
that I cannot vnderſtand, much leſſe
rightly remember, what hath bene deliuered.
            
            
               Preach.
               If it be ſo with you, who
profeſſe the obedience of faith, how is
it with the rude multitude, whoſe imaginations
are in no good ſort brought
into captiuitie to the obedience of
Chriſt? But we ſée the words of Chriſt
fulfilled:Ioh. 8. 43. That we do not vnderſtand
his talke, becauſe we cannot heare his
word. Me thinkes, profeſſors ſhould

attribute ſo much to their teachers, yea
ſuch as they acknowledge to be faithfull,
as to heare with the Athenians,Act. 17. 19. 20. 32. 11.
and to examine with the Bereans. For
doth the law of God iudge a man,Ioh. 7. 51. before
it heare him? But truely ye preſume
too farre in cenſuring your teachers,
as thoſe that checke Pietie and
Charitie. What? Is this Pietie, with
an high hand to breake godly Orders
of a gracious Prince ſet downe for preſeruation
of life? Is this Charitie, preſumptuouſly
to hazard the liues, God
knoweth of how many? Is this either
Pietie or Charitie, wilfully to runne
our ſelues into mortall daunger?
            
            
               Prof.
               I am enforced of conſcience to
confeſſe it to be a fault, that we haue preſumed
to cenſure our teachers, and that
ſo ſeuerely, before we well vnderſtood
and humbly examined their doctrine:
for by our deed we ſpeake that in Gods
eares, which irreligious people, by word
vttered to Ieremiah his face,Ier. 44 16. 17. viz. The
word that thou haſt ſpoken vnto vs in the
name of the Lord, we wil not heare it of thee;
but we will do whatſoeuer goeth out of our

owne mouth. But pardon me, and let me
now with your patience intreate you to
proue, not by mans pollicie, but by Gods
word (according to your profeſſion) that
Princes may inhibit, or forbid the works
of Pietie and Charitie.
            
            
               Preach.
               Neighbour, you ſtill begge
the queſtion, which is the common fallacie
of the common ſort, who dote vpon
whatſoeuer commeth out of their
owne mouth, as you ſaid. For it is in
queſtion, whether the workes you cō
                  mend,
be the workes of Pietie & Charitie
or no. But I will ſhew you by the
word of God, that Princes both may
and ought keepe from aſſemblies, ſuch
as be no leſſe daungerous to them, thā
one ſcabbed ſhéepe is to an whole flock,
and reſtraine the whole and ſound frō
vnneceſſarie running into eminent
daunger. This I will do vpon condition,
that you will then ſhew me, what
reaſons you haue to doubt of ſo cléere a
truth, or obiect againſt any thing I
haue ſaid, or ſhall ſay, that I may either
ſatisfie you, or reforme mine own
iudgement.
            
            
               
               Prof.
               If I do not ſo, my ſecond error
will be worſe than the former: for then I
ſhould be like them that pretended with
proteſtation to be informed by Ieremiah,
                  Ier. 42 56. & 43. 2. 3.
but yet obeyed not his voyce, when it
was againſt their mind: for the truth is,
the longer we talke, the more I remember
what is muttered by the common,
and what obiected by the better ſort.
            
            
               Preach.
               Vpon this condition I procéed,
yet ſo, as not intending any large
diſcourſe: for I néede not, ſpeaking to a
profeſſour; and I would you ſhould
haue time enough to propound al your
doubts. In one word therefore conſider
well this argument:Eſa. 4
                        •
                     . 23. 1. Tim. 2. 2 Kings and
Quéenes ought to be nurcing fathers
and nurcing mothers to the Church, ſo
as that Gods people may leade a quiet
and a peaceable life, in all godlineſſe
and honeſtie. But this is an honeſt
thing before God and men, that Kings
ſhould (out of a fatherly care) preſerue
their ſubiects from deſtruction, by infection,
as wel as by the ſword.2. Sam. 24. 17. & 19. 9. As Dauid
was no leſſe carefull for his people,
when the Peſtilence raged, than valiant

in defending them againſt their enemies.
Againe, what other thing do
ſundrie lawes and cuſtomes of Iſrael
teach vs?Leuit. 10. 9 10. Prieſts were forbidden to
drinke wine or ſtrong drinke, that they
might put difference betwéene the
cleane and vncleane:Num. 5. 2. 45. 57. that euery leaper
and euery one that had an iſſue, and
whoſoeuer is defiled by the dead, ſhold
be put out of the hoſt: that garments
and houſes defiled by leproſie,Leu. 13 45. 57 & 14. ſhould
be deſtroyed:Deut. 23. 12. 13. that euery one to do the
worke of nature, ſhould go out of the
hoaſt:Luk. 7. 12. and that the dead were buried
out of the citie.Ioh. 19 17. 41. Heb. 13. 12. What (I ſay) do theſe
lawes and cuſtomes (well conſidered)
teach vs in their equity, but that Gods
people ſhould be carefully preſerued
from filthineſſe and contagion? Let vs
a litle better conſider the lawes of Lepers,
as moſt nearely concerning vs,
and we ſhall find that they were not
onely to haue markes to be known by,
but alſo to giue warning to companie
approching,Leuit. 13. 45. by ſaying: I am vncleane,
I am vncleane. Whereby it is euident,
that Lepers ſhould ſhunne other, and

other ſhould ſhun them. And it is as euident,
that they were not to come into
the houſe of God.2. Chro. 26. 20. 21. For a King being a
Leper, was kept out thereof all the
dayes of his life. Much more may Moſes
(a Magiſtrate) ſhut Miriam (though
his ſiſter) out of the hoaſt for 7.Numb. 12. 10. 14. dayes.
But the plague is more daungerouſly
contagious being mortall,Ezec. 34. 2. 8. then the Leproſie
which is not mortall: therefore
Princes and Magiſtrates (which are
called ſheapheards) may and ought to
be very carefull, to kéepe the ſound frō
the infected, and the infected from the
ſound, eſpecially in aſſemblies. As the
ſheapheard is carefull to keepe ſcabbed
ſhéepe from his flocke, and his flocke
from ſcabbed ſhéepe. Let this ſuffice for
this time: let me now heare your
doubts.
            
            
               Prof.
               As king Agrippa ſaid vnto Paul:
Almoſt thou perſwadeſt me to become a
Chriſtian,
                  Act 26. 28. ſo I may ſay, you haue almoſt
chaunged my mind. But yet for my promiſe
ſake, and for further reſolution, I
will propound certaine doubts: and will
firſt begin with that which I know doth

moſt trouble moſt men, eſpecially of the
poorer ſort. To wit, they thinke it moſt
extreame crueltie, to be barred from going
abroad to ſeeke reliefe or maintenance
for them and theirs, except they
either had ſufficient of their owne, or
their wants were ſupplied.
            
            
               Preach.
               I am of the ſame mind: for
Lepers might go abroad to ſéeke reliefe:Luk. 17. 12. 13.
but yet in ſuch ſort, as hath bene
ſhewed. And ſo I could wiſh that our
infected poore, ſith they muſt néeds go abroad,
wold remēber ye 10. Lepers, how
they ſtood afar off, & lift vp their voyce,
when they craued helpe of our Sauior:
ſo they would go abroad in ſuch ſort as
authoritie directeth: to wit, out of the
moſt frequented way, and with a rod
in their hand. I ſay with griefe (muſt
needes) for if authoritie had regarded
theſe things betimes, when there were
but few infected houſes, they might
haue bene well ſhut vp and prouided
for, till they were cleanſed, either of
their owne, or the common charges.
But what ſay you to thoſe, who are
not ſo poore, but that they may kéepe

their houſes at their owne charges, till
they be cleanſed?
            
            
               Profeſſ.
               They thinke it an hell to be
ſo long ſhut vp from companie and their
buſineſſe: the neglecting whereof is the
decay of their ſtate.
            
            
               Preach.
               Indéed this impatiencie is
the cauſe why ſo many ſmother the
plague in themſelues and their families,
ſo long as they can to the hazarding
of life: but I aduiſe them to conſider
the reſolution of Paul, which was,
neuer to cate fleſh rather then he would
offend his brother:1 Cor. 8. 13 much more ought
they patiently to endure a litle reſtraint
and loſſe, rather then to indanger
the life of many.Gen. 4. 10. O bloud is a grieuous
and crying ſinne!Pſal. 51. 14. and therefore
Dauid would not drinke the water of
the well of Beth-lehem though he longed
for it,2. Sam. 23. 15, 16, 17. becauſe it was gotten with
the ieopardy of liues, but called it blood.
Let them beléeue that God is able to
giue them more then they looſe by following
his direction.
                     
                        〈◊◊〉
                      5.9 
                        〈◊◊…〉
                     
                   Let them know
what this is: I will haue mercie, and not
ſacrifice.
                  Rom. 8. 25. Let them ſhew their faith by

patience. For he that beléeueth, maketh
no haſt,Eſa. 28. 16. & 30. 15. being aſſured of Gods promiſe:
that in quietnes and confidence ſhall be
their ſtrength. Let them imitate Moſes
and Aaron,
                  Numb. 12: 12, &c. who were as haſtie in behalf
of their ſiſter Miriam, but yet were perſwaded
by God to ſhut her out of the
hoſt ſeuen dayes. Thus much for theſe
goers abroad. But what ſay you now
for thoſe that come to Church, in whoſe
behalfe you ſéemed much affected at the
firſt.
            
            
               Profeſſ.
               I was indeed affected as I ſeemed:
but that which you haue ſaid to goers
abroade, belonging for the moſt part
to commers to Church, hath ſtopped my
mouth: and the rather becauſe I remember
the King, who was kept from the
Temple,2. Chro. 26. 20, 21. whiles he liued, for the Leproſie.
Why then (thinke I) ſhould not the
infected with the Plague be content to
forbeare for a while, ſith in the Plague
they vſually mend or end in ſhort time?
            
            
               Preach.
               God be praiſed, for now you
vnderſtand and remember well, I haue
therefore the leſſe to ſay: only this, touching
the comfort of ſoule, which they

deſire by comming to Church. I pray
them examine what true comfort they
can haue, when they conſider that they
are more dangerous than they who go
abroad. For in the Church they ſit by it,
and that in a throng and heat: whereas
if they humble themſelues vnder Gods
hand, and tarie at home, though taking
it as a part of their croſſe that they kéep
ſo long from the Church; I doubt not
but that they ſhall find God (who turneth
his childrens bed in time of ſickneſſe)
as a ſanctuary to them.Pſal. 41 3. And this
I further ſay,Ezec. 11. 16. that he rather is in the aſſembly
of ſaints,1. Cor. 5. 4. who is there in ſpirit,
though abſent in body;Eſa. 29. 13. then he that is
preſent in body, but abſent in ſpirit.
            
            
               Profeſſ.
               All this (as I vnderſtand) concernes
ſuch as being infected themſelues,
do yet come to Church. But what ſay you
to thoſe who haue ſpacious houſes, ſo as
they come not neere the ſicke of their family,
and be ſound themſelues: may not
they come to Church as well as thoſe, betweene
whom and the infected there is
but a wall?
            
            
               Preach.
               They may, as I am perſwaded.

But all things are not expedient
which are lawfull.1. Cor. 10. 23. 24. For many too fooliſhly
fearefull (another extremitie of this
time, as generall and daungerous, as
Preſumption) knowing their houſes to
be infected, wil verily ſuppoſe that they
haue béene about the ſicke, and that the
plague is in their garments; and therefore
if it fal out ſo that they ſit together,
their fearefull conceipt may bréede the
Plague.
            
            
               Profeſſ.
               O ſir, are you of that mind,
that the Plague may be in a garment, and
the partie not ſicke; and that one may
take the Plague onely with feare, and do
you beare with ſuch a conceipt?
            
            
               Preach.
               No, I do not. But I déeme
them guiltie of their owne bane, who
take it with ſuch a conceipt. And yet I
thinke euery charitable Chriſtian will
grieue at the heart, that he ſhould be the
occaſion of ſuch a fright, and could wiſh
that he had rather béen from the church
a moneth, eſpecially being in ſome ſort
Gods priſoner, and the affrighted hauing
likelyhoods that either he or his
garment might be infected. That a garment

may be infected, and the Plague
taken onely by feare, experience and
reaſon do make manifeſt. Concerning
the former, it hath béene proued that
clothes of infected perſons layed vp and
not well ayred, being opened though a
yéere or more after, haue inſtantly renewed
ye Plague. Againe, we perceiue
by the ſmell that garments wil retaine
the ſent of Wormewood or muſke for a
long time: the cauſe is not in the ſent
by it ſelfe conſidered, but in the ayre
which is the ſubiect of the ſent. The
plague in a garment is a poyſoned aire
(being according to the nature thereof
called by the learned the Death of the
ayre) procéeding from the partie infected,
and infecting the garment, though
not perceiued by ſmell: as the open,
cléere and wholeſome ayre of the heauens
is healthfull for the body, though
not perceiued by ſmell.Lev. 13. 51. & 14. 46. 47 Laſtly, leproſie
infecteth garments: and he that ſléepeth
or eateth in an houſe, ſhut vp for leproſie,
muſt waſh his clothes: which argueth
that infection may be by the ayre,
ſith a man may eate in the houſe, and

not touch the walles infected. If Leproſie
be ſo contagious, much more the
Plague, which is a ſtronger poyſon, becauſe
it infecteth and killeth.
            
            
               Profeſſ.
               This is more then euer I heard
and conſidered, and I think it reaſonable:
but I cannot conceiue how the garment
can be infected, and yet the perſon that
weareth it eſcape the Plague.
            
            
               Preach.
               I will ſhew you that in a
word. Do you not conſider that either
the infection may be but weake, or the
party of a ſtrong and healthfull conſtitution.
Cinders will not ſet fuell on fire
ſo ſoone as burning coles: neither will
gréene wood be ſo ſoone kindled as chips
and drie deale-boord.
            
            
               Profeſſ.
               I now ſee and in ſome ſort aſſent
to your opinion: proceed therefore
I pray you to giue reaſons why by onely
feare a man may be infected with the
Plague.
            
            
               Preach.
               
                  The ſpirit of a man will ſuſtaine
his infirmities:
                  Pro. 18. 14. & 4. 23. 
                  but a wounded ſpirit, who
can beare it? ſaith Salomon. By ſpirit here
is meant a comfortable heart, which animateth
a man in all troubles: but if

that fayle, hée is ſoone ouerthrowne.
From the heart procéed (as Phiſitions
ſay) vitall ſpirits, whereby man is
made actiue and couragious. If they by
feare be inforced to retire inward, the
outward parts be left infirme: as may
appeare by the paleneſſe and trembling
of one in great feare, ſo that as enemies
eaſily ſcale the walles of a towne
abandoned by ſouldiers: ſo the Plague
(eſpecially in a ſeaſon diſpoſed to infection)
doth find readie paſſage into the
outward parts of a man, deſtitute by
feare of the vitall ſpirits which ſhould
correct ye ſame.Mat. 9. 22. & 13. 58. Againe, as faith maketh
vs partakers of Gods helping hand, ſo
vnbeléefe depriueth vs thereof:Pro. 10. 24. & feare
(aduerſarie to faith) pulleth to the wicked
the euill which he feareth.
            
            
               Profeſſ.
               By this conference I haue learned
to feare more then I haue done, and
yet to take heed of feare: to feare becauſe
the plague may be caried about in garments,
and therefore may infect me, keeping
company with one that is cōuerſant
with the infected, I being peraduenture
not of ſo ſtrong a conſtitutiō as the party.

To take heede of feare, leſt I be guiltie of
mine owne bane.
            
            
               Preach.
               Your collection is good, eſpecially
if you remember the diſtinction
of feare in that ſence which I haue often
taught it: to wit, Feare is contrary
either to Security,Phil. 2. 12. 13. and ſo it may be called
Héedfulneſſe, or to Faith, and ſo it
is couſin germain to Deſpaire.Mar. 4. 40. But hoping
that now you ſee our doctrine againſt
vnruly and vncharitable going
abroad of the infécted, either in perſon
or garments, not to be a checke to Pietie
and Charitie, I pray you tell me,
what you can ſay for vnneceſſarie and
deſperate running to the ſicke and buried
of the Plague?
            
            
               Profeſſ.
               What? I tell you (be it without
offence) that many maruell (I will
not ſay, cry out) that Preachers, who
ſhould be examples of loue and faith in
viſiting the ſick according to their office,1. Tim. 4. 12.
do yet ſo flatly ſpeake againſt the expreſſe
words of Chriſt. For doth not he
ſay:Mat. 25. 36, 43. That we ſhall be iudged at the laſt
day, according to our workes of charity,
and amongſt the reſt, our viſiting, or not

viſiting the ſicke?
            
            
               Preach.
               O neighbour you now lay
on loade! I muſt therefore eaſe (a litle)
the ſhoulders of Preachers whom you
charge heauily, for not viſiting the ſick
of the Plague; before I can nimbly encounter
your maine obiection. Surely
ye Profeſſours, who ſo vrge this pretended
dutie, are farre from the louing
care and kindneſſe of the Iſraelites,
who would not ſuffer Dauid to hazard
himſelfe in battell,2. Sam 18. 3. &. 21. 17. leſt if he, being
woorth tenne thouſand of them, were
ſlaine, and the light of Iſrael ſhould be
put out. Againe, ye forget that Chriſt
ſaid to him that deſired to burie his
father:Mat. 8. 21. 22. 
                  Follow thou me, let the dead burie
their dead. If ye did conſider this
well, you could not but thinke, that as
Paule ſaid,1. Cor. 1. 17 
                  Chriſt ſent me not to baptize
but to preach: ſo Preachers may ſay:
Chriſt hath ſent vs not to viſite the
ſicke, but to preach, and thereupon cō
                  clude;
that the leſſe dutie (if a dutie) eſpecially
being daungerous, muſt giue
place to the greater, and the viſiting of
a few ſicke and leſſe capable of inſtruction,

muſt giue place to the teaching of
the whole congregation, and more capable
of doctrine and comfort. Now if
they viſite euery one that is ſicke, how
can they attend vnto reading, and follow
Chriſt in the moſt proper and neceſſarie
worke of the miniſterie?1. Tim. 4. 13. 15. 16. Luk. 10. 42 Laſtly,
I ſée not (but herein I humbly ſubmit
mine opinion to the Church) that
viſiting the ſicke is a proper dutie of a
Miniſter, as he is a Miniſter. For as
none can ordaine officers in the Church
but Chriſt,Eph. 4. 8. 11 Mat. 28. 18. 19. ſo none (as I am perſwaded)
can preſcribe duties to thoſe officers,1. Cor. 12. 5. 8.
but Chriſt. But I cannot find
where Chriſt preſcribeth viſiting of the
ſicke, as a Miniſters dutie. If not
Chriſt, why ſhould any ſurcharge Miniſters,
and the rather becauſe they
are not (no not the beſt) ſufficient for
duties preſcribed?2. Cor. 2. 16 Act. 6. 1. 2. 3. 4. Did not the Apoſtles
pronounce it an vnmeet thing to be
hindred from giuing themſelues continually
to prayer, and to the miniſtration
of the word, by miniſtring to the
poore, and therefore put ouer that duty
to ſpeciall men? If the Apoſtles extraordinarily

aſſiſted, by the Spirit, both
with gifts and bleſſing, caſt off an impertinent
burthen (yea ſuch an one as
is no leſſe neceſſarie then viſiting.) Alas,
why ſhould Miniſters, who néede
all helpes (as much reading, diligent
conference, and frequent meditation,)
be further charged than they are by
Chriſt? Indéed I confeſſe that a Miniſter
ought (as you ſaid) to be an example
of all good workes,Eſa 50. 4. eſpecially of that
as being the fitteſt man to ſatisfie the
doubtfull conſcience, to humble the
ſtubburne heart, and to comfort the
wounded ſpirit.
            
            
               Profeſſ.
               I neuer heard this matter
doubted of before. But (I pray you Sir)
doth not Iames ſay:Iam. 5. 14. 
                  Is any ſicke among you,
let him call for the Elders of the Church?
Doth he not vnderſtand Miniſters by
Elders? If ſo, doth not this place proue
plainely, that it is a Miniſters dutie to
viſite the ſicke?
            
            
               Preach.
               I ſay not but that it is a
Miniſters dutie to viſite the ſicke, for
example ſake: and as he is more able to
do good than other, but not as he is Miniſter.

I graunt alſo, that long ſince the
ſame doctrine from this place hath bene
gathered, which you now apprehend.
So as vpon the ſame, Papiſtes haue
grounded their baſtard Sacrament of
Extreame vnction.
                  Ioh. 7. 49. Ier. 44. 16. 17. Which taken away,
the curſed people (which know not the
law) neither care to know it (being euer
addicted to ſuperſtitious vanities)
muſt néedes (forſooth) in ſtead thereof,
haue a Miniſter to viſite their ſicke,
though they be more then halfe dead.
As in ſtead of Dirgies and Trentals,
they muſt haue funerall Sermons for
faſhion ſake. Thus the holy Miniſtery,
and moſt glorious name of God muſt
be abuſed and taken in vaine, by following
the vaine humour of arrogant
Folly, which neuer cared for Miniſters,
or Sermons (as al ought to haue
done) in time of health. I graunt that
ſome Profeſſors (for all this Plague,
whereby humours (I trow) ſhould be
mortified) haue a mind, that funerall
Sermons attend their credit. So ſtrōg
a temptation is the Pride of life incouraged
by Cuſtome. But to come to the

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
point: this place of Iames doth not
proue, yt it is the proper dutie of a Miniſter
to viſite the ſicke. For the Elders
were ſent for to heale the ſicke by prayer
and oyle, according to that miraculous
grace which was then beſtowed
vpon them,Mar. 6. 13. for confirmation of the
Word: ſo that I am of your mind, that
teaching Elders be here vnderſtood.
Which gift diſcontinuing, this Canon
is annulled: ſo that in time of Peſtilence,
it is abſurdly concluded: that becauſe
Iames inioyned Miniſters to go
to heale the ſicke, therefore Miniſters
muſt vpon euery call aduenture their
liues, by viſiting the ſick of the plague.
Againe, if it be the proper dutie of Miniſters
to viſite the ſicke, as it was the
proper gift of Elders, for confirmation
of the word, to heale with oyle, then
none muſt viſite the ſicke but Miniſters,Heb. 5. 4. 2. Chor. 26. 16. 17. 18. 19.
as none muſt miniſter the Sacraments
(which properly belong to their
function) but they. Laſtly, this word,
Elders in the plurall number, putteth
me in mind, that Miniſters were in
the primitiue Church, aſſiſted with

other Elders,1. Tim. 5. 17. Act. 6. 2. 3. Rom. 12. 7. 8. (for there were two ſorts
of Elders) who looked to the manners
of people, and with Deacons who looked
to the poore, that they themſelues
might attend their ſtudie, prayer, preaching,
and the Sacraments. Why
then ſhould we thinke, that viſiting
the ſicke, was laid vpon them as a dutie
properly pertaining to their miniſterie?
But rather that Elders by ſpirituall
comfort, and Deacons by outward
reliefe viſited the ſicke as there
was néed: ſo that the Miniſter was
not troubled but in extraordinarie neceſſitie.
As when none but he could ſatisfie
the deſpairefull conſcience, or
mind doubtfull in a fundamentall errour,
of one likely (otherwiſe) to die
out of the faith. In which caſe, I thinke
a Miniſter ought to hazard his life. My
reaſon is: It is the reueiled will of God
that he muſt ſaue a loſt ſhéepe:Ezec. 34. 2. 4. but it is
Gods ſecret, whether he ſhall be infected.
And the rather becauſe of the promiſe
made to him that walketh in his
way.Pſal. 91. 10. 11. The premiſes conſidered touching
ordinarie viſitation, thus I conclude,

that as Miniſters are exemplarily
(but not as Miniſters) to releeue
the poore, according to their abilitie,
and where they haue ſome ſpeciall calling:
ſo they are exemplarily (but not
as Miniſters) to viſite the ſicke, according
to their leyſure, and where they
haue ſome ſpeciall calling.
            
            
               Profeſſ.
               I know not whether I ſhould
be glad or ſad, for drawing from you
ſo probable, and (it may be) a profitable
diſcourſe: but I will ſuſpend my iudgement,
ſith you ſubmit your opinion
to the cenſure of the Church, and
proceede (with your fauour) to require
the iuſtifying of that vncharitable
doctrine (ſo ſeeming) againſt viſiting
the ſicke of the Plague, and ſo contrarie
to Chriſt his iudgement, as hath
bene ſhewed.Pag. 17.
               
            
            
               Preach.
               But haue you ſhewed
that the plague is expreſſed? And haue
you neuer heard, that there be few
rules ſo generall, but they admit ſome
exception? By the ſame iudgement priſoners
are to be viſited, and yet none
were bound in conſcience to go into the

dungeon there perſonally to viſit Ieremy,
                  Ier. 38. 6.
though he were the Lords prophet.
Againe, you vtterly miſtake the point:
for the queſtion is not whether the ſick
of the Plague are to be viſited; which
God forbid that any Preacher ſhould
gaineſay: but whether they are to be ſo
viſited and with ſuch reſort, as other
ſicke of diſeaſes not contagious. Laſtly,
in the place ſo much vrged, Chriſt doth
not neceſſarily require perſonall viſitation
(though that alſo be comfortable in
caſes conuenient, and ſo required accordingly)
but real, that is, by reléefe, either
brought,Mat. 25. 44. ſent or procured: for in the 44.
verſe of that chapter you may find, Miniſtring
to Chriſt vſed, for all other
workes of Charitie before ſpecified.
Whereby it is manifeſt, that Chriſt requireth
not ſo much perſonall viſiting,
as charitable miniſtring to the neceſſitie
of the ſick. Of all other, Princes and
Magiſtrates (who are foſter-fathers
and ſhepheards) are to viſite the ſicke.
But who will ſay they are to do it in
perſon, and not rather by a faithfull
care, that the ſicke of the Plague be wel

prouided for.
            
            
               Profeſſ.
               But how can the ſicke be wel
prouided for, if none do perſonally attend
them? and if none be bound in conſcience
perſonally to viſite, how ſhall they be attended?
            
            
               Preach.
               All this is true. But huſbands
and wiues, parents and childrē,
maſters and ſeruants, neare neighbors
and deare friends, are mutually to attend
each other: if otherwiſe conuenient
attendance cannot be procured.
            
            
               Profeſſ.
               Why do you adde this condition?
            
            
               Preach.
               Becauſe life is precious:2. Kin. 1. 14. Deuter. 22. 6, 7, 8. ſo
that we muſt not deſtroy the dam with
the yong: and therfore ſéeing the plague
ſwéepeth where it findeth many together,
life ought to be preſerued with as
much care as may be, by ſeparating the
ſound from the infected, except there be
neceſſary cauſe of the ſound, or ſome of
their attendance or repaire. Moreouer,
it may be that the ſound, or ſome of thē,
be profitable members in the Church,
or common wealth: now the more hope
there is of good by them, the more care

there ought to be of their preſeruation;
according to the peoples care for the
ſafetie of Dauid, before ſpoken of.
            
            
               Profeſſ.
               In my conſcience this ſeemes
to be very true: but I pray you tel me what
you think of them who ſend their ſeruants
vnto the Peſt-houſe.
            
            
               Preach.
               Right wel: eſpecially if they
want conuenient roome & other means
at home: for I vnderſtand of the Cities
right honorable and chriſtian prouiſiō
for that houſe: I know diuers there wel
vſed, and thence well returned: and it is
extant in print, that when there were
buried in and about London 3385. in
one wéek, yet of all peſtred in that houſe
there were buried but ſix. And therfore
I condemne thoſe that raiſed a ſlander
vpon that houſe, holding them as deſpiſers
of gouernment,Iud. 8. and wicked ill
ſpeakers of them that are in authoritie.
            
            
               Prof.
               If you conuerſed amongſt people
as I do, and muſt do, I know your ſpirit
would be griued to ſee how ready
they be to lay hold on euery light occaſion
and falſe report, to ſpeake their wicked
pleaſure of Gouernors. O that they

would conſider the example you lately in
a Sermon vrged of a plague kindled amongſt
the Iſraelites,Numb. 16. 41. 46. for charging Moſes
and Aaron with killing Corah and his rebellious
complices. Well, God amend vs
all, and giue vs grace to humble our ſelues
vnder this his heauie hand, that we may
be raiſed again and comforted,Pſal. 90. 15. according
to the dayes he hath afflicted vs. Now I
ſpeake of cōfort (that we may go on with
the main matter) I wold know (if it might
be without offence) whether you would
haue thoſe pittifull creatures that are tormēted
with the plague, to want the comfort,
which they may take by the very preſence
of their good neighbors & friends,
much more by their comfortable words?
            
            
               Preach.
               O neighbour! I wiſh them
all true comfort of body and mind, the
Lord knoweth, and I graunt that the
very preſence of thoſe we loue, is very
comfortable in time of ſickneſſe: but yet
I aduiſe all viſited with that deadly
and contagious diſeaſe, to manifeſt
their mortification from vnneceſſarie
deſires, & their charitable loue to their
friends, by not deſiring them to come

into far greater daunger than their preſence
can do good, without neceſſarie
cauſe.2. Sam. 23. 15, 16, 17. And let them remember how
Dauid refuſed that water which was
gotten with ieopardie of life, and called
it bloud, though he had longed for it,
& the daunger was paſt. As for comfortable
words, I likewiſe acknowledge
their ſpeciall vſe: but before I anſwer
that point, let vs conſider how needfull
it is (eſpecially in time of mortality) to
hide in their hearts the word of life, leſt
wée be iuſtly puniſhed with want of
comfortable words, when we moſt
need them: according to that of Amos,
                  Amos. 8. 5. 11, 12.
where a famin of the word is threatned
to deſpiſers of the Sabboth, and that at
ſuch a time, when to find the word, they
would run from the Eaſt to the Weſt.
Now to the point. Sith all ſickneſſe (eſpecially
the plague, vntill the worſt be
paſt, when cōfortable words are not vſually
in great requeſt) maketh vs vnfit
for long & learned diſcourſes, & therfore
ſhort ſentēces may (through Gods bleſſing)
do much good: whereby attendants
& friēds, repairing for neceſſary cauſes,

may ſufficiently comfort the afflicted,
according to that which is required by
the Apoſtle, in Theſſ. 4. 18. except there
be extraordinary néede of reſolution or
conſolation, whereof I haue ſpoken before.Ioh. 14. 26.
Again, the Spirit of God is called
a Comforter, becauſe he bringeth the
words of Chriſt vnto remembrance:
and that eſpecially in time of néed, as
when we iuſtifie wiſedome before authoritie,Luk. 12. 12.
ſo when we are ſick. For when
the outward man periſheth,2. Cor. 4. 16 the inward
man is renewed: ſo that we often heare,
not onely men but euen children alſo,
ſpeake diuinely and admirably in their
ſickneſſe. We may the rather make account
of this holy aſſiſtance, if we follow
Chriſt his counſel in laying vp his
words in our hearts,Luk. 21. 14. & 11. 13. and praying for
the holy Ghoſt. All the premiſes conſtdered,
I hope that you are now of my
mind, touching the reſtraint, as of the
infected from the ſound, ſo of the ſound
from the infected.
            
            
               Profeſſ.
               Indeede I confeſſe that your
probable diſcourſes haue won (I know
not how) a certaine inclination to your

opinion, but yet I muſt ſuſpend my reſolution,
till you haue anſwered certain obiections
againſt the maine grounds of
your opinion: but before I come to them,
let me haue but one word with you about
buriall. I ſay but one word: for if thoſe
that are infected in perſon or garment,
are to keep from Church for a time conuenient:
and if friends are to forbeare reſorting
to friends ſicke of the Plague, except
they haue neceſſary cauſe, then I may
(of my felfe) conclude, that we are not to
throng after infected corpſes (which haue
no good thereby) without ſome reaſonable
cauſe. That one word (I ſpake of) is
this, I would gladly know (if I may obtaine
that fauour) your iudgement, concerning
the direction of authoritie, that
but ſixe perſons, beſides the Miniſter,
Clerke and bearers, ſhould accompany
infected corpſes.
            
            
               Preach.
               I dare not preſume to iudge
of the determinations of authoritie
without ſufficiēt reaſon, which I want
in this caſe: but rather I am perſwaded
(according to that I am commaunded
by theſe words, Honor thy father and mother)
                  Ex. 20. 12.
                  
to indge the beſt, and take it as an
argument, that authoritie careth more
for the liuing then for the dead, their
pompe ſo dangerous in theſe times and
not neceſſary, as wiſe men thinke. But
mine own opinion is this I could wiſh
ye friends of the diſeaſed would reſpect
the preſeruation of life more than complements
of buriall. But I vtterly miſlike
that infected perſons ſhould thruſt
into the throng, and it grieueth me to
heare how the poorer ſort, yea women
with yong children, will flocke to burials,
and (which is worſe) ſtand (of purpoſe)
ouer open graues, where ſundry
are buried together, that (forſooth) all
the world may ſee that they feare not
the Plague. This peruerſe courſe of too
too many, in doing that which authority
forbiddeth, and deſpiſing that which
authoritie commandeth, to wit, faſting
and praier, occaſioneth me to obſerue a
notable proportion betwéene ye plague
& the wickednes of this time: by which
proportion, God ſéemeth to teach men
to ſay in their hearts, we would not be
ruled, neither by reaſon nor authority,

therefore are ſo many, as it were diſtracted
in their ſickneſſe, and by no
meanes to be ruled: ſo that ſome leape
out of the windowes, and ſome runne
into ye Thames. As the rough ſpéeches
of Ioſeph cauſed his brethren to ſay:Gen. 42. 7. 21. 
                  As
we would not heare Ioſeph, ſo this man
will not heare vs. I rather obſerue this
proportion betwéene the vnrulineſſe of
our ſinne, and the vnrulineſſe of this
ſickneſſe, becauſe I find in the Scriptures,
that the Plague was eſpecially
threatened againſt, and inflicted vpon
wilfull offendors. At your leyſure conſider
theſe places. Leuit. 26. 23, 24, 25.
Num. 14. 37. and 16. 41, 45, 46. 2. Sam.
24. 1, 2, 3, 4, 15. and you will perceiue
as much. But now let me heare one of
your obiections againſt the grounds of
mine opinion.
            
            
               Prof.
               The ground whereon you build
your opinion, of ſeparating the ſound
from the infected, is the law of Lepers.
Which (vnder your correction) ſeemeth
to be no rocke, but a ſand, becauſe that
law was meerely ceremoniall.
            
            
               Prea.
               Nay Sir, my ground is the

mortall contagion of the Peſtilence,
which we call the Plague. Indeed I receiue
confirmation from the law of Lepers.
For thus I reaſon: If ſuch care
is to be had of infection which is not
mortall, much more of ye Plagues infection
which is mortall. And this argument
holdeth good, your obiection notwithſtanding.
For the lawes of ſeparating
women in time of their flowers,Leuit. 15. 24. & 17. 18 15.
and not eating ſtrangled beaſts, were
ceremoniall: but yet huſbands are
now to forbeare the act of matrimonie
in that time, and all are to take héede
how they eate of ſtrangled fleſh, and
both are to be héeded in naturall conſideration
of bodily hurt, which is ſtill
to be feared, in ſuch copulation and eating.
So Leproſie is ſtill infectiue, as
experience ſheweth: if now, why not
then, notwithſtanding the lawe of Lepers
was ceremoniall? And the rather
becauſe in Sacraments and ceremonies,
there muſt be a reſemblauce betwéene
the ſigne and the thing ſignified:
ſo that, as we obiect againſt Tranſſubſtantiation,
and ſay: If the ſubſtance

of bread and wine be taken away
by conſecration, how can there be
bodily nouriſhment? if no nouriſhment,
how can our ſpirituall féeding be
reſembled? So I ſay to you, If in the
Leproſie there were no infection, how
could the contagion of ſinne be ſignified?
            
            
               Prof.
               I graunt that in Leproſie there
was ſomewhat to ſignifie a ſinne to be
ſhunned. But that was Pollution, not Infection.
For vpon occaſion of this queſtion,Leuit. 14. & 15.
I haue read both the Chapters cō
                  cerning
Leproſie, and find them ſtill
mention Vncleaneneſſe, and neuer Infection.
Againe, if the Leproſie were infectiue,
how chaunced it that the Prieſtes,
who ſo often viewed the Lepers, were
neuer infected?
            
            
               Preach.
               Do not you conſider, that
though all vncleaneneſſe be not infectiue,
yet all infection is vncleane, and
therefore you might haue vnderſtood
Infection as well as any other Pollution,
by the word Vncleaneneſſe. And
though you find not the very word Infection,
yet you may find enough to

make it euident, that the Leproſie is
infectiue.Leuit. 13. 8 51. For it was not to be pronounced
Leproſie, except it were found
ſpreading and fretting as a Canker,2. Tim. 2. 16. 17. or
Gangrene in a mans bodie. And why
was the Leper to couer his lips, and to
to cry,Leu. 13. 45. 
                  I am vncleane, I am vncleane, but
to giue warning, that none ſhold come
within the infection of his breath? As
for the Prieſtes eſcape, that is to be attributed
to the prouidence of God, who
ſet him on worke.Ier. 1. 18, 19 Act. 18 9, 10. As he promiſed to
preſerue Ieremy and Paule for that
cauſe.
            
            
               Prof.
               If my memorie faile me not, I
haue heard you ſay, that the ceaſſing of
Man,Ioſ. 5. 11. 12 preſently after the children of Iſrael
had eaten of the corne of the land of
promiſe, teacheth vs not to depend vpon
extraordinarie meanes (viz. Miracles and
ſuch like) when we may enioy ordinarie.
So I thinke it may be ſaid, we are not to
ſuppoſe the extraordinarie prouidence
of God, in preſeruing Prieſts viewing
the Lepers, where we may find an ordinarie,
to wit, their not touching of Lepers,
whereby they might be defiled.
            
            
               
               Preach.
               How find you that to be the
cauſe? Sith you find not in both your
Chapters Touching ſpoken of.Leu. 15. 5: 7, 19, 21. Whereas
in the next Chapter you find Pollution
communicated by touching and
not otherwiſe in the vncleanneſſe of a
man by fluxe of ſéed, and of a woman
by iſſue of flowers. Nay in this caſe of
of Leproſie,Verſ. 14. 37 46. a man is become vncleane,
by going into an houſe ſhut vp for Leproſie
in the wals, which he néed not
to touch, as hath bene ſaid.Pag. 14. So that if
you conſider your two Chapters well,
it may rather appeare to you, that as
the infection of the Plague, ſo of the
Leproſie was communicated by the
ayre, and not onely by touching. But
ſuppoſe that Pollution not Infection,
were the cauſe that cleane men ſhould
ſhunne vncleane Lepers, leſt they
ſhould be defiled, not infected; yet this
makes for my purpoſe. For if. Pollution
be to be ſhunned, much more Infection,
and that deadly.
            
            
               Profeſſ.
               I ſee I muſt either depart not
fully ſatisfied, or come to a point which
I haue hitherto auoyded, becauſe I wold

not offend you, whom I haue heard ſo
carneſt againſt it, ſo as you haue pronounced
it to be a bloudie errour, to wit,
It is ſtiffely maintained by no ſmall number
of people, that the Plague is not contagious.
            
            
               Preach.
               I graunt that mo than a
good many do more ſtiffely than wiſely
maintaine that bloudie error, ſo I will
call it againe and againe. For moſt of
that many do wilfully maintaine that
opinion, becauſe they cannot abide to
be Gods priſoners. It is a death to be
out of companie, and they had rather
indanger a thouſand liues, than want
any part of their pleaſure or profite. As
may appeare by the diſcoured courſe
of many, who hold the Plague to be
infectiue, while they and theirs be wel:
but when they or theirs be infected; thē
(forſooth) the Plague is not infectiue.
So their reaſon followeth and is framed
to their will, and not their will
followeth reaſon to be ruled thereby.
But me thinkes euery reaſonable man
ſhould ſay to his owne ſoule: O let me
be ſure mine opinion touching the ininfection

of the Plague (whether negatiue
or affirmatiue) be vndoubtedly
true, leſt by maintaining an error, in a
caſe and time of ſo great mortalitie and
vnſpeakeable miſeries, I do infinite
hurt. For if it be true that the Plague
is contagious, then of neceſſitie, he
that maintaineth the contrarie, is guiltie
of the bloud of ſo many, as are incouraged
by his opinion to runne into
daunger. On the other ſide, if the
Plague be not contagious, then he
that maintaineth the contrarie, is guiltie
of all the wants and miſeries of ſo
many as want conuenient reliefe, not
miniſtred for feare of contagion, apprehended
by the maintenance of his opinion.
But neighbour, I wonder that
any ſhould deny the Plague to be contagious
againſt ſo generall and wofull
experience. Do not the botches, blains
and ſpots (called Gods tokens) accompanied
with rauing and death, argue
a ſtraunger infection, then that of the
Leproſie, to be iudged by botches and
ſpots? Doth not the ordinarie experience
of laying liue Pigeons to plague

ſores, and taking them preſently dead
away, and that one after another, demonſtrate
mortall infection? In that
the Plague rageth and raigneth eſpecially
amongſt the younger ſort, and
ſuch as do not greatly regard cleane
and ſwéete kéeping, and where many
are peſtred together in alleyes or houſes:
is not this an argument of infection?
Thouſandes can directly tell,
where, when, and of whom they tooke
the Plague. Doth not all this make it
more then manifeſt, that the Plague
is contagious? All Magiſtrates, all
Diuines, all Phiſitians, all learned
men, and all wiſe men, in all ages,
haue held the Plague to be contagious.
Dare any but blind bayard, be ſo impudent
to deny it, without ſuch reaſons,
as may ſway againſt ſo great experience,
and ſo great authoritie? If
you haue any ſuch, I pray you let me
heare them.
            
            
               Profeſſ.
               That I haue any ſuch I cannot
ſay, in regard of the weaknes of myiudgment,
as alſo of the probabilitie (at leaſt)
of that I haue heard already ſpoken to the

contrary: but ſuch as they be (if it pleaſe
you) I will bring them out, humbly deſiring
your anſwers. The firſt, is thus vrged
with open mouth: This opinion of infection
doeth vtterly ouerthrow charitie towards
the viſited by the plague, being the
cauſe, why they by whoſe meanes the ſick
and ſound are eſpecially to be prouided
for, do runne away, viz. Magiſtrates, Miniſters,
(ſuch I meane as indeed were neuer
faithfull, for (bleſſed be God) many
faithful remaine) Phiſitians and rich men:
and why ſo many be thruſt out of doores,
periſh in town and field for want of help,
and are ſo cruelly vſed by country people:
ſo that it is a very countermaund to Chriſt
his iudgement concerning viſitation of
the ſicke.Pag. 24, 25, 26. 27. Pag. 7, 8, & 34. But by that which hath bin ſaid,
and by gathering from the laſt point we
talked of, that the preciſe commaundement
touching Lepers to be ſeparated
from Church and companie, was no hinderance
to their viſitation, but that they
were to be miniſtred vnto, according to
their need: I am for my part induced to
lay the blame of all this vncharitable dealing
vpon the exceſſiue feare of people,

occaſioned perhaps, but not well grounded
vpon the opinion of the Plagues infection:
for though the Plague be to be
feared, becauſe of the infection, yet (as I
take it) not ſo exceſſiuely and inordinatly.
For of ſuch feare, the cauſe is want of
faith, rather then the opinion of infection;
as I may partly gather from that which
you deliuered before:Pag. 16. I will therefore propound
an argument (ſo deemed) which
we haue not yet handled.
            
            
               Preach.
               Stay here a while, for I can
not but thanke God that you iudge ſo
rightly betwéene mine opinion, and
others feare of infection. If Profeſſors
would wiſely obſerue what is taught,
there would not be ſo many ſpiders to
ſuck ranke poiſon out of ſound doctrine.
Then might we hold the plague in the
nature thereof to be contagious, and
men would not take occaſion before it
be giuen, of exceſſiue and inordinate
feare: then might we inuey againſt exceſſiue
and inordinate feare, and men
would not take occaſion before it be giuen,
of inordinate and dangerous preſumption:
but fooliſh men (as wiſe men

obſerue) are euer running into extremities.Rom. 3. 28.
If Paul teach, that we are iuſtified
by faith, without the works of the law;
the carnal goſpeller taketh occaſion before
it be giuen, to neglect good workes.
And if Iames teach,Iam 2. 26. that faith without
workes is dead, the arrogant Papiſt
taketh occaſion before it be giuen, to aduance
good workes to merite and ſupererogation.
Mine heart bléedeth to heare
of the crueltie and inhumanitie you
mentioned: ſo that if I were in the cuntrey,
I would (by Gods grace) ſet my
ſelfe againſt thoſe damnable effects of
inordinate feare, and make it euident
that the Plague is not ſo contagious
as exceſſiue feare makes it to be. But
now I follow this courſe (which God
bleſſe) becauſe I liue where the contrarie
ſinne of Preſumption is more generall,
and more dangerous; both becauſe
of that bloudy errour, as alſo of the abſence
of Magiſtrates, who ſhould ſée
good orders put in execution: through
which default it is come to paſſe, that
men, women and children with running
ſores, go commonly abroade, and

thruſt themſelues into company, ſo that
ſome haue perceiued when they tooke
the infection of ſuch. How many may
be ſuppoſed to haue taken the infection
from ſuch, though they perceiued it not?
I would be loth to make Magiſtrates
neglecting their charge, guiltie of all
this bloud: but (if I were in place) I
would humbly and earneſtly intreate
them, ſeriouſly to conſider the nine firſt
verſes of the 21. of Deuteronomy, where
they may learne, how fearefull they (of
all other) ſhould be of bloud-guiltines.
But leauing them to Gods direction, I
pray you propound your argument ſo
déemed.
            
            
               Profeſſ.
               That I will, and (as neare as I
can) in ſuch ſort as it is inforced. If the
Plague be contagious, why is not one infected
as well as another? I haue lyen in
bed with many that haue had the plagueſores
running on them, I haue bene ſtill
about them, when they ſwet, their ſores
brake, and breath went out of their bodies,
and yet I (and a great number beſides
me, who haue done as much) had neuer
the plague yet, and truſt neuerſhal, ſo long

as I haue a ſtrong faith in God: for is it
not written,Pal. 91. 5, 6, 7, 9. 
                  Thou ſhalt not be afraid of the
pestilence, for thouſands ſhal fal beſides thee,
yet it ſhall not come neare thee; for thou haſt
ſaid, The Lord is my hope.
               
            
            
               Preacher.
               This aduenturous argument
ſtandeth vpō two points, viz. firſt
the eſcaping of ſome, and ſecondly their
ſtrong faith. Concerning the former, I
anſwer, (in the name of the opponent)
Is thine eye euill becauſe God is good?
                  Mat. 20. 15. Wilt
thou by thy bloody errour poiſon other,
becauſe God hath glorified his ſpeciall
prouidence ouer thée? Is this thy thankfulneſſe
for ſo great deliuerance, to obſcure
Gods prouidence by attributing
thine eſcape to this, that the plague is
not infectiue? Conſider better the very
text alleaged for thy ſtrong faith, and
you may (if you will) ſée clearely, that
God doth hereby ſet forth his prouidence,
in that he preſerueth thoſe that
truſt in him, and walke in his wayes,
by Angels, and then, when by the peſtilence,
thouſands fall about them: for
the greater the daunger is, the greater
is Gods prouidence in deliuering his

people: as may further appeare by their
walking vpon Lions,Pſa 91. 13. 14 Aſpes and Dragons,
mentioned in the ſame Pſalme.
Therefore take héede how you obſcure
the prouidence of God, and draw many
into daunger by denying the plague to
be contagious; leſt as he that feared
not the day of the Lord,Amos 5. 18. 19. met with a
Beare when he had eſcaped a Lion: ſo
you méete with a iudgement heauier to
you, though you ſtill eſcape the plague.
But neighbour, I will turne my ſpéech
to you, praying you to conſider this
Pſalme wel, and you ſhall ſée me proue
from the ſame the Plague to be contagious.
For if an extraordinary prouidence
of God be manifeſted in preſeruing
thoſe that beléeue from peſtilence,
then is the peſtilence very dangerous:
as be the Lion, Aſpe and Dragon, but
the former is true, therefore the latter.
If then the peſtilence be dangerous to
one that is in the middeſt of thouſands
dying thereof, it muſt néedes be ſo by
contagion: as may further appeare, in
that it is called noiſome; and in that it
is ſaid,Pſal. 91. 3, 7 
                  it ſhall not come neare thee. But let

vs trie the ſtrength of the former part
of that huge argument, layed downe in
this forme. Many haue bene with the
ſicke of the plague, when they ſwet, &c.
& yet are not infected, therefore it is not
contagious. Certaine Prieſts ſaid to
a Philoſopher, All theſe monuments
which you ſée in this Temple, be in remembrance
of ſo many deliuered from
ſhipwracke, by prayer to the God of
this Temple. But (quoth the Philoſopher)
can you ſhew me how many
prayed, and yet periſhed? As the Philoſophers
anſwer was ſtronger againſt
their God. then the Prieſts obſeruation
was for their God: ſo it maketh much
more to proue the plague to be contagious,
to ſay: an hundred (if not a thouſand)
infected by being where the
plague is, may be brought for one that
eſcaped. Againe, if that argument be
good, then theſe be as good: Many haue
had the plague ſores and were ſick, and
yet died not; therefore the plague is not
in it owne nature mortall. Many run
vpon the mouth of a canon, and eſcape,
therfore canon ſhot is not murthering.
            
            
               
               Profeſſ.
               We ſee the canon ſhot to kil,
but we ſee not the Plague to infect.
            
            
               Preach.
               By common experience it is
obſerued, that ſouring of drinke, and
other effects follow thunder, wherunto
they are attributed: and children take
the ſmall pockes comming where they
be: though it be not ſéene how thunder
and being where ſmall pocks are, cauſe
ſuch effects. Why then ſhould we not
feare aſwell the peſtilence that walketh
in darknes, as the plague that deſtroyeth
at noone day: ſith by common experience
it is obſerued, that thouſands
fall ſicke of the plague preſently vpon
their being where it is, though it be not
ſéene how ye infectiō is conueyed. Truly
the commō people herein do litle differ
from brute beaſts: in that (for the moſt
part) they are moued by ſenſe, and not
by reaſon.
            
            
               Prof.
               I feare it is ſo in too many: for going
amongſt thē, I hardly perceiue one of
ten once looke for help, though they haue
a riſing of the plague in ſome part of their
body vntil they be heart ſick, & then often
they ſeeke for help too late. Whereas if in

reaſō they wold cōſider, that as the plague
may be ſome good time in the garmēt, before
it infect the outward parts, ſo it may
be in the fleſh a good while, before it
ſtrike the very heart, no doubt they wold
betime preuent the worſt. Through
which default I am perſwaded hundreds
do periſh daily: but commending ſuch to
Gods gracious prouidence. I pray you
tell me what cauſes are giuen by the learned,
why ſo many eſcape, though they
be continually in ſo great daunger of the
Plague,Pag. 44. as hath bene ſaid.
            
            
               Preach.
               There be cauſes both naturall
and diuine. For naturall cauſes
I referre you to learned Phiſitians.
Onely I will ſhew you ſomewhat,
which euery reaſonable man (as I
thinke) may conceiue. Before any qualitie,
good or bad, can qualifie any ſubiect,
the ſubiect muſt be firſt diſpoſed
thereunto, or capable thereof. The Salamander
liueth in the fire, though the
flie, playing with the flame of a candle
is conſumed therewith. Gun powder
takes fire preſently, but ſo doth not
chalke. So perſons of a tender conſtitution,

or corrupt humours ſooner take
the Plague, then thoſe that be of a
ſtrong conſtitution, & ſound bodies, as
hath bene ſaid:Pag. 15. & ſome infected are much
fuller of poiſonfull corruption then other.
The infirmities of many women
in trauell, and other diſeaſes turne vnto
the Plague. We ſée few auncient
people die in compariſon of children,
and the younger ſort. Laſtly of thoſe
that kéepe a good diet, haue cleane and
ſwéet kéeping, liue in a good aire, vſe
reaſonable and ſeaſonable preſeruatiues,
and be not peſtred many in one
houſe, or haue conuenient houſe-roome
for their houſhold, we ſee few infected
in compariſon of thoſe, that faile in all
theſe good meanes of preſeruation, and
yet will thruſt themſelues into danger.
This well conſidered, may not an argument
be drawn from hence, to proue
(euen by reaſon) that the Plague is not
ſo infectiue as faithleſſe people conceiue,
and therefore they need not feare
the Plague ſo extreamely as they do?
But I will procéed to the diuine cauſes
or reaſons. The chiefe whereof is this:

God worketh al things after the counſell
of his owne will,Eph. 1. 11. Rom. 9. 13 15. and therefore he
hath mercie on whome he will haue
mercie,Icr. 15. 2. Ioh. 7. 30. and none ſhall die but they who
are appointed. For though the Phariſies
ſought to lay hands on Chriſt, yet
they could not, before the appointed
time came: and therefore be ye Plague
neuer ſo contagious in it owne nature,
none can be ſmitten with it, but thoſe,
whom God hath ſpecially appointed.
            
            
               Profeſſ.
               Here I remember an opinion
of ſome people (with whom I conuerſe)
whereby they ſeeme to thēſelues,
to reconcile the difference, touching the
Plagues infection; and that is this. Let
one (ſay they) go neuer ſo daungerouſly
where the Plague is, he cannot die before
his time, and yet indeed he may take
the ſickneſſe. What thinke you of this
opinion?
            
            
               Preach.
               What thinke I of it? as I
do of other opinions which brain-ſicke
men (deſpiſing the word of God, and
miniſterie thereof) do forge in their
owne phantaſticall braine-pans. How
wittie ſoeuer it ſéeme to them, I tel you

it ſauoureth ſtrongly of Epicuriſme.
For doth God diſpoſe of capitall and
principall, and not of leſſe matters, as
Epicures dreame? Shall we ſay:Pſal. 68. 20. The
iſſues of death belong to the Lord, and
ſhall we doubt with the Philiſtims,1. Sam. 6. 9.
whether ſickneſſe be by chaunce? If
they knew the Scriptures they might
learne,Luc. 12. 6. Mat. 10. 29 that God forgetteth not ſparrowes,
but ſo regardeth them, that
without him, not one of them falleth
to the ground. Doubtleſſe Gods prouidence
is the ſame, though not alike
manifeſt, in litle and great matters.
            
            
               Profeſſ.
               The more I conferre with
you, the more I perceiue (I thank God
for it) the preſumptuous wit of fooliſh
men, and herein I ſee euidently, that they
meaſure the infinite prouidence of God,
by the ſhallowneſſe of their owne capacitie.
The Lord graunt vs grace to vnderſtand
according to ſobrietie.Rom. 12, 3. I haue another
argument againſt the opinion of infection
from the prouidence of God, but
I would firſt heare ſome mo cauſes or
reaſons, why ſo many eſcape ſo great
danger of infection.
            
            
               
               Preach.
               Neighbour you ſtill harpe
vpon, ſo many, ſo many. I tell you they
be few or nonein compariſon of them,
who daily are infected by being within
daunger of the Plague. As for your deſire
to heare mo cauſes, I am content
to ſatiſfie the ſame. But I muſt firſt tel
you, that he is happy who can know
the cauſes of things, to the end you
may content your ſelfe with thoſe few
I can preſently gather out of the word.
God preſerueth ſome to manifeſt his
power and prouidence. As may appeare
by the 91.Pag. 45 46 Pſalme before diſcuſſed:
and by Eſa. 1. 9 (2) God will take
none hence before they haue done him
all that ſeruice, which in his counſell
was appointed, as appeareth by theſe
places, Luk. 13. 31, 32, 33, and Act. 13.
36. (3) God reſerueth ſome for an heauier
iudgement, as may appeare by
theſe places: 1. King. 19. 17. 2. King. 8.
10, 15. Amos 5. 16, 17. And 4, towards
ſome he perfourmeth his promiſe in
preſeruing them, in their wayes: that
is, wayes whereinto God calleth thē:
according to the 91. Pſalme, verſ. 11.

For which cauſe Prieſts, though taking
often view of Leproſie, were preſerued,Pag. 36.
as I ſhewed before, and kéepers,
buriers, and ſuch as haue neceſſarie
cauſe of comming to the infected of
the Plague, are (for the moſt part) now
preſerued So that Peter may boldly go
on the water when Chriſt biddeth him
come. As you may reade, Mat. 14. 28, 29.
            
            
               Profeſſ.
               I thank you heartily for yeelding
me this ſatisfaction. For amongſt
all your good notes I take hold of the ſecond
with ſome comfort, and thereon
ground this concluſion: If I ſhall not die,
before I haue done God all the ſeruice I
am appointed: why ſhold I be vnwilling
to die, when my time is come, and not
rather be prepared to ſay, yea ſing with
good old Simeon:
                  Luk. 2, 29. 
                  Lord now letteſt thou thy
ſeruant depart in peace. But I miſſe one
principall cauſe of preſeruation from the
Plague: to wit, A ſtrong faith according
to the 91. Pſalme.
            
            
               Preach.
               I thought verily you wold
not let go your hold on that part of the
mightie argument. But I aſſure you
there is no ſuch force in it, as it ſéemeth

to haue. Nay rather it ouerthroweth
the former part of that argument. For
in that Pſalme, the promiſe of preſeruation
is not made only, to our taking
hold of Gods promiſe, but alſo to our
walking in our wayes. Wherefore as
that faith which ſtandeth vpon the
precept (which is implyed) to walke in
our wayes, and forgetteth (as it were)
the promiſe of helpe, ſauoureth of diſtruſt
in God. So that faith which taketh
hold of the promiſe, neglecting the
precept, ſauoureth of preſumption, and
therefore hauing no promiſe (with cō
                  fortable
aſſurance) cannot hope for
preſeruation. Againe, though faith do
equally reſpect both the promiſe & the
precept, yet ſith all temporall bleſſings
are promiſed, not abſolutely but conditionally,
ſo farre as the performance
of them ſhall be to the glorie of God,
and good of the beléeuer, as I wil proue
if néed require, it cannot be otherwiſe
aſſured of preſeruation, then with reſpect
to thoſe conditions. If without
ſuch reſpect it be abſolutely aſſured, thē
it is not faith, but preſumption. Except

you will haue it to be a miraculous
faith, which taketh hold of the will of
God inſtantly and by inſpiration reueiled.
But that faith liueth and
dieth with miracles, becauſe (I ſay againe)
it hath no promiſe. For howſoeuer
ſaluation be abſolutely promiſed to
beléeuers, becauſe it is reuealed that
the performance of that promiſe is for
Gods moſt glory and the beléeuers beſt
good, and is therefore abſolutely to be
beléeued: yet becauſe it is not reuealed
at any time, that then the performance
of a temporall promiſe, is for Gods
moſt glory and the beléeuers beſt good:
therefore a temporall promiſe, is in the
nature thereof, conditional, and accordingly
to be beléued. Laſtly, do you not
perceiue that the ſtronger faith is required,Luke 22. 31, 32.
the greater danger is ſuppoſed.
But if the plague be not contagious,
what daunger is there? if no daunger,
what néed of faith?
            
            
               Profeſſ.
               There is no need you ſhould
proue your conditions: for they ſtand
with all reaſon,Pro. 16 4. ſith God hath made all
things for his owne ſake, and promiſeth

deliuerance for his glory ſake,Pal. 50. 15, & 34. 10. and his
promiſes pretend the good of his people.
But yet it will not out of my mind, but
that godly men who die in this plague, do
therefore die becauſe they faile in faith: I
meane not touching their ſaluation, but
touching the particular promiſe of preſeruation
from the plague. Therefore I
pray you for my better inſtruction, ſhew
me how by the death of godly men dying
of the plague, and beleeuing the promiſes
both of eternall ſaluation and temporall
preſeruation, God may haue glory and
the deceaſed benefit.
            
            
               Preach.
               I graunt that a right godly
man may faile, as in obedience to the
precept of kéeping his wayes, by preſumption:
ſo in faith to the promiſe of
preſeruation, by feare, eſpecially when
he heareth nothing but crying of wiues
and children, mourning of huſbands
and parents, ſorrowing of friends and
kinſfolke, and withall ſéeth the plague
wéekely to increaſe from tens to hundreds,
from hundreds to thouſands,
and to draw nearer and nearer to himſelfe,
and that God in viſiting him may

iuſtly take hold of this feare: for Peter
walked on the water for a while,Mat. 14. 29. 30. but
when he ſaw a mightie wind, he was
afraid and began to ſinke. But this poſition,
A godly man dying of the plague
failed in faith, touching promiſed preſeruation,
I hold to be as vnſound as
this: All godly men dying before their
dayes be long, failed in honouring their
father and mother. But I will ſhew
you in a word how the death of godly
men dying of the plague, and in the abſolute
faith of eternall ſaluation, and
conditionall faith of temporall preſeruation,
may be to Gods glorie and the
beléeuers good: for by the death of the
faithfull, God glorifieth his iuſtice and
wiſedome. His iuſtice amongſt the wicked,Luk. 23. 31.
in giuing them cauſe to ſay, If God
ſpare not the gréene trée, what will become
fo the drie? His wiſedom amongſt
the godly, leaſt they ſhould ſay, For our
righteouſneſſe we are deliuered.Deut. 9. 4. As for
the good of the beléeuer, I maruell that
you ſhould forget that which is ſo often
taught in funerall ſermons, that as the
wicked are reſerued for a further miſchiefe,

ſo the righteous is taken away
from the euill to come:Eſa. 57. 1. Rcu. 14. 13. Luk. 16. 25. beſides, that he
reſteth in glorie from mo and greater
labors, then the wicked are commonly
ſubiect vnto.
            
            
               Profeſſ.
               God helpe vs, for our owne
conceiued errours will hardly out of our
minds, but we eaſily forget that which
may reforme our iudgement. Well, acknowledging
that you haue fully anſwered
my firſt argument, I proceed to another,
grounded on the prouidence of
God, in this ſort. If God ſhoote his arrowes
at a certaine marke, and not at randon,
if none die before his hower: and
if thoſe that are appointed to die, ſhal dy,
and thoſe that are appointed to periſh by
ſword or famine, ſhall ſo periſh, and none
other,Pag. 51. as you proued euē now; otherwiſe I
had thoſe proofes ready for this purpoſe:
then if I go where the plague is a thouſand
times, I ſhall not die of the plague, if
God haue not appointed me to dy thereof:
and if he haue, I ſhall die thereof
though I come not neare it by a thouſand
miles.
            
            
               Preach.
               How now neighbour, ſtay

you there, ſhall we haue no concluſion?
All this is granted: but what infer you
hereupon touching our queſtion?
            
            
               Profeſſ.
               Truſt me ſir you poſe me now.
I haue ſhot the bolt which many deeme
to be a kill cow. But indeed I know not
to what purpoſe.
            
            
               Preach.
               Then may you ſée what kind
of reaſoners heady people be: euen ſuch
as are blamed by God for darkning the
counſell of God with words without
knowledge.Iob. 37. 2. But to vſe the words of
Paul,
                  1. Cor. 4. 19. if God will, I will know, not the
words of them that are puffed vp, but
the power. To bring this about, vnderſtand
that vpon that ground of Gods
prouidence, you muſt of neceſſity frame
one of theſe two arguments, if you will
reaſon to the purpoſe: None can die of
the plague but ſuch as are ſpecially appointed
thereunto, therefore the plague
is not contagious: or this: None can
die, &c. but ſuch &c. therfore we may as
boldly reſort to them that are ſicke of
the plague, as to thoſe that are ſicke of
any other diſeaſe. Which of theſe cōcluſions
do you like better? or do you like

both? or will you make ſome other that
may ſerue your turne better?
            
            
               Profeſſ.
               If neither of theſe will ſerue
the turne, I cannot imagine any other:
for my dull wit could not ſo diſtinctly
haue gathered theſe. I ſee that learning is
a good help to iudgemēt: for the very framing
of theſe in this ſeuerall ſort (which
I neuer heard before) maketh me ſtagger.
For the former concluſion ſeemeth now
to be abſurd: for (as I now conceiue) by
the ſame reaſon, the bloudy ſword in a furious
battell, and extreme famin amongſt
a multitude of miſerable poore people,
may be concluded to be in their owne nature
without daunger of death: for in the
ſame chapter of Ieremy (now ſo much vrged)
it is as well ſaid,Ier. 15. 2. 
                  Such as are for the
ſword to the ſword, and ſuch as are for the
famine to the famine, as Such as are appointed
to death vnto death. As for the ſecond
concluſion, if the plague be contagious, I
ſee not how it holdeth good. But yet I
pray you to ſay ſomewhat to it, that I may
the better ſatisfie my ſelfe and other, as
occaſion ſhall ſerue.
            
            
               Preach.
               Certaine Anabaptiſtes of

                  Amſterdam, croſſing the ſeas vſually
without any weapons, were demanded
why they did ſo, conſidering the Dunkirkers
were then abroade? They anſwered,
If God haue determined that
we ſhall fall into their hands, we ſhall
not eſcape though we had all the guns
and weapons in the world: if God haue
determined otherwiſe, we ſhall eſcape
though we haue no weapons, nor any
ſhew of defenſiue prouiſion. Another
being ſicke of the plague, and aduiſed to
take ſome phiſick, denieth ſo to do, vſing
the ſame argument. What thinke you
of theſe concluſions?
            
            
               Profeſſ.
               If the onely ſetting downe of
your former concluſions, did make me
ſtagger, the laying of theſe by them (and
that in ſo goodly proportion) muſt needs
make me ſtumble: for now I ſee not, but
that we may as wel hold it vnneceſſary to
eate and drinke, though it be for a yeare
together, if God haue determined that we
ſhall liue ſo long.
            
            
               Preach.
               There is great difference
in the caſes propounded by me, and
that propounded by you. For it is impoſſible

to liue a yeare without meate
and drinke, except God worke a miracle:
but the Anabaptiſts might
happely eſcape the Dunkirkers by not
méeting with them: & there may be in
a man, though in outward appearance
dangerouſly ſicke of the plague, yet
ſome ſecret power of nature to preuaile
againſt the diſeaſe.
            
            
               Profeſſ.
               All this may be; And yet becauſe
the Anabaptiſt, and ſicke man do
not know that God hath determined
ſuch a miſſe, and graunted ſuch a power,
they both preſume (in mine opinion) as
well as he, that refuſeth meat and drinke:
becauſe they neglect lawfull meanes, the
one of defence, the other of recouery.
            
            
               Preach.
               Now haue you hit vpon the
very point. For God, who is onely
wiſe, hath in his counſell determined
the meanes as well as the euent.
Which appeareth, as in the caſe of eternall
ſaluation, wherein we ſée, that
God calleth all them to faith, whom he
Rom 8. 29. 30. Act. 13. 48. Ioh. 6. 37. 44. Math. 13. 11. 15. Iude 4. predeſtinated to life: and cōtrariwiſe,
he leaueth them in their reprobate
minds, whom he hath ordained to condemnation:

ſo in caſes of temporall
deliuerances. For though God graunted
Hezekiah recouery,2. Kin. 20. 5. 7. yet he preſcribed
a plaiſter for his ſore. And though
Paule was aſſured by an Angell,Act. 27. 22. 23. 24. 31. that
not one in ſhip with him ſhould be
loſt: yet, if they had vſed any other
meanes of preſeruation, then God had
determined, they could not be ſafe. And
howſoeuer Chriſt could not die before
his houre (as hath bene ſayd) yet his
life was preſerued till that houre by
ſhunning danger.Deut. 2. 26. 30. On the other ſide:
as God had determined to giue Sihon &
his land vnto the Iſraelites, ſo he made
his heart obſtinate to refuſe peace, the
onely meane of his preſeruation.
            
            
               Profeſſ.
               I perceiue your meaning;
namely, from all theſe inſtances to conclude,
that as God hath determined to
infect any with the plague vnto death, or
otherwiſe, ſo hath he determined, by
what meanes they ſhould be infected: I
graunt all this. But do you thinke that
taking infection one from another is the
onely meane?
            
            
               Preach.
               No: For there muſt of neceſſity

be (a Firſt) that is infected, & we
ſée the godly aſwell as the wicked, and
not onely yong and poore folke, but ancient
and wealthy perſons: yea, ſuch
as dwell in a good aire, and auoid infection
with all care, to haue the plague
as well as other: for otherwiſe how
were it a calamity, or a iudgement?
And yet many of them (I doubt not)
are infected by being in company of
ſome other infected, in perſon, or garment,
though they do not perceiue it
many dayes after, for cauſes giuen
before.Pag. 49. But to anſwer your queſtion
more fully: I will tell you, what I
thinke further: To wit. As God himſelfe
bringeth ſome to their deſtruction,
by working vpon, and by the ſpirituall
corruption he findeth in their ſoules,
as Pharaoh and Sihon,
                  Exo. 4. 21. Deu. 1. 30. Gen. 3. 1. &c. 2. Chro. 10. 14. 15. but many moe
by outward meanes, as our firſt parents
and Rehoboam: ſo he himſelfe
infecteth ſome, by turning the naturall
or accidentall corruption he findeth in
their bodies into the plague, but (according
to his prouidence) he viſiteth
many moe, by the meane of taking infection

one from another. But howſoeuer
God ſtriketh whom he will unmodiatly,
yet the Plague being contagious
in it owne nature, it cannot be
denied, but that one man may be infected
by another, except Gods prouidence
be to the contrary? Now becauſe
that cannot be knowne, but by
the euent, therefore as the Anabaptiſt,
ſicke and hungry men preſume (in
your opinion) when they neglect the
meanes of their defence, recouery and
feeding: ſo he that doth not keepe himſelfe
from the daunger of infection, except
he haue a neceſſary calling, doth
by ſuch neglecting his owne ſafety, preſume
on Gods prouidence. For (to
confirme you in your opinion) it is
written:Deu. 29. 29 That ſecret things belong to
God, and reueiled things belong to vs.
So that I may conclude, that ſith the
prouidence of God touching life or
death is ſecret before the euent, and it
is reuealed, that the Plague is contagious:
therefore it followeth, that
howſoeuer it be true that none can die
of the Plague, but ſuch as are ſpecially

appointed thereunto, yet there ought
not to be that bold and free reſort to
them, that are ſicke of the plague, as
to thoſe that are ſicke of any other diſeaſe.
To confirme this point further,
thus I argue: A wanton or vnneceſſary
putting of God to the manifeſtation
of his power or ſpeciall prouidence, is
a tempting of the Almighty: as may
appeare by theſe places, Pſal. 78. 18. 19.
Eſa. 7. 12. Math. 4. 6. 7. But to runne into
danger of the plague without neceſſary
cauſe, as they do, who reſort as
boldly and fréely to them that are ſicke
of the plague, as to thoſe that are ſicke
of any other diſeaſe, is wantonly and
vnneceſſarily to put God to manifeſt
his power and ſpeciall prouidence in
preſeruing them from the Plague:
therefore to runne into danger of the
plague without neceſſary cauſe, as
they do, who reſort as boldly, &c. is a
tempting of the Almighty. The aſſumption
or ſecond propoſitiō I proue
by the fourth of Mathew, verſe, 6. 7.
where Satan would haue perſwaded
Chriſt to caſt himſelfe downe from a

pinacle of the Temple, vpon this preſumption,
that the Angels had charge
to preſerue him, being the Sonne of
God. Where it is to be noted, that
Chriſt doth not take knowledge of Satan
his abuſing the Pſalme 91. by him
alleaged, in putting in theſe words,
At anie time, for theſe, In all thy
wayes: but alledgeth another Scripture
forbidding vs to tempt the Lord
our God. Whereby it is euident, that
to preſume vpon Gods protection,
when we are not in our wayes, or to
neglect meanes (as the ſtaires of the
pinacle were) is to tempt the Almighty,
and that without neceſſary cauſe:
to runne into danger, as Satan would
haue had Chriſt to haue done, is to be
out of our wayes, therefore to runne
into danger of the plague, without a
neceſſary cauſe, is to tempt the Almighty.
Thus you ſée, that from the
prouidence of God, you cannot conclude,
that either the plague is not
contagious, or we néed not ſhunne it
more than other diſeaſes. Indéed vpon
that ground, he that hath a neceſſary

cauſe of reſort where the plague is,
may thus argue: It is the reuealed
will of God, that I am in my way, and
therefore haue a promiſe of preſeruation,
if it ſhall be to Gods glory, and
my good, and it is not reuealed, that I
ſhall be infected, therefore I may procéed
with hope and comfort. I ſay more
from the prouidence of God manifeſted,
the beléeuer ought in euery affliction,
to conclude thus: Howſoeuer I
vſed meanes as Dauid did to preuent
this affliction,2 Sam. 12. 22, 23. yet perceiuing by the euent
that God hath decréed it, I will
(by his grace) take it patiently as Dauid
alſo did. Thus for your ſatiſfaction
I haue ſayd that which I thinke ſufficient
to the ſecond concluſion. But yet
if you haue any thing to reply, or any
other argument to obiect againſt the
infection of the Plague, I would not
haue you (in any caſe) to hold it in.
            
            
               Prof.
               If I ſtaggered and ſtumbled
before, how is it likely that I ſhould be
able to reencounter now in this skirmiſh?
I am therefore to ſeeke ſupply
from another obiection, which if you

ouerthrow I muſt yeeld: for I remember
no moe. But before I aſſault you
with that, perceiuing by your diſcourſe,
that ſhunning the plague is the cauſe of
preſeruation, as being within the danger
thereof is the cauſe of infection, I pray
your iudgement touching flying into the
country for feare of infectiō: which ſome
iuſtifie,Pro. 22 3. by theſe words of Salomon: The
prudent man ſeeth the Plague, and hideth
himſelfe. Other ſay this place is miſconſtrued,
yea ſome preach againſt Flying into
the countrey becauſe of the plague.
            
            
               Preach.
               If you had ſayd, a cauſe,
in ſtead of, the cauſe, you had more
rightly reported my mind: for I haue
deliuered ſundry cauſes or meanes of
Infection and Preſeruation. Amongſt
the reſt, I thinke, going, and abiding in
the countrey, to be an excellent meane
(in it ſelfe) of preſeruation. But that
this meane may be ſanctified to them
that vſe it, let it be conſidered, Who
may take the benefit thereof, and How
it is to be vſed. I thinke that they
whoſe reſidence is not neceſſary, may
take the benefit of going into the countrey,

as well as a man, who hath a
large houſe, may remoue from one ſide
infected, to another not infected. But
let vs further examine this point by
conſidering thoſe 4. ſorts of people whō
you taxed for running away,Pag. 41. viz.
Magiſtrates, Miniſters, Phiſitians,
and rich men. As for Magiſtrates and
Miniſters, I thinke they ſhould be reſident:Pag. 43. 44.
the one for reaſons I gaue before:
the other for reaſons no leſſe euident.
For when will they offer to God
the ſupplications of his people for
helpe and health, if not now, when
their miſerie is ſo great? When will
they comfort the afflicted, if not now,
when there be ſo many wofull huſbands
and wiues, parents and children,
friends and kinſfolkes? When
will they preuaile againſt ſinne with
the word of exhortation, if not now,
when men are humbled with the puniſhment
of ſinne? And when will
they do good by preparing men to patience,
and teaching them to make
good vſe of affliction, if not now, when
(euery houre) they looke to come to the

triall of their faith and wiſedome in
Chriſt Ieſus? I will ſay no more, ſith
Chriſt hath ſayd inough, when he ſetteth
it downe,Ioh. 10. 12. as a property of an hireling
to leaue the ſhéepe when he ſéeth
the Wolfe comming. As for Phiſitions,
I onely propound this queſtion:
Whether they be bound in
conſcience to be reſident, in regard of
their profeſſion, and ability to do good,
or they may vſe their liberty to ſhift for
themſelues, & (as they thinke) for their
liues, in regard they are no publicke
perſons, and liue (not by a common ſtipend,
but) by what they can get. But
howſoeuer this queſtion be anſwered,
I dare ſay thus much, That a Phiſition,
who may do much more good than
a keeper, hath as great intereſt in Gods
promiſe and prouidence. There remaineth
Rich men to be conſidered, vnder
which name I vnderſtand alſo ſuch as
are able to prouide for themſelues abroad.
I thinke they may go and abide
in the countrey, ſith the good they can
do (as they be rich men) is to reléeue
the ſicke and néedy: which they may

do well inough, without their reſidence,
if they were ſo well minded. To
which purpoſe I ſpake ſomewhat before.Pag. 25.
But though they may be non reſident,
yet they muſt not vſe their liberty,1. Pet. 2. 16.
as a cloake of their naughtines,
and therefore let them conſider: how,
or with what cautions, they are to vſe
that benefite. The cautions be two:
One concerning Feare. The other
concerning Loue.Pſal. 84. 2. 10. & 137. 5. 6. Amos. 6. 6. Ro. 12. 15. Pſal. 137. 1. 2. 3. Their feare muſt
be neither exceſſiue, one argument
whereof is, their careleſneſſe to prouide
for their ſoules, ſo they ſhift for
their bodies, nor too litle, which appeareth
when they forget miſerable
Ieruſalem, and giue themſelues to
pleaſure. Out of their Loue, they are
to mourne with, and pray for their diſtreſſed
brethren,Heb. 13. 3. as if they themſelues
were in their caſe: they are to be no
leſſe liberall in reléeuing their afflicted
neighbours,2. Cor. 8. 7. 8. then they ſhould be, by order
from authority or otherwiſe, if
they were reſident, and they are to
haue a ſpeciall care, that their ſeruants
whom they leaue behind,1. Tim. 5. 8. may be well

gouerned while they be in health, and
well prouided for, if they fall ſicke. If
they flie, not reſpecting theſe, or like
cautions, or good conſiderations, Preachers
(as you ſay) reproue them iuſtly.
Otherwiſe I dare ſay they do not.
            
            
               Prof.
               Indeed your cautions make
me remember, that they ſpeake much
what to that purpoſe. But Sir, I cannot
let you paſſe without ſaying ſomewhat
to that place, concerning Hiding our
ſelues from the plague: and the rather becauſe
ſome excuſe their not comming to
Church thereby. Therefore I eftſoones
craue your iudgemēt touching the ſame.
            
            
               Preach.
               Will you let nothing paſſe?
Well. That I may incourage you to
ſéeke reſolution, and not (as many do)
build opinions vpon ſo vaine imaginations,
I am, and will be willing to ſatiſfy
you as I may. The truth is, many
abuſe that place to iuſtifie their inordinate
feare, taking hold of the words
Plague and Hide. Amongſt other, they
who will not come to Church becauſe
of the Plague: of whom I would demaund
theſe queſtions: Whether they

thinke that becauſe of the Plague,
the Lords day ſhould, by warrant of
Gods word, ceaſe to be ſanctified by
an holy aſſembly? If not, but that rather
ſpeciall dayes of publike humiliation
and prayer, are to be ordained and
kept, during the viſitation: then
what diſpenſation haue they to be away
from holy aſſemblies, more then
other? Againe, if the promiſe of protection
belong to ſuch, as frequent holy
aſſemblies in time of this viſitation, as
to thoſe that truſt in God and walke in
their wayes: and if God can ſtrike
them with the Plague, as well tarying
at home, as comming to Church, what
griefe will it be to their conſcience (if
God do ſtrike them) to conſider that
they haue failed in faith, forſaken their
wayes, and are found in their ſinne?
Touching the place, whereunto you
would haue me ſay ſomewhat, thus I
vnderſtand it. The word Plague doth
ſignifie a ſtripe, or ſtroke, and therefore
not onely the Peſtilence, but euery puniſhment
for ſinne is meant thereby.
Hiding is put for Preſeruing,
                  2. Chro. 22. 11. as Ioaſh
                  
was, by hiding preſerued from murther.
But it is to be conſidered, from
what a prudent man hideth or preſerueth
himſelfe. In a Plague two
things are to be auoided. The wrath
of God, and the puniſhment it ſelfe.
That men may take héed of inordinate
feare, let them know that a prudent
man hideth not himſelfe, or obtaineth
preſeruation from the former, otherwiſe
then by Prayer and Faſting,
Faith and Repentance. For we cannot
hide our ſelues from God,Pſal. 139. 7. &c. who is
infinite, but by God himſelfe. That is:
as the woman appealed from King
Philip ſléeping, to King Philip awakened,
ſo a prudent man hideth himſelfe
from Gods wrath, vnder Gods mercy,Eccl. 2. 21.
which is as great as himſelfe. As
we may learne by theſe ſayings of Dauid:
In the time of trouble the Lord
ſhall hide me in his Tabernacle.
                  Pſal. 27. 5. & 36. 7. And:
How excellent is thy mercy, ô God,
therefore the children of men truſt vnder
the ſhadow of thy wings. As the prudent
man hideth himſelfe from the puniſhment
it ſelfe, he vſeth, and may vſe

lawfull meanes, temporall, as well as
ſpirituall. And therfore a prudent man
may vſe lawfull meanes of preſeruation
as well from the Peſtilence, as
from other leſſe Plagues, or ſtrokes of
Gods anger: & by conſequence, if ſhunning
infection be a mean to preſerue, as
being within danger is a meane to infect,
then a prudent man may flie out of
the City infected, into the country not
infected: prouided his reſidence be not
neceſſary, and he obſerue cautions conuenient,
as I ſayd before.Pag. 73. This is
mine opinion touching flying into the
countrey for feare of Infection, and
that place concerning hiding our
ſelues from the Plague. Now let me
heare your laſt obiection, if you remember
no moe.
            
            
               Profeſſ.
               I haue troubled you ſo long,
that I trow it is high time to come out
with my laſt obiection, and yet (I tell you)
it is deemed none of the leaſt: for it ſeemeth
to be againſt all reaſon, that the
Plague ſhould be infectiue, ſeeing it is
ſpoken of in the Scriptures ſo often, and
yet in no place is ſaid to be infectiue.
            
            
               
               Preach.
               Howſoeuer that ſéemeth, I
am ſure this is againſt all reaſon, to
make the Bible a booke of phiſicke: or to
conclude thus, the Scriptures do not in
any place ſay that ye plague is infectiue,
therfore it is not infectiue. It may be as
well concluded thus: the Scriptures do
not in any place ſay that the French diſeaſe
commeth by whoredom, therefore
it commeth not by whoredome, and by
conſequence whoredom is not to be feared
for that cauſe. I obſerue with griefe
the humour of moſt to be this, if they
haue a mind to any ſinfull pleaſure, vnlawful
profit, or erronious opinion, thē
they ſtoutly demaund: What expreſſe
Scripture haue you againſt it? Contrariwiſe,
if they haue no mind to any holy
duty, then they muſt know where ſcripture
doth expreſly commaund it. But
neighbor, tel me, do you not thinke that
baptizing of infants is lawfull, ſith it
may be iuſtified by ſound concluſions
from the word, though in all the new
Teſtament, there is neither precept for,
nor example of baptizing infants?
            
            
               Prof.
               No doubt of it. But can you proue

the plague to be infectiue by concluſions?
If you can, for Gods ſake let me heare
ſome, & then I wil beleeue, through Gods
grace, and informe others as wel as I can.
            
            
               Preach.
               What néed you be ſo earneſt
for proof out of the ſcripture, ſith I gaue
you before an argument out of the 91.Pag. 46▪
                  
                  Pſalm, which may be ſufficient to proue
a point, wherein the ſcriptures ſéeme to
be ſo ſilent. But that I may giue you
contentment (if I can) at our parting, I
will ſhew you ſome other Scriptures
which ſpeake to this purpoſe. In the 14.
of Ezechiel, verſe 21. God nameth foure
principall iudgements appointed to deſtroy,
viz. the ſword, famine, noiſome
beaſts, and peſtilence: where note, that
(without queſtion) thrée of them be fit
means in their nature to deſtroy many:
why not ye peſtilence? Conſider further,
that God doth not threaten to deſtroy
by dogs, buls or ſuch like creatures; but
by noiſom beaſts, ſuch as ſhould deſtroy
not to ſatiſfie hunger, but to make hauocke:
as may appeare by ye deſtruction
of thrée and forty children,2. Kin. 2. 24. only by two
Beares: ſo in that God doth not kill by

the burning ague, conſumption, or any
other diſeaſe, when he meaneth to deſtroy
many, but by the peſtilence (which
alſo is called Neiſome in ye 91. Pſalme,
verſe. 3.) it is to be gathered, that the
Peſtilence is a deſtroyer by infection:
and the rather, becauſe God ſaith in the
26. of Leuiticus, verſe 25. When ye are gathered
in your cities to eſcape the ſword, I wil
ſend the Peſtilence amongest you. Why
ſhould the Peſtilence be more noiſome
when people are thruſt together, then
when they be ſeuered, but that it is cō
                  tagious?
Laſtly, in ye 24. of the Acts, ver.
5. Paul is called a Peſtilent fellow, or
(according to ye originall) Peſtilence it
ſelfe. And why? Becauſe as the Peſtilence
is contagious, ſo was he accuſed
to be by ſedition and hereſie. Doth it
not now appeare vnto you by the ſcriptures,
that the plague is contagious?
            
            
               Profeſſ.
               It doth, I confeſſe it freely, and
thanke God that I had the grace to come
to you for reſolution, beſeeching his heauenly
Maieſtie for Chriſt his ſake, not to
charge me with that bloud wherof I may
be guiltie, by incouraging my ſelfe and

other, vnneceſſarily to runne into danger,
in maintaining that bloudy errour, as you
rightly call the denying of the plagues
infection: which error I wil neuer defend
againe whiles I liue, but will hereafter (by
Gods grace) take heed▪ as well of headie
preſumption, as inordinate feare.
            
            
               Preach.
               I alſo thanke God with you,
in the name of Chriſt, for this bleſſing
of our conference: but neighbor, I muſt
put you in mind, and charge you with
your promiſe, to informe others. For it
may be that people, howſoeuer (for the
moſt part) they learne corrupt opinions
one from another, ſooner then ſound doctrine
from the godly and learned Miniſters,
yet they may conceiue this truth
better by your familiar talking with
them, then by my maner of teaching.
As children learne ſooner to ſpeake by
pratling one with another, then by
hearing the diſcourſes of their parents.
Therefore as Chriſt ſaid to Peter, When
thou art conuerted, ſtrengthen thy brethren:
                  Luk. 22. 32.
ſo I eftſoones require you, that being reformed
in iudgement your ſelf, you wil
wiſely and zealouſly indeuor to reform

the iudgement of other in an error of ſo
great danger. And withal I deſire you,
that if you méet with any argument againſt
the plagues infection, or for vnreſtrained
repaire to the infected, that is
worth the anſwering, let me know it,
and I promiſe you either humbly to
yéeld to ye truth, or clearely to anſwer it
when God ſhal be pleaſed that we méet
againe. In the meane while let vs pray
that God would ſanctifie this grieuous
viſitation both to Prince and people,
that thereby the King (whom God preſerue
from all contagion both bodily
and ghoſtly) ſéeing ſo many thouſands
of his people dying wéekely, and that in
his royall Citie, and beginning of his
raigne, may be occaſioned to take héede
that he leaue not his firſt loue, decline
not from his profeſſed ſinceritie, and be
not drawne away from his owne ſtedfaſtnes,
but rather to vow reformation
of whatſoeuer maybe found by diligent
inquirie, to be offenſiue in the Church
and common-wealth, and that thereby
the people may be ſtirred vp out of a
true faith to ſéeke the Lord, with contrition

of hart, confeſſion of mouth, and
amendment of life, that ſo he may be
found in due time to heale the ſores of
his people, and to reſtore health and
wealth to Iſrael. All which God grant
for Chriſt his ſonnes ſake, in whom he
hath profeſſed himſelfe to be well pleaſed,Mat. 17. 5. Heb. 12. 24
as being the Mediatour of the new
couenant; whereby he bindeth himſelfe
not to take his mercies from vs,2. Sam. 7. 14, 15. though
he chaſten vs with the rods of men.
To whom (for this time and euer)
I commend you and all
our neighbours.
Farewell.
            
         
      
      
         
            Faults eſcaped.
            PAg. 2. lin. 12. reade deceaſed for diſeaſed. pag.
16. lin. 15 reade reſiſt for correct. pag. 29. lin. 12.
reade our for their. pag. 30. againſt line 5. ſet in the
margent Pag. 23. pag. 39. lin. 24. reade ſtronger for
ſtraunger. pag. 45. lin. 10. reade vaine for name.
pag. 64. againſt lines 11, 12, 13. ſet in the margent
Pag. 51. Math. 2. 13. Luke 4. 29. 30.
            FINIS.
         
      
   