
      
         
            
            
            THE BAPTIZING of the Eunuch: In three Sermons vpon Act. 8.36.37.38.
            BY SAMVEL HIERON.
            
               
                  MARKE 16.16.
               
               He that ſhall beleeue and be baptized, ſhall be ſaued.
            
            
               printer's or publisher's device
               M B
            
            LONDON, Printed by MELCH. BRADVVOOD for SAMVEL MACHAM, and are to be ſolde at his ſhop in Pauls church-yard at the ſigne of the Bull-head. 1613.
         
         
            
            
            TO MY VERIE worſhipfull good friend GEORGE CHVDLEIGH of Strachley in Deuon Eſquire.
            
            
               SIR, I haue much deſired to preſent you with ſome testimony of my loue. Being therefore mooued to the publication of theſe Sermons touching the initiating of the Eunuch by Baptiſme, into the number of profeſſed Christians, I thought fit to commend them by this more ſpeciall inſcription to your reading: I preached vpon the whole History, touching what paſſed betwixt Philip, and this noble Conuert: but least I ſhould be thought to oppreſſe the times with ſo many of my publiſhings in one kind, therefore I ſelected that which God gaue me to deliuer out of this paſſage; and that principally for the furtherance of their vnderstanding into whoſe hands this ſhall come, in the point of ſauing faith, and in the manner of applying Christ vnto the ſoule. My hope is (through Gods mercy) it may doe ſome good that way. Your ſelfe are one to whoſe ſoule I wiſh the best; as an vndiſſembled argument whereof, I beſeech you to accept theſe ſheetes. Your reſpect to me in my Miniſtery (out of which, what am I?) doth I confeſſe deſerue more: but where power is defectiue, I must pray you that ſyncerity of affection, may make the ſupply: The truth is I am paid before hand, for

this, and for more then I now make offer off; but yet I will craue this recompence of you, that if either by this or any other my endeuour, you receiue comfort, you would deſire God to make me faithfull and profitable in my function to the end: In aſſured hope that you will doe ſo, my ſelfe doe heere promiſe vnder my hand to remaine. Modbury this 27. of Ianuary.
            
               Your worſhips remembrancer to the throne of grace SAM. HIERON.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE BAPTIZING OF THE EVNVCH.
            
               
                  
                     ACTS 8.36.
                  
                  And as they went on their way they came vnto a certaine water, and the Eunuch ſayd, See, here is water, what ſhould let me to be baptized?
               
               
                  
                     37.
                  
                  And Philip ſayd vnto him, If thou beleeuest with all thy heart thou mayst. Then he anſwered, I beleeue that Ieſus Chriſt is the ſon of God.
               
               
                  
                     38.
                  
                  Then he commanded the chariot to ſtand ſtill, and they went downe into the water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he baptized him.
               
            
            
               THE FIRST SERMON.
               
                  IN this report heere made of the baptizing of the Eunuch,The diuiſion of the Tent. there are two things conſiderable; 1. The Eunuch his motion for baptiſme: 2. Philip his condeſcending to the motion. Touching the former, this is to be conceiued, that Philip among other things deliuered in the opening the doctrine of Chriſt Ieſus, out of Iſaiah, ſpake alſo concerning Baptiſme: by which thoſe that profeſſe Chriſt are admitted into the ſociety and fellowſhip of beleeuers, and haue alſo their owne perſonall intereſt into Chriſt ſealed vp vnto their ſoules. Heereupon theſe two, Philip and the Eunuch trauelling together, and in their iourney comming

to a riuer, the Eunuch made this motion, to a like effect as if he had thus ſaid,The meaning of the word 
                        •
                      of the 1. part. 
                  Thou ſpeakeſt of Baptiſme as a neceſſary badge of Chriſtian profeſſion, ſee heere is a place conuenient, heere is matter for the purpoſe, let mee I pray thee receiue this ſacrament, for what ſhould hinder. Now the points of doctrine to be gathered out of this motion,The 1 Doct. are theſe. Firſt, That to an obedient and cheerefull hearer, the word of God is neuer preached without ſucceſſe. The generall purpoſe of this verſe is to ſhew to vs how Philips doctrine wrought vpon the Eunuchs heart, and we ſee heere how powerfull it was; For this one diſcourſe preuailed through Gods mercy, to the enlightning of his minde, making him to conceiue the hope of his calling, and the riches of that glorious inheritance which God hath in his Saints 
                  Eph. 1.18.; it wrought alſo vpon his affections in ſuch a meaſure, that nothing was more deſired by him, then to ſhew himſelfe a Chriſtian, and to haue ſome pledge of the fauour of God in Chriſt gaged to his ſoule. An admirable iſſue of one ſermon, and a notable inſtance of the bleſſing of God, vpon ſuch an hearer, as the Eunuch was one who came to heare with deſire, and ſubmitted himſelfe to the authority of the word with an obedient heart. The word neuer is vnprofitable where it meetes with ſuch an auditor. It is ſaid of thoſe three thouſand which were added to the Church by one Sermon of S. Peters (when the ſpirit of God beginneth to relate their obedience,) that they were ſuch as gladly heard the word 
                  Act. 2.41.. This was an excellent preparatiue to obedience, when their hearts long for the word, when it was a ioy to them to be taught: Dauid ſaith his heart ſtood in awe of the Lord 
                  Pſal. 119.161.; ſo did theirs, for it is ſaid before they were pricked at their hearts. So I note, that as it is ſaid in one place of Antioch, that by reaſon of the number of beleeuers, the Diſciples there were firſt called Chriſtians 
                  Act. 11.26., ſo in another place, the forwardneſſe to heare is reported in the inhabitants there, as, that they beſought Paul to preach the ſame words to them, and accordingly at the time, came almoſt

all the whole city together to heare 
                  Act. 13.42.44.: ſo againe in the ſame Chapter, it is ſaid, that when the Gentiles heard, they were glad 
                  Ver. 48.: and then ſtrait it followeth, Thus the word of the Lord was publiſhed throughout the whole country 
                  Ver. 49.. See what wings were giuen to the Goſpell, by the deſire and gladneſſe of thoſe to whom it was deliuered. The word of God by this meanes grew mightily and prevailed. The Apoſtle to the Hebrewes, inſiſtes vpon the want of this readineſſe and yeeldingneſſe of the inward man, as the cauſe of the vnprofitable hearing of the ancient Iewes; The Goſpell was preached alſo vnto them, but it profited not, becauſe it was not receiued with faith in thoſe that heard it 
                  Heb. 4 2.. I may applie to this purpoſe as very fitting to it that of Solomon, He that reproueth the wiſe and the obedient eare, is as a golden earing and an ornament of fine gold 
                  Pro. 25.12.. His meaning is, that if a man haue to do with men of obedient and yeelding hearts, it will be a credit to his paines and labour in perſwading; the ſucceſſe with which his endeuours ſhall be crowned, will make his ſpeach as beautifull as an ornament of gold. Now beſides theſe proofes, it is eaſie to make it manifeſt, that ſucceſſe cannot be wanting, where there is ſuch a diſpoſition to heare, as the Eunuch had: For God hath promiſed to fulfill the deſires of thoſe that feare him 
                  Pſa. 145.19., and that the hearkening eare, which doth (as it were) thirſt for knowledge, ſhall lodge among the wiſe 
                  Pro. 15 31.. He will guide the meeke in iudgement 
                  Pſa. 25.9., He will reveale his ſecret vnto ſuch 
                  Ver. 14., Euen that which is called, the hid wiſedome of God 
                  1. Cor. 2.7., and the minde of Chriſt 
                  Ver. 16. The vſe
                  . The vſe is, to ſhew vnto vs the true cauſe, why there is no ſuch profiting by the word preached, as there ſhould bee, and as there was of old in the firſt and purer times. Then one Sermon wonne many, now many Sermons ſcarſe preuaile with one. Surely the cauſe is, men want that ready, that cheerefull, that forward, that inclinable, that humble diſpoſition, which the good people in thoſe times had; then they ſued to bee taught, as the Eunuch heere, and thoſe

(Act. 2.) and the Antiochians, and the Iaylor, now it is well, if we will heare when we be entreated; then they had learned to ſubmit themſelues to the power and authority of the word, now euery man is wiſe and able enough to inſtruct himſelfe; then their hearts trembled at the maieſtie of God ſpeaking in his ordinance; now they haue a kinde of baſe eſtimation of the meanes, neither is it generally apprehended to be the arme and power of God vnto ſaluation. Heere is the very cauſe, that ſo much is ſpoken to the men of this generation without ſucceſſe, and that ſo many Sermons, be (as the woman of Tekoah ſpeake in another caſe,) as water ſpilt vpon the ground, which cannot be taken vp againe 
                  2. Sam. 14.14., and that ſo many of the Lords Meſſengers may lament with the Prophet, and ſay, I haue laboured in vaine, I haue ſpent my ſtrength in vaine, and for nothing 
                  Iſ. 49.4.. It is a hard matter to meete with ſuch an one as this Eunuch in a Pariſh, that will intreat to be furthered: one that will yeelde himſelfe as a Diſciple to him who watcheth for his ſoule. We haue to do with gainsaying people 
                  Rom. 10.21., with men of vncircumciſed hearts and eares 
                  Act. 7.51., ſuch whoſe neckes are iron ſinewes 
                  Iſ. 48.4., not eaſily bent, they leane to much to their owne wiſedome 
                  Pro. 3.5., to be wiſe in God: If then our deſire be to be profitable hearers, let vs labour to be deſirous and humble hearers, ſuch as account it no diſparagement to ſitte in the ſchoole of Chriſt vpon the learners forme. In the times of Popery men were taught to be too ſervile, the Prieſts tooke on them to haue dominion ouer the peoples faith 
                  2. Cor. 1.24., there might bee no asking why ſo? if they deliuered it. Now, on the other ſide, our people are as much on the other hand, too much out of rule, and it is not knowne what it is to depend vpon the ordinance of God, and to ſubmit to the meanes, with that meeke and quiet ſpirit, which is a thing in the ſight of God much ſet by 
                  1 Pet. 3 4. The 2. Doct.
                  .
               A ſecond Doctrine out of this Motion made by the Eunuch is, That where the heart is truly touched, and the ſoule

indeed turned vnto God, there is a deſire to bee partaker of the Sacraments. This Eunuch being now through Philips preaching ſeaſoned with the ſauing knowledge of Chriſt Ieſus, doth even long to bee partaker of the Sacrament, which might be a pledge of his new birth, and an earneſt of his ingraffing into the myſticall body of his Sauiour Oh Philip, as thou haſt taught mee, ſo I pray thee alſo to baptize mee, let mee not want the comfort of the Sacrament, now that I haue receiued benefit by thy doctrine. This very thing may be gathered out of this, that the Apoſtles ſtile vrged the vſe of the Sacrament preſently vpon the peoples yeelding to receiue the Doctrine, as though that ſhould bee a triall of them, whether they heard in ſincerity or no. If they had refuſed the Sacrament, their Hypocriſie had beene eftſoones diſcouered, if they embraced it in ſuch maner as became them, it was an euidence that their hearts were ſeaſoned as was meete. Thus Iohn Baptiſt bound his heares to the Sacrament Math. 3., and Peter, Amend your liues and be baptized 
                  Act. 2.38., and after that order did the reſt proceede. I remember how the neglect of the Sacrament is made to be a marke of a diſpiſer. The Phariſes are ſaid to haue deſpiſed the counſell of God in Iohns miniſtry: and how doth that appeare. They were not baptized of him 
                  Luk. 7.30.. In the old law, he who profeſſed himſelfe to be one of Gods people, and made a ſhew of religion, and yet neglected the Sacrament, was called, a breaker of the Couenant, and was threanep to be cut of 
                  Gen. 17.14. There be juſt cauſes of deſiring the Sacrament, in him that is enlightened: 1. He knoweth the vſe of the Sacraments to be Gods ordinance, and therefore in obedience to his will hee will make conſcience thereof, 2. He conceiueth them to be ſeales of the righteounes which is by faith 
                  Rom. 4.11., aſſurances of ſociety with Chriſt, for which cauſe they muſt needes be ſweete vnto his ſoule. 3. Hee apprehends them to be badges of his profeſſion, and of his ſeruice vnto Chriſt, and therefore he cannot but deſire them. 4. Hee belieueth them to bee

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
bands of the communion of Saints, and in that reſpect he muſt needs affect them.
               This is a very behoofull point to be ſpoken of in theſe daies. becauſe among men profeſſing godlineſſe, there is not that reſpect to the Sacraments, that there ſhould bee. The Sacrament of Baptiſme, the truth is we haue receiued it in our childhood, but what man of many, laboureth, to make the right vſe of his Baptiſme, or ſeeketh to know, what it meanes, and why it was. It ſeemeth men are led with an ignorant conceipt, that the good of Baptiſme is limited to the time of receiuing it, and was only then as a doore of entrance into the outward ſociety of Gods people, whereas indeede there is good vſe to bee made of that Sacrament, at a mans laſt breathing, and not at the firſt inſtant of partaking it only. So that I ſay ſtill, men giuing good hopes of ſome religion to be in them, are exceeding careleſſe in this point of ioyning the vſe of the ſacraments to their cuſtomary hearing, and ſo by that meanes they depriue themſelues of an vnknowne and vnthought of help, both to provoke to obedience, and to ſtrengthen faith, and to increaſe the comfort of the inward man. And as for the Sacrament of the Lords ſupper, generally it is made no more reckning of, then ſome three-halfepeny ordinary, ſaue only at ſome ſeaſon of the yeere or at ſome (ſuppoſed) good times, as though ſeaſons and moones and the influences of the sky, gaue vertue to Gods ordinances. Certainely this is an argument of ſcanmes of grace amongſt men. There cannot but be a ſtomacke to the Sacrament, where there is felt ſweetneſſe in the word. And it is well knowne that in thoſe prime daies, when zeale was feruent, the belieuers mette not together to heare, but withall they did communicate; and this vſe continued many yeeres. It was Popery that firſt brought in the ſeldomnes of this ſeruice, and at laſt drew it to once a yeere, making the people belieue, that in reſpect of the difficultie to be well prepared, it was better for them to communicate

in heart with the Prieſt, then to do it in act. Theſe dregs yet remaine among men and it is an vniuſtifiable error that they committe, to paſſe ouer the Sacrament of the ſupper, to ſome old people or women with child, who muſt take it (as was ſaid in the daies of ſuperſtition) for their viands,Pro viatico being neerer (in opinion and poſſibility) to their laſt paſſage, and themſelues either to turne their backes, or to ſit by, proclayming to the world their want of appetite to ſuch an heauenly banquet. I ſay the ſame reaſon is in both the Sacraments, in regard of deſiring comfort. And therefore the doctrine is good hence, that where grace is, there is a deſire of the Sacraments, and a willingneſſe to vſe them according to the order of him that ordained them, and where there is little reſpect to the ſeales, ſurely there the couenant it ſelfe is not much eſteemed.
               A third doctrine out of this motion is,The 3 doct. 
                  That in whom there is any truth of Christianity, in him there is alſo a deſire to diſcover and to make it knowen to the world that he is a Chriſtian. I gather this out of the Eunuch his requeſt to bee baptized, which Sacrament his deſire was to be partaker of, not onely for the eſtabliſhing of his heart, and the confirming of his faith, but withall that hee might haue vpon him the badge and cognizance of his new profeſſion, and might ſhew himſelfe not to be aſhamed of the name and title of a Chriſtian. And indeed it was an evidence of great reſolution in this conuert, that whereas it would not but breed him ſome queſtion and trouble at his returne into his owne country, to be fallen from the religion wherein he was borne and brought vp, & to be become one of that new Sect which was euery where ſpoken againſt 
                  Act. 28 22.. yet he, fearing no hazard of his honour, no loſſe of his office and dignity, no incurring the hatred and cenſure of his country-men, would needs be baptized, and as it were enrouled and booked among Chriſtians. This is the nature of true conuerſion, albeit it may ſtirre but weakely at the firſt and

ſeeme almoſt not to dare to ſhew it ſelfe (as wee ſee in the caſe of Nicodemus and ſome other in our Sauiours time, whom the oppoſition of the world made ſomewhat ſlow in the diſcovery of themſelves) yet when it is come to a fuller grouth, ſo that a man is more then in the way to converſion, and is indeed renued in the inner man, then there will be a deſire to make it knowen, that he marcheth vnder the colours of the Lord Ieſus, and hath renounced all other wayes of ſaluation to reſt onely vpon him. So euen the ſame Nicodemus, albeit in the beginning, when he was but a beginner hee came to Ieſus by night 
                  Ioh 3.2.. And after ſpake on his ſide at a Conuocation of the Phariſies, but covertly and a farre-oft, ſo that it could ſcarcely be ſmelt, which way he did encline Ioh. 7.50.. Yet in time he grew to more openneſſe, as in joyning with Ioſeph in the honourable interring of our Sauiour Ioh. 19 39.. And ſo much it ſeemeth to haue beene the purpoſe of the Holy Ghoſt to inſinuate, in the manner of reporting it. Then came Nicodemus alſo; which firſt came to Ieſus by night &c. As if he had ſayd, howſoeuer he was ſomething timorous at the firſt, yet now the fire was kindled, and the light thereof brake forth more apparantly. The ſame may beſayd of Ioſeph of Arimathea himſelfe, there is no ſpeech of him at all during our Sauiours life, and the text ſaith too, he was a ſecert diſciple 
                  ver 38.. but then (ſaith S. Marke) he went in boldly vnto Pilate &c Mark. 15.43.. So yet although there bee much weakeneſſe and faintneſſe at the firſt taſting of religion, whiles a man is but yet (as it were) in the throwes of his new birth, yet when the worke is accompliſht; and one is become a Chriſtian indeed, there is a willingneſſe to make it to appeare, and a kinde of neglect of all other things, in reſpect of this one, that a man may be knowen to haue given his name vnto Chriſt. Not that the children of God doe ſeeke applauſe, but that it may be ſeene they are not aſhamed, and doe therefore ſhew themſelues in their kinde, yea though ſome outward inconuenience do befal them. It is ſaid of Paul, that aſſoon as he had

receiued direction from Ananias, he ſtraight way preached Chriſt in the ſinagogues &c Act. 9 20.. As who would ſay he did euen long, vntill he had giuen ſome euidence to the World what he was, and what change God had wrought in his heart. Thus in the firſt times of the Apoſtles preachings notwithſtanding the ſharpe perſecutions raiſed vp aginſt the Truth, yet the beleeuers trouped togethet, and drew themſelues into ſocieties, and ioyned themſelues to the aſſemblies, and had fellowſhippe with thoſe which were in Chriſt before them, in thoſe things by which it could not but be deſcryed what they were. The text ſpeaking of the conuerſion of theſe three thouſand, ſaith, they were added to the Church 
                  Act. 2.41., which argueth that they not onely in heart embraced the Truth, but withall diſpoſed of themſelues ſo, that it was manifeſt to all, to what number they belonged. And the number of them that beleeued (ſaith Luke) grew more and more 
                  Act. 5.14.. which ſheweth a viſible adhering to the fellowſhip of profeſſors. The like is intended in that ſpeaking, Barnabas was a good man &c. and much people ioyned themſelues vnto the Lord 
                  Act. 11.24.; ſo it is ſayd of the conuerts at Epheſus, they came and confeſſed and ſhewed their workes 
                  Act. 19.18.. when Chriſt commended mutuall loue vnto his diſciples, By this (ſaid he) ſhall all men know you are diſciples 
                  Ioh. 13.35., as if he had ſaid, If you be ſuch as you ſhould be, you wilde fire to manifoſt your ſelues to be my diſciples, you wil be willing to haue it knowen what you are: Now then behold a marke whereby the world ſhall diſcerne you. What ſhould I ſay more in this. It is certaine, he that rightly apprehends the good to be gotten by Chriſt, and is ſenſible of ſome intereſt in it, for his owne particular, will deſire nothing more then that he may ſhew himſelfe to be his, and to be reputed one of his followers and dependants, yea though it be with ſome preiudice in the world, yet he will acount it to be the greateſt honour, can befall him. To returne home with the badge of a Chriſtian, out of all doubt the Eunuch valued it more then his office of Treaſurer in the Kingdome,

and he choſe rather to hazard both that and all other dignities, then to goe into his country as a ſecret Chriſtian.
               
                  The vſe.This deſerues to be commended to the care of all that feare God, that how ſoeuer the vaine applauſe of men, be not to be hunted after, and it be hipocriticall and phariſaicall to practiſe the duties of godlineſſe to be ſeene Math. 6.1.. yet it is neceſſary that we ſhould make it to appear what we are and yet we be not aſhamed of that ſincerity & godly care, which becommeth thoſe that would be ſaued. Will ſome man ſay vnto me; this a needleſſe exhortation vnto vs. For (behold) we haue done as much for the ſhewing of our ſelues to be Chriſtians, as this Eunuch did. He was baptized in the name of the Lord Ieſus, ſo haue we beene euery one, and therefore you may ſpare the labour of perſwading that which wee haue already done. I anſwere; To receiue the Sacrament of Baptiſme was to this man ſufficient for the declaring of himſelfe a Chriſtian in his owne country, where the name of Chriſt was either not heard of or not liked of, and where the Sacrament of Baptiſme was a thing ſtrange and vtterly vnknowen, but the caſe is not ſo with vs. For with vs neither the bearing the name of a Chriſtian nor an admittance by the Sacrament of Baptiſme, into the ſociety of Gods people, is enough to prooue a man to be a Chriſtian indeed; becauſe theſe things are common to many hypocrites with the beſt profeſſours. So that albeit Baptiſme might be a witneſſe of this mans Chriſtianity, among a people either hating it, or not eſteeming it: yet it cannot be ſo with vs, but ſome further thing is neceſſary to the end our ſincerity of religion and Chriſtianity may appeare. There be ſome things as hatefull, among the men of this generation, as the name of a Chriſtian, was or could be among the Ethiopians, as namely for a man, to make conſcience of his wayes, to binde himſelfe to a kinde of circumſpect walking, to ſhew himſelfe fearefull to offend, and loth to doe any thing diſpleaſing

to the maieſty of God, to follow after holineſſe with a kinde of ſtriuing, to be ſtrait in thoſe things, wherin men generally take a kinde of liberty to themſelues, and to ſeeme not to dare to doe diuers things, which the world makes no queſtion of: theſe and the like (I ſay) are as ſtrange, as harſh, as diſpleaſing, as much ſubiect to cenſure and hate, in theſe our dayes, as euer was the name of Chriſtianity among the heathen which knew not God. And therefore if we that profeſſe godlineſſe can frame our ſelues hereunto, not regarding what we may loſe in credit, in eſtimation, in riſing to preferment in the world thereby, not reckoning of the reproaches, and euill ſpeeches, and ſcorne, that may be caſt vpon vs; this will teſtifie, that wee be Chriſtians indeed. When we be not backward in thoſe things, which are like to bring vs vpon the ſtage, and to make vs a matter of note and ſpectacle vnto others. It was a notable euidence of the Eunuch his faith and piety, that albeit he knew well, that after his returne, the kingdome would be filled with the newes, of his conuerſion, and he was like to come to an account to his Queene, and the reſt of the ſtate, for his religion: yet baptized he would needs be, it ſhould be his glory to be knowen to be a dependant vpon Chriſt crucified. It vtterly condemneth that ſpirit of cowardize which poſſeſſeth many, who are loth to doe ought appertaining to religion, that might ſingle them out from the multitude, or make them to bee noted amongſt men. Thinke not, I would giue countenance, to that vaine ſingularity which leadeth ſome, who take a kind of pride if they can once bring themſelues to be talked of, and ſo runne themſelues out of breath, in a kinde of violent and head-ſtronge zeale, hauing too much of that phariſaical diſeaſe of deſpiſing others 
                  Luk. 18.9.. and being as Solomon ſaith, pure in their owne conceipt, though they bee not waſhed from their filthineſſe 
                  Pro. 30.12., I ſay my purpoſe is not to giue allowance to any of any ſuch ſpirit, but I labour againſt that faint heartedneſſe of men, reaſonably well affected (it

may be) and yet loth to be too forward for feare of eſpying and forbearing to doe thoſe things which are meete to be done, leſt they ſhould incurre ſome diſgrace, or hazard ſomewhat which they are loth to loſe. For a man to caſt himſelfe into perill is raſhneſſe and folly, and more then there is any warrant for: ſo, for a man to deſire to bee noted, and to affect a name of ſomewhat more then ordinary that is vanity: but, for a man to conſider, what his profeſſion binds him to, and to giue euidence to the world, that he reſpects the doing thereof, more, then any worldly circumſtance, and would faine ſhew himſelfe not to bee aſhamed of his Sauiour and of his words before men, that is true Chriſtianity, and the thing which I labor out of the Eunuch his practize here in this place. The Law of gouerning the antient Roman army was drawen to two heades, Non ſequi not to make any raſh purſuit againſt the enimy wherby to runne into needleſſe danger. non fugere. not to flie before the enemy, whereby to betray the common cauſe into his hands. So it muſt be in this: Neither is trouble to be ſought, neither yet to be declined when it commeth. The Eunuch was willing the world might know he had renounced Idolatry and had giuen his name to Chriſt, as the Prince of his ſaluation. He thought it not fit, though it might bee for the ſafety of his outward honor, to ſmother his profeſſion, and to frame to the times, keeping his beliefe in ſecret to himſelfe. So far, of the Eunuch his motion. A true conuert hath euer a loue and a deſire to the Sacrament, and a care to giue euidence to the World, that hee hath learned better things then he ſometimes knew.
               
                  The 2 part of the whole text.Now followeth Philips condeſcending to the Eunuchs motion: where we haue three things to treate of. 1 A condition propounded by Philip to the Eunuch vpon which it might be lawfull for him to receiue Baptiſme.The particulars of it. 
                  If thou beleeueſt with all thy heart &c. 2 The Eunuchs entertaining the condition: I beleeue &c. 3 The Baptiſme it ſelfe with the circumſtances. Then he commanded the charet &c. In

the firſt of theſe two particulars deſerue note. 1. Philips care to informe the Eunuch to the Sacrament: 2. The thing propounded as a neceſſary condition to the partaking of the Sacrament. Out of Philips care, this doctrine ſprings.
               
                  That he that adminiſtreth the Sacrament ought to be carefull to inſtruct the people in things neceſſarie to the comfortable partaking of the Sacrament.
                  The 4. Doct. Philips courſe heere is exemplare: By his cariage heerin. Euery one that is entruſted with the diſpenſing of the Sacrament may ſee what hee is bound vnto, namely, to acquaint the people carefully vppon what conditions only, they may receiue the Sacraments to their comfort. Philip (no doubt) had taught the Eunuch, that Baptiſme is a neceſſary badge to be put on, by euery one, that would be taken for a Chriſtian, and now, that the Eunuch ſheweth a willingnes to receiue that badge, he ſeeketh to bind him, to a due enquiry into himſelfe, whether he haue that in him, without which he can receiue no benefit by the Sacrament. And that thus much ought to be done by euery one that medleth with the giuing of the Sacrament, it is eaſie to prooue. 1. The doctrine appertaining to the right vſe of the Sacrament is a part of the counſell of God, and therefore not to be ſecreted by him, that deſireth to be pure from the peoples bloud 
                  Act. 20.46.. 2. The Miniſter is appointed by office to watch for the peoples ſoules 
                  Heb. 13.17., and ſuch a watch man he is, that if he ſee a ſword comming, he muſt giue notice of it, that if the people do die for their iniquity, yet he may deliuer his owne ſoule 
                  Ezech. 33.9. Sith then it is a matter of ſuch hazard, and hath ſuch a penalty annexed to it, to preſſe into the vſe of holy things not being ſo fitted and ſo furniſhed as is neceſſary, it is the Miniſters part to giue warning of the danger, that ſo if any man notwithſtanding will giue the aduenture, it may appeare that he is a wilfull treſpaſſer, and his owne heart may be able to teſtifie, that he was aduiſed otherwiſe. 3. It is one part of the Paſtors duty, to take away
                  
(as much as in him lieth) the precious from the vile 
                  Ier. 15.19., and to put a difference betwixt the one and the other, the prepared and the vnworthy, that (as far as it poſſibly may be) Holy things may not be giuen vnto dogs 
                  Math. 7.6. 4. It is a matter of charity, to which euery man is bound, not to ſuffer his brother to ſinne 
                  Leu. 19.7., but by all the meanes he can to ſtoppe him from it. It is a Miniſters duty much more, as much as he may, to taxe the people from committing ſo great an euill, as is the entermedling with the ſeales of Gods Couenant, the due conditions not obſerued. 5. There is a particular iniunction, by which thoſe that ſerue the Lord in the adminiſtration of holy things, are commanded together with the ſanctifying of them ſelues to prepare their brethren 
                  2 Chro. 35.6. Now how ſhall they, prepare their brethren but by teaching them with all diligence, what things are neceſſary to the right vſing of Gods ordinances, and by charging them as from the Lord, not to dare to prouoke him to anger 
                  1. Cor. 10.22, by their irreuerence, and by careles and profane dealing with thoſe things which are of ſo high and holy nature as the Sacraments.
               
                  The 1. vſeThis muſt firſt needs make againſt thoſe who want either ableneſſe or conſcience or both, in this particular, that is, which either know not how to direct the people depending on them, to the right vſe of the Sacrament, or els, knowing ſomewhat appertaining to it, want compaſſion ouer the peoples ſoules, and ſo ſuffer them to defile Gods ordinances, by comming to them, after a kinde of preſumtuous maner, and euen to kick againſt the offring of the Lord 
                  1. Sam. 2. The matter which God laid to Elies charge about his ſons was, His ſonnes ran into a ſlander, and he ſtated them not 
                  1. Sam. 3.13. The ſame is our ſinne, if we labour not with the vtmoſt of our might to ſtop the raſhnes and rudeneſſe of the people, in thruſting themſelues into the vſe of thoſe viſible pledges of his grace, without due prouiſion. God giue vs all, that we may conſider it, becauſe as the irreuerent and profane dealing with the Sacraments, is none of the leaſt

ſinnes of this generation, ſo much of the guilt thereof, it is to be feared will fall vpon vs, who doe not deale herein ſo faithfully as we ſhould, in vrging (as it is fit) the conditions neceſſary, and in inquiring into our people how they be furniſhed.
               This is ſecondly to be vrged againſt theſe of the people,The 2. vſe who are apt (as the moſt are) to ſet at naught the care of their Miniſter, ſeeking to further them in this buſines. It is a common ſaying, what neede he trouble himſelfe about vs, let him looke to himſelfe, he ſhall not anſwere for vs, I hope we are of age to conſider what we haue to doe, neither are we ſo ſimple, as not to know, what belongs to theſe matters &c. Thus it is ordinary with men to ſet light by that care which is taken in duty to God and to their ſoules, to ſtay them from running in (as it were) vpon the pikes of Gods diſpleaſure: Men ought to account it a bleſſing to be ſo watched for, and be it that they were neuer ſo cunning in reſpect of knowledg in the nature of thoſe holy ſeruices, yet who is there, that doth not need an admoniſher. But the truth is, whatſoeuer our knowledge is, which yet (among the greateſt number is but raw) yet certainly our care in thoſe buſineſſes is but ſlender, and happy is he (if he know his owne happines) that hath a faithfull admoniſher, to make him heare a word behind him 
                  Iſa. 30.21., when he is reaching out his hand to the vſe of holy things.
               The next is, the thing propounded as a condition &c.The 5. Doct. wherein we haue two things, to handle. 1. The requiſiteneſſe of faith to the partaking of the Sacrament. 2. The quality of that faith which is requiſite. Touching the former this is the doctrine, That there is a neceſſity of Faith to the end a man may be ſuch a partaker of the Sacrament as is meete. The words are plaine, If thou belieueſt &c. as if he had ſaid, Thou deſireſt Baptiſme, but doeſt thou belieue, if thou doeſt thou maieſt with comfort, if not, it will but encreaſe vnto greater iudgement. In the opening of this doctrine, I will thus proceed. 1. I will ſhew the generall truth of it. 2. I

will teach with what limitation and reſtraint it muſt be vnderſtood. The generall truth I will declare touching both Sacraments. For of both in regard of generall circumſtances there is the ſame reaſon: Neither can there be any cauſe aleaged why there ſhould be a neceſſity of faith, in the right vſe of Baptiſme, and not alſo in the right vſe of the Lords ſupper. Heere for proofe, I might produce thoſe generall ſpeaches, Whatſoeuer is not of faith is ſinne, 
                  Rom. 14.23., and, without faith it is impoſſible to pleaſe God 
                  Heb. 11.6.: But the maine reaſon is this, the Sacraments are in their nature ſeales of righteouſneſſe 
                  Rom. 4.11., and therefore it is abſurd for a man to offer himſelfe to receiue a confirmation of that thing which he hath not, to haue a ſeal, ſet as it were to a blanke, to come to haue faith ſtrengthened, when (perhaps) there is ſcarce a right vnderſtanding either of what is to be belieued, or of what it is to belieue. And then, the ancient order of the Church heerin is not to be neglected. For, as touching the Sacrament of Baptiſme, the courſe taken with theſe whom the Apoſtles and their aſſociates drew out of Iudaiſme and Gentiliſme into Chriſtianity is apparant. They vrged them to giue euidence and teſtimony of their faith, and of their purpoſe to walke with God in newneſſe of life. So Iohn Baptiſt began Math. 3., ſo the reſt followed: and the order of asking queſtions of the Baptized, Doeſt thou belieue, doſt thou renounce: is very probable to haue beene in vſe euen in the Apoſtles time, whereunto that ſaying of S, Peter giueth a very good colour, where ſpeaking of Baptiſme, he mentioneth, the Anſwer of a good conſcience 
                  1. Pet. 3, 21. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ., the ſtipulation or engagement of the conſcience; the baptized giuing his word, that thus and thus he beliueth, and this and this he vndertaketh. And in the primitiue Church ther was in the congregation a certaine forme or ranke, called Catechumeni, which were firſt trained vp in the knowledge of the grounds of Faith, before they were baptized, (they being conuerts out of gentiliſme) which grounds what the chiefe of them were, the

Apoſtle relates (Heb. 6.) which points are there termed, The doctrine of Baptiſmes, becauſe they were the particulars in which they which deſired to bee numbered amongſt Chriſtians were inſtructed before they were baptized. To this alſo agreeth that which is generally held, that the Creed was digeſted into ſuch a forme, as ſeemeth to bee an Anſwer to a queſtion. The baptized was demanded, what doeſt thou belieue? his Anſwer was, I belieue in God the father &c. Thus for the Sacrament of Baptiſme. Now for the other Sacrament, the rule of the Apoſtle is perpetuall, and alwaies binds, that who ſo commeth to it, muſt examine himſelfe 
                  1. Cor. 11.28., and ſeeing all ſearch and examination aimeth at the finding out of ſome thing, what ſhould a Chriſtian intending to partake that holy Myſterie examine himſelfe about rather, then about this, whither, hee be in the faith or no 
                  2. Cor. 11.5.. How is it poſſible hee ſhould bee a meet and a worthy receiuer if he want this Grace. And thus I haue cleered the generall ground of this Doctrine. Now I come to the limitation thereof. Touching which this I ſay, that in the Sacrament of the Lords ſupper it holds ſtill that none ought to be admitted to it, but ſuch as are able to giue euidence for themſelues, that they are belieuers, but in the Sacrament of Baptiſme the caſe is not like. For we muſt not hold that the ſacrament of Baptiſme can lawfully be giuen to none, but to ſuch as are able (being vrged) to giue teſtimony of their Faith: becauſe euen the Infants of belieuing parents haue a right to that Sacrament, albeit as yet, becauſe of their preſent ſtate, they cannot (in ſtrait ſpeaking) bee ſaid to belieue, nor yet are able to anſwer a demand concerning Faith, ſo that the point touching faith neceſſary to the Sacrament of Baptiſme is to be vnderſtood only of thoſe, which are admitted to it being of yeares. As for example, if a Turke, or Iew or Pagan, ſhould come amongſt vs and ſhould deſire Baptiſme, it were neceſſary he ſhould firſt be inſtructed, in the doctrine of faith, yea and examined and

dealt with, and cauſed to giue publique Teſtimony of his beleeuing, but we muſt not ſtretch this rule ſo, as that we ſhould exclude from this Sacrament the children of Beleuers. Indeed the Anabaptiſts, who diſpute with the vtmoſt of their skill againſt the Baptiſme of Infants, doe much vrge the practiſe of the Apoſtles, and this our text among others, namely that they are not read to haue baptized any but ſuch who by age were able to bee countable for their faith, and from thence they would draw a generall concluſion, that where there is no capableneſſe of faith, there ought to be no Baptiſme. Heerevnto diuers things might be replyed but theſe briefly. That it is not ſimply an improper ſpeech to call the infant of belieuing parents, a beleeuer, becauſe although he do not now actually beleeue, yet partly, becauſe for his parents ſake, he is within the compaſſe of the couenant, partly becauſe of that which may well be hoped for hereafter, as it were hard to terme him an infidell, ſo it were not harſh to call him a beleeuer: And why not a beleeuer, as well as a reaſonable creature, though yet there is in him no vſe of reaſon, no nor any certainty of ability heereafter to enjoy it: And beſides by the antient and moſt receiued doctrine of the Church, the infants of beleeuers, are reputed to haue a kinde of intereſt into their parents faith, who by faith appprehend the promiſe of eternall life as appertaining to their children, as farre forth as to themſelues. And what more inconuenience to terme ſuch, beleeuers, in reſpect of their parents, then to terme them holy through them as Paul doth 1 Cor. 7.14.. 2 The argument is naught from the Apoſtles practize; for that courſe which they tooke with one certaine age of perſons, cannot be ſtretched out to all without exception. As, when the Apoſtle deliuereth a law, that he which doth not labour ſhould not eate 
                  r. were it not a notorious abſurdity yea and a wickedneſſe, to keepe meat from infants vnder a pretence that they doe not worke. And why? becauſe euery man conceiueth that the law belongeth onely to

thoſe which are of age and ability to labour, and yet neglect it. The ſame may be ſayd, of he Apoſtles proceeding in baptizing; that it extendes onely to thoſe that bee of yeares: to ſubiect infants to the ſame condition with them were vnreaſonable. In Abrahams perſon, the knowledge of the Nature of the Sacrament, and an yeelding himſelfe to liue vnder the Lords obedience, went before the receiuing of circumciſion: yet in Iſaac it was not ſo, he was circumciſed firſt, and inſtructed after. It was neceſſary in Abraham that a profeſſion of Faith ſhould goe before circumciſion, it was not neceſſary in Iſaac, the difference in their ages altered the caſe of the neceſſity. 3 As concerning the Apoſtles practize it ſelfe, there is no certainty for it, that they baptized none but ſuch as were able to make acknowledgement of their Faith. There is more probability on the contrary, that they baptized euen ſome infants, as (namely) when they baptized whole families, as Lydia and her houſhold 
                  Act. 16.18., the Iaylor with all that belonged to him 
                  Dſ. 33.. Criſpus with all his houſhold 
                  Act. 18 8, the houſhold of Stephanas 
                  1 Cor. 1.16.. Albeit a man cannot make a certaine demonſtration, that in theſe generall Baptiſmes adminiſtred to whole families there were ſome infants baptized with the reſt, yet it were very ſtrange if there ſhould be none, in none of theſe houſholds, and to ſay that there is in ſuch ſpeeches and figuratiue ſpeaking, all the family being put for the greateſt part of the family, and ſo vnder that colour to exclude infants, is but an indifferent euaſion, it being a rule, that we are not to account any thing as figuratiuely, where there is no neceſſity, for the auoyding of ſome manifeſt inconuenience like to follow, if the words of the ſentence ſhould bee taken properly. Be it that none of all theſe things wil ſerue to iuſtifie the Baptiſme of infants (yet vnable to make confeſſion of their faith) yet their intereſt into the promiſe of God is a ſufficient plea: that promiſe is made to them that beleeue, and to their children 
                  Act. 2 39.. If then the promiſe belong to infants, why not alſo the ſeale of the promiſe. It

may be, ſome may make doubt of this reaſon, becauſe it may ſeeme by the like argument, that vnto infants alſo ought to be giuen the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: They haue a right to the promiſe, and why not alſo to the ſeale of the promiſe: ſo may ſome diſpute. Anſwere, Indeed this mooued ſome among the antients to giue this other Sacrament euen to infants, as Cyprian Serm. 5. de lapſis.. and Auguſtine De ecc. dog. c. 52.. the latter of which two, was the rather ſtrengthened therein by miſtaking Chriſts words, Except ye eat the fleſh of the ſonne of man, and drinke his blood, yee haue no life in you 
                  Ioh. 6.53., ſuppoſing thoſe words to bee ment of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, he accounted the vſe therof of neceſſity to ſaluation. But the Truth is, that the reaſon fetched from the intereſt into Gods promiſe, which doth prooue infants to haue a right into Baptiſme, is not of like force, to prooue them to haue a right into this Sacrament. For beſides the difference betwixt the two Sacraments in reſpect that the one is the Sacrament of entrance into the Church, and therefore agreeing to infants; the other the Sacrament of proceeding, and therefore fit only for thoſe which are of grouth in Chriſt; beſides this, I ſay, there be certaine expreſſe reſtraints to be collected out of the rules ſet downe for the maner of receiuing the Lords Supper, as namely that in vſing it, there muſt be an examining of ones ſelfe 
                  1 Cor. 21.. there muſt bee a diſcerning the Lords body 
                  ver. 29.. there muſt be a Remembrance 
                  Vſ. 25. of Chriſt, which be things whieh infants cannot reach to. Thus haue I endeuoured to cleere this point, touching the limitation of this doctrine, of the neceſſity of faith to the right partaking of the Sacraments, proouing it to be vnderſtood only (in the point of Baptiſme) of theſe that are of yeares, and that this courſe taken by the Apoſtles in baptiſzing thoſe of yeares,, is no preiudice at all to the baptiſme of infants, but that ſtill it remaineth firme and ſure, that children borne in the Church ought to bee admitted to the Sacrament which may be a pleadge of their admiſſion into the

Church, and whereby alſo much comfort may returne vnto their parents, God being pleaſed hereby to giue euidence, of the truth of his promiſe that he is not aſhamed 
                  Heb. 11.76.. to be called both our God, and the God of our ſeed alſo.
               The maine and ſpeciall vſe of this doctrine is to be a direction to vs,The vſe. how we may learne to make the right vſe of that Sacrament of Baptiſme, which in our infancy we receiued. The beſt vſe of Baptiſme is to vſe it as a ſtore-houſe of comfort, as indeed it is, being applied a right. Now as no man, not baptized till he is of yeares can bee comfortably and effectually baptized vnleſſe hee beleeue: ſo no man baptized in his infancy, can, when he commeth to yeares, comfortably make vſe of his Baptiſme vnleſſe he beleeue. There is an old popiſh opinion which is firmely held by ignorant men & women, and it is this, that Baptiſme doth confer grace of and by it ſelfe, howſoeuer the party bee diſpoſed that receiue it. And ſo people generally hold a conceipt, that there is a kinde of vertue and Chriſtendome (as they call it) infuſed into them, by the hauing of this Sacrament howſoeuer they be affected. But this is a meere fiction and fancy without truth. It is a kinde of lifting vp the Sacrament aboue the naturall condition thereof, and miniſters of the Sacrament, are thereby made workers of miracles, as if their Arte did regenerate of it ſelfe. Peter ſaith, that the waſhing of the fleſh doth not ſaue 
                  1 Pet. 3.2.. Simon Magus was baptized and yet after that remained in the gall of bitterneſſe and bond of Iniquity 
                  Act. 13.23.. and many of the old Iſraelites were baptized vnder Moſes, with whom God was not pleaſed 
                  1 Cor. 10.2.5.. Paul ſaith, Chriſt ſanctified his Church, by the waſhing of water, through the word 
                  Eph. 5.26.. So that it is the beleeuing and receiuing of the word that maketh the Sacrament to be effectuall. Let no man therefore glory in his Baptiſme, vnleſſe he haue Faith. If thou who haſt beene baptized, ſhall ſay vnto me in ſome ſuch maner as the Eunuch ſpake to Philip, See I haue beene baptized, what ſhould let me to aſſure my ſelfe that I am a Chriſtian. I cannot but

anſwer thee as Philip did, If thou beleeueſt &c. thou maiſt. Let vs looke to this one thing therefore, euen to our Faith. Faith is the tenure by which we hold heauen, Baptiſme is but the ſeale to confirme it. Faith, if we haue it, will appeare by this, It worketh by loue 
                  Gal. 5.6.. and what loue, a loue to three things: To the author of Faith, and that will appeare by obedience Ioh. 14.15.. 2 To the word of Faith 
                  Rom. 10.8.. For he which is of God heareth Gods word 
                  Ioh. 8.47., and faith cannot but loue that whereby it is begotten and built vp further. 3 To the houſhold of Faith 
                  Gal. 6.10., He that loueth him which begat, loueth him alſo which is begotten of him 
                  1. Ioh. 51., ſuch an one, will loue euen the name of a diſciple 
                  Math. 10.42.. Try then your Baptiſme by your Faith, and your Faith by the fruits, otherwiſe the water of your Baptiſme ſhall not be able to quench the fire of that burning lake which is the ſecond death. The ſame muſt bee ſayd of the other Sacrament; thou ſaiſt to me againe. Lo heere are Bread and wine, what ſhould let me to communicate, I anſwer ſtill as I am taught heere, If thou beleeueſt with all thy heart thou maiſt: If thou come without Faith, thou art no welcome gueſt to this banquet; without it thou mayeſt eate the Lords bread,Panem domini non panem dominum: vt Auguſt. de Inda. but not that bread which is the Lord, and thy receiuing ſhall be but a pledge of iudgement and vengeance to thy ſoule. This point will be quickned by that which followeth touching the quality of Faith.
            
            
               
               THE SECOND SERMON.
               
                  NExt to the requiſitenes of Faith to the well pertaking of the Sacrament, followeth the quality of that Faith which is required: If thou belieueſt with all thy heart &c.
                  The ſence of the words heere handled. as if it had beene ſaid, Thou deſireſt to bee baptized, if thou doeſt belieue and that not formally alone and in ſhew, but in ſincerity and in truth of thy heart thou maieſt, this Sacrament ſhall returne to thy comfort, and bee a pledge of grace vnto thy ſoule. This thus opened doth afford two doctrines.
               This is the firſt,The 1. Doct. 
                  That there is a kind of Faith out of which there commeth no good vnto the ſoule of him that hath it. This is inſinuated in Philips ſpeach, For ſo much manifeſtly is intended, that it was poſſible for the Eunuch to belieue after a ſort, and yet to remaine vncapable of the comfort, and ſweetnſſe of the Sacrament; Suppoſe thou belieueſt, yet if it be not with all thy heart, by ſuch a Faith thou art not one haires bredth neerer to ſaluation, ſo that the very nature of the ſpeach preſuppoſeth an vnprofitable Faith, a Faith which is of no vſe, vnleſſe it bee to the encreaſing of his damnation that profeſſeth it. This is alſo eaſily prooued by the Scripture. Our Sauior in the parable of the Seed ſpeaketh of a Faith, and the ſame gotten by hearing which is alſo accompanied with a kind of flaſhing, ſodaine ioy, but yet is but like ſeed among ſtones, withering away for lacke of moiſture 
                  Luk. 8.6.13.. This is that Faith which is called a temporall Faith, or a Faith whoſe continuance is only for ſome little time. Some ſuch Faith may ſeeme to haue beene in

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
thoſe, of whom it is ſaid, Many belieued &c. when they ſaw his miracles, But Ieſus did not commit himſelfe vnto them. 
                  Ioh. 2.23.24.. There was a certaine yeelding wrought in their hearts by the power of Chriſts miracles, that ſurely he was that Meſſias, yet Chriſt did not hold them worth the truſting to. In this preſent Chapter it is ſaid, Simon Magus belieued 
                  Act. 8.13.. We cannot thinke his Faith was that which for diſtinctions ſake we terme a Sauing Faith: He had as a learned man ſaith of him,Auguſt queſt. in Leuitic. the viſible Baptiſme but he wanted the inuiſible ſanctifying. Saint Paul, mentioneth a Faith which a man may haue and yet bee nothing 
                  1. Cor. 13.2.. Iames giueth a kind of Faith euen to Diuells 
                  Iam. 2.19., and ſpeaketh of a Faith, which he calleth a dead Faith 
                  Ver. 26.. Theſe few teſtimonies are very pregnant. Sathan knoweth how to transforme himſelfe into an Angell of light 
                  2. Cor. 11.14, ſo that there is no good thing but he can counterfeit it and doth, and by that meanes maketh many hypocrites to make a wonderfull ſhew. Seeming to be as ſincere and forward in religion as the beſt. There is no grace which accompanieth ſaluation, wherewith God is pleaſed to enrich and furniſh his elect, but he can frame ſome one or other of his limmes to a ſhadow of it, yea and teach them to come ſo neere it as that for the preſent it ſhall be a very hard matter to diſcerne it. There may be ſomewhat like praier, which yet is not praier, but lip-deuotion; Something like repentance, which yet is not repentance, but worldly ſorrow cauſing death 
                  2. Cor. 7.10, ſomething like obedience, which yet is not obedience but groſſe hypocriſie, and ſo in other particulars. Felix trembled 
                  Act 24.26., Ahab was humbled 
                  1. Kin. 21.27., Saul confeſſed his fault 1. Sam. 26.11, Eſau wept 
                  Heb. 12 17., Iudas had a kinde of repenting 
                  Math 27.3., Herod heard gladly 
                  Mar. 6 20., Balaam deſired to die the death of the righteous 
                  Num. 23.10.. The Apoſtle ſeemeth to acknowledge a taſte of the good gift of God &c. in ſome revolters, that yet fall away beyond all poſſibility of repentance Heb. 6.4.5. Thus ſtill it appeares how neere a man may come to true religion, and yet ſtill be in the ſnare of the Diuell, caried vp and

downe as a Captiue at his will 
                  2. Tim. 2.26.. He may carry the name of a belieuer, and yet miſſe the end of Faith, the ſaluation of his ſoule 
                  1. Pet. 1.9..
               The vſe is, to exhort vs all, who thinke wee haue Faith,The vſe and boaſt of Faith, and profeſſe our ſelues to be belieuers to giue all deligence 
                  2. Pet. 1.5., and to prooue our ſelues with our beſt endeuour, whether the faith which we thinke we haue be ſuch as will not deceiue vs in the end. Wee ſee by that which hath beene ſaid, that there is a thing which for the time is as like vnto Faith, as one thing can bee to another. The wit of man for the preſent can diſcerne no difference, and yet the hauers of it ſhall not be ſaued. How behoofull then is it for vs to follow the counſell of Paul, to prooue our ſelues whether we are in the Faith or no 
                  2. Cor. 13.5. The life of a Chriſtian is a continuall warfare, we haue a ſtrong and a dangerous enemy to grapell with, and there are many particulars of ſpirituall armour neceſſarie for our defence; among the reſt, there is a ſhield of Faith 
                  Eph. 6.16.. A carefull ſouldier will try his buckler whether it will keepe out ſhot, or otherwiſe be free from being pierced by that kind of weapon, againſt which it muſt be vſed. Now if faith be a ſhield, it muſt be tried that it may be a ſhield of proofe againſt the day of battell. Faith is (as I before ſaid) the Tenure of our Free-hold (for by it we ſtand 
                  
                     
                        •
                     . Cor. 11.24.) All the euidence we haue to ſhew for our inheritance in the kingdome of heauen is our Faith. Now we know the care that men haue about their deeds and tenures: they examine them, to ſee whether they be ſound, they aske the counſell of this and the other Lawyer touching them: Such yea and far greater care ought we to haue about our Faith. If that be not good, what becometh of all our hope for life eternall. And thinke what a wofull thing it is herein to bee miſtaken. I ſaid Faith is the Tenure we hold heauen by. Now put caſe a man hath continued a ſute at law, a great while truſting to a certaine piece of writing which he hath in a boxe, if at the day of hearing, that writing proue inſufficient, what

becommeth of him? wee know hee looſeth all his former coſt, he is caſt out of doores, and miſſeth that which hee thought he ſhould haue enioyed all his daies. So in this: A man maketh account, he hath Faith ſufficient to ſaluation; hereupon he goeth on, without feare of future euill, at the day of reckning his faith proueth counterfet; thinke then in what a wofull caſe is that man. Wee may gueſſe ſomewhat herein by a ſpeach of Chriſts. Many ſhall ſay to mee, in that day, Lord, haue we not in thy name prophecied &c. and yet it ſhall be ſaid to them, Depart from mee, &c. 
                  Math. 7.22.23.. It ſeemeth theſe will bee very confident, and make full account to be ſaued: But now when for all this, it ſhalbe ſaid, Depart, we may well tremble to thinke vpon their miſery. For the more ſure a man is in his owne opinion, the greater confuſion & vexation it will be to him to be diſappointed of his hope. How neceſſary a matter is this to be vrged in theſe ſecure times. It would make a mans heart woe to thinke how exceeding carefull men be in other things, but how deſperate in this point concerning Faith. Is this leaſe good, is this bond good, is this cloth for my garment good, is this beaſt good, is this ground good, is this husbandry good, is this corne which I haue choſen for my ſeed good. Wee abound in theſe inquiries, and are ſcarſely euer ſatisfied, wee are ſtill ielous and afraid, leſt it ſhould not bee as wee deſire. But who amongſt many makes a queſtion touching his Faith. who ſaith to himſelfe, Here is much ſpeaking of Faith, and it is taught that without it there can be no ſaluation, what is my Faith which I promiſe myſelfe I haue, ſuch as it ought to bee, ſure if it be not, I can neuer be ſaued. Who is it that thus communeth with his owne ſoule. Who keepeth this priuy audite within himſelfe. I hearkned and heard and no man ſpake aright ſaid Ieremy of old Ier. 8.6.. He would euen deliuer vp the like verdit of the men of this generation, if he were now liuing. It is the great pollicy of the Diuill, to leade men on, and to lull them a ſleepe in their careleſſenes, it filleth his barnes, and helps to encreaſe his kingdome. A

debating with a mans ſelfe touching his hope of a better life, is a very firſt ſtep towards heauen. Sathan knoweth that if men ſhould once put it to the queſtion how their Faith is, they ſhould ſee ſuch ſcantnes in themſelues that way, that the very ſight thereof would make them looke about and begin a better courſe; wheras now preſuming al is well, they run on headlong, and will ſurely be in the pit, before they be ware. When thou art perſwaded and called vpon to examine thy ſelfe, whether thy faith be right and ſound, why man (ſaith the diuell by and by vnto thee) wherfore ſhouldſt thou doubt it, Haſt not thou beleeued in God euer ſince thou couldſt remember. Haſt thou done thus well hitherto, and ſhouldst thou now beginne to make queſtion of thy Faith. Feare not, doe not doubt, but thou art euen as good a beleeuer as the best. Thus with theſe and the like charmes, this ſubtile enemy rockes men aſleepe, and encourageth them to feed themſelues with vaine perſwaſions, and to trust on lying words which cannot profit 
                  Iere. 7.8.. Let therefore the doctrine taught worke to the reforming of this common euill, from which ſcarce one of many, is able well to cleere himſelfe. We hope to be ſaued, we ſay we haue faith, we would take it for a wronge, if any man ſhould call vs vnbeleeuers: Oh let vs remember that there is a faith which will deceiue, a kinde of beleeuing which is but counterfet. Let vs not content our ſelues with ſuppoſals, with idle imaginations which haue no ground, but let vs bring our faith to the touch-ſtone, and let it be tried throughly, whither it will hold in the day of account or no. There is nothing more contrary to Chriſtianity then preſumption, nor any in worſe caſe, then they which are moſt ſecure, and make themſelues beleeue, that all is with them as it ſhould. We read that Iacob in his dreameſaw a Ladder vpon the earth, of which the top reached to Heauen 
                  Gen 28.12.. This Ladder betokened Chriſt, as Chriſt himſelfe hath reference to it, in his ſpeech to Nathaniel, touching Angels aſcending and deſcending vpon the ſonne of man 
                  Ioh. 1.51.. Now (to apply this to my

preſent purpoſe) we know that hee which climbeth vp a ladder, is eſpecially carefull of his footing and hold, and looketh diligently and aduiſedly to euery ſtep. So doth he which is in Chriſt, and is by him, and through him getting vp to heauen; he is alwaies trying whither his ſtanding be ſure, and whither his hold that he hath caught, be ſuch as will not deceiue him. Thus he worketh out his ſaluation with feare and trembling 
                  Phil. 2.12.. and happy is he who is ſo buſied: And ſo I haue laboured to preſſe the vſe of this neceſſary point. In the matter of faith it is a dangerous thing to be deceiued: If a mans faith be vnſound, all his hope is ouerthrowen, it is eaſie to be miſtaken, our Heart is deceitfull 
                  Ier. 17.9., and in our owne caſes wee are partiall iudges; Sathan is cunning and will beguile vs with a ſhadow of Faith, and there is a faith, which is very like to true Faith, but yet will deceiue vs; what then can be more behoofull then to proue our faith that we may be ſure it will not faile vs moſt when we ſhall need it moſt. This is the ſumme. And to the end wee may bee the better prepared for this duty of Triall, I come now to the next doctrine, as the Text giueth occaſion, to ſhew what kinde of Faith it is which is auailable to life eternall, and which is therefore called, the Faith of Gods elect 
                  Tit. 1.1.. becauſe it ſtreameth from Election and is a pledge thereof.
               
                  The 2. Doct.The next doctrine then is, That onely that Faith maketh a man capable of ſaluation and giueth him an interest into life eternall which is with all thy heart: This is direct out of the words, If thou beleeuest with all thy heart thou mayst: that is, If thy beleeuing be ſincere, and thy faith vnfained, thou mayſt finde comfort in this Sacrament, otherwiſe it will be to thee but an idle ſigne. In all matters betwixt God and vs, this is a chiefe thing which he requireth, that we giue him our hart 
                  Prou. 23.26., & that, that which we profes to do, be done in ſinglenes. He himſelfe is a God of truth 
                  Pſal. 31.5.. and therefore can delight in none but ſuch in whoſe ſpirit there is no guile 
                  Pſal. 32.2.. His choſen are called the Iſrael of God 
                  Gal. 6.16.. and it is the badge of a true

                  Iſraelite to bee without Deceit 
                  1. Ioh. 1.47.: A double heart is the marke of the vngodly Pſal. 12 2.. and God commands vs to purge out this leauen if we would draw neere vnto his Maieſty Iam. 4.8.. The true worſhippers ſhall worſhip him in Truth, for the father requireth euen ſuch 
                  Ioh 4 23.. It remaineth as a blemiſh in the name of the old Iſraelites that albeit they made a ſhew of ſeeking God, yet their Heart was not vpright with him, neither were they faithfull in his Couenant 
                  Pſal. 78.37. Thus much to ſhew the neceſſity of vnfainednes, and of doing that with the Heart, which we doe in all things which concerne God, and ſo by conſequence in the matter of Faith. God is Truth, Chriſt is Truth, the holy Ghoſt is the ſpirit of truth. How can Faith make vnion betwixt God and vs vnleſſe it be Faith of truth 
                  2. Theſ. 2.13. This point will not bee ſo profitable in the application, vnleſſe, we looke a little more neerely into it, to finde out, what that ſpeciall point is, in reſpect whereof Faith is ſaid to be with all the heart. The heart is the ſeat and fountaine of all the affections. A man therefore belieueth with all the heart, when that which is belieued is become (as it were) the center of all his affections, the maine marke and matter of his loue, delight, ioy, &c. ſo that whatſoeuer els is loued or delighted in, is ſo reſpected only for the ſake of that principall ſcope, and ſo far forth as it leadeth and draweth towards it. As for example: The maine obiect of Faith is Chriſt: now then to belieue in Chriſt with all the heart, is to faſten a mans whole affiance, his whole ioy, his whole contentment only vpon him; So that Chriſt beareth the whole ſway and principality in his affections and the maine end, why his Faith worketh and ſtriueth towards him, and why he deſireth to be vnited to him, is not ſo much the good and ſaluation of his owne ſoule, as the enioying of him, in whom all fulneſſe dwelleth 
                  Col. 1.19., and in whom the Treaſures of all godneſſe are laid vp. There may be a relying and a belieuing vpon Chriſt, which may bee ſaid to be true, and vndiſſembled, in this reſpect, becauſe the party in whom it

is, doth indeed doe that which he profeſſeth to doe, neither doth ſpeake contrary to his ſecret thoughts, when he ſaith he beleeueth in Chriſt, and yet is not this the Faith with all the heart here ſpoken of: As for example: I doubt not but a Papiſt ſpeaketh truly and as hee meaneth when he ſaith he beleeueth to be ſaued by Ieſus Chriſt, yet notwithſtanding, there wanteth in him this quality of belieuing with all his heart, becauſe he hath alſo a ſecret dependance vpon the helpe of Saints, vpon the interceſſion of the virgin Mary, vpon the merit of ſome worke, or action of his owne. Here Chriſt hath not all his heart, becauſe he hath diuided it betwixt him and ſome other obiects. So againe among our ſelues, I doubt not but many profeſſe ſoothly, and without fraude in auouching that they haue caſt all their hope of ſaluation only vpon Ieſus Chriſt, and yet there is a defect in there Faith, and that in this particular, that it is not with all the heart, becauſe their Heart draweth not towards Chriſt, ſeeketh not to be knit to Chriſt only for Chriſts ſake, and becauſe of that worth and excellency which is conceiued to bee in him, but for ſome other by-reſpect, and for their owne ſakes. For let mee make this knowne vnto you, (which is not generally conſidered;) it is poſſible for a reprobate to goe thus far; namely, to acknowledge there is no ſaluation in any other but in Chriſt, to diſclaime all hope ſaue only by him, to deſire truly and with his ſoule to haue a part in him and to account himſelfe happy if hee might haue fauour with God through him; thus far he may come, and yet ſtill Chriſt hath not all his Heart, becauſe the principall drift and aime of his reſpecting Chriſt, is, his owne ſaluation by Chriſt: why (will ſome man ſay), what ſhall a man els aime at in beleeuing vpon Chriſt, but only ſaluation by Chriſt. Anſwere: I deny not but that it is lawfull to loue Chriſt, and to reſt vpon Chriſt for ſaluations ſake, but I ſay withall, that he which eſteemeth Chriſt for nothing els but to be ſaued by him, ſhall neuer be ſaued by

him. My Heart is to my ſelfe, it is not to Chriſt if I make account of him and ſeeke to him only for my benefit. So then, Chriſt is belieued with all the heart, when the enioying of Chriſt is the ſcope of our belieuing. I deſire not to enioy Chriſt ſo much becauſe I would be ſaued, as thus, I deſire to be ſaued that I might enioy Chriſt. My Heart is to Chriſt as to the maine, to mine owne ſaluation as to the inferior, and as to a matter therefore only worthy the deſiring becauſe it leadeth vnto Chriſt. Thus I hope we now ſee, 1. that that Faith which is effectuall to ſaluation is only that which is a belieuing with all the heart, and then 2. that that is a beleeuing with all the Heart, when Chriſt who is the obiect of Faith, and is acknowledged to bee a ſole and complete ſauior, is laboured after principally for himſelfe, my heart is towards him for his owne ſake, more then for mine owne ſaluation ſake. I know I can not depend vpon him, and be made one with him, but it will bee for my profit, yet I looke not ſo much vpon that, as I doe vpon him; yea and I ſtriue to be affected as Iob, to continue my Faith, and my truſting to him, though he ſhould ſlay mee 
                  Iob. 13.15., though I ſhould not only not get good by him, but receiue ſome ſharpenes from him.
               We muſt couple this point with the former,The vſe and I wiſh we may well digeſt it, and that we could bee perſwaded to beſtow ſome part of our thoughts vpon it euery day.Ardua ras est fides. Hierony. It is no eaſie thing rightly to beleeue. Not euery one, that taketh the name of Ieſus into his mouth ſhall by and by bee ſaued, no nor yet euery one which goeth further then a ſuperficiall naming him. It is poſſible to vnderſtand the myſtery of Chriſt, to profeſſe truly and vndiſſemblingly a dependance onely vpon Chriſt, and (as it were) to ſet vp a mans reſt on this, that no man can come vnto God the father, but by Chriſt, and yet in the end to come ſhort. Let vs remember that the very life and glory of faith is to beleeue with all thy Heart, that is, in our beleeuing to let Chriſt haue the preeminence, the full and the very all of

our affections. If wee can bring our ſoules once to this, to value Chriſt more for his owne proper worthes ſake, then for owne ſaluations ſake, then are we beleeuers with all our Heart. This is indeed ſinglenes & ſincerity of affection this is vprightnes of mind: when my faith reacheth after Chriſt for Chriſt, I account my owne ſaluation but the Bay, the fruition of Chriſt the Maine. Theſe be two things I know which cannot bee ſundered in enioying, Chriſt and ſaluation; but yet it is poſſible to giue the one the precedence aboue the other in deſiring. Let not this ſeeme ſtrange vnto vs. Who amongſt vs, accounts him a friend worth the hauing, whoſe chiefe end in ſeeking to be linked in with him in ſociety, is more his owne commodity, or ſome credit like to accrew to him, then the fruition of him to whom he profeſſeth loue. When we can ſay of a man profeſſing friendſhip, I know he reſpecteth mee for this, or for that, were it not for ſuch a hope, or the expectation of ſuch a benefit, I am ſure he would regard me as little as another man, will we iudge ſuch an one an vnfained friend? How then ſhall that be called an vnfained Faith, which aimeth at Chriſt onely for this becauſe there is hope of a kingdome by beleeuing. This is a mercenary reſpect, neither is that a true ſauing faith which hath no higher ſcope. Would I not draw towards Chriſt in my deſire and affection, if there were no ſaluation by his meanes, is it onely to make a benefit of him, that I do caſt my ſelfe vpon him? & ſhal this be called faith? No I doubt not but ſuch reſpects as theſe may be found in many which yet ſhall bee called the leaſt in the Kingdome of God. And thus we may ſee how one thing followeth vpon another: that maine matter of preaching muſt be Chriſt the ſupreame purpoſe of hearing muſt be to finde Chriſt This was taught out of the 35 verſe.; and ſo the principall intendement of faith muſt be to enioy Chriſt. To be ſaued, may lawfully be an inducement, but ſure we ſhall miſſe, if it be the chiefeſt motiue. If we will beleeue on Chriſt; he will haue all the Heart or nothing. And ſo much touching

the quality of Faith which I commend to our beſt obſeruation, & wiſh it may be well conſidered, that we may not beguile our ſelues with an opinion of faith. Let it bee remembred how neere counterfet faith commeth vnto true faith, and wherein the maine difference doth conſiſt. Chriſt hath but halfe the heart, if wee reſpect him onely for this, that vpon his ſhoulders wee may bee carried vpwards into Heauen. If we could thinke Heauen it ſelfe not worthy the hauing but onely for his ſake, that were excellent. So far of the condition propounded by Philip, now next of the Eunuchs vndertaking it: Then he anſwered, I beleeue that &c.
               We haue here three things to note. 1 That the Eunuch was able to giue an account of his Faith: 2 That hee was ready ſo to doe. 3 What the account was: The firſt of theſe is very apparent: for what is this ſpeech but an account giuen by the Eunuch what hee beleeued, and it was ſo ſufficient, that vpon it he was admitted to the Sacrament. So that the doctrine hence is,The 3 doct. 
                  That it is neceſſary for euery good Christian to be able to expreſſe for himſelfe what he beleeues. This ſufficiency of the Eunuch to returne an anſwer to the inquiry made into his faith, is not to bee paſſed ouer without noting; out of all queſtion it was written for our learning, that we might labour not to be to ſeeke in the things which doe concerne our ſoules. This is that which Peter caleth, a giuing a reaſon of that hope which a man hath 
                  1. Pet. 3.15.: Paul termeth it a confeſſion with the Mouth 
                  Rom. 10.9., and maketh it a neceſſary companion of that Faith which brings to ſaluation; and Let euery man be fully perſwaded in his owne minde 
                  Rom. 14 5., that is, let him that is a beleeuer, labour to conceiue diſtinctly what that is, whereupon it is neceſſary for him to reſt, that he may be ſaued let him not ſatisfie himſelfe with a kinde of reſerment to the faith of others, but let him ſee that hee himſelfe doe apprehend that which is neceſſary: The iust must liue by his Faith 
                  Heb. 2.4., by that which hee conceiueth in his owne heart, not by ſubiecting himſelfe to the opinion of

another. This is life euerlasting to know thee, the onely God 
                  Ioh. 17.3.: It is not imagination, or ſuppoſall, or ſome looſe, and vncertaine fancy, ſome rauing coniecture, that can guide a man to life; it is vnderſtanding, it is knowledge, ſuch which the hauer, is both able (if need be) to ſet downe determinately what it is, and to giue a reaſon alſo thereof to: Thus is it written, and this I beleeue; this is my Faith, and this is the foundation thereof; Why elſe is it, that the Scripture teacheth grounds of the Chriſtian Faith ſo exactly? Why is it, that there is any ſuch neceſſity laid vpon vs, which are called to the ſeruice of the Church, to lay open the myſtery of Chriſt? Why (I ſay) ſhould this be, if it were not the duty of beleeuers, to be able in heart to comprehend, and with mouth alſo (if occaſion bee) to declare, whereupon they reſt, for the ſaluation of their ſoules. Indeed what comfort can there be, or what ſweetneſſe in vncertainty, or what poſſibility to put Sathan to flight, with ſome confuſed motion, which a man hath catched vp he knoweth not how. It is the glory of Chriſtians to be fulfilled with Knowledge and ſpirituall vnderſtanding 
                  Col. 1.9., to haue the Spirit of wiſedome and reuelation, and to know what is the hope of their calling &c. Eph. 1.17.18. A ſhame to them to be children in vnderſtanding 
                  1 Cor. 14.20., to be dull of hearing 
                  Heb. 5.11., to be euer learning and yet neuer able to come to the knowledge of the truth 
                  2 Tim. 3.7.. Theſe things may ſerue to prooue this doctrine.
               
                  The vſeIn the vſe it giueth ful occaſion to accuſe the ignorance of the times, in which ſo many of all ſorts, and of all degrees, are vtterly vnable to giue a comfortable account of that which is neceſſary to be knowen vnto ſaluation. Euery pariſh, euery aſſembly, euery congregation ſwarmes with ſuch. There is no Miniſter that laboureth to know the ſtate of his flocke, but can be a witneſſe with me touching this. Men ſpeake of I know not what, hoping well, and of being of that which they call Gods beliefe, but (alas) how far be they from that which Peter calleth a Reaſon of their Hope? The Apoſtle calleth Faith an euidence
                  Heb. 11.1.. Now,

ſuppoſe a man ſhould be called before a iudge in a matter betwixt party & party, & could there be able to ſpeake as little to the point in queſtion, as the moſt are able to ſay in the caſe of Faith; would the Iudge account their anſwere a competent euidence, or would hee not thinke himſelfe wronged to haue his eares troubled with ſuch heed-leſſe tales. Surely he that had no better to ſhew for his outward eſtate, then many haue for their future inheritance into the kingdome of glory, would and well might feare euery houre to be diſplaced. This is wofull in the cleere light of the Goſpell, and it is one of the ſinnes for which the Lord hath a ſpeciall controuerſie 
                  Hoſ. 4.1. with the times. And it is a ſinne ſo much the more dangerous, becauſe it is ſcarſely taken notice of to be a ſinne. To be a ſwearer, a whoremaſter, a drunkard, an oppreſſor, a greedy worldling, a lyer, a curſed ſpeaker, theſe and the like, partly by the light of nature, partly by ſome generall rules gotten by continuall hearing, are of the moſt, yeelded vnto to bee ſinnes. But ignorance in religion, yea euen in theſe points, which are (as it were) the very life and ſoule of religion, is hardly taken to be a ſinne. Who thinketh himſelfe euer the leſſe honeſt becauſe he is ignorant. Thus (I ſay) is this euill, the more dangerous, becauſe it paſſeth away vnobſerued, vntaxed, vnblamed, and yet it is a principal ſin againſt which the Lord will proceed at his iudging day 2. Theſſ. 1.8. and the people that doe not vnderstand ſhall fall 
                  Hoſ. 4.14.. It is true there is much dulneſſe, much hardneſſe of conceit, much weakeneſſe of apprehenſion euen in the very beſt, but yet certainly if that be not in vs, which in one place is called a Minde to know 
                  1. Ioh. 5.20., in another an endouour to know 
                  Hoſ. 6 3., we can neuer be ſaued. Remember we how the Eunuch profited by one Sermon, and conſider how many we haue heard, who yet (many of vs) cannot giue ſo good an account as the Eunuch did. For let no man thinke, that this was all, namely that the Eunuch was able to deliuer thus many words, as are heere, and no more; it were an iniury to the memory

of that holy man, if wee ſhould ſo imagine, and it were a wrong to the wiſedome of Philip if wee ſhould thinke hee would let him paſſe with a kind of verball acknowledgement of a matter which he did not vnderſtand. Can wee thinke with any probability, that either the Eunuch ſaid no more then is heere deliuered, or that Philip did not feele him againe and againe, to ſee how he was ſetled? yes vndoubtedly: The Eunuch knew the perſon of Chriſt, the office of Chriſt, knew how the ancient prophecies of the old Teſtament were fulfilled in Chriſt, and was able to ſhew cauſe why he for his particular part ſhould thinke to bee ſaued by Chriſt, knew how Faith coupleth vnto Chriſt, how it doth procure to a man an intereſt into the obedience and righteouſneſſe of Chriſt. Theſe and the like materiall points out of all doubt the Eunuch knew. Philip would neuer haue admitted him to the Sacrament of Baptiſme, vpon the vttering only of a few words, or haue left him in ſuch a raw meaſure of knowledge, before hee had brought him to conceiue aright the grounds of godlineſſe, and that doctrine which is called the doctrine of the beginning of Chriſt 
                  Heb. 6.1.. I adde this leſt any man ſhould beguile his owne ſoule, becauſe of his ableneſſe to ſay ſo much as is heer reported to haue beene ſpoken by the Eunuch. I wiſh the words in euery mans heart and mouth, but take heed we make not a charme of the Scripture, to imagine a vertue in words of which we know not what to make. Let vs labour to ſpeake the Eunuchs wordes, with the like knowledge that the Eunuch had; otherwiſe to ſay we belieue that Ieſus Chriſt &c. ſhall not auaile vs. So much of this, that the Eunuch was able to expreſſe his Faith, and to ſhew for himſelfe what he belieued.
               
                  The 4. Doct.The next thing is his readines to giue an account, which affordeth vs this doctrine, That where the power of Godlines beareth any ſway, there is no frowardnes of diſpoſition, when one is dealt with in the matter of Faith. This I obſerue out of the modeſt and yeelding diſpoſition of this Eunuch, who was

thus content (as it were) to be catechized by Philip, and to ſubmit himſelfe to giue an account of his beleeuing. No doubt he held it meet, that he which now tooke care of his ſoule, ſhould by him be made acquainted with the ſtate of his ſoule. If a man ſpeake in the eares of a foole he will deſpiſe the wiſedome of his words 
                  Pro. 23.9., and ſuch an one being queſtioned with about religion, anſwereth roughly 
                  Pro. 14.23., but Gentlenes, Goodnes, meekenes, are the fruites of the ſpirit 
                  Gal. 5.22.23.: It was the humor of the Phariſes, in pride of heart to diſdaine to ſubmit themſelues to Iohns Miniſtry, they deſpiſed the counſell of God 
                  Luk. 7.30., and they tooke it in ſoule ſcorne when the blind man asked them, whether they would be Chriſts diſciples 
                  Ioh. 9.29., their ſtomackes could not frame to be treated with as men ignorant in ought or as liable to an account to any what they beleeued. It is the commandement of God that euery man in ſuch a caſe as this betwixt Philip and the Eunuch, ſhould be ready to giue an anſwer 
                  1. Pet. 3.15.: & religion where it is doth teach men ſo to be. For as it abateth theſe high ſpirits which are in man by nature, ſo it maketh a man to conſider the good that may enſue, by ſubmitting himſelfe with meekenes, to be communed with by him that is able to inſtruct him; If his knowledge be right, this is a meanes to confirme it, if it be miſtaken, this is the way to better it.
               This reprooueth that ſturdy and contemptuous humor which is in many now,The vſe. who hold it for a very great diſparagement, to bee vrged to tell how they beleeue. It is thought to be a courſe not vnfit to be practized vpon children, but to vrge thoſe to it, that are elder yea though they neuer ſo much need inſtruction, in deemed inſolency in him that vndertaketh it, and ſimplicity and baſeneſſe of diſpoſition in thoſe that ſubmit to it: The greateſt part therefore, are ſo affected, that if they ſhould ſo bee dealt with, they would haue much a doe with themſelues to beare it well, or not to returne the crooked anſwere of a froward mouth: By this meanes their ſpirituall wounde putriſie, becauſe of their owne fooliſhneſſe 
                  Pſal. 38.5.. They 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                     
in their Imagination. 
                  Rom. 1.22., They will not be knowen of their ſecret ignorance, and by that meane they do depriue them ſelues of many an opportunity by which they might bee blinded vp in the ſauing knowledge of Gods truth. A froward Heart neuer findeth good 
                  Pro. 17.20.. This then let vs learne hence; Thou whom God hath bleſſed with a faithfull paſtor, furniſhed with the Tongue of the Learned 
                  Iſa. 50.4., and able to miniſter a word in time to him that is weary, be not vnwilling to lay open to him the ſtate of thy ſoule, nor thinke it a wrong to be ſo communed with, as may make way to thy further edifying in the myſtery of Chriſt. Our dayes are in as bad an extremity as were the dayes of popery. Then the Prieſts had gotten ſuch a tie vpon men, by the (ſo called) Sacrament of confeſſion, that they diued further into mens ſecrets then was fit. But now men are grown to as much ſtrangenes and ſtanding aloofe from their ſpirituall ouerſeers, ſo that he which attempts though in neuer ſo humble and reſpectiue maner to mooue a queſtion to them, or to feele their knowledge, ſhall be requited as Lot, when he gaue good counſell to the Sodomites, Away hence 
                  Gen. 19.9., or taken vp as Moſes, Who made thee a man of authority 
                  Exod. 2.14? This is the curriſh diſpoſition of vnregenerate men. They are as thornes, that cannot be taken with hands the man that would touch them, must be defenced with yron, or with the ſhaft of a ſpeare 
                  2 Sam. 23.6.7.. This maketh religion, to grow ſo ſlowly as it doth, either Philip doth not aske, or the Eunuch will not anſwer. Thus farre of the Eunuchs readineſſe to giue account; here was no diſdaine, no haughtineſſe, no ſtomacking of the matter to bee thus inquired into, no ſhaking of the Demander with a croſſe reply; heere is meekeneſſe and calmeneſſe of ſpirit, heere is a plaine and direct acknowledgement of what hee conceiues. Happy was Philip to haue ſuch a tractable ſcholar, and happy the Aethiopian to haue ſuch a ſearching Teacher. God encreaſe the number of ſuch Philips, and make vs all ſuch as the Eunuch was in this particular.
            
            
               
               THE THIRD SERMON.
               
                  WE are now come to the Account it ſelfe, and to the matter of the Eunuchs confeſſion. I beleeue that Ieſus Chriſt is the ſonne of God. The plaine doctrine here is,The 1. doct. 
                  That the beleeuing of Ieſus Christ be the ſonne of God, is the very ſubstance of that Faith which is required to ſaluation. This is plainly to be gathered hence. The Eunuch deſired Baptiſme, (the badge of a Chriſtian:) Philip enquireth of him, whether hee haue that Faith, which maketh a Chriſtian, he anſwereth, I beleeue ſo: This anſwer is approoued and taken for ſufficient; ſo that to beleeue that which this Eunuch heere acknowledgeth is the very life of ſauing Faith, it is the ſumme of all that is required to ſaluation, and without it there is no ſaluation. And this collection is iuſtifiable from hence ſo much the rather, becauſe the chiefe confeſſions and abridgements of the Chriſtian faith, which are in the new Teſtament, conſiſt vpon this point chiefly: as, that memorable one made by Peter in the name of the reſt of the Apoſtles Mat. 16.16. 
                  Thou art the Christ the ſonne of the liuing God: then that in Iohn, (which it may be is the ſame with the former, in effect I am ſure it differeth not) We belieue and know that you are the Christ, the ſonne of the liuing God 
                  Ioh. 6.69.: thirdly that of the blind-man, Doest thou beleeue in the ſonne of God! Lord I beleeue 
                  Ioh. 9.35.38.: fourthly, that of Martha, I beleeue that you are the Christ the ſonne of God, that ſhould come into the world 
                  Ioh. 11.27.. Theſe ſolemne declarations

of the Faith required to ſaluation doe all concurre in this one generall point, Ieſus Christ is the ſonne of God. The doctrine of the Scripture is called, the word of Faith 
                  Rom. 10.8.; it is therefore committed to record that men might beleeue 
                  Ioh. 20.31.. Now the pith of the whole Scripture is, Ieſus Christ; He is the end of the Law 
                  Rom. 10.4., to him giue all the Prophets witneſſe 
                  Act. 10.43., and the ſumme of the Goſpell is, that whoſoeuer beleeueth in him ſhould not periſh but haue life euerlasting 
                  Ioh. 3.16.. If then Chriſt be the ſubſtance of the Scripture, needes muſt the building vpon him be the ſumme of Faith. Faith goeth no further then the word, and the word hath no more to teach but this, that God hath giuen vnto vs eternal life, and this life is in his ſonne 
                  1. Ioh. 5.11.. Thus for a generall opening of this doctrine. To the end it may be the more profitable, we muſt conſider ſomewhat more exactly, what it is, to beleeue that Ieſus Chriſt is the ſon of God: Firſt in general to beleeue, betokeneth two things. 1. To hold a matter to be a truth, and ſo it is an action of the vnderſtanding power. 2. To truſt to a thing, or to relie vpon it, and ſo it is an act of the will, and iſſueth out of the former. Secondly (according to this) to beleeue that Ieſus Christ is the ſonne of God, comprehendeth two things. 1. To apprehend this as a ſound and vndeniable truth, that Ieſus Chriſt is the ſonne of God. 2. To conceiue it as a doctrine into which a mans ſelfe hath ſome intereſt, and ſo to relie and reſt thereupon for a future benefit. Firſt that this propoſition, Ieſus is the ſonne of God, is an abſolute and vndeniable Truth, it muſt be reſolued: It is the ground worke of Faith, and the foundation without which it cannot ſtand. It was the errand vpon which Iohn Baptiſt ſent his diſciples vnto Chriſt, that they from his owne mouth might bee made ſure, that it was He that ſhould come, and no other to be looked for 
                  Math. 11.3.. The certainty herein is gotten by the Scripture: and indeed (to beleeue) as it is an act of the vnderſtanding,Auctoritati debemus quod 
                        •
                     redimus. Auguſtin. is properly to aſſent vnto a matter and to take it as a truth: vpon the report and credit of another. So then a man muſt be poſſeſſed

with this truth, by the authority and teſtimony of the Scripture, that he who is called Ieſus Chriſt, is the very ſon of God, whom God of old promiſed to ſend being made of a woman, to be the Prince of our ſaluation, and to make peace betwixt God and man by his blood. This is one neceſſary principle to be appehended vnto ſaluation, neither can any report ſettle a mans knowledge in this, but onely the report of God himſelfe ſpeaking to vs in his word. Secondly, this muſt alſo be laid hold on, as a matter more particularly concerning the beleeuer. For a bare aſſent vnto this propoſition, (Ieſus Chriſt is the ſonne of God) cannot ſaue. I know who thou art, (ſaid the euill ſpirit therein he ſpake as he thought and was perſwaded) euen the holy one of God 
                  Luk. 4.34.. And ſhall we thinke that this was all, was intended in the Eunuchs acknowledgement, that hee gaue credit vnto the Scripture touching Ieſus Chriſt to be the ſon of God? God forbid. He might haue done ſo and yet neuer haue beene ſaued. He had not beleeued with all his hart, if he had done no more; It was neceſſary there ſhould bee alſo a relying, a reſting, a caſting himſelfe vpon Chriſt, a truſting to him, an expecting ſaluation by his means, a fitting of this general truth touching Chriſt to his owne particular for the diſcharge of his ſoule in the ſight of God. And indeed this is ſo neceſſary a part of Faith, that as it cannot be without the former (for a man cannot rely vpon Chriſt, vnleſſe he be certaine, he is the perſon to be relyed vpon) ſo the former is not rightly and truly apprehended vnleſſe this latter be attained to, or at the leaſt endeuoured for. For, firſt generally it is true that the points and articles of Faith, are ſo contriued that the failing in one, ouerthroweth all. Then, ſecondly, a man cannot properly bee ſayd to beleeue the report of the Scripture touching Chriſt, vnleſſe he doe apply it to himſelfe. For how doth a man giue credit to this, that Chriſt is the ſonne of God, and a Sauiour, if he himſelfe doe not rely and hang vpon him for his owne ſaluation. So that indeed it is no full and

compleate aſſent, where there wants an application of that Truth which is aſſented vnto, to a mans owne particular. How can I beleeue Chriſt to be my Sauiour, except I know him to be the promiſed Sauiour? and how doe I beleeue him to be the promiſed Sauiour, if I dare not truſt him with my owne ſoule, and am backeward to depend vpon him for my ſelfe. And therefore in this truly ſaith the Apoſtle, that he maketh God a Lyer, that doth not proceed from the generall doctrine to the point of particular application, that God hath giuen (vs) eternall life 
                  1 Iohn 5.10.11.. If then we yeeld (as we needs muſt) that the Eunuch did more then aſſent to this generall truth, as it is reuealed in the Scripture, and did lay hold vpon it as a matter into which himſelfe had intereſt, it cannot but follow thence, that the Faith required to ſaluation, hath in it, beſide the acknowledgement of the Truth in the vnderſtanding, an embracing it alſo in the will, and a dependance thereon, for the perſonall good of him in whom it is. And thus of this doctrine touching that matter and obiect of Faith, Ieſus Christ the ſonne of God, apprehended by the authority of the Scripture to be ſo, and laid hold vpon as a Sauiour.
               
                  The vſe.The vſe is, principally to moue vs to a due and diligent enquiry, whither we who ſpeake of Faith, and doe alſo make full account of being ſaued by Chriſt, doe ſo beleeue, as hath beene deſcribed, and as out of all doubt this Eunuch did; namely, how we be grounded and ſetled in this by the teaching of the Scripture, that Ieſus Christ is the ſonne of God, in whom only god is pacified, and then next, how we doe depend vpon him in particular for our ſelues, with what warrant and vpon what tearmes. This is a matter that deſerueth ſcanning in the cloſet of euery heart that would be ſaued. Certainly it will appeare vpon inquiry made, that if this be to beleeue, ſurely then the number of beleeuers is exceeding ſmall. For firſt, how raw, how confuſed, how vncertaine (generally) is mens knowledge in this fundamentall point, touching the perſon, and office

of Chriſt Ieſus? How few are able to prooue vnto their owne hearts out of Gods word, that this Ieſus Chriſt whom we ſo often name, is that very perſon in whom all Gods promiſes touching life and ſaluation are yea and Amen
                  2. Cor. 1.20, hauing in him and by him their full accompliſhment; that it is he whom God the father hath ſealed 
                  Ioh. 6.27. 
                  to ſaue his people from their ſinnes. 
                  Math. 1.21, If a man ſhould come to many, who are belieuers by profeſſion, and ſay, Oh, thou that makest thy boaſt of Christ, and thinkest vnder his wings to be ſhrouded against the wrath of God, how knowest thou that this is the perſon in whom God will be reconciled to thee, what warrant hast thou, in him to finde fauour, and acceptance with the Lord! How quickly would they be foyled, and how eaſily graueled in this neceſſary particular, without certainty wherein, all a mans Faith is but meere preſumption. Verily I am perſwaded that it is not the tenth of our ordinary hearers and profeſſors thar can tell how to make this point good againſt ſathans cauils, with which he will vndermine and batter it in the euill day, that, Ieſus Christ is that perſon vpon whom he that deſires ſaluation must rely. For ſhame let vs not be more remiſſe and careleſſe for our ſoules, then we would be for our outward ſtate. What wiſe man, will take the word or bond of another, vnleſſe he be ſure of his ſufficiency to make that good for which he offereth himſelfe, either by word or writing to be engaged? wherein is a man the neerer to haue his bond for many pounds, who (it may be) is not worth ſo many groates? Heere therefore let vs firſt begin in the matter of faith, let vs labour to ſee this point well prooued out of the teſtimony of Gods word, that Ieſus Chriſt is the chiefe ſtone elect and precious, put in Sion, vpon whom who ſo beleeueth, ſhall not be aſhamed
                  1. Pet. 2.6., that he is the way, the truth, and the life, and that as no man can come to the Father but by him 
                  Ioh. 14.6., ſo hee which commeth by him cannot be repelled. If we would be ſound in the Faith 
                  Tit. 1.13., and rooted in Chriſt, let vs looke to this. It is abundantly cleared in the Scripture: Search the

Scriptures, they are they that teſtifie of Christ
                  Iohn 5.39.. Well, now as I haue diſcouered the ſcarſity of Faith, by the common defect in this maine ground of Chriſtianity, ſo may I as eaſily doe it in vrging the other part touching the particular application of the generall doctrine of Chriſt Ieſus. For in it there is as great an errour as in the other. I know there is an ordinary making account to be ſaued by Ieſus Chriſt; but yet, though therein there is a kinde of fitting the doctrine of Chriſt to particulars, yet it is not that application which is the life of faith, and which (out of all doubt) this Eunuch had attained to. For to the Application of Chriſt there is more belongs then this, to ſay, Christ died for ſinners, and I hope by him to eſcape damnation: Many ſhall goe into Hell, with as much as that commeth to, in their mouthes. Application of Chriſt is a matter of greater conſequence, and hath more going to it then ſo. There muſt be firſt a particular conceiuing of a mans owne neede of Chriſt: ſecondly an vnderſtanding how that fulneſſe which is in Chriſt may ſupply the particular wants of him that deſireth to apply him that ſo the ſoule may ſee how the turne thereof may abundantly be ſerued by reſting vpon him: thirdly a diligent noting how the preaching of the word fitteth the particulars of Chriſts fulneſſe, to the ſoules particular wants, that ſo a man may not be (as it were) his owne caruer heerein, but may feele how the hand of the Lord worketh in the buſines: fourth, a carefull working how the ſoule is acheered and inwardly refreſhed, by that warmth, which it feeleth itſelfe to receiue by cumming ſtill neerer vnto Chriſt, how it hath more boldneſſe to come to the Throne of grace, how it findes more ſweetneſſe in the doctrine of ſaluation, how it hath more life in holy ſeruices, how it is furniſhed with more alacrity and greater deſire to walke with God in new obedience? Thus the application of Chriſt is another maner of thing then a ſudden conceit, that if I and I, ſhall be ſaued by his death: ſo much is common, but to apply Chriſt

is a thing which few attaine vnto. Thou ſaieſt thou art perſuaded that Christ Ieſus the ſonne of God is thy ſauiour, I demand of thee: who did tell thee ſo? what is thy warrant ſo to thinke? Art thou come to this perſwaſion by due courſe, by being first nurtured in the ſchoole of humiliation, to bring thee to ſee what neede thy ſoule hath of the leaſt drop of the bloud of Ieſus Chriſt? hath this apprehenſion beene begotten in thee by the preaching of that word, in which thou haſt been taught to whom only ſaluation doth belong? hath it been long in getting, and haſt thou had much adoe to attaine to this meaſure? or is it ſome ſuddaine and raſh conceit vpon which thou hast aduentured? Take heed and be well aduiſed; To apply Christ, is excellent, but it is not ordinary, neither is it eaſie, and he that neuer taſted the difficulty that is in it neuer yet knew what it ment? Thus I muſt deale with thee, thus I muſt aduiſe thee, that profeſſeſt an application of Chriſt vnto thy ſelfe. And now (for a further opening of the matter) methinkes that title of a Rocke giuen vnto Chriſt Iſa. 28.16. Math. 16.18., is worthy the conſidering, to make this plaine. Chriſt his being a Rocke of ſafety, argueth, that man in himſelfe is plunged into a Sea of Hazard with which he is euer ready to be ſwallowed vp. Now, ſuppoſe we a man ſuffering ſhip-wracke vpon our Coaſt, and at the laſt after much driuing too and fro, eſpying a rocke, which if he could recouer there were ſome hope of eſcape. To this he beginneth to direct his courſe, thither he beares with the vtmoſt of his might: the waues hinder him, the wind and weather are againſt him, yea oft times when he is come euen cloſe to, and is ready to touch it and to lay hold vpon it, a guſt commeth, or ſome ſtronger waue, and carieth him into the maine in deſpight: Nay, it may be when againe he is come yet neerer, and is euen in a manner gotten vp, yet there is ſuch an heauineſſe in his garments oppreſſed with water, ſuch benummedneſſe and weakneſſe in his ioynts through the extremity of colde, that he cannot keepe that which hee hath gotten, but againe looſeth his hold, and is euen about to giue ouer his hope, and to reſolue

with himſelfe that there is no remedy but he muſt needes periſh in the ſea. Well, yet at the laſt hee renueth his courage, purpoſing now to make his laſt attempt, he recouereth the Rocke, to the top he is gotten, where he may looke about and ſee where hee was toſſed: But behold, before he can throughly collect his thoughts, heere beginneth a new feare: the water ſwelleth, and threatneth to couer euen the higheſt part of the rocke, the wind helpeth it forward, and aduanceth the pride thereof, and it beginneth to encounter as with an open mouth ready to deſtroy: What is now to be done? Surely nothing but this: He reſolues to keepe his ſtanding with his vtmoſt might his hold he determines not to forſake, here (thinketh he)' I will abide, and if I periſh I periſh. Heere is that true eſtate of a man labouring in this painfull buſineſſe of applying Chriſt. Firſt he is toſſed long on the waues of much inward perplexity, and crieth out with Dauid, I ſticke fast in the deepe mire where no ſtay is, I am come into deepe waters and the ſtreames run ouer mee 
                  Pſal. 69.2.. O God, all thy waues and thy flouds are vpon mee 
                  Pſal. 42.7.. The ſnares of death compaſſe mee, and the griefes of the graue haue caught mee 
                  Pſal. 116.3.: At the laſt by the pointing of the finger of the Goſpell preached, the Rocke is eſpied: Ieſus Christ the righteous 
                  1. Ioh. 2.1., that Rocke, which Dauid calleth, The Rocke that is higher then I 
                  Pſal. 61.2., that rocke which was reſembled by that, into the cleft whereof Moſes was put, that he might ſee the Lord as he paſſed by Exod. 33.22.. For as Moſes could not haue ſeen the Lord without death vnleſſe he had beene hidden in that Rocke: ſo can no man ſee the face of God and liue, vnleſſe he be put into the cleft of this rocke that vnder the ſhelter thereof he may behold him. Well, this rocke being once deſcried, the ſoule longeth greatly after it 
                  Pſal. 63.1., and thinkes it ſelfe ſhould be moſt happy, if it might arriue at the ſmaleſt Hole 
                  Can. 2.14. thereof. To this therfore it aymeth and laboureth with the vtmoſt endeuours: (I endeuour myſelfe, and follow hard 
                  Phil. 3.13.14.. But (alas) much a doe there is to get neere it, there be many ſwelling

ſurges of much doubting, many bluſtering ſtormes of great diſcouragements. Ofttimes is the ſoule ready euen to claſpe vpon the Rocke, but ſomething or other puts it backe, and then there followeth euen a wofull drooping, and a kind of deſpaire, euer againe to be in ſo faire a poſſibility: Oh, then commeth in, I am caſt out of thy ſight 
                  Pſal. 31.22., thoſe that told me of ſaluation by Chriſt, and of his redineſſe to receiue thoſe that ſeeke him are all Lyers 
                  Pſal. 116.11.: yet at the laſt, this agony is ouercome, and the ſinner beginneth to rebuke his ſoule for this faintneſſe. Why art thou cast downe my ſoule and vnquiet within me
                  Pſal. 42.5., trie yet againe, ſurely there is an end and thy hope ſhall not be cut off
                  Pro. 23.18.. So with much ſtriuing, euen (as it were) to the loſſe of breath (I opened my mouth and panted 
                  Pſ. 119 131., the former feeling is regained and the ſoule is come once more vnder the ſhadow of this Great Rocke
                  Iſ. 32.2., yea and the feet are ſet vpon it 
                  Pſal. 42.2., and the ſoule beginneth to triumph in ſafty, (Returne vnto thy rest ô my ſoule 
                  Pſal. 116.7., I know nothing ſhall be able to ſeparate from the loue of God which is in Christ Ieſus 
                  Rom. 8.39., yea it falleth to a diſcourſing vpon the ſtrange manner of her eſcape, Come I will tell you what God hath done for me 
                  Pſal. 66.16.. But (behold) ſuddenly a new feare interrupteth all, I ſaid I ſhall neuer be mooued, but thou hidst thy face and I was troubled 
                  Pſal. 30.6.7.. My well beloued was gone and past, I ſought him, but I could not finde him
                  Can. 5.6.. What is now left, but to reſolue to ſticke faſt, whotſoeuer ſhall betide. My ſoule cleaueth vnto thee 
                  Pſal 63.8.; my fleſh fayleth and mine heart, but it is good for me to keepe me cloſe 
                  Pſ. 73.26.28.; either heere I muſt be ſafe, or no where. Thus haue I giuen you a taſte of the trauill of the ſoule in the application of Chriſt. Chriſt being (as he is called) a Rocke of ſafely, there is no fitter thing to deſcribe it then this caſe that I haue named. Hee that hath not had ſome experience of this in himſelfe, or at the leaſt ſhall not now vpon the hearing thereof make conſcience to finde it true by his owne particular, name faith he may, but haue faith he cannot, preſume he may, but beleeue he cannot. Hee that thinketh it an eaſie thing

to reſt vpon Chriſt, and to ſettle vpon him and to apply the ſaluation offered in him to a mans owne particular, I may boldly ſay, he doth vtterly deceiue his owne ſoule, he is yet farre from the Kingdome of God. Thou art vpon the Rocke, before euer thou knoweſt what it is, to be toſſed on the maine, thou art in the hauen, before euer thou waſt in hazard in the deepe; verily thou art miſtaken in the coaſt, beare out againe with ſpeed, this Rocke will caſt thee away into a gulfe of ſecurity, this is not the Cape of Good-hope, Gods good ſpirit neuer lead any man this way into the land of Righteouſneſſe 
                  Pſ. 143.10.. I wiſh all you that heare this, the ſweet and comfort of this point. An aſſent to the report of the Scripture touching Chriſt, is neceſſary to ſaluation, but not ſufficient; neither was it all that the Eunuch had. Application of Chriſt is neceſſary, My well beloued is mine and I am his 
                  Cant. 2.16., that is the life of all: But in this the Diuell counterfeiteth as well as in other things, and he can be content men ſhould apply, yea he himſelfe will helpe ſo to doe; but his application is a little to quicke like the Heritage that is haſtily gotten, but the end not bleſſed
                  Pro. 20.21. When Chriſt is much valued, but not by and by feelingly enioyed, when he is much deſired but very hardly reached vnto, where the ſoule longeth for him, and ſometimes cometh to ſee him, and againe looſeth the ſight of him and is oft-times, almoſt out of all hope of recouering him, there is application of Chriſt. This is not the worke of a day or two 
                  Ez. 10.13., When I tell thee of labouring to belieue that Ieſus Chriſt is thy ſaluation, if thou ſay vnto me as Peter ſaid to Chriſt about forgiuing his brother. How oft, ſhall I ſet about it, vntill ſeauen times: I muſt anſwer thee as there, yea vntill ſeauenty times ſeuen times 
                  Math. 18.21.22., Why ſhould I beguile thee or my ſelfe? If thou be not euen euery day more or leſſe at this buſineſſe, that thou mighteſt win Christ
                  Phil. 3.8., ſtill conſidering how thou art faſtened on him, and what hold thou haſt, ſtill labouring that thou maieſt not looſe him, ſtill looking for a new ſtorme that may put thee from

him, ſtill graſping cloſer about him, ſtill crying with Peter Master ſaue me
                  Mat. 14.30., ſtill harkning to this come of the Lord, the preaching of the Goſpell, by which he pulleth thee to him, neither I nor any Miniſter of God will dare to promiſe thee any hope of ſaluation. If we take a leaſe, or buy a purchaſe, we will haue the matter firſt drawne vp into articles, then digeſted into a forme, then peruſed and enterlined, and aduiſed vpon with the beſt counſell we can get, euery word ſhall be waighed, as in a paire of ballances, and we will not ſuddenly engroſſe it, as it muſt be. Why will we that be ſo prouident for our earthly things, be ſo ſimple and ſo careleſſe about heauenly? If we haue got but a kind of looſe and generall apprehenſion of Chriſt that he is ours, there we reſt. Oh let vs looke vpon it againe, let vs beware while we liue of a falſe title, aske a little more counſell, if we let it alone vntill the Hearing-day, a writ of error will not helpe it. Methinkes, I cannot ſpeake to much againſt our great ſecurity. Euery man ſeemeth to be ſure of heauen and yet few men euer knew, what it was to be in hazard of heauen. Worke out your ſaluation with feare and trembling 
                  Phil. 2.12.. Thus much of the Eunuchs confeſſion. Euery man muſt be able (as he) to giue account of his Faith: Euery man muſt be willing (as he) to giue a reaſon of his hope. Euery man muſt beleeue (as he) that Ieſus Christ is the ſonne of God. How hee belieued this, and how wee muſt beleeue it, hath beene ſhewed: God make it profitable.
               Now followeth the Baptiſme it felfe, Then commanded he the Charet to ſtand ſtill &c. The words are plaine, and the ſenſe is euident to be this; The Eunuch being found meere for the ſacrament of baptiſme, there was a commandement for the ſtaying of the Chareot, in which the Eunuch rode and Philip with him, whereupon they both went into the Riuer, and there by the miniſtery of Philip the Eunuch was baptized. The principall things conſiderable heere, are theſe two. 1. The place where this Sacrament

was adminiſtred.The 2. doct. 2. The action it ſelfe. Out of the former this doctrine ſprings, That ſince the cumming of Chriſt in the fleſh there is no betterneſſe or precedence of one place aboue another for the administration of holy things. Loe ſee heere, is Baptiſme adminiſtred by the high-way ſide, and that in an ordinary Riuer: the ſacrament had beene no whit better to the Eunuch, if he had receiued it in ſome hollowed place, or in ſome conſecrared veſſell. In the former times that publike worſhip of God was limited to a certaine place, There ſhall be a place which the Lord your God ſhall chuſe, thither ſhall you bring all that I command &c. 
                  Deu. 12.11., neither was there any lawfulneſſe (ordinarily) for any Altar but at Ieruſalem. There was the Paſſeouer only to be ſolemnized, there only the firſt borne to be preſented to the Lord. But Chriſt being manifeſted in the fleſh who was the body of all former ſhadowes 
                  Col. 2.17., the diſtinction of places is aboliſhed, and neither is Gods worſhip tied to the Iewes Ieruſalem, nor to the Mount Garizim of the Samaritans Ioh. 4.21., but now, in euery place incenſe ſhall be offered to my Name ſaith the Lord 
                  Mala. 1.11., Therefore Chriſts fore-runner exerciſed his miniſtery openly in the Wilderneſſe, and baptized in the Riuer of Iorden 
                  Math. 3.16.: and our ſauiour preached in Mountaines 
                  Math. 5.1., by the Seaſide, and out of Boates 
                  Mat. 13.1.2., any where, where the audience was according. So the Apoſtles, after, preached in houſes, in fields, and baptized in any vſual riuer which came next to hand. For which cauſe by all of any ſound iudgement, that of Conſtantine the great, that famous Chriſtian Emperour, worthely renowmed for many things, is notwithſtanding taxed, as ſomething ſuperſtitious, that after he was conuerted from Paganiſme to the Chriſtian faith, yet he differred his Baptiſme, looking ſtill for an opportunity to goe to Iordan it ſelfe, where our Sauiour was baptized, as if there had been ſome more vertue in that place then in another. Whereſoeuer two or three are gathered together in my name &c
                  Mat. 18.20, there is no exception of place, ſo that in other things the due

forme be obſerued.The Vſe. This might be vrged againſt the ſuperſtition of Popery, which is much deuoted to hallowed places, as if ſome worth were added thereby to the ſeruices there performed; and beſides, that ſimplicity which in the firſt adminiſtration of Baptiſme, they haue adulterated and corrupted, with intermixing ſalt, oyle, ſpittle, creame &c, with the ſacramentall water, and then (forſooth) the people muſt imagine there is more in this confection, and in this compounded ſtuffe, for the benefit of the baptized, then if the matter were performed with the naked element as it commeth from the brooke. This ſuperſtition is not yet throughly purged out of many hearts. It is well known what a vertue many thinke to be in places, and in veſſels &c. The Diuell knowing that it is a thing which cannot be rooted or razed out of mans minde, that when he hath to doe with God, there muſt be ſomewhat done to grace and ſanctifie the action, leadeth him away with falſe ſurmiſes, and by perſwading him that places, and times, and ſuch like complements and circumſtances doe giue worth to the buſineſſe, maketh him to neglect that which indeed ſhould make it acceptable. As for example, if a child be brought to the Church and baptized in a Font, all is well in opinion, and there is Chriſtendome inough; but the maine thing, as to learne what that Sacrament is, and wherefore it ſerueth, and vpon what tearmes it may be a meanes of comfort to the ſoule, the people (generally) deſire not to know, it is a trouble to them to be taught, and to inſtruct children, when they come to be of yeares, wherefore they were baptized, and what the receiuing of that ſacrament bindeth them to, who (almoſt) maketh any conſcience? Thus we are all for forme, and looſe the ſubſtance, we eſteeme the gift (as Chriſt ſaid of the blinde Phariſees) but ſet at naught the altar which muſt ſanctifie the guift 
                  Math. 23.19.. This is not ſpoken to draw men to a contempt of theſe outward conueniencies: For albeit I know, that the place it ſelfe bettereth not the buſineſſe, neither is baptiſme

(ſimply) better adminiſtred out of a Font, in a Church, then out of a Riuer by the High waies ſide, yet it were a wickedneſſe for any now vnder that pretext to forſake the places put a part for holy vſes, or to goe out (in a humour) to preach and to pray, and vſe the ſacraments in the fields, that were, to auoid one extremity by running into another as bad, and indeed it is true which is ſaid, that if a man haue not good diſcretion in running from a miſchiefe he may fall into an inconuenience. In auoiding ſuperſtition,In vitium ducit culpae fugaſi care
                        •
                     arte. Horet. a man may ſoone become either ſchiſmaticall or profane. Well are they that can finde and keepe the meane. I will not imagine any infuſion of vertue into my praiers, or vpon my other deuotions, by the frame and building where the yeare performed, becauſe I will not be ſuperſtitious, and yet I wil repaire to the places deputed to ſuch ſacred actions, I will not run to Riuers to baptize, I will not flie into corners to communicate, becauſe I muſt not forſake the fellowſhip, which wee ought to haue among our ſelues 
                  Heb. 10.25., and all things muſt be done in order
                  1. Cor. 14., neither is God the author of Confuſion
                  V. 33.. So much touching the place: This water was as good as Iordan, or as if it had been one of the riuers, which iſſued out of Paradiſe, and as well, here vpon the way as in the Temple at Ieruſalem.
               The action it ſelfe is in theſe words, He baptized him: that is, he waſhed him with water in the name of the father, the ſonne, and the holy Ghoſt: So muſt we conceiue it, although ſo much be not heere expreſly ſaid. We may not thinke Philip would or did tranſgreſſe the order ſet downe by our ſauiour to be obſerued in the adminiſtration of the Sacrament Math. 28.19. The 3. doct.
                  . Heere this Doctrine: That in the Chriſtian church the Sacrament of Baptiſme must accompany that preaching of the word. Vnderſtand me aright. I meane not by this that whenſoeuer the word is preached the ſacrament of baptiſme muſt be miniſtred (for there is not alwaies occaſion of both at the ſame inſtant) but this I intend, that in the

Church of Chriſt there muſt be a vſing of this ſacrament, as well as a deliuery of the doctrine of ſaluation. And ſo much I gather hence: For we may not thinke this an arbitrary ſeruice, that Philip baptized the Eunuch when hee had taught him, but we muſt thinke it a matter hee was bound to, that he whom he had by teaching conuerted to Chriſtianity, ſhould from him alſo receiue the badge of Chriſtianity. This is confirmed by our Sauiours owne edict, Goe teach and baptize &c. 
                  Mat. 28.89., and the Apoſtles kept that order Act 2 38.41. Act. 8.12.9.18.10.48.. Baptiſme was ſtill an attendant vpon the doctrine, their commiſſion was equally for both; and this courſe muſt continue ſo long as God hath a people vpon earth; ſo much is proued by the promiſe, Loe I am with you alwaies to the end of the world 
                  Mat. 28.20., which as it argueth a bleſſing to be beſtowed vpon others beſides the Apoſtles (to whom the words were perſonally ſpoken) euen to ſuch as ſhould be emploied in that ſeruice to the end, ſo it declareth what courſe is to be held to the end, Preaching, and Baptizing. And whereas Paul ſaith hee was not ſent to baptize but to preach 
                  1. Cor. 1.17, we muſt not take it as ſpoken ſimply, as if Paul had no commiſſion at all to baptize, for how then did he baptize Criſpus and Gaius, and the houſhold of Stephanus 
                  Ver. 14.16., but it is ſpoken comparatiuely, namely, that his maine errand on which he was ſent was to preach, and thereupon he was chiefly to attend, leauing the adminiſtration of Baptiſme vnto others. Such a kinde of ſpeakeing we ſhall finde in the Prophet, I ſpake not vnto your fathers, nor commanded &c. concerning ſacrifices
                  Ier. 7.22.; did not God ſpeake at all touching thoſe things? yes, but that was not all he ſpake, or the chiefe thing he gaue charge off. So is this place of Paul to be expounded. Let vs a little conſider why this ſacrament and ceremony of Baptiſme was ordained by Chriſt to accompany the preaching of his word. There are two maine ends of it. 1. To ſtrengthen faith. 2. To be a teſtimony of profeſſion. Baptiſme ſerueth to ſtrengthen faith two waies. 1. By repreſentation.

2. By aſſurance. Firſt the thing it repreſenteth, and the thing it aſſureth are all one, namely, a waſhing away of the guilt of ſinne by the bloud of Chriſt. Baptiſme ſhadoweth out this faith. Water well reſembleth the purging power of Chriſts bloud, It clenſeth from all vnrighteouſneſſe 
                  1. Ioh. 1.7.. Againe, the outward waſhing of the body repreſenteth the inward purging of the ſoule by the ſpirit, which ſtandeth in iuſtification before God, and ſanctification before men. Hence the ſcripture ſpeaking of thoſe things, vſeth the tearme of Waſhing
                  1. Cor. 6.11., and Regeneration is called the Waſhing of the new birth 
                  Tit. 3.5.. Further, that manner of Baptizing which was in vſe in hotter countries and in baptizing men of yeares, and which was heere vſed in baptizing the Eunuch was a rite of worthy ſignification. The going downe into the water ſignified mortification or fellowſhip with Chriſts death: the ſtaying vnder the water, the buriall of ſinne; the comming out, the riſing from ſinne to newneſſe of life. Theſe were excellent ſignifications and to theſe Paul hath reference, in thoſe words, Know ye not, that all we which haue beene baptized into Ieſus Christ, haue beene baptized into his death? We are buried then with him by baptiſme into his Death, that like as Chriſt was raiſed vp from the dead by the glory of the father, ſo wee alſo ſhould walke in newneſſe of life
                  Rom. 6.3.4.: And we may conceiue a Reſemblance of theſe three, in our ordinary baptizings: in the putting on of the water, in the letting it to remaine a time, and in the wiping it off. Thus Baptiſme ſetteth before our eies the benefit by the bloud of Chriſt and the good that commeth by being ingraffed into him. Now as Baptiſme repreſents, ſo it aſſureth. For the ſacraments are not naked ſignes & bare ſhadowes of ſpirituall things, but they are appointed of God to be pledges vnto vs of heauenly grace: and ſo is Baptiſme, a pledge to a beleeuing ſinner, that as he doth ſee the waſhing of water to purifie the body; ſo certainly is his ſoule clenſed from the guilt of ſin by the bloud of Chriſt. Thus is the firſt end of Baptiſme, to ſtrengthen faith. It

is alſo a witneſſe of profeſſion. Firſt, the common nature of a Sacrament, is to be as a ſolemne oath vndertaken for the performance of ſome important matter. Secondly, the being baptized, in the name of the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost; ſignifieth an admittance into the houſhold of Faith, and the addicting of a mans ſelfe to the ſeruice of him, whoſe name is called vpon, ouer him in baptiſme, and ſo teſtifieth his couenanting with the Lord, to deny vngodlineſſe and fleſhly lusts 
                  Tit. 2.12., and to beware of returning after this waſhing to a wallowing againe in the mire of old vncleaneſſe2. Pet. 2.22.. Therefore is it that Baptiſme is called the Baptiſme of Repentance 
                  Luk. 3.3., becauſe it remaineth as a witneſſe of a promiſe of repentance, with which the baptized hath bound himſelfe to God. This it is plaine. Baptiſme is of perpetuall vſe in the Church of Chriſt, and that for good ends, namely to ſtrengthen our faith, and to be a continuall remembrancer vnto vs what wee profeſſe.The 1. vſe. Now for vſe, firſt this may further thoſe that are ignorant in this matter, how to behaue themſelues in the vſe of Baptiſme as men of knowledge. A generall vſe there is of baptiſme amongſt vs, but the warrant of vſing it, is not ſo well knowne, as the thing itſelfe ordinarily is receiued: and the moſt, in offering their infants vnto baptiſme, are more led by cuſtome, and caried with the ſtreame of common practize, then guided by any certaine rule from him, who is the law-maker of his church. This maketh this ſacrament to be vſed ſo ignorantly, ſo ſuperſtitiouſly, ſo vnprofitably. It ſhall not be amiſſe therefore for thoſe that be to ſeeke herein, to learne hence, whence it cometh, that ſuch a water is in vſe. That which is not done in obedience, though it be done neuer ſo formally in he eie and outward appearance is of no account with God. Secondly,The 2. vſe. this may teach vs all, or at leaſt put vs all in minde what vſe to make of our Baptiſme. 1. To euery one of vs ſo often as we thinke vpon our baptiſme, it ought to be a ſpurre to holineſſe. A ſeruant to a great man, when he looketh

vpon his liuery, cannot for ſhame if he haue any common honeſty, be an enemy to him, of whom he hath receiued it; the ſight of it is rather a continuall caller vpon him to be faithful to him, into whoſe ſeruice he is entred. So Baptiſme is the cognizance of a Chriſtian, and by it we haue taken on vs to weare (as it were) the colours of our grand Captaine Ieſus Chriſt; the very thought thereof ſhould reſtraine vs from doing the buſines of Sathan, and worke vs by all meanes to the willing obeying of the Lord, to the ſtudying, learning, and preaching of his will. How excellent were it, if in doing of many things, which we ruſh vpon without any ſcruple, we would ſay to our ſelues, Is this according to promiſe, is this agreeing to the vow of Baptiſme? 2. To thoſe that thus make vſe, baptiſme as a motiue to Obedience, it is a ſtore-houſe of much comfort. When mens titles to land be in queſtion, they fall to peruſing their ſealed euidences; and ſo a Chriſtian muſt often looke to the will and deed of his heauenly father ſealed vp in Baptiſme and by it he ſhall haue comfort. We ſeldome looke backe ſo far as baptiſme, and we limit it onely to the preſent vſe, conceiuing it as an entry into Chriſtianity, but as a ſpurre, to walke worthy our profeſſion, and a meanes to build vs vp in Chriſt, we doe not vſe it, and ſo we depriue ourſelues of worthy comfort. *⁎*
               
            
         
      
   