
      
         
            
            
            
            A FVNERAL ELEGIE.
            
            LONDON, Printed for Thomas Harper. 1625.
         
         
            
            
            A FVNERAL ELEGIE, VPON THE MVCH LAMENTED DEATH OF THE Trespuissant and vnmatchable King, King IAMES, King of Great Brittaine, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith.
            Who to the vniuersall sorrow of the Princes his Allies, his owne Kingdomes and people, expired the 27. of March, Anno 1625. In the yeere of his reigne 23.
            Written by Thom. Heywood.
            
            
               
                  Tibul. Lib. 5. Eleg. 2.
               
                Non ego firmus in hoc non hac patentia nostro 
                     〈◊〉
                  : frangit fortui corda dolor.
            
            LONDON, Printed for Thomas Harper.
            
            1625.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, EDWARD EARLE OF Worcester, Lord of Chepstoll, Ragland and Gower, &c. Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, Lord 
                     〈◊〉
                   Seale, and one of the Kings most Honourable 
                     〈◊〉
                   C
                     •…
                  fort.
            
            
               THe continuance of your fauours, and necessitie of my dutie (Right Honourable) as hauing beene the vnchanged Patron of all my weake and vnperfect labours, that haue beene published euen from the first to the last, haue compeld me (bowsoeuer troublesome to your more serious and weightie designes) to make this affectionate presentment of my long seruice (and yet still due to your Lordship) in these mourning papers. Assuring my selfe that you, who reioyst in

so incomparable a Kings life, will not refuse to 
                  •…
               rtaine this sad Elegic of his death. For euen amongst the greatest 
                  〈◊〉
                best; of their vertues this is nor held the teast to have bec
                  •…
                compossionate and heart-sad, for the lamented losse of our so gracious and so good a King, whose wisdome 
                  〈1 line〉
                and his 
                  〈1 line〉
                the whole earth not equall Account at 
                  •…
               seech your Lordship is your 
                  〈◊〉
                grace and elemencie this solemno Obsequie performed to Him and obliged affection, celebrated to you, wishing you as many happie future ioyes, as for King 
                  〈◊◊〉
                been, or shall hereafter be wept Funerall teares.
            
               
                  〈1 line〉
               
            
            
               
                  〈1 line〉
               
            
            Thomas Heywood.
         
         
            
            To the sad Reader.
            
               TO thee; (Compa
                     •…
                   Reader) 
                     〈◊〉
                   I pay
               My lost of Duties at this Bayall
                     •…
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               (For best of
                     •…
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   better) give me Ieame
               Some thing to speake, which (I intraint) recaine
               With as prepar'd, and well-dissasta 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               As it is freely to thy 
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
            
            
               I haue obseru'd, and still me thinker I see
               Beneath this goodly and 
                     〈◊◊〉
                   Tree,
               (Now ruin'd and 
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               Vnder his shadow, 
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               By his protection cheer'd and kept aliue,
               Their growth and beauties multiply and thriue,
               Sweld with increase, their boughs on him depending,
               Laden with ripe fruits to the ground euen bending,
               Hath shadowed from the Winters bleake extremes,
               And (in the Summer) the Sunnes scorching beames.
            
            
               Yet this faire Dodon Oake, late all-commanding,
               Hath in his mightie ruine left them standing:
               
                  
And not (as we 
                     〈◊〉
                   seene) great buildings fall
               Crushing and 
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
            
            
               Now 
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               Bettred to this day by his former graces:
               Others by transplantation; higher rear'd,
               And to more eminence in Court preferr'd:
               (Excepting still those 
                     〈◊◊◊〉
                  
               
               That sought to sute his fauours with their merits)
               Since some 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •…
                  rrely by him 
                     〈◊◊〉
                  
               
               To such great worth and goodnesse 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Rites due and needfull, as 
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               For such a royall Patriot fr
                     •…
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   came.
               Excuse me euen the weakest if I (
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Not knowne to him) that onely from him grow
               To others profit; 
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
               Yet neuer tasted of his 
                     〈1 line〉
                  
               
            
            
               And this (
                     〈◊◊〉
                   Reader) 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Now if thou please, to teares prepare thine eyes.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A Funerall Elegie.
            
               DOubly at once despoil'd, where shall I borrow
               T'expresse one priuate grief, a two-fold sorrow?
               Oh thou of all the nine, the saddest Muse,
               Whose Inuocation I of force must vse,
               Giue me direction, in what Funerall straine
               A Subiect may a Soueraignes losse complaine.
               It were too little should we weepe whole Seas,
               And sigh huge tempests, what alas could these?
               Or could we to our selues assume a powre
               To drop vpon the earth a greater mowte
               Then made the generall deluge, twere too small
               Sufficiently to weepe his Funerall.
            
            
               Let the Gangetick shores their Emperors boast,
               Or where Chiaspes is renowned most.
               Let Tanais speake of Princes neere it bred;
               Let Granicus, that of Darius dead
               Keepes memory: or such as crowne the stile
               Of Potentates, bred by the Riuer Nile:
               
               
                  
Sca
                     •…
                  der shew thy worthes; or thou Rine
               Thy 
                     〈◊◊〉
                   or faire Tiber thine
               (The all 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Caesars.) Let that stood
               That in the greatest compotence 
                     〈◊〉
                   stood
               For Ancestry, that flowes through France or Spaine,
               
               They for priority shall 
                     〈◊〉
                   in vaine:
               Since about the
                     •…
                   or thy Londons, Thames.
               Hath bin ma
                     •…
                   glorious by the great King IAMES.
            
            
               He than the Romans with the Greeks compar'd,
               And punctually their amplitudes declar'd,
               Of such as werain veriucs anteoelling:
               Their greatnesse and their goodnesse paralelling,
               Though in his search of Annals he might finde
               Matches, and likes, in fortunes, and in minde
               For Iustice, Mercy, Bounty, Wisdome, Glory,
               Or for what else could dignisie a Storie,
               Obserues no equall, to Him mourned here,
               Who as he liu'd, so dyde without compeere.
               For sound in struction and wise document,
               He might haue bin a remark'd president
               To th'Sages of whose memory euen Greece
               
               Is proud to this day more then of their Fleece,
               For what by any of them hath boene done 
                     
                        •…
                     on Dorot.
               
               Like to his gift bequeath'd vnto his Sonne?
               Had graue Hartenfius in his time so Fam'd,
               Or Cicero by some (before him) nam'd
               
                  
Heard his smooth 
                     •…
                  oquence, which was 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               But their
                     •…
                  , 
                     〈◊〉
                   laboure
                     •…
                   and premoditante,
               They would have 
                     〈◊◊〉
                   (as forhemring)
               To giue his Languages delightfull hearing.
               The Academics both his fluence praise,
               And worthily did laurtace him with Bayes.
            
            
               In Parlaments phat were by him acci
                     •…
                  ed,
               Where then the members with the head vinted
               Sate in delibe
                     •…
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Of pol
                     •…
                   
                  
                     〈◊◊〉
                  , and deepe designet of State,
               You might observe them in his words inelining
               As to an Oracle: He still diuming
               Nothing but 
                     •…
                  mmongo
                     •…
                  : did beb
                     •…
                   speak,
               The wisest there, to him to 
                     〈◊〉
                  , foem'd weak;
               His apprehensions, and concepcious growing
               Like Hydraes heads; for with continuall flowing,
               Conceirbogot conceit, (by all admir'd)
               As still in course, and yet at no time tyr'd.
               No phrase but was an Apotheg
                     •…
                   Inn
                     •…
                  
               
               New, and unwearied to bego
                     •…
                  
               
               Nothing that slipt him, but to be inrold
               By pens of Diamonds, in rich leaues of Gold.
            
            
               But whether this so said 
                     〈◊〉
                   depriuation
               Be for the many sin
                     •…
                  es of this our Nation,
               Or for our great Ingratituds, not estimating
               So great a blessing inther vnder-rating
               
                  
This gemme beneath his value, as possest
               Of mighty wealth (like Mysers) nay the best,
               Yet in this height of fulnesse, did not 
                     〈◊〉
                   it
               To others good, but in our selues abuse it;
               Or to what else our losse we may impute
               "This all-good-speaking Oracles are mute,
               Yet haue his vertues in their last bequest
               Departing to his cuerlasting rest,
               To recompence the silence of that tongue,
               Which might haue still his own deseruinge song
               Behinde him left, to all succeeding dayes,
               Myriads of pens and tongues to sound his praise.
            
            
               I onely yet speake to y
                     •…
                   how he spake;
               But of his actions who shall notice take,
               Shall finde them (if they but consider well)
               (As farre as good works, good words) to excell
               His Machination
                     •…
                   
                  
                     〈◊◊〉
                   common things,
               Leauing a president to after Kings,
               Of which he onely, and alone might boast,
               "That seeming to doe least, he still did most.
            
            
               The King of Peace this King did imitate,
               Who planting it in our domesticke state
               Did labour it in others remote hence,
               Sparing therein, not counsell nor expence,
               But so his purpose to his Sauiours suited,
               Who the command of peace first instituted,
               
                  
Knowing no better president to finde.
               He where he left vs, left his peace behinde.
            
            
               Yet as the couchant Lyon, when he lyes
               Downe to repose and rest, ne're shuts his eyes;
               Hee, the like prouidence about him kept,
               And still wakt for vs, when he seeming slept;
               For when whole Christendome was vp in Armes
               Frighting the fearefull Subiect with alarmes.
               Nations distracted; euen the great'st abilitie
               Of the most potent, weakned with hostility:
               Drums each where thundring, & the Canon roaring,
               Proud victory tweene doubtfull battailes soaring,
               While horrid warre, in his extream'st of rage,
               Fill'd both the streets and fields with blood and strage;
               How haue these late afflicted Kingdomes wondred
               To see vs in our blessed Goshen sondered
               As freed from Egypts plagues, no way distrest,
               Yet they with all calamities opprest.
               Ruins attending them; on vs, increase
               Still multipli'd by this faire King of peace.
            
            
               Wherefore should I thus labour to commend
               Him, whose renowne is datelesse without end,
               Subiect to no expression; their least straine
               Not within compasse of the pen or braine,
               Scarce dare I further in his praise proceed.
               Being a proiect that in me doth breed
               
                  
Amazement onely; as so far aboue
               My weake performance, that the more I loue,
               The more I feare, for as a moderate light
               Comforts the eye, and benefits the sight,
               But view the Sun in's glory, and we finde
               That his more perfect lustre strikes vs blinde;
               'Tis eath t'apply; His worth being so diuine
               In all respects, and so defectiue mine,
               Yet shall my loue so farre outstrip my feare,
               Rather to dare, then breake abruptly here.
            
            
               Ere I proceed, let me a little borrow
               Space to collect my selfe, high drown'd in sorrow.
            
            
               
                  Beware the Ides of March; 'twas a prediction
               To him that had the whole Worlds Iurisdiction,
               
                  Iulius, the first of Caesars, who declin'd
               Iust in the houre that was before diuin'd.
               In th'Ides of March the blest Eliza fell,
               The famous Mother of our Israel.
               
               In March Queene Anne, a Princesse much admir'd
               (As much lamented in her death) expir'd.
               Now lastly in these ominous Ides of March
               Is snatcht away, our strong and glorious Arch,
               (As violently by death from vs extorted)
               By whom three mighty Kingdomes were supported,
               And had he not an Atlas left behinde,
               Succeeding him in potency of minde,
               
                  
In vertue, goodnesse, royalty of State,
               And all things, that a Sonne may imitate
               So great a Father in; so iust, so wise,
               So rare a Phoenix, suddenly to rise
               Out of his Ashes: in a Time so small,
               We likewise had bin crushe beneath his fall.
            
            
               Oh ominous Moneth, thou didst our losse presage
               When with thy windy and obstreperous rage
               Thou vsher'dst in the Spring: yet I commend
               Thy going out, thou lest'st-ys as a friend
               And fellow mourner (as to all appeares)
               Parting with vs in many showres of Teares,
               In strange varieties of stormy weather,
               Snow, raine, haile, windes; and in all these together
               Weeping and sighing. But (O King) t'attend thee,
               How many Noble seruants did death send thee
               As harbingers before to view the place,
               Where thou art anchor'd now, the land of Grace?
               
                  Richmond and Lenox Duke, whose memory was 
                     Loabwi
                           •…
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      Duke of Rubmmond and 
                        
                           •…
                        my.
                  
               
               Worthy to be ingrau'd in Iron or Brasse
               For his inimitable modesty,
               And what doth grace euen Princes honesty,
               Integrity of life, nay euery Thing
               That might become a kinsman to a King.
               It was the noble Earle of Dorsets taske The Earle of Dwset.
                  
               
               To make one likewise in this dolefull maske,
               
                  
And much more cause we should haue still to need him,
               Had he not left behinde here to succeed him
               So braue a brother, one so good, so wise
               In all true Noblesse, him to equalise.
               Then Lenox Duke, a brother him succeeding The Lord 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      Duke of Lenox.
                  
               
               (Alike indow'd) as of one birth and breeding;
               In this the partiall sisters were too blame
               To take him hence so soon as giue him name:
               Now Duke, now dead, stooping to th'earth his knee
               Ere he could well expresse what he would be. 
                     Charles Earle of Nottingham
                  
               
               Then Nottingham a Pilot, who did steere
               
                  Englands once dreaded Nauie many a yeere;
               Who though he cut his cable ere he dyde,
               Brought here his Ships in a faire Port to ride.
               
                  Henry, Southamptons Earle, a Souldier proued; 
                     Henry Earle of Southampton.
                  
               
               Dreaded in warre, and in milde peace beloued.
               Oh giue me leaue a little to resound
               His memory, as most in dutie bound,
               Because his seruant once. His worth exprest
               Can no way be detraction to the rest.
            
            HENRY WRIOTHESLY Earle of Sowth-Hampton.
            
            His Anagram.
            Thy Honor is woorthe all praise.
            
               
               A short Elegie vpon the ANAGRAM.
               
                  
                     THy Honour's woorthe all praise: 'tis true, the same,
                  By which we Anagram matise thy name,
                  (Thrice Noble Henry) which, let me define
                  And first shew wherefore Honour, next, why Thyne;
                  
                  Last from thy Ashes vrne, to build and raise
                  A Monument to proue it, Woorthe All prayse.
                  
               
               
                  If onely that bare honour here were ment
                  Which Heraldry allowes thee from discent,
                  And onely that inherent, vnderstood
                  Which lineally Nobilitates the blood,
                  It rankes thee equall with the great'st of Peeres,
                  Deriuing thee from long forgotten yeeres.
               
               
                  But that's thy least (though some affect it most,
                  (Of that which is not ours, why should we boast?)
                  The noble seedes in our fore-fathers sowne,
                  May well be tearm'd our Grandsires, not our owne;
                  But happy those, their Ruins can repaire,
                  And husband still, their Names from heire to heire;
                  
                     Wriothesley was such, in all things striuing
                  To gaine a Name, by Arts, and Armes: suruiuing
                  Beyond all Marble, which at this time weepes
                  Vpon the bed where now this worthy sleepes.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Cambridge, thy pupillage; thy youth, the Court,
                  And singularity that can best 
                        •…
                     opprt:
                  Of thy braue valour Ireland witnesse can,
                  Writing thee Souldier, euen as soone as Man.
                  
                  And what as natiue was in thee begon,
                  Thy valour left success
                        •…
                      to thy Son The Lord 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            oth fly son to the Earle Hen y
                  
                  Let Belgia mourne with vs a double losse,
                  Your gold repur'd thence, you haue left them drosse.
               
               
                  Let me looke backe againe to Ireland; where
                  Me thinkes I see thee a braue Cheualeere,
                  Commanding others, and so farre extend
                  Thy worth; as onely to be tearm'd the friend
                  Of Noble Essex: such thy friendship was, Robert Dt
                        
                           •…
                        ax Earle of Essex.
                  
                  Deseruing to be character'd in Brasse
                  And euer read: shrield with a stentor's breath,
                  'Twixt you it liu'd, and parted not in death.
               
               
                  Thy patience in thy troubles thousands sing,
                  Thy innocence, the goodnesse of the King
                  Crown'd at's inauguration; whose free grace
                  Suited thy merits both with gifts and place;
                  And thou whose wisdome seem'd obscur'd but late,
                  Thought worthy to be Councellor of State,
                  And honour'd with the Garie
                        •…
                     : we fuide then
                  Kings through the brest, see more then common men.
                  Religion, which becomes a Statesman best,
                  Was in thy bosome planted, and irop
                        •…
                     est
                  
                     
Without all schisme or faction, charitie,
                  Deuotion, bounty, noble curtesie,
                  Which many (sweld and pust with Title) scorne,
                  These did thy other vertues much adorne.
               
               
                  Thy brest of all these Iewels was the Mine,
                  Markes of true Honor all: And all these Thine.
                  
                  And since their number farre exceeds thy dayes,
                  I thus conclude, Thy Honours woorthe all prayse.
                  
               
               
                  Next him the Noble Hammelton; a Man, The Mirqueste of Him
                              •…
                           .
                     
                  
                  Whom, let detraction doe the worst it can,
                  With no despightfull callumnie can brand,
                  A mighty prop and collume of the Land,
                  Whose death so much lamented well approues
                  Him dennison'd in all the peoples loues;
                  Nor was there euer any Northerne Peere
                  Better deseru'd, or more bewailed here.
               
               
                  From these I now descend vnto the last Sir 
                           
                              〈◊◊〉
                           
                         Lord Belsalt.
                     
                  
                  That followed them in death, the Lord Belfast,
                  
                  A Souldier and a Counseller of Warre,
                  Who though he went where no such turmoiles are,
                  The Fates thought fit to send him, as forerunning
                  To tell the Saints, the King of peace was comming.
               
               
                  Now thou most gracious and all dreaded power,
                  To whom ten thousand yeeres are as one houre,
                  And ages lesse then Instants, that in measure
                  Do'st spare or punish: If thy heauenly pleasure
                  
                     
So thinke it fit (but yet thy will be done)
                  Spare thou the rest still to attend his Sonne.
               
               
                  How may we best consider this great crosse,
                  So many lands lament, vnlesse the losse
                  We rate at highest: and to vndertake
                  That taske, it were impossible: To make
                  Value of lands we may, of gold, of treasures,
                  Iewels, and Honour, nay of wealth and pleasures,
                  Set a full price of our owne liues we may,
                  And how much we esteeme them. Nay euen they
                  That enioy Scepters, Crownes, and Kingly state,
                  May their great glories and abundance rate,
                  But neuer Him: All these, man may enioy,
                  Which if he lose, it can but one destroy;
                  But this priuation is so generall,
                  (As if all were but one, it toucheth all.)
               
               
                  Oh Royall Sir, beneath whose potent sway,
                  So many Kingdomes peaceably obay:
                  How deepe it wounds each loyall subiects brest,
                  To thinke vpon your losse aboue the rest;
                  T' imagine you sit mourning mongst your Peeres,
                  Your selfe heart-sad, their eyes all glaz'd in teares:
                  Let all their eyes vnto their owne hearts turne,
                  And weepe to thinke that you haue cause to mourne.
                  Yet why should the least sorrow touch thy heart,
                  That the sole hope of many millions art?
                  
                     
Or wherefore should the least offensiue brine,
                  With their salt watrie drops moyst those faire Eyne?
               
               
                  Yet Nature will haue course, Kings and Kings Sons
                  Must all obey to passion; for it runs
                  Th'row euerie veine, and with internall zeale,
                  Despight the brest, it from the heart can steale
                  Sighs and sad throbs, norspares it Princes eyes,
                  But euen from them, drawes teares at obsequies;
                  But let not one of my weake parts possest,
                  Dare search the sorrowes of a Kingly brest.
               
               
                  Now ere that you your moistned cheekes can dry,
                  The newes (for still bad tydings swiftest fly)
                  As farre as Holland will artiue, and there
                  Who can expresse the sorrow shall appeare,
                  To see a great Kings daughter in her pride The L
                           •…
                        die 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                  
                  Of Loue and Beautie, and by her faire side
                  Her hopefull Issue (prettie Infants playing)
                  They, as not capable of her dismaying,
                  Or what themselues haue lost; but when they spie
                  Her change of lookes, with a pearle-dropping eye
                  Distracted, and confus'd, (For who can blame
                  Strange extasies in her, to heare such fame)
                  Those little soules for companie to weepe,
                  To see her fall, those teares she cannot keepe.
                  What heart so obdure in all her Princely traine,
                  At this sad sight will not in felfe complaine?
                  
                     
Making the soule within the bosome melt,
                  Bee't but to see the pangs that she hath felt.
               
               
                  Amidst this dolefull Quire, next to behold
                  The Princely Pfaltzgraue, vnto whom its told Fre
                           •…
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         P. Psalizgr
                           •…
                        
                     
                  
                  The cause by this, in whose heroicke brow
                  You may like passion read, perplexed now,
                  Whether in his staid thoughts to comfort theirs,
                  Or adde to griefe with his owne sighs and teares,
                  Me thinkes I see both in his lookes prepar'd,
                  But which shall first breake forth, to ghesse 'tis hard.
                  Me thinkes I heare the passionate Ladie cry,
                  Oh what a losse King Charles hath, and what I;
                  What England, Scotland, Ireland, and what All,
                  Suruiuing his lamented Funerall.
               
               
                  Oh you his ioy, the Peeres selected pleasure
                  Offorraigne Climes, the praise of ours a Treasure,
                  On whom your Maker hath his bountie shewed,
                  And Heauen with all choyse graces hath endued;
                  Whom euen the Angels loue, and men admire,
                  Made vp with what perfection can desire
                  From Earth or Heauen: your health and beautie spare,
                  He sainted liues, his vertues crowned are.
                  The whilst we daily of hie Heauen importune,
                  You may increase in grace and blessed fortune:
                  Proue thou a Prophet, Muse, say 'tis decreed,
                  All Christendome may flourish in your seed:
                  
                     
And excellent Pfaltzgraue, may your loues perseuer,
                  That these our Nations may admire you euer,
                  Diurnally augment, but not decline,
                  Till Heauen that gaue you vs, make you diuine.
               
               
                  But doth not Denmarke thinke I doe't some wrong,
                  T' haue stayd you in the Netherlands so long,
                  Not to take view of the great sadnesse there,
                  The blacks they both in hearts and habits weare: Christerne K. of Denmarke. Duict esse of San
                           •…
                        , Ducctetle of Binns
                        
                           •…
                        cte, the Kings sisters.
                     
                  
                  Excuse me, Mightie Christerne, if for haste,
                  To come to thee, I almost had ore-past
                  Two Princely Germane Ladies, both like neere,
                  T'expir'd Queene Anne, and to thy selfe as deere.
                  But on their griefes why should I further dwell,
                  Since I haue onely a sad tale to tell.
                  And th'row the world there is no place assign'd,
                  Where for the present I can comfort finde;
                  For he that to a sorrowfull heart shall come,
                  And without comfort, had as good be dumbe:
                  To search a desperate wound, and haue no skill,
                  In stead of curing he as soone may kill.
                  Where others grieue, and I my selfe complaine,
                  Seeking to ease, I shall but adde to paine.
                  Then better to be silent
                        •…
                     : be't not yet
                  Offensiue, if I loth am to forget,
                  (Oh Mars-slarr'd Denmarke) your fraternall loue A memory of Queene Anne.
                     
                  
                  To our deceast Queene Anne, now shrin'd aboue,
                  
                     
When hath it often, nay scarse once beene seene,
                  So great a King, to see a sister Queene,
                  And for no other reason, but to please
                  His eye with her bright glorie, twice the Seas
                  T'haue crost with danger: his Maiesticke state,
                  Safetie and ease, leauing, to tempt his fate
                  'Gainst tempests, gusts, and the swolne surges wrath,
                  Nay all the fearefull terrours Neptune hath:
                  Not all the Oceans frownings and affrights
                  Could stay him from th'inticements and delights
                  He tooke in her sweet sight: Whirlewinds nor wrack,
                  No feare of surge or billow kept him backe:
                  All these exprest his loue; but for Queene Anne,
                  
                  His Sisters death, his sad laments who can?
                  My weaknesse I confesse, and therefore leaue it
                  To some that can more feeling passion giue it,
                  And come vnto her gratitude, whom Spite,
                  Nor Enuie can accuse; She to requite
                  His magnitude of loue, (to giue it name
                  To all posteritie, and whence it came,)
                  Her Palace, which to her great charge and cost,
                  She then repair'd, as there delighting most,
                  With goodly structures beautified and wall'd,
                  Late Somerset, now Denmarke House is call'd.
               
               
                  Doe but obserue (I intreat) one thing with me,
                  To shew the loue and vnanimitie
                  
                     
Betwixt our Royall King, and blessed Queene,
                  What more remarkt a president hath beene?
                  As if the heauens to shew his loue vnto her,
                  And that in death (againe) he ment to woe her,
                  Haue so ordain'd, that though he dide romoce,
                  Some miles from hence (not all vnworthy note) 
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        
                     
                  
                  Euen to the very place by death assign'd her,
                  His breathlesse corps, as hoping there to finde her,
                  Should be conuer'd; whether at his bequest,
                  Or that th'mscrutable powers so thought it best,
                  I'am ignorant; yet this assur'd I am,
                  She went from Denmarke house, he thither came.
                  From thence (as in one Temple they were wedded)
                  So in one place to be together bedded:
                  But into forraigne Countries I was growne
                  So farre, that I had nigh forgot mine owne;
                  As if we had not Country, Court, and Citie,
                  All to b'included in this mournfull dittie;
                  Therefore in this griou'd synod I comprise
                  The poore, the rich, the ignorant, the wise,
                  The Noble, base, the Citizen, the Swaine,
                  Who all (and all aronce) his losse complaine.
               
               
                  But were their grid
                        •…
                      like yours, thrice Noble Sir,
                  In whose more sad view, this sad character
                  I giue to safe protection, it would moue
                  M
                        •…
                     ble or Adamant, or what's aboue
                  
                     
These in relentlosse hardnesse, Corsicke stone,
                  Flint, Iron, Copper, Steele, or that which none
                  Can paralell in's kinde, and nothing but
                  It selfe can worke to beauty, mould, or cut,
                  The Diamond; could it partake your passion,
                  'Twere possible euen that to frame and fashion
                  Iust as the fire doth wax; nay, which is more,
                  Euen drop it into Teares: you did adore
                  His state and maiostie, for by his grace,
                  You stood before him in high eminent place.
                  But loth at this sad season should I be,
                  To put you (honour'd Sir) in memory
                  Too much of that, of which so much your brest
                  Is to your more infirinity possest.
                  Our generall comfore is, he's but translated
                  From earth to heauon, where he is now instated.
                  His peacefull soule hath giuen his foes the foyle,
                  Death wher's thy sting, & Hell wher's now thy spoyle?
               
               
                  What should I now, hauing the greatest past,
                  Dwell on tholester? they may weepe as fast,
                  Though not so fully, for the greater farre
                  The persous be, the greater their griofes are:
                  Pause 
                        〈◊〉
                      a while, his funerals to deploce,
                  Some other (that can better) praise him more.
               
            
            
               
               A short Consolatory Elegie, alluding to the happy and blest succession, of the hopefull and most Royall CHARLES the first King of England stiled by that name.
               
               
                  SVnshines succeed blacke tempests, calmes a storme;
                  The Heauens that in themselues haue vniforme,
                  Mix cares with pleasures, ioyes with discontent,
                  As if (to moralise) they thus much ment,
                  Presume on nothing; Things incertaine are,
                  Nor (in thy most deiectednesse) despaire.
                  Long tedious fasts in men consumptions breed,
                  Continuall surfets make vs loath to feede:
                  That we may both disgest with more facility,
                  They haue ordain'd the Lady Mutability
                  
                  To soueraignize on earth, as meerely sent
                  To tell vs that there's nothing permanent.
                  Sicknesse attends on health, a fall on pride;
                  Againe, there is no ebbe but hath a tyde.
                  All this th' inconstant Moone can teach vs plaine,
                  Growing to th' Full, declining in her waine:
                  The heart of man doth still affect varietie,
                  And yet in nothing can it finde satietie;
                  There's emptinesse, and fulnesse; Flux, and wast;
                  Yet (Man) in neither thou assurance hast;
                  Rest followes labour, Day succeedeth Night,
                  And now my blacke page I will change to white.
               
               
                  
                  The Kingly Prophet; who the Psalmes compil'd,
                  Left us a pres'dent, mourning for his child,
                  Who 
                        •…
                     oulst the 
                        •…
                     ufaut on his death-bed lay,
                  Was groueling on the earth, did fast and pray,
                  But after seueu daies, when he saw hope past,
                  That his (so much belou'd) had breath'd his last,
                  He that had all that time abstain'd from meat,
                  From his teare-watred couch, arose and ear:
                  Being askt the reason, the wise King replide,
                  I had some hope of mercy, till it dyde,
                  By prayer and fast his weaknesse to restore,
                  But now in vaine I should lament him more.
               
               
                  By humane power, I neuer heard or read
                  Sackcloth and ashes could reuiue the dead;
                  But as Hee instantly perswaded sorrow
                  From all such eyes as teanes from his did borrow;
                  So our Kings obsequies perform'd and done,
                  Cast eyes of ioyes on his successiue sonne.
                  The bitter sadnesse I before pursude,
                  Thus with the tragicke Poet I conclude;
               
               
                  —Tibi crescit omne,
                  Et quod occasus vides & quod ortus, 
                        
                           〈1 line〉
                        .
                  
                  Paree venturis, Tib
                        •…
                      Mors par
                        •…
                     
                  
                  Sis licet segnis propiramus ipst
                  Prima qua vitam dedit Horacarpsit.
               
            
            
               
               An Acrosticke vpon the most happy Inauguration of CAROLVS IACOBVS STVARTVS our dread Lord and Soucraigne.
               
                  
                     C harles Iames succeeds King Iames in his true Right,
                  I n Maiestie, Globe, Scepter, Sword, and Crowne.
                  A Royall Sonne, to giue great Kingdomes light,
                  A fter his Fathers set, and going downe;
                  R adiant and shooting farre, may his beames flye,
                  C ompassing Lands where Britain's name's scarce heard;
                  O uer all ciuill States, remote, or nye;
                  O uer all Seas may his great power be fear'd:
                  L ong may his growing glories 'mongst vs last,
                  B lest with a fortunate Nestorian Reigne.
                  V ertue; in which his Father all surpast,
                  V nchang'd a Legacie with him remaine.
                  S hould I all panegyries put in one,
                  S uch as of th'ancient Heroes haue beene writ,
                  S ure it might be conferd on him alone;
                  T ruth tels me he so truely merits it;
                  V aliditie of body, Heauen long send him,
                  A rmour of proofe, protect him from Inuasion.
                  R eligion, zeale, and pietie defend him,
                  T o guard and guide him vpon blest occasion.
                  V nto my King I dedicate this Oad,
                  S ince in his brest all vertues haue aboad.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   