
      
         
            
            
            MYSTICAL BABYLON, OR Papall Rome.
            A Treatiſe vpon thoſe words, 
                  APOCAL. 18.2. 
                  It is fallen, it is fallen BABYLON, &c.
            
            In which the wicked, and miſerable condition of Rome, as ſhee now is in her preſent Babylonian eſtate, and as ſhe ſhall be in her future ineuitable ruine, is fully diſcouered:
            
            And ſundry Controuerſiall points of Religion, betwixt the Proteſtants, and the Papiſts, are briefly diſcuſſed.
            
            
               By Theophilus Higgons, Rector of the Parochiall Church of Hunton, neere Maidstone in KENT.
            
               
                  PSAL. 119.126.
               
               It is time for thee, LORD, to lay to thine hand; for they haue deſtroyed thy Law.
            
            LONDON, Printed by William Stansby, for Matthew Lownes and William Barret. 1624.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR HENRY MOVNTAGV, Knight, Baron of KIMBOLTON, Viſcount MAVNDEVILLE, Lord Preſident of his MAIESTIES moſt Honorable Priuie Counſaile.
            
               
                  Right noble, and truly Christian LORD;
            
            
               SInce I haue preſumed to appeare thus in publique, and to treate peculiarly of this ſubiect [Myſticall Babylon] rather then of any other, and, finally, to recommend this Treatiſe vnto your fauourable patronage; I ſtand therefore obliged to expreſſe my Motiues,

and Reaſons, in the two former points, for the generall ſatisfaction of others; and, in the laſt, for the particular of your Honorable Selfe.
            As for the FIRST; I am not mooued, vpon any oblique reſpect, to take vp the Sword of my Pen, in this ſpirituall warfare: I am not vexed with the ambition of preferment, nor affectation of applauſe; for I deſire earneſtly of God, that the diuine ſentence of Saint Paul may bee deeply grauen in my heart; The World is crucified vnto me, and I vnto the World.
            
            Neither am I prouoked vnto this deſigne out of any ſpleene, or vindictiue humour againſt the Church of Rome, or any perſon therein: and indeed I haue beene ſo farre from giuing them any ſpeciall diſtaſte, that I haue obſerued the tearmes of ciuill, and morall reſpect towards ſome of them, to my greater preiudice, then I will either bragge, or complaine of, vnto the World.
            But the true, and proper cauſes are theſe. First; I am bound, as a dutifull Sonne of my Mother-Church (from whoſe ſacred breaſts I drew the firſt nutriment of my faith) to ſuccour, and comfort her, in her diſtreſſed eſtate, while the little Foxes of Rome eate vp her Grapes, and the wild Boare thereof ſeeketh to enter into the Vineyard of God. And therefore, ſince euery man (indued with any facultie of writing) ſhould performe his ſeruice vnto the Church of God, eſpecially, when, and where, the contagion of Hereſie doth dilate it ſelfe (as Saint Augustine doth grauely aduiſe) I could not bee ſilent in ſo neceſſarie a time: for as

wee ſhall anſwere vnto God for our idle words, ſo wee ſhall anſwere vnto him for our dangerous ſilence.
            
               Secondly; to make ſome ſatisfaction, thereby, vnto the Church of God; which, being vniuſtly wronged by my meanes, doth iuſtly challenge this remedie of my paines; that the hand, which hath hurt her, may ſomewhat helpe her; and that, as I haue made a wound, ſo I may make a cure againe.
            
               Thirdly; to procure the ſweete peace of my conſcience towards God, that I may heale the wound, which I haue formerly made vnto my owne ſoule; Chriſtian Wiſdome teaching me to powre ſome Oile into that, to ſupple it, which hath found ſo much Vineger to fret it; and therefore I am reſolued to neglect all troubles without, that I may find this comfort within.
            
               Fourthly, to exempt, hereby, all ſcruple out of their hearts, who deſire to vnderſtand the ſtate, and diſpoſition of my conſcience in the matter of Religion. For as Saint Hierome, being vehemently ſuſpected of the infection of Origens errours, did therefore diuert that ſuſpition, by cleere publication of his mind in writing, That they, who would not beleeue his tongue, in his deniall, might yet beleeue his Pen, in his refutation thereof (as hee doth ingeniouſly write in this behalfe) ſo I find my ſelfe very deeply charged, in the point of conſcience, and diſcretion, to giue ſufficient notice vnto all the ſonnes of my Mother (touching my Faith, and Religion) by ſome Treatiſe, now to bee

publiſhed vnto the World, and to remayne) I hope) after my deceaſe, as a Record, what I doe certainly beleeue, concerning the doctrine of faith profeſſed in this Church of England, and oppugned by the Church of Rome.
            
            SECONDLY, therefore, I haue made ſpeciall election of this ſubiect (concerning Rome, and her ruine) as being of greateſt importance in it ſelf, and ſpecially in theſe dayes. For whereas the moſt vſuall ſubiects of diſputation, betwixt vs, and the Papiſts, are particular, and therefore haue a particular iſſue of veritie, or falſhood therein; this is of an higher nature, of a larger extent, and of a more generall effect; for that it doth concerne not onely a part of her doctrine, but the whole being of the Church of Rome; it toucheth not a branch, or two, but the very root it ſelfe; it reacheth not onely vnto a piece of her building, but vnto the very foundation thereof. And therefore this diſputation (viz. Whether, and How the name of Babylon, in the viſions of Saint Iohn, doth agree vnto Rome) is of ſingular conſequence; thereby to confront the audacious inſultations of her politike Agents; to giue an Antidote againſt the poyſon, which they ſeeke to inſtill into many vnſetled hearts: that ſo, they, who are fallen from the truth, may bee happily reduced vnto it; and they, who are falling, may be ſtrongly confirmed in the ſame.
            Now THIRDLY, and laſtly, it remaineth (moſt worthy Lord) that I make true remonſtrance of the cauſes, which haue bred this confidence

in mee to offer vp this little Treatiſe, vpon the Altar of your Honourable fauour. I ſpeake not of your deſcent, and extraction out of a Noble Family, nor of your high degree of Honour, nor of your ſpeciall aduancement in the State (for which reſpects, many men apply themſelues vnto the ſeruice, and attendance of great perſons) but, aboue all things, I am comforted in your ſincere, and conſtant profeſſion of the Truth; which grace ſeemeth to be hereditarie in your Houſe, as being ſpectable in all the branches thereof.
            Since therefore Greatneſſe, and Goodneſſe haue mutuall coniunction in your Lordſhips perſon, I cannot ſuppoſe, that a Worke of this nature can want your acceptation, nor the Author thereof your protection. Whereof alſo I conceiue the greater hope, becauſe I haue knowne heretofore (by the double teſtimonie of mine eyes, and eares) the gracious inclination of your Honour towards mee; and that onely for the Truths ſake, and the Words ſake: as, indeed, I haue euer found them to be my moſt aſſured, and certaine friends, that haue affected mee in this regard.
            But if I ſhould need, or ſeeke any externall, or farther motiue, to induce your Honour to vouchſafe your patronage vnto mee, and vnto this Treatiſe, I would not goe out of your owne Family (though it muſt bee from the liuing to the dead) but I would intreate it by the deare, and precious memory of that religious, learned, & moſt accompliſhed Prelate, your famous Brother, IAMES (lately Lord Biſhop of Winton) whoſe kind entertainement

of mee in priuate, and fauourable teſtimonie of mee in publike, were more ſufficient arguments of his loue, then of my deſert. For I may truely ſay, by the certaine experience of ſundrie occurrents in my life, that I haue taſted a little of Gods deſerued wrath, but a great deale more of his vndeſerued grace: whereof I account this no ſmall part, that hee hath giuen mee ſo much intereſt in the good opinion, and affection of ſundrie perſons of eminent qualitie, and particularly of your Honorable Selfe; whom I beſeech the Lord of all mercies to bleſſe in your owne Perſon, and in your noble Poſteritie, with the temporall bleſſings of this life, and the eternall of the life to come, through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord; in whom I am, and will euer remaine
            
               Your Honours moſt humble, and truly deuoted Seruant, THEOPHILVS HIGGONS.
               
               
                  London. 
                  
                     Ian. 27. 1623.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE PREFACE OF THE AVTHOR VNTO THE CRHISTIAN READER.
            
               COurteous, and ingenuous Reader; Since no man can enter well into the roomes of any Treatiſe, but by the doore of a Preface, therefore I commend theſe enſuing Obſeruations vnto thee, to prepare thee, the better thereby, vnto the reading of this Diſcourſe.
            Firſt; though ſundry Expoſitions are extant vpon this part of Scripture (as likewiſe vpon the whole Booke of the ſacred Reuelation) and certain Sermons haue beene preached vpon it, and then commended vnto the Preſſe, yet I confeſſe, that (opening my heart vnto God by prayer, to illuſtrate my vnderſtanding with a true, and ſufficient knowledge thereof) I followed chiefly ſuch generall notions touching the ſame, as were layd vp formerly in my mind; and willingly ſequeſtred from mee the helpe of other mens labours in this kind (excepting ſuch as I ſhall preſently name) leaſt I ſhould build vpon another mans

foundation, and ſo drowne the diſcourſe of my vnderſtanding in the conceits of other learned men, with whom I had a reſolution not to conſult, before I had finiſhed the impreſſion of this Treatiſe. Miſtake not my meaning, and purpoſe, good Reader; for I doe not intend hereby to arrogate any thing vnto my ſelfe aboue other men (ſince I am conſcious of mine owne infirmities) but to preuent their exceptions, who may ſuppoſe, or pretend, that I haue framed a collection, onely, in this Treatiſe, out of the Sermons, or Bookes of other men.
            Secondly; whatſoeuer I may ſeeme to owe vnto any Author of our ſide, I confeſſe it to bee due, principally, vnto the learned, and indicious Pen of our gracious Souereigne Lord, King IAMES, in his Paraphraſe vpon this Booke, as thou wilt eaſily obſerue (gentle Reader) in certaine paſſages of my Diſcourſe. As for Authors on the Aduerſaries part, I had no ſmall aduantage, and furtherance out of the writings of two learned Ieſuites, Ribera, and Viegas, of whom therefore I make frequent mention, as ſeruing, in many things, exactly for my purpoſe.
            Thirdly; if any acerbitie of ſtile appeare in this Diſcourſe, know that it is drawne from me, rather by the neceſsitie of the matter it ſelfe (which could not be well expreſſed otherwiſe) then that it came out of the diſpoſition of my mind; which, hating the errours of Babylon, doth yet pittie, and loue the perſons of all (and ſpecially of ſome) that are inſnared with the ſame; wiſhing, and deſiring, their ſaluation from my heart, in Ieſus Chriſt.
            
               Fourthly; I enter vpon this diſputation, not out of contention, but out of conſcience, with a ſecure, and certaine perſwaſion of truth, and ſoliditie therein; whereof becauſe I make ſome larger mention hereafter, I will ſay the leſſe in this place.
            Fifthly; though this Booke, in all the pages thereof, beareth the title of a firſt, and of a ſecond Sermon, yet vnderſtand, that, after I had preached two Sermons, at Maidſtone in Kent, to this purpoſe, and had recollected my meditations, I framed them afterward more copiouſly into the body of a Treatiſe, which therefore I preſent vnto thee, rather vnder this name; as exceeding the proportion, and, in ſome things, differing (perhaps) from the qualitie of Sermons.
            
            Sixthly, and laſtly; if it ſhall pleaſe any of the Romane ſide, to ſtand againſt me, in the defence of his Mother-Church of Rome, and to make anſwere vnto my Diſcourſe (vnto which buſineſſe, as I challenge no man, ſo I feare not the performance of any man in this kind) he muſt follow me in his anſwere, as I haue gone before him in this Treatiſe; not flying vp, and downe without order, nor concealing my proofes, and reaſons; but, from point to point, making a cleere, and a ſubſtantiall refutation thereof. As for bitter words, and calumnious writing, though I can ſteepe my Pen in Vineger, and Worme-wood, as well as they, yet I reſolue not to follow any aduerſarie in this courſe: but, as Tertullian ſaith in his diſputation againſt Hermogenes, Viderit Perſona; cum Doctrina mihi quaeſtio eſt; ſo I will leaue the perſon, and come vnto the matter it ſelfe.
         
         
            
            
            An Aduertiſement.
            
               WHereas ſome of my Brethren in this Church of England, and ſome of my Aduerſaries in the Church of Rome, expect of me an Anſwere vnto mine owne Booke of Purgatorie, and Prayer for the dead (ſometimes publiſhed by mee in forreine parts) I aſſure them both, that I had made a collection of ſundry notes for this intent, and that they were growing into the proportion of a Book, had not the neceſſitie of publiſhing this Diſcourſe ſo ſoone, preuented my deſire in the other; which yet may follow in due time, if it ſhall pleaſe God to grant me better health of bodie (the ſtate of it being much attenuated by infirmities) with the acceſſion of ſuch helpes, as are requiſite for them, that enter vpon this controuerſiall kind: for want of which neceſſary meanes (together with my bad health) in the priuate, and ruſticane courſe of my life, I may be compelled to deſiſt wholy from the ſame; contenting my ſelfe hereafter with the exerciſe of my Paſtorall Office in that little Congregation, which it hath pleaſed GOD to commit vnto my charge. Farewell.
            
         
         
            
            THE PRINTER to the Reader.
            
               GOod Reader; thou ſhalt find the Errata, or Faults (which are committed in the Impreſsion) obſerued, and amended in the end of this Booke; where the principall errours are noted with this marke, * becauſe they chiefly, aboue the rest, require a correction by thy Pen, before thou entreſt into the reading of this Treatiſe. As for the leſſer errours (viz. in Points, in Orthographie, in defect of ſome Letters, in placing ſmall Letters in ſteed of capitall, &c.) they are left vnto thy prudent, and ingenious cenſure.
         
      
      
         
            
            MYSTICALL BABYLON, OR PAPALL ROME. The firſt Sermon.
            
            
               
                  
                     APOCAL. 18.2.
                  
                  It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon.
                  
               
            
            
               THis Text is little in words, but great in conſequence; as Benjamin was a little Tribe, but great in dominion: Pſal. 68.27. It is part of a Proclamation made from Heauen: and three things inuite vs vnto a ſerious attention therof. FIRST; The Perſon proclaiming: an Angell [verſe 1.] euen Christ Ieſus himſelfe; as ſome conceiue (amongſt whom I

may particularly name our profoundly learned Souereigne, in his iudicious and well compoſed Paraphraſe vpon this myſticall booke) who is deſcribed here, by his excellency [he had great power] and by his operation; the earth was lightned with his glory.
            
            SECONDLY; The manner of his proclamation: He cried out mightily, with a loude voice [verſe 2.] with a voice, more then Stentorian; and no maruell: for it was Verbum à Verbo; a word from the Word: a word powerfully ſpoken by the Word ineffably begotten.
            THIRDLY; The matter it ſelfe; It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon: the place is conſiderable; for it is Babylon, by qualitie, and name; alſo a great Citie by amplitude of place, and power. The ruine of it is markable: for it is a fall, extreme, and finall: and it is fallen; in the time paſt (though it be yet to come) by an enallage of the tenſe: and againe; it is fallen; by an anadiplôſis: the one, and the other, ſhewing an infallible certainty of euent. Thus now my Text is like Rebeccaes wombe; it hath twinnes in it, [Cecidit, cecidit] as if the ruine of Babylon were ſounded forth by the two ſiluer trumpets, Num. 10.2. It is a double voice of ruine; fall vpon fall: ſo that I may vſe the words of the Pſalme; God hath ſpoken it once or twice. Pſal. 62.11.
            And as my Text is double here, by the ingemination of one word; ſo it is double by the repetition of the ſame ſentence elſewhere, viz. Apoc. 14.8. Againe, that, which, in both theſe places is ſpoken of, myſticall Babylon (Rome; as an one you ſhall heare) is foretold by prophecie (and we haue ſeene it verified by

experience) of literall Babylon [the renowned Citie of Chaldaea] in the Praedictions of Eſay 21.9. Babel is fallen, it is fallen. This conſonancie is in the Scriptures; this reſemblance in ſinne, and ruine, betwixt the old Babylon, and the new. For Babylon 
               
                  •
               s the firſt Rome, and Rome is the ſecond Babylon.
            
            I come to the words of my Text, wherein there is a fatall coniunction of two things: Culpa, and Poena: the Sinne of Rome, implyed in her name; Babylon: and the puniſhment of Rome, annexed, or prefixed rather; it is fallen, it is fallen. We may Logically therefore make this partition of my Text: heere is the SVBIECT; Babylon: and heere is the PRAEDICATE; it is fallen. In order of the words (as they ſtand herein my Text) Babylon is laſt, but, in order of ſenſe, it is firſt. For, in Grammer, the nominatiue caſe goeth before the Verbe; In Logicke, the Subiect goeth before the Praedicate; and in Diuinitie, the Sinne goeth before the Puniſhment: Pride goeth before Deſtruction; Pro. 16.18. Wherefore, in the proſecution of my Text, I will change the place of the words; and, as Iacob gaue the prioritie to Ephraim [Gen. 48.14.] in the aduiſed impoſition of his hands; ſo I will giue the precedency to Babylon (the laſt word in my Text) and then I will reflect duely vpon her fall, expreſſed in the firſt place thereof.
            
               The FIRST part; concerning the Subiect, and Sinne in the Text; BABYLON.
               
               THough I haue affirmed this Babylon to be Rome; yet I require not your ſuddaine beliefe, without a

ſubſtantiall proofe. So that, to deduce this matter fairely, and cleerely to your vnderſtandings, I muſt propoſe a double inquiſition; in purſuit whereof, we ſhall come ſecurely vnto the hauen of my deſire, and then arriue happily vpon the coaſt, vnto which I direct my thoughts.
               
                  
                     Firſt: What is this Babylon in my Text.
                  
                     Secondly: Why this name is impoſed vpon that place, which is thereby ſignified vnto vs.
               
               Theſe two points being ſufficiently diſcuſſed, for the true explication of my Text, and illuſtration of this name; I will conclude the firſt part of my Text with ſuch obſeruations, as ſhall kindly, and properly enſue vpon the ſame.
            
            
               The FIRST Inquiſition; What is this Babylon in my Text.
               
                  THis Babylon is not literally to be vnderſtood, neither for that ancient Citie in Chaldaea, nor for that famous Citie in Egypt (once called by the name of Memphis, and now of Cair) ſince the generall ſcope, and purpoſe of this booke, doth not intend any ſuch ſenſe: and many circumſtances therein doe ſufficiently refute it; and, finally, not any Author, in former, or later times, no Father in the ancient Church, no Doctor in ſucceeding ages, did euer ſo conceiue of this place.
               This Babylon, therefore, is myſtically to be vnderſtood, according to the common, and vſuall tenour of this booke. That whole booke of the Reuelation of

Saint Iohn is ſpiritually to be vnderſtood, by the iudgement of Saint Hierome; Epiſt. 148. And hence it is, that Dionyſius, ſometimes Biſhop of Alexandria, confeſſeth of this obſcure, and profound booke, that it cannot be vnderſtood, according to the firſt, and obuious ſenſe thereof (as Euſebius relateth; Hiſtor. Eccleſ. l. 7. c. 24.) but that there are deepe, and hidden myſteries in the ſame. Deepe, I confeſſe, and hidden, till that Time (the mother of truth) in the ſucceſſe, and euent of things, was the midwife to helpe the Church of God, which trauelled long in bringing forth the true, and proper ſenſe thereof. For as Sampſon was directed, and guided, by his ſeruant, vnto the pillars, vpon which the houſe did ſtand [Iudic. 16.26.] ſo the ſucceſſe of things, conſpiring with the Oracles of this booke, hath conueighed vs vnto a ſound, and euident knowledge of many myſteries therein; vnknowne to former ages, but reuealed in this: in regard whereof this booke doth now more fully anſwere vnto its name; for now it is a Reuelation indeed, as it was before in title.
               Since therefore this Babylon is heere ſo called by a Myſterie, we will paſſe along, by a gradation, through foure ſeuerall interpretations thereof, that ſo wee may diſcouer in this point, how farre the ancient Church digreſſed from the marke: then, how neerely, at the laſt, the Romiſh Church is come vnto it, and thereby to know her ſelfe: and then finally, how the Reformed Church hath directly hit the marke: as the Beniamites could ſling ſtones at an haire breadth, and not fayle, Iudic. 20.16.
            
            
               
               The FIRST Interpretation.
               THe firſt interpretation is framed by S. Auguſtine, whom many follow in this, and ſundry other points, rather for the reaſon of his authoritie, then for the authoritie of his reaſon, and therefore are carried into errour by the venerable eſtimation of his name. Hee confeſſeth, that Rome is another Babylon, de ciuit. Dei. l. 16. c. 17. and that ſhee is the daughter of Babylon, l. 18. c. 22. but not in regard of her ſinne and ruine (as it is now in my Text) which things that greatly learned Father neuer ſeemed to ſuſpect: and therefore teaching truly, that there are two Cities in this world (mixed together in outward things, but ſeuered in their inward qualities, and tending, conſequently, vnto different ends) he aſſumeth falſly, that this Babylon (out of which wee muſt flye: Apoc. 18.4.) is onely the generall Citie of the Deuill and his members; whereas the other Citie is a Spirituall Ieruſalem, and the Citie of God. Read S. Auguſtine, de Ciuit. Dei, l. 18. c. 18. In Pſal. 26. enarrat. 2. In Pſal. 61. and though the Homilies vpon the Reuelation (paſſing vnder his name) are not his genuine Workes, yet they truely containe his opinion in this behalfe, Homil. 11. and 16.
               This ſiniſter, and miſconceiued interpretation, of S. Auguſtine, doth ſometime qualifie the feare of Bellarmine; who finding that Rome ſhall be deſtroyed, neere the end of the world, by deduction (as hee affirmeth) out of the Reuelat. cap. 17. Videtur (ſaith he) this may ſeeme ſo to bee; but hee recollecteth himſelfe immediately in this manner; Auguſtine, with many others, doth conceiue, that this Citie of Babylon is the generall Citie

of the wicked, and not the particular Citie of Rome. De Rom. Pont. l. 4. c. 4.
               It is no maruaile, that Bellarmine (like a man readie to be drowned) taketh hold of euery ſtraw for his reliefe. The maruaile is rather, that Auguſtine, a man ſo learned, ſo ingenious, ſo iudicious, ſhould not cleerely diſcerne, by ſo many circumſtances in the Text, that this Babylon is a particular Citie, and not a generall Societie: and farther, that this particular Citie is Rome, and not any other place.
               But the glorious luſtre of the [then] preſent ſtate of Rome (in the Empire, ſo potent, and in the Church, ſo religious) might, and certainly did breed an eclipſe of this euident truth vnto S. Auguſtines eyes, looking more earneſtly vpon the condition of the time, then deepely into the coherence of the Text.
               I conclude, therfore, the firſt interpretation, and aduiſe men that conuerſe in the Monuments of the ancient Fathers (without which no man can be profound, and exact in the knowledge of Diuinitie) to draw their wine, and to leaue their dregges; and not to eſteeme that currant in them, which is not weighed in the ballance of holy Scripture. For the Sunne of this ſacred Booke hath natiue light of truth without any darkeneſſe of errour; whereas the borrowed light of the Moone [the beſt Fathers, and moſt commended Interpreters] doth ſhine with the ſpots of infirmitie, which attendeth the nature of mankind.
            
            
               
               The SECOND Interpretation.
               THe ſecond Interpretation is that, which Saint Hierome doth follow; who ſaw a part of the truth, but not the whole: as the blind man, vpon the firſt, and imperfect recouerie of his ſight, ſaw men, but hee ſaw them walking like trees, Mark. 8.24. He confeſſeth then, that Babylon is Rome; that Babylon, at the leaſt, wherof Saint Peter doth make mention (Epiſt. 1. cap. 5. v. 13.) whoſe authoritie hee pretendeth to follow in this point; de Scriptor. Eccleſiaſtic. in nomine, MARCVS. But in the time of Saint Peter (if, by that name of Babylon, hee did vnderſtand Rome) it was Ethnicall Rome, which the Romaniſts themſelues doe willingly confeſſe, and vſually pretend to haue beene ſtiled by that name, which they ſuppoſe was not, and cannot bee extended vnto the Christian [or rather Antichriſtian] Rome in ſucceeding ages.
               But, to vnderſtand yet more punctually the reſolution of Saint Hierome in this caſe, let vs obſerue, that hee affirmeth Rome to haue beene Babylon in his owne time, when there was a true and a glorious Church of Chriſt in Rome: and therefore, in the name of certaine religious Ladies [Epiſt. 17.] he aduiſeth Marcella to flie out of that Babylon, and to repaire vnto Bethlehem. A paſſage verie rhetoricall, and full of inſinuation (rather then found, and ſubſtantiall) to breed in her tender heart an alienation from the Citie of Rome, as being that Babylon, whereof wee now intreate; though elſewhere hee ſeemeth wholly to free, and diſcharge Rome from the ſcandalous imputation of this title, as belonging to ETHNICALL

                  Rome, in her former, and paſt eſtate. Vrbs potens, vrbs orbis domina (ſayth he: contra Iouinian. l. 2. in fine) ſcriptam in fronte blaſphemiam Chriſti confeſsione dele
                     
                        •
                     iſti, &c. O potent Citie, ô Lady of the world, thou haſt, by the confeſſion of Christ, blotted out the blaſphemie written in thy forehead. Vpon which paſſage, Marianus Victorius (a learned Babylonian) writeth to this effect. Hierome imputeth this name of BABYLON vnto Rome, as ſhee was ETHNICALL, as ſhee perſecuted the Chriſtians, and was drunken with the effuſion of their bloud; and therefore it cannot bee appropriated vnto Rome in theſe latter times, as the Hereticks doe falſely ſurmiſe, and maliciouſly pretend. With him a multitude of Babylonians doth conſpire in this behalfe; and therefore Maſter Robert Parſons [in his three Conuerſ. of England; part. 2. c. 5.] paſſeth his verdict in this manner: The name of BABYLON is applyed to the ſtate of the perſecuting Emperours, and afflicted Chriſtians, which ſtate (ſaith he) hath beene aboliſhed, as we haue ſeene already fulfilled.
               
               Thus as Agag, the King of Amalek, came pleaſantly before Samuel [1. Sam. 15.32.] perſwading himſelfe, that the bitterneſſe of death was paſt; (which was yet to come, and was then at hand) ſo theſe miſerable Babylonians, by poore, and weake euaſions, perſwade themſelues, that the ſcandall, and horrour of this name is paſt, and that condition of Rome is expired, and ſo Rome is ſafe: whereas the imputation cleaueth faſt vnto her, and her future ruine doth certainly attend her preſent ſtate; as we ſhall ſee anon, in the orderly purſuite of this point. For, as yet, the queſtion is not, vpon what Rome [Ethnicall, or Chriſtian]
                  
this hatefull name and direfull calamitie doth fall: whether vpon Rome in her eſtate paſt, preſent, or to come (which particular ſhall afterwards enſue, in the proceſſe of my Diſcourſe) but ſimply and preciſely; whether this Babylon bee the particular Citie of Rome (as Saint Hierome doth conceiue; though he be variable, and inconſtant in the manner of his aſſertion) or whether it bee the generall ſocietie of the wicked, as Saint Augustine doth, in an Allegoricall ſenſe, ſomewhat wittily, but very improbably, diuine.
               That this Babylon, in my Text, is the Citie of Rome, it appeareth euidently by many, and cleere circumſtances in this Scripture, but ſpecially two. FIRST; in regard of her Dominion: Shee fitteth vpon many waters. Chap. 17. Verſe 1. Which Waters, the Angell doth interpret to be the multitude of Nations: Verſe 15. And therefore, Verſe 18. he ſaith, that ſhe reigned ouer the Kings of the Earth. This was the condition of Rome, in the time of Saint Iohn, to whom this Reuelation was made; and therefore the Commentarie vpon the Reuelations, which beareth the name of Saint Ambroſe, ſaith expreſly vpon this place; hoc manifeſtum eſt, &c. This thing is manifeſt (namely, that the Angell ſpeaketh this of Rome) For we know (ſaith the Author) that, in this time, the Romanes did obtayne Souereigntie ouer the Princes of the Earth. SECONDLY; in regard of her third ſituation vpon ſeuen hills, or Mountaynes (for ſo the ſeuen heads in the third Verſe are expounded by the Angels in the ninth) which deſcription agreeth fairely vnto Rome, ſtanding (once wholly, and now partly) vpon ſeuen hils of

markeable note; whence the Grecians called her 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the Latines, in the ſame ſenſe, ſepticollis; both agreeably heere with the Spirit of God.
               Hence it is, that (a learned Ieſuite) duly expending the concurrencie of theſe proper and indiuiduall markes, doth ingenuouſly confeſſe; Omnia profecto, niſi in Romam, non conueniunt; all theſe things agree vpon no other Citie, but Rome alone; as I ſhall further obſerue anon. Hence it is, that Bellarmine concludeth, by demonſtration of theſe notes; Babylon was certainly Rome; and therefore hee inſiſteth vpon it, as a matter of ſpeciall aduantage, to proue that Saint Peter was at Rome. De Rom. Pont. l. 2. c. 2.
               Thus much concerning the ſecond interpretation of this name of Babylon. We haue found the place; it is Rome: we are yet to enquire of her ſtate; whether it be paſt (as it was Ethnicall) or whether it be preſent (as wee conceiue it is) or whether it bee future; as ſome learned Papiſts themſelues doe teach. So ſtill we draw neerer, and neerer vnto Rome, till ſhe ſay vnto me, as Ahab vnto Eliah: Haſt thou found me, O mine Enemy? 1. Reg. 21.20.
            
            
               The THIRD Interpretation.
               THe third interpretation of the name of Babylon in this place is this; that Rome is Babylon, not onely as ſhe was Ethnicall (nay rather ſhe is Babylon here not as ſhe was Ethnicall, nor in her eſtate now already paſt) but in another ſtate, which was future, and yet to come, in the time of this prediction, and was then

to ſucceed, in enſuing Ages; after that Paganiſme was extinct; after that Heatheniſh Idolatry did decreaſe; after that Perſecution by the Emperours, did ceaſe; and after that peace was reſtored vnto the Church. This interpretation I will approue, by three Remonſtrances, to be ſincere, proper, and true.
               FIRST; by the playne euidence, and coherence of this Scripture; by two perſpicuous demonſtrations out of the ſame. First; becauſe this Babylon is heere ſo called by title, and ſhe is ſo indeed: when? neere vpon the period, and conſummation of the World; not that ſhe ſhall then begin to be this Babylon (for this opinion of ſome Papiſts, pretending that Rome ſhall bee Babylon within two or three yeeres of the end of the World, and not before, I ſhall refute in due place) but becauſe ſhe continueth ſo, in the decourſe of many yeeres, and Ages (after the time of her Ethnicall eſtate) neere vnto the determination of the World. The truth hereof doth cleerely appeare by the conſequence of things, and connexion of euents in the ſeuenteenth, eighteenth, and nineteenth Chapters of this Booke. For the ſinne of Rome, and her ruine (together with the cauſes, and Concomitancies thereof) being copiouſly expreſſed in the ſeuenteenth and eighteenth Chapters, we find that, immediately thereupon (in the nineteenth Chapter) the Saints prayſe God for the notable iudgement executed vpon this Citie; and therefore our learned Souereigne doth well obſerue in the title, and argument of that Chapter, that the Saints prayſe God, becauſe the Pope is destroyed: for it is he, whoſe exceſſiue pride, and exorbitant proceedings, draw this ſcandalous name, and dolefull vaſtation

vpon this vnhappy place. Secondly; becauſe we find [Chap. 17. v. 12.] that ten Kings (whether preciſely ten, I doe not now enquire) aroſe, and aſſumed Royall power vnto themſelues, vpon the diſſolution of the Romane Empire; for as it fell into pieces, by the vaſt magnitude therof, and could not ſubſiſt vnder her owne greatneſſe, ſo, out of her parts, ſundry States, and Principalities did ariſe.
               It followeth Verſe 13. that theſe Kings gaue their power vnto the Beaſt: namely, the Second Beast, ariſing in the place, and after the decay of the firſt (as wee reade Apocal. 13.11, 12.) that is to ſay; they had no ſooner obtained their dignitie, and eſtate, vpon the diſſolution of the Empire, but they ſurrendred a great part of their glorie and authoritie vnto the Pope; who, by degrees; artificially, and cunningly inuaded the Imperiall Seate, and power; ſo that, in admiration of his excellencie, theſe Kings, as deuoted ſonnes (or rather Seruants, or rather Slaues) of his SANCTITIE, ſubmitted a great part of their Royall Scepter vnto his triple Crowne. This prediction as wee reade in this diuine Booke, ſo, what the accompliſhment thereof hath beene, the Hiſtories of ſundry Nations, and the paſſages of ſucceeding Ages, doe ſufficiently declare. But let vs proceed againe. It followeth [verſe 16.] that after this ſubmiſſion of their Regall power vnto the Beaſt (with whom, or neere about that time, they aroſe euen at one houre: verſe 12.) they ſhall hate the Whore, and burne her with fire (to wit, Rome, this Babylon) though formerly they gaue their Kingdomes vnto the Beaſt: but how long? vntill the Words of God be fulfilled; vntill the appointed time. And what ſhall

incline theſe Kings to withdraw their obedience from this Second Beast, and to aſſociate themſelues, in this fearefull expedition againſt him, and his Citie? God ſhall put this motion into their hearts, for her ſinnes againſt his Maieſtie: and Papall iniuries, done againſt the Crowne and Royall dignitie of theſe Kings, ſhall excite them vnto this warre; as hereafter it ſhall more euidently appeare. But now this is the point, vpon which I doe inſiſt; that this great, and fatall deſtruction of Rome, being yet to come, and not yet fulfilled, this name, and this eſtate of Rome is not alreadie paſt (as Victorius and Parſons, and the moſt generall number of Papiſts do ſimply & ignorantly pretend in this behalfe) but her ſin is preſent (for ſhe now is Babylon) and her puniſhment is future; for ſhe ſhall hereafter fall; as I ſhall cleerely demonſtrate, in the ſucceeding paſſages of my ſpeech. Meane while let vs obſerue with ioy vnto our ſelues, and with gratitude vnto God, that the ſucceſſe and euent of this Propheſie doth alreadie beginne, for that many Kings doe hate this Whore, and haue diſcouered the qualitie of this ſecond Beast, and, as I hope, ſhall euer continue in that diſpoſition of minde, and rectitude of iudgement, till God ſhall induce other Princes to concurre with them, in the finall accompliſhment of this great and glorious worke. And ſo much concerning the firſt remonſtrance, to proue thereby, that Rome hath the name of Babylon, in, and for her eſtate, which was not preſent but future, in the time of Saint Iohn, and that ſhe ſhall be deſtroyed in regard of her ſins, in that eſtate, when her Ethnicall condition is paſt, and neerer vnto the conſummation of the World.
               
                  SECONDLY; I make remonſtrance of this poſition, by obſeruation of the nature, and propertie of God; and that in two reſpects. Firſt: by the TRVTH of God. For he hath promiſed vnto euery particular man, turning from his former ſinnes, that hee ſhall ſurely liue, and not dye: yea, that all his former iniquities ſhall not be mentioned, but he ſhall liue, in regard of the righteouſneſſe, which afterward he hath done. Ezek. 18.21, 22. If this be true in a particular perſon, ſhall it not be true in a particular Citie? Is God mercifull to one, and not vnto many? euen many thouſands? It is his owne iuſt plea for his ſingular mercy vnto Nineueh, vpon her repentance: Should I not ſpare Nineueh, that great Citie? Ionah 4.11. Now therefore, ſince Ethnicall Rome is paſt, and that ſtate is aboliſhed (ſaith Parſons) for which cauſe ſhe did beare the name of Babylon, and Saint Hierome, hath aſſured vs, that Rome, by her confeſsion of Christ, hath blotted out the blaſphemie, written in her forehead (which point the Babylonians doe greedily embrace, to their vnhappy excec
                     •
                  ation) ſince Rome hath turned from her former ſinnes, and done righteouſneſſe, ſince ſhe hath had a glorious name by her renowmed Faith (after the time of Paganiſme, Idolatrie, and Perſecution vnder her ancient Emperours) ſince, in our opinion, ſhe was a glorious member of the Church (and, in their opinion ſhee is ſtill the Head, Queene, and Miſtreſſe thereof; embracing, and propounding the truely Catholike Faith) and, finally, ſince her enſuing repentance hath cleered the ſcore of her preceding ſins; how can it conſiſt with Gods Truth, that, in regard of her ſinnes, ſo long paſt, and ſo deepely repented

of, he ſhould lay a deſtruction vpon her in the time yet to come (for it is yet to be fulfilled) and that in ſo terrible and vnexemplifiable a manner? Apocal. 18. Her ruine, therefore, (and ſuch a ruine) which is yet to come, when her Ethnicall eſtate is ſo long paſt, doth ſufficiently proue, that later ſinnes, in a future age ſhould renue and reuiue her old name (if Babylon euer were the name of ancient Rome, according to the tenour of the Scriptures) and bring her vnto this lamentable end: it being one of the laſt Tragicall acts of Gods Iuſtice, vpon the great Theater of the world; as it appeareth in the hiſtoricall predictions of this Scripture.
               
                  Secondly, I make farther remonſtrance of that poſition, by the IVSTICE of God. For he will not puniſh the children for their fathers ſins; euery one ſhall die for his owne, Ezek. 18.4. Since therefore Rome is yet to be deſtroyed, this deſtruction doth not attend her ancient ſinnes (committed in her Ethnicall eſtate, and done away by her repentance in her Christian eſtate) but for latter ſinnes, in latter ages, wherein ſhe was to beare the ſcandall of this name, and to ſuffer ruine for the ſame. Innocent Rome ſhall not periſh for nocent Rome: not the latter for the former: not the Papall for the Imperiall: not the Church for the State: there cannot bee iniuſtice in God. Shall not the Iudge of all the world doe right? Yet I confeſſe, that, in ſucceeding ages, God doth ſometimes remember the ſin of ages paſt; and ſo it is ſaid of Babylon, Apocal. 18.5. God hath remembred her iniquities: but, in this caſe, latter ages doe renew, imitate, and increaſe the ſinnes of the former. And ſo I grant, that, for her old ſinnes

of Idolatrie, Perſecution, &c. renewed afterward, Rome ſhall ſuffer this ruine; as Ribera, and Viegas, the Ieſuites doe confeſſe.
               Meane while, this is the point, which I commend here vnto your prudent obſeruation. If Rome were ſinfull Babylon (here ſpoken of) onely in her Ethnicall eſtate (which is a plauſible deluſion) ſhe ſhould haue ſuffered her fatall puniſhment (here threatned) during that Ethnicall eſtate; and not in her Chriſtian condition: whereas the ſpeciall calamities of Rome (ſince the time of this prediction) enſued vpon Chriſtian Rome (not Ethnicall Rome) by the furious incurſions, and impreſſions of the Goths and Vandalls; which were caſtigations of Chriſtian Rome, and not of Ethnicall, nor Antichristian Babylon: whoſe finall and vtter ſubuerſion, being yet to come (and neerer vnto the end of the world) therefore Gods Truth and his Iustice doe cleerely euince, that ſhee was to bee Babylon againe (if ſhee were ſo once before) and to bee ſtamped with this hatefull name; after the time of her entertainment of Chriſtian Religion, and after the expiration of her Ethnicall eſtate; this name ariſing out of a latter condition of ſinnes, for which ſhee ſhould fall, and in latter times, in which ſhee ſhould periſh, by the iuſt indignation of God, and Man. And ſo much for the ſecond remonſtrance.
               THIRDLY; I make remonſtrance of my poſition, by the ingenious, and faire confeſſion of two learned Babylonians themſelues (they alſo being Ieſuites of eminent qualitie, publike Readers in their Schooles) who, by diligent inquiſition into the very Text of this Scripture, and carefull obſeruation of the

circumſtances thereof, oppoſe themſelues againſt the common errour of their owne ſide, and cleerely deduce out of the coherence of many circumſtances in this Scripture, that this BABYLON doth ſignifie Rome, not in her Ethnicall eſtate onely (as the Papiſts doe more ordinarily conceiue) but neere the concluſion of the world: that then ſhee ſhall, by her great ſinnes, deſerue this name, and therefore come to ruine. Neither doe I make vſe of their confeſſion, becauſe it commeth from aduerſaries, but becauſe they make it out of the conſcience of truth, grounded vpon the cleere euidence of the Scripture. For I ſhould thinke meanely of my cauſe, if the truth and certaintie of my aſſertion ſtood vpon the falſhood and errour of their confeſſion, and had no better ſtrength to ſupport it ſelfe.
               The firſt Babylonian, is Ribera, a man of no vulgar note, as being a Doctor of Diuinitie, and profeſſour thereof in Salmantica, a famous Academy of Spaine. This man wrote a Commentary vpon the Reuelation of Saint Iohn; where, treating vpon theſe words, Apocal. 14.8. Babylon, that great Citie, is fallen, hee proueth by ſundry infallible circumſtances of the Scripture [Apoc. 17.] that this Babylon is not the generall ſocietie of wicked men, but a particular Citie; and, finally, the Citie of Rome; and therefore he concludeth his diſputation (as I noted before) vpon that point, in theſe words; Omnia profectò, niſi in Romam, non conueniunt; certainely all the circumſtances in the Text cannot agree vnto any other place, but vnto Rome alone; in cap. 14. num. 31.
               Then he commeth [num. 32.] to explicate the ſtate,

and condition of Rome, in regard whereof this name [Babylon] and this ruine [ſhee is fallen] belong vnto her in this ſacred Reuelation. And here, ſuſpecting the ſcandall, and offence of his owne brethren, he entreth vpon this diſcourſe, with a preoccupation, in this ſad, and graue manner; 
                     Offenſionem pio Lectori amoueri volo, I will that no pious Reader [a Romane Catholike, that is to ſay, a Babylonian] ſhould take offence at my expoſition, as if it were aduantagious vnto the Heretickes [the Proteſtants] who aſſume vnto themſelues an occaſion, vpon this name of Babylon, aſcribed here vnto Rome, to lay an imputation vpon the Church of Rome, and our holy Father the Pope. Wherfore [num. 34.] hee ſaith, that this name of Babylon agreed vnto Rome, as ſhee was in her Ethnicall State, an Idolatrous, perſecuting Citie; but now, ſaith hee, the caſe is altered, for ſhee is, and long hath beene, the Miſtreſſe of Faith, and the Mother of Chriſtians. Then hee addeth immediately; Si quando haec eadem fecerit, quae Iohannis tempore faciebat, iterum Babylon vocabitur; if Rome ſhall commit the ſame things hereafter, which ſhee committed in the time of Iohn, ſhee ſhall bee called Babylon againe [marke this well good hearers, for now the Ieſuite draweth neere vnto the point] as it was in the caſe of Ieruſalem, which, of a faithful Citie once, became afterwards a Whore. So he.
               
               But let vs heare the man tell out his tale; hee hath yet more to ſay, to acquit his Mother Church, and Father-Pope; and therefore [num. 38.] hee affirmeth, That this name of Babylon is neuer applyed vnto the CHVRCH of Rome, but onely vnto the CITIE; howbeit, not as the Citie long hath beene vnder the Pope,

and now is vnder him, nor indeed ſhall haue this name, while the Pope is Lord, and Gouernour thereof: but, as ſhee was Babylon in her Ethnicall ſtate, ſo ſhe ſhall be hereafter againe, vpon her defection from the Pope, and from Chriſtianitie, neere the end of the world.
               
               Now becauſe Ribera feared another cenſure here, hee maketh another preoccupation [num. 40.] in this manner; diuinare me dicet quiſpiam; Some man perhaps will ſay, that I take vpon me to be a Prophet, and to foretell things to come; but (ſaith hee) I would intreate that man to lay aſide his preiudice, to examine the whole matter with mature iudgement, and to beleeue me no farther, then reaſon, and truth ſhall perſwade him in this caſe.
               
               Then hee addeth [num. 42.] That, for as much as Rome, in her Ethnicall ſtate was ſo idolatrous, ſo wicked, and ſo cruell againſt the Chriſtians (for that all the Martyrs, throughout the Romane Empire, were put to death by the authoritie of Rome, and by the power of Romane Magistrates) therefore it is iust, and meet that ſhe her ſelfe ſhould once ſuffer for her impious courſes; which being not yet done [according to the purport of this Scripture] ſhall be done hereafter, when ſhe ſhall be no leſſe wicked, then ſhe was in former times.
               
               Then [num. 43.] he proceedeth in a faire, and ingenious manner of Theologicall diſcourſe; ſaying: Whereas this extreame deſolation ſhall fall vpon Rome, neere the end of the world; it is very iuſt, and equall, in good congruitie of reaſon. Why? Becauſe the Citie is ſtill the ſame; which, being once ſo defiled with ſin, muſt one day be purged with fire. Beſides (ſaith he) there are many Citizens in Rome at this day, who by their name,

and ſtock, boaſt of their deſcent from the ancient Romans, who alwayes increaſed there in great number. Then hee addeth further; that, as a Citie, built out of the ruines of a former, is reputed to be one, and the ſame Citie with it; ſo here, in this caſe, the latter Citizens of Rome [when ſhe ſhall be deſtroyed] may be accounted the ſame Citizens with the former (though they be not of their bloud, and kindred) becauſe they ioyne themſelues vnto the former, and become as it were, one body, and one commonwealth with them; but ſpecially by their imitation of the facts, and ſins of their Predeceſſors. This (ſaith he; Num. 44.) is the cauſe, therefore, why the latter Romanes, neere the end of the World, following the impieties of the ancient, ſhall be puniſhed, and the more grieuouſly alſo in that regard. So that (ſaith hee) though her old ſinnes, [committed in her Ethnicall ſtate] were forgotten by God, in regard of her Chriſtian profeſsion, which ſhee entertayned afterward: yet now, vpon her new, and like Impieties, neere the end of the World, the old are remembred againe, and therefore ſhe ſhall be burned for them both together.
               
               Excellently, and diuinely ſpoken; according to the true tenour of the Scriptures elſewhere, and particularly of the Reuelation it ſelfe; and therefore Ribera began to grow warme in the concluſion of this diſcourſe; proteſting in this manner; We know this truth ſo perſpicuouſly, by the words of this Reuelation, VT NE STVLTISSIMVS QVIDEM NEGARE POSSIT; ſo that the verieſt foole in the world cannot deny the ſame. Then hee addeth; Since Babylon ſhall be the ſhop of all IDOLATRIE, and of all impieties; therefore it cannot be doubted, but that this ſhall be the

condition of Rome hereafter. And thus hauing made his explication of the Text, he propoundeth a very fit queſtion, in the end of his diſcourſe [Num. 51.] namely; By what meanes the Citie of Rome, neere the end of the Vorld, ſhould attaine vnto ſo great a power, and abundance of riches? He anſwereth firſt; that no man can certainly know the reaſon thereof; and ſecondly, that this may come to paſſe, partly, by reaſon of the tenne Kings, who ſhall make a conqueſt of the whole World, and diuide it amongſt them; and partly in regard of Antichriſt, who ſhall bee aduanced in this time; by meanes whereof Rome ſhall ſhortly returne vnto her ancient power, and ſhall haue theſe tenne Kings vnder her gouernment, who a little after ſhall reigne in the whole World: but, finally, theſe Kings ſhall deſtroy Rome; Apoc. 17.17.
               Here the coniecture of Ribera (founded vpon the vaine ſpeculations of ſome ancient Fathers, not vnderſtanding the nature of this myſterie, nor the ſenſe of the Scriptures in this behalfe) failed him very much; as not knowing, that Eccleſiaſticall Rome is this Babylon, and that the Pope is the ſecond Beaſt therein (by which meanes, truly, Rome hath beene eleuated in a new, and ſecond greatneſſe in the World, in ſome ſort excelling the former, in her Ethnicall eſtate) as, by due remonſtrance it ſhall hereafter appeare. Meane while (good hearers) excuſe my tedious declaration (taken out of the Commentarie of this learned Ieſuite) as contayning much varietie of matter of very markeable obſeruation for my purpoſe.
               My ſecond Babylonian Authour is Viegas; a Ieſuite alſo, and a Doctor of Diuinitie, and Profeſſor thereof,

firſt at Conimbrica, then at Ebora (two Vniuerſities of Portugall) who framed a more copious, and elaborate Commentarie, vpon this ſacred Booke of the Reuelation; inſiſting very often in the ſteppes of Ribera, and eſpecially in this point, whereof we now intreat. Therefore, though it bee materiall to expreſſe the iudgement of Viegas alſo vpon the ſame; yet I may contract his long Diſcourſe into a few words.
               This Viegas, then [in Apocal. 17. §. 2.] confeſſeth that the destruction of this Babylon [foretold cap. 18.] ſhall be in the laſt times, before the end of the World. Afterwards [§. 3.] he ſaith, that this Babylon is the Citie of Rome; howbeit, not as ſhe is now, vnder the Pope, but as ſhe was heretofore in her Ethnicall condition, and as ſhe ſhall be hereafter in the time of Antichriſt, vpon her defection from the Pope, and from her Christian Faith; and then he ſheweth, in many words, the qualitie of her ſinnes, and manner of her ruine (conformably with the iudgement of Ribera) and that, for old ſinnes, ioyned with the latter, God ſhall execute his wrath vpon her, by theſe ten Kings; as hee doth more largely deduce alſo, in cap. 18. §. 6.
               Thus you haue heard the conſonant expoſition of theſe two learned perſons, the ſecond treading in the ſteps of the firſt; and both (for the maine point, now in queſtion) in the ſteps of the holy Scripture. Now, therefore, I ſhould proceed to collect, out of them both, ſuch obſeruations, as are ſutable to our purpoſe, but that I am a little ſtayed, and hindred, by the voluminous Commentarie of Ludouicus ab Alcaſar (a Ieſuite of great eſteeme in Spaine) which hee publiſhed, vpon the yeare 1612. [many yeeres after that

the two other Commentaries, vpon the Reuelation, neere extant; for the latter, of Viegas, was commended to the Preſſe, vpon the yeere 1599. and the former, of Ribera, certaine yeeres before that; for Ribera died vpon the yeere 1591.] in which Commentarie a man would, therefore, reaſonably ſuppoſe, that ſome more excellent matters ſhould now come to light, and eſpecially, after the diligent, and painfull diſcuſſion of ſo many points, by his learned Brethren, preceding him in this kind. But marke the euent, in this our preſent iſſue; how this learned ignorant man, this wiſe fooliſh man, this iudicious abſurd man, this acute obtuſe man, this Expounder of the Reuelation, or rather this compounder of Fables, doth heerein comport himſelfe. Two things then in this paſſage, deſerue your carefull attention [ſhall I ſmile at his folly, or laugh at his miſery, while I propoſe the ſame?] The firſt is this; that this Babylon is Rome indeed, but onely, as ſhe was in her Ethnicall ſtate, and not in any ſtate enſuing hereafter. The ſecond is this; that the fall of this Babylon was mysticall, and ſpirituall; namely, from Ethnicall Idolatry to Christian Religion [an happy fall] from the ſuperstition of Pagans vnto the profeſsion of Chriſt; which fall being paſt, he ſaith, that this was myſtica vltio [O myſticall, or rather, O miſerable Foole] a certaine myſticall reuenge of God againſt the old Idolatrous Babylon; which vltion (ſaith he) is eternall; for the Citie of Rome ſhall neuer returne vnto the vomit of IDOLATRY againe. Theſe particulars, as they are worthy to be noted, ſo they are vnworthy to be confuted, in this profound Mercurialist; who can extract ſuch ſenſes, out of the Scripture, againſt

the ſenſe of common reaſon; and therefore I leaue him vnto the cenſure of Ribera; who, prouing the contrary aſſertions, by the cleere euidence of the text, giueth his verdict againſt this Ludouicus (and the aſſociates of his ſimple opinion) that hee is worſe then a very Foole: (as you heard before) and therefore let him accompany Spalatenſis; who (vpon his returne to Babylon) is ſaid, for all his ambitious expectations of a Cardinals Hat to get nothing but a Fooles Cappe, but (I doubt) with a Knaues heart; as any man may well ſuppoſe that this Ludouicus doth beare in his breſt; ſeeking to obſcure, and to draw into queſtion, the true, cleere, inexpugnable confeſſion [according to the point, whereof I now intreat] which his more iudicious, or more conſcionable, fellowes had formerly made in this behalfe.
               Now therefore, leauing this graue, and tedious Ieſuite, with his profuſe, and fooliſh Booke, I reflect vpon ſuch obſeruations, as, out of Ribera, and Viegas, are markable in the iſſue, vpon which I now proceed. For though they are not ſo Regular, as that I dare follow them in all things; yet I will firſt take ſuch things, as they grant, vpon the euidence of the Text, and then proue ſuch things, as they denie, in their miſpriſion of the ſame. The points, which I will collect out of them, are ſixe:
               The firſt; They confeſſe, that Rome is (or ſhall 
bee) Babylon after her Ethnicall eſtate, in a later condition.
               The ſecond; They confeſſe, that IDOLATRY, and impietie ſhall abound in Rome, in this her later condition.
               
                  
                   The third; They confeſſe, that Rome, in this condition, ſhall perſecute, and oppreſſe the faithfull profeſſours of Gods Truth.
               
                   The fourth; They confeſſe, that Rome, in this condition, ſhall haue great power, authoritie, and command in the World.
               
                   The fift; They confeſſe, that, in this condition, and latter eſtate of her IDOLATRY, Antichriſt ſhall poſſeſſe this Citie, and ſo it ſhall bee a ſpirituall Babylon; a ſinke of ſinne, and ſhoppe of Idolatrie, which ſhall bee deriued vnto the World, vnder the gouernment of Rome, in the latter dayes.
               
                   The ſixt; They confeſſe, that Rome, in this condition, ſhall bee deſtroyed, burnt with fire, made deſolate by tenne KINGS; and ſo ſhall come vnto her extreame ruine, by the iuſt iudgement of God, for her former, and for her latter ſinnes.
               All theſe points (being inforced out of the plaine teſtimonie of the Scripture) wee admit as true; and ſuch, as either the verieſt Foole cannot denie, or, at leaſt, the wiſeſt can neuer impeach.
               Now though Ribera, Viegas (and others that follow their interpretation) lay this ſcandall vpon the Citie only (and not vpon the Church of Rome) and vpon the Citie alſo when ſhee falleth from her obedience to the Pope, and not before; yet I will demonſtrate, that this goodly Song is not tuneable to the Text, but that it is a poore euaſion, vpon a miſerable neceſſitie, which ſhall bee no Citie of refuge for the protection of their CHVRCH; howſoeuer being weather-beaten by the ſtorme of the Text (afflicting

their hearts) they are driuen vnto this Harbour of their inuention; wherein the Conſcience findeth ſmall comfort, and reaſon it ſelfe (obſeruing the euents of things, and the occurrencies of times) doth force them immediatly out of this ſilly creeke, into a troubleſome Sea.
               Wherefore, I come now vnto the fourth, the laſt, and the ſubſtantiall interpretation of my Text, which layeth this name of BABYLON directly, and cleerly vpon the CHVRCH of Rome, as ſhee long hath beene, and now is, and (though declining in her glorie) as ſhe ſhall continue vnto the fearefull time of her vnhappy fall; and the whole Riuer of Tyber (though it were all made Holy water by Popiſh incantation) ſhall neuer waſh away this ſcandall of her name, which now truly doth, and long hath done, and ſhall for euer cleaue faſt vnto her; as the Leproſie vnto Gehezi, and vnto his ſeed for euer.
            
            
               The FOVRTH Interpretation.
               FOurthly then, and laſtly (for now wee are come vnto the mayne and principall iſſue) I confidently proclaime, and will cleerely proue, that, as this Babylon is, Rome, and Rome after her Ethnicall eſtate; ſo it is Rome in regard of the Church, and not onely of the Citie, as both are vnder the Pope, and this I will euidently deduce by fiue Reaſons.
               FIRST therfore, I proue my aſſertion in regard of the very edifices in Rome; the Churches, the Chappels, the Monaſteries, the Palaces of the Pope, the houſes of Cardinals,

and ſundry Eccleſiaſticall places, which take vp a ſpeciall part of Rome; being now a Papall Rome, the ſeate of the Spirituall Monarch; the ſecond Beaſt (as you ſhal heare anon) inuading the Imperiall Seat, and dignitie of the firſt therein: ſo that all motion in Rome is to the Centre of the Church there, whoſe Circumference (by dominion, and power) is ſo largely extended in the World: all reference there is vnto Saint Peters Chaire (in whoſe perſon they ſuppoſe that the actuall Souereigntie, now exerciſed by the Pope, did habitually dwell) there the ſplendour of the Church darkeneth all the glorie of the Citie, which alſo, now, by a Popiſh Metaphor, is tranſlated into the Church; for that the Citie, and the Church, are now coupled in vnion together, both being in ſubiection to one head: in regard whereof, it is Eccleſiaſticall Rome, rather then Ciuill; the Citie being ſwallowed vp of the Church, as Pharaohs fat Kine were deuoured by the leane. The name of Babylon, then, agreeing to Rome (as wee ſhall more cleerely perceiue anon) falleth eminently vpon the Church there (rather then vpon the Citie) hauing all the properties of Babylon, which the Reuelation doth aſſigne; as in the ſequell of my Sermon, you ſhall very ſenſibly diſcerne.
               SECONDLY, therefore I prooue my aſſertion, by the reuiew of that Merchandtze in Rome, which is ſpirituall, and of the Church there; not temporall, and of the Citie; as ſome doe poorely conceiue, and weakly prooue. And becauſe this is a matter of eſpeciall conſequence, I reſolue to ſound the depth of this myſterie, and to lay it forth in liuely colours; as it ſhall

pleaſe God to guide, and to direct my thoughts.
               The 
                     〈◊〉
                   Merchants of this Babylon are ſoule-merchants, dealing in ſpirituall affaires, vnder the great, and terrible Monarch of the Church therein, ſitting as God, in the Temple of God. This is not mine inuention, but the very teſtimonie of the Scripture it ſelfe; Apocal. 18.13. For the Spirit of God, making a large enumeration of the Wares, and Merchandize of this Babylon (a Spirituall Babylon, and, conſequently, ſpirituall Wares, vnder a ſpirituall Prince) concludeth it with the SOVLES of men; as the proper, and pretended ſubiect of their negotiations; though, vnder, and by the pretenſe of ſpirituall things, this Papall Monarch doth exerciſe a temporall, and an earthly domination; as the principall ſcope of his ſubtile practiſes, and operations in the World. And becauſe this point is exellently deliuered by the learned pen of our gracious Souereigne, I will expreſſe it in his owne words. Babylon ſhall haue many that ſhall bee Merchants vnto her of the ſoules of men, by ſelling, for Money, PARDONS, giuen by that Monarch [the ſecond Beaſt] which ſhall bee thought to haue power to ſaue, redeeme, and free mens ſoules; namely out of Purgatorie. Wherefore it was truly affirmed in a Booke, compoſed by the Clergie of England, in the Reigne of King Henry the eight, (vnto the which all the principall members of the Clergie did ſubſcribe; as by name, Gardiner, then Biſhop of Winton; and Boner, then Archdeacon of Leiceſter, &c.) that it was neceſſary, that ſuch abuſes bee cleerely put away, which vnder the name of Purgatorie, haue beene aduanced; as to make men beleeue, that, through the pardons of

the Biſhop of Rome, SOVLES might be cleerely deliuered out of PVRGATORIE, and all the paines thereof.
               
               But ſince I ſhall haue occaſion anone to touch this ware, and other merchandizes of Babylon, more neerely to the quick, let vs obſerue here by the way, what the learned paire of Ieſuites doth conceiue of this traffick; whether it may be taken in a Litteral, or in a Spirituall ſenſe; whether it may appertaine vnto the Church, or vnto the Citie of Rome.
               
               RIBERA commeth firſt in order; who, treating of theſe Merchants (in Apoc. 18.3.) ſpeaketh of their repaire vnto Babylon, to fill her with all varietie of things; and afterwards (in v. 11.) hee ſaith, that the Merchants ſhall weepe, and lament for the destruction of Rome, where they had ſo great negotiation, becauſe they can haue no more traffick in that great and opulent Citie.
               
               VIEGAS followeth, & ſpeaketh more copiouſly vpon this point; in Apoc. 18.3. For he ſaith, that Merchants ſhal flow together to Rome (being Babylon, neere the end of the world) out of al parts of the earth, & ſhal lament the fall of Rome, becauſe their traffick with her ſhal be intercluded for euer. Afterward [nu. 6.] he ſaith, that it is manifeſtly gathered, by ſo much, & ſuch precious merchandiſe as is expreſſed here in this Chapter, that Rome ſhal attain vnto very great power, and abundance of riches, and that her Empire (which ſhal be moſt flouriſhing) ſhal be largely propagated in all the world. And again, he affirmeth immediately thereupon; that, in the last times, Rome ſhal be a most flouriſhing Citie; her Empire very large; that ſhe ſhal liue in great pleaſure, in great abundance of al things; that ſhe ſhall then ſerue IDOLATRIE; and, that thus being Babylon, ſhe ſhal come vnto a fatal, & woful end.
               
                  Thus they hunt counter in the literal ſenſe of temporal merchandiſe, & other Babylonians alſo, with them (or rather before them) run in the fame courſe; as by name, our country-man D. Briſtow (to whom D. Worthington, from whō I receiued this notice, did attribute very much, for his ſober, graue, and deep iudgement) who, long before the commentary of Viegas came forth (&, as I ſuppoſe, before the commentary alſo of Ribera euer ſaw the light, was cōfident in his opinion that this ſhould be the condition, and eſtate of Rome, in the latter daies, which I haue now related out of their works.
               O fooles, and ſlow of heart, to beleeue that, which is ſo cleerely reuealed in the Scriptures; if you compare their prediction with the euent of things! For firſt, theſe Merchants are called the Merchants of Soules; as I noted before, vpon the point of Indulgences, of which I ſhall ſpeake more anone. With which ſpirituall merchandiſe we may ioyne many other matters of their traffique; by diſpenſations, abſolutions, appellations, faculties, inuestitures, and many pretended intereſts of the Church of Rome; in a word, by their courts Legantine, by the diſcurſations of Legates, and Apoſtolicall officers, in Temporall, and Eccleſiaſticall eſtates; to the ſingular aduantage of Babylon, and the negotiators of that Apoſtaticall See.
               
                  Secondly; it is extreamely improbable, that Rome ſhould become ſuch a Tyrus [ſuch a Mart of the Nations; Eſay 23.3.] as theſe men pretend; a place of ſuch traffique, and negotiation; it being, by ſituation, and want of conueniences, incapable of ſo great employments, as neither ſhee enioyed in the higheſt pride of her Paganicall eſtate, nor any Citie (if the Text be are purely a litterall ſenſe, in ſo many verſes;

11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 23; amplifying her merchandize with rare varietie of phraſe) of moſt commodious ſituation, indued with all benefits of Art, and Nature, did perhaps euer enioy the like.
               
                  Thirdly; it is morally impoſſible, that Rome in this future, imagined eſtate, ſhould increaſe to ſuch an immoderate, and vaſt power, as is deſcribed in this place; Apoc. 18.3. ALL NATIONS haue drunke of the wine of the wrath of her fornication; and THE KINGS OF THE EARTH [euen they that, chap. 17.3. gaue their power, and authoritie vnto the Second Beaſt] haue committed fornication with her; and THE MERCHANTS OF THE EARTH are waxen rich with the abundance of her pleaſures. This rare, and portentuous euent in Rome [after her Ethnicall eſtate; after her entertainment of Chriſtian Religion; as the Ieſuites confeſſe] doth require no ſmall extent of time, and opportunitie of meanes; ſuch time, and ſuch meanes, as cannot be found in this ſuppoſed pedling, merchandizing Babylon.
               
               For firſt; if you conſider the extent of time (according to the common iudgement, and generall conceit of theſe Babylonians, themſelues) you may palpably diſcouer the vanitie of their ſurmiſe. Vnderſtand therefore, and well obſerue; that, in their opinion (taken by them out of many Ancients; and miſtaken by them out of ſome paſſages of the Scripture) the reigne of Antichrist is confined vnto the ſpace of three yeeres, and an halfe. Againe, conſider that, in their opinion, Antichriſt, and his adherents, ſhall deſtroy the Citie of Rome; and that, vntill the defection of Rome, from the Pope, vpon this very time, the

Pope ſhall retaine this Citie, as the place of his Papall Seate; as being affixed vnto the ſame. See Bellarm. de Pont. l. 4. c. 4.
               Now therefore, ſince Rome ſhall be Babylon againe, communicating her Idolatry to all Kings, and Nations, and ſhall haue a large Empire in the world, and there ſhall be the exerciſe of great traffique, and commerce, by the Merchants of the earth, and ſhee ſhall attaine vnto an immenſitie of riches; may we not perceiue, that this new, and extraordinary condition of Rome doth require a good ſufficiencie of time to compaſſe, and effectuate ſuch an admirable euent? And yet, forſooth, Rome ſhall not fall from the Pope, till vpon this very time; ſo that, after his departure (voluntarily, or rather neceſſarily out of Rome; now beginning, as they ſay, to become a Babylon againe) all theſe wonderfull effects muſt enſue in Rome, and in the world; and yet all this muſt be done within a very little time (as you ſee) againſt all probabilitie of reaſon, and all poſſibilitie of things; as you may eaſily diſcerne, by comparing one part of their ſuggeſtions with another; which are arena ſine calce, ſand without lime (as Caligula ſpake of the writings of Seneca) ſuppoſed points, without any coherence of ſemblable truth. But, in our apprehenſion of this Scripture, all points haue a faire, ſubſtantiall, and orderly connexion; for as much as Rome, being Babylon, vnder the Pope [who is her Second Beaſt; as the euents, concurring cleerely with the prediction, doe ſufficiently deduce vnto our knowledge] hath therefore had not onely a ſpatious time, but a proper meanes alſo, to atchieue, and performe ſuch ſtrange deſignes; to communicate
                  
IDOLATRY to the world, and to obtaine an Empire in the world, and to attaine great riches, and ſtate; and finally, to haue commerce with the world by her ſpirituall wares; wherewith ſhe doth intangle, and inſnare the world, by her artificiall deluſions; couered with the glorious veyle of APOSTOLICALL termes.
               Therefore, ſecondly; whereas an opportunitie of meanes is required in ſuch a rare ſucceſſe of things, the Babylonians themſelues are puzzeled to inuent ſome colourable deuice in this behalfe. Whence it is (as I noted before) that Ribera [in Apocal. 14. num. 51.] pondering deepely vpon this point, ſaith; I thinke that no mortall man can certainly know, by what meanes, Rome [in the end of the world] ſhould come vnto ſuch an incredible power, &c. Notwithſtanding (ſaith hee) a man may, in ſome ſort, coniecture out of the words of the Apoſtle; Apocal. 17. where wee reade, that the purpled Whore ſitteth vpon a Beaſt, hauing ten hornes, in which are vnderſtood ten Kings, who ſhall ſubdue, and diuide the whole world betwixt them. In their time ſhall Antichriſt reigne; whence I doe ſuſpect, that Rome, hauing caſt out the Pope, ſhal, in a ſhort time, reuert vnto her ancient power, ſo that ſhee ſhall haue thoſe tenne Kings vnder her gouernement, who, a little after, ſhall reigne in the whole earth. And yet theſe (forſooth) are alſo the ten Kings, that muſt finally deſtroy her with fire, and ſword. What probabilitie is in this ſuppoſed meanes, to produce ſuch prodigious effects, and that within ſo little time, let any man, endued with reaſonable capacity, with ingenuity, and with conſcience, conſider aduiſedly with himſelfe; & he may perceiue,

that, as the Iewes, being conuinced out of the Old Teſtament, concerning Chriſt, haue certaine diuerticles, and poore euaſions, to eſcape the force of truth: ſo here this Ieſuite, being conuinced out of the New, touching Babylon, and the condition of Rome (masked in that name) will not ſee his owne Antichriſt, who is truely the Second Beaſt; to whom theſe ten Kings, long agoe, ſurrendered a great part of their Royall power (whereby Rome aſpired vnto ſuch dignitie in the world) and thence it is, that Rome hath ſuch a new Imperiall State, vnder the Papall Crowne, and by ſpirituall wares (belonging to the ſhop of a ſpirituall Monarch) hath traded ſo generally with many parts of the Chriſtian world.
               
                  Fourthly; wee may diſcerne the vaine conceit of their pretended Literall ſenſe, concerning this Babylonian Merchandize, becauſe they now change the coppie, and tenour of the very Text; which being Myſticall (as I noted before) and a Myſticall Babylon vnderſtood therein, they run ſuddenly from the Myſterie to the Letter, from the Tree to the Barke; taking all now in an open, outward, obuious ſenſe, againſt the generall purport of this Booke, and particular of this place. And yet I deny not, but that Rome hath ſome vſe of Merchants, and merchandiſe in a Litterall ſenſe; to furniſh her Idolatrous Temples, her masking Maſſes, and thereby to commend her ſpectable vanities vnto men of popular iudgement, and of carnall hearts.
               And thus much, heere by the way, to diſſolue the knot, wherewith the Ieſuites would tye our vnderſtandings vnto an apprehenſion of much temporall

merchandize, which ſhall abound in Rome, for a few yeeres (or dayes rather) before her finall end; accompanied with the very end of the world.
               Now, therefore, I returne againe vnto a reueiw of the ſpirituall merchandize in Rome,; and particularly of INDVLGENCES; which are diſpenſed from this Apoſtolicall Seate alone; as Bellarmine ſaith in praefat. lib. de Pont. Rom. Vnde habemus Indulgentiarum communicationem niſi ab hac ſede? Whence haue wee the communication of Indulgences, but from this Seate alone? What are theſe Indulgences? A relaxation of temporall paines, inflicted vpon ſoules in Purgatorie. Oh the falſhood of this execrable merchandize. Did the ancient Church of God ſo beleeue, and teach? No; not for a thouſand yeeres; Indulgences were then a relaxation only of Eccleſiaſticall cenſures, inflicted vpon penitents, by the Church: and therefore Peter Lombard (the ſtudious collector of the whole ſumme of Religion; who flouriſhed vpon the yeere 1172.) made no mention of this great myſterie of Papall Indulgences; which began a little after, by the ſophiſtications of darke, and ſubtill Schoolemen; Roffenſis himſelfe confeſſing, that the vſe, and practiſe of them was lately receiued in the Church. And therefore you may obſerue, that Bellarmine (treating laſt of all, concerning Indulgences, which gaue occaſion of the publike, and iuſt diſceſſion of Proteſtants from the Church of Rome) proceedeth not in this diſputation (as in the reſt) by that faire, and ingenious method; viz. by Scriptures, by Councells, by Fathers, by Reaſons framed out of the grounds of Scripture, and Religion) but, in a new, obſcure, intricate

courſe; of Poſitions, Suppoſitions, Concluſions, vaine Opinions of darke, and obſcure Schoolemen, &c. which made the learned Doctor Raynolds ſay, that, till hee ſaw this Treatiſe of Indulgences, hee tooke Bellarmine to be a man of ſome conſcience, and that hee wrote out of his perſwaſion; but now hee conceiued of him otherwiſe. But I proceed, and haſten vnto a concluſion of this point. This Babylonian ware of Indulgences is that traffique of the Church of Rome, whereby ſhee keepeth her intimate correſpondencie, and participation with all her members, tying thereby their conſciences, by a ſecret, and ſtrong obligation, vnto the Pontificiall Seate; it being alſo of ſingular vſe in the manner of her proceedings. For, as this Merchandize is the daughter of many falſe doctrines [Supererogations: Merits, euen the hatefull, and dangerous merit of Condignitie: of an Eccleſiaſticall treaſure, ariſing out of the merits of Chriſt, and alſo of the Saints; the ſame being more, then they were bound vnto, and therefore, being not rewarded vnto them in heauen, may bee communicated to the poore ſoules in Purgatorie; and the diſpenſation of this myſticall treaſure is committed vnto the Pope, by vertue of his keyes, &c.] ſo it is the mother of many wicked practiſes, for the aduantage of their Church; as being the very bellowes, which blow the fire of treaſon againſt the Perſons, and States of Princes. This is the ware, wherby Babylon bewitcheth not onely priuate men, but great Kings; for her Merchants are the great men of the earth; Apocal. 18.3. Therefore infinite ſtore of this Babylonian trumperie was tranſported vnto the poore Indians, for the pretended benefit of their

ſoules, but for the intended benefit of a Princes worldly eſtate. This is the ware, which Leo the tenth ſo freely, and bountifully diſpenſed for the redemption of ſoules out of the Purgatorian fire (which keepeth warme the kitchin of his Holy-ſhip) in the compaſſion of his charitable heart, and fulneſſe of his Papall power. Said I freely? Forgiue mee this wrong: it was for the commoditie, and reliefe of his ſiſter Magdalen (as Guicciardine, a Popiſh Hiſtorian, doth relate; lib. 13.) who had her Factors to diſtract, and vent this Babyloniſh ware; whence Magdalen, the ſiſter, had the gaine, but Leo, the brother, had the loſſe; for, vpon this occaſion (no leſſe iuſt before God, then acceptable to the Chriſtian world) Martin Luther began that courſe, which hath ſucceeded ſo happily to the further diſcouery of Babylon, and ſcandall of her wares; for, ſince that time, her brocage hath ſuffered a great decay. Finally; this is that ware, whereby this merchandizing Babylon doth principally ſubſiſt, in honour, authoritie, riches, and applauſe of the world; inebriated with ſuch incantations of her whoriſh cup, and deluded with the vaine hope of theſe miſerable helpes.
               What ſhould I ſpeake of the Pedlery of Meddalls, Beades, Graines, Holy Water, Images, certayne peculiar Churches, Chappels, and other places of blind deuotion? vnto which ſundry Pardons are appendant, as being the meanes, and inſtuments of Papall benignitie, thereby to diſpenſe, and communicate Indulgences vnto poore, ſeduced ſoules; euen as certaine Fryers, receiuing temporall reliefe from their deuoted followers, pretend to communicate the merits of all

the Saints of their owne order, vnto them for their helpe; and ſome, Lay-men, by wearing a Franciſcans Girdle, and vſing certaine Ceremonies (according to the Rites of the Papall Church) are made partakers of the merits of Saint Francis, and of all the brethren of that religious Order. All which, and many more Wares come, originally, out of the Store-houſe of Rome.
               
               To conclude then: vnto theſe Indulgences (ſome of them being for an hundred thouſand yeeres; ſo liberall is the holy Father) I may adde other ſpirituall ware of Babylon; as of Agnus Dei (which is a ware of ſpeciall vertue, and force) but chiefly of Diſpenſations; which are ſometimes the diſſipations of diuine, and humane right; of naturall, and morall bands: as full of great preſumption againſt the Lawes of God, and Nature (to tye ſome Princes in vnlawfull Mariages, and to vntye many ſubiects from lawfull obedience) as of ſingular art, thereby to intangle Souereignes, and ſubiects, in the obedience of that predominant See, and to keepe them vnder the captiuitie of the Triple Crowne. Therefore the Pope doth greatly applaud his owne felicitie, when Princes (inſnared with the loue, or terrified with the greatneſſe, or oppreſſed by the power of this Apoſtaticall Seat) will humbly ſue vnto him for Diſpenſations, or accept ſuch gracious fauours kindly at his hands; whereby hee gaineth ground vpon them ſtill, to keepe them more ſecurely within the obedience of the Church; which they ſhall not dare to offend, without the perill of their liues, and ſtates.
               And now ſince this Romiſh ware is Spirituall, and

                  of the Church, and for ſoules (not temporall, not of the Citie, and for this life) I conclude the ſecond proofe of my aſſertion; namely, that this Babylon, in my Text, is the Church of Rome, or Papall Rome, or Eccleſiasticall Rome, wherein the greateſt Monarch doth reigne (next vnder the King of Heauen) aboue all the Kings of the Earth; as we know by their owne pretenſes, challenges, doctrines, and vſurpations in this behalfe. And ſo I proceed vnto a new, and the third proofe of my ſaid aſſertion.
               THIRDLY, therefore, I proue my aſſertion, to be true, becauſe the whole World (as the Ieſuites ſay; perhaps they meane the Romane World, according to the phraſe of Scripture; Luc. 2.1. and the ſenſe of the ancient Fathers: or ſome great part thereof, and ſpecially in Europe) ſhall bee vnder the gouernment of Rome, and ſo ſhe ſhall make a generall communication of her Idolatry vnto the ſame. Now, in this great dependencie of the World vpon Babylon, and in this vniuerſall reference of Nations vnto her, how can this be verified of the Citie? How ſhould the Citie arriue vnto ſuch a large Dominion in the World, and, ſpecially, in ſo little a time, as the Babylonians doe preſcribe? You haue heard the difficultie propoſed lately by Ribera himſelfe; and how hee reſolueth it, by a poore coniecture. But the truth is cleere, and eaſily ſeene, where God doth open the eye; namely, that Rome had this generall Dominion once, in, and by her Imperiall State; not onely vnder the Emperours (ſucceeding Iulius Caeſar) but while the dignitie of Rome remayned in the Senate, and the authoritie in the people. During this Imperiall State, Rome receiued

Idolatry from all Nations; as Leo (ſometimes Biſhop of Rome) doth ſpeake; Serm. 1. in Natal. Petri & Pauli: and the ciuill Stories of Liuie, Plutarch, and others doe ſufficiently declare, how ambitious, rather then zealous, or how ſenſeleſſe, rather then religious, the old Ethnicall Rome was, in bringing forreine Gods, and extraneous Idolatrie into her boſome, for the publike honour, and ſafetie of that blinded Citie. Therefore Rome had once her Pantheon; a Temple of all the Gods; conuerted ſince into a Church of all the Saints. This former Dominion was loſt, this imperiall State was diſſolued; but behold a ſecond Beaſt (of whome I haue ſpoken much before, but you ſhall heare more fully of him anon) entring, by little and little, into, and vpon the place of the former, with a pretenſe of greater authoritie, carried with a new forme, and vnder another colour; and, in this Papall State, Rome hath ſent, and communicated her Idolatries vnto the World: hauing a cup of gold in her hands, full of abomination, and filthineſſe of her fornication [Apoc. 18.4.] which ſhe doth not now receiue from others (as in her Ethnicall condition) but others receiue it from her, by her Papall incantations, and by the venditation of her ſacred power.
               Hence it is, that Babylon hath ſuch dominion in the World; extenſiuè; by ſuch a large dilatation; and intenſiué, by ſo ſtrong an operation thereof. Therefore Apocal. 13.11. the ſecond beaſt appeared like a Lambe; as the Pope entred vpon this dominion, with a faire pretenſe of a Catholike Paſtor, a Succeſſour of Saint Peter, a Vicar of Chriſt, &c. and hee had two hornes; which word [horne] ſignifieth power, very frequently

in the Scripture: ſo that his two hornes are indeed two powers, which this ſecond Beaſt [with his humble ſtile of Seruus ſeruorum Dei] doth pretend; whence Babylon hath gained ſo great authoritie, and veneration in the World.
               The firſt power, which he did originally pretend, was onely Spirituall; the power of the KEYES: and therefore the Pope doth arrogate all this power, in the whole Church, vnto himſelfe; and ſaith, that, from him, it is deriued vnto the inferiour Paſtors there of; as the power of Order, and the power of Iuriſdiction, which all Biſhops, and others in the Cleargie, hold immediately, or mediately, from his Apoſtolicall feate, as the true, proper, and onely fountaine thereof. From hence all Diſpenſations doe flow: to it all Appellations doe tend: ſhe hath all fulneſſe of power from Chriſt; others haue a part of it from her: nay, (if we may beleeue her principall Doctors) her Peter gaue their Paſtorall authoritie vnto the other Apoſtles (elſe Rome could not be the Mother-church, in Bellarmines iudgement; de Rom. Pont. l. 1. c. 23.) and therefore as all Eccleſiaſticall power was deduced onely from S. Peter at the firſt, ſo now it is deduced onely from his perſonall Succeſſours, in this Apoſtolicall ſeate.
               Now, vnto this Spirituall power in the Church, they ſubiect all temporall power in the State (as I will preſently declare) as being of greater excellencie, and vertue. And it is true indeed, that the ſpirituall power of the Church excelleth the temporall in the State: but how? ratione finis; becauſe the end of the Churches power, is eternall life; and ratione medij; becauſe the courſes, whereby ſhee worketh, are ſpirituall

meanes; namely, ſuch as are contained in the Word of God, conducing vnto this end. But yet this her ſpirituall power excelleth not the temporall power of Princes in dominion, command, ſublimitie, and glorie; which are properly appendant to their Crownes.
               The ſecond power, which Babylon doth challenge by her ſecond Beaſt, is Temporall; which her Popes haue affected with many inſinuations, and ſometimes with open vendication thereof: and her neereſt friends aduance it with the beſt art, which wit, and learning can miniſter in this behalfe. And certainly this is the opinion, which daily increaſeth in Babylon, and which they will indeuour to ſupport with might, and mayne; though ſome, more moderate, Babylonians doe not yet giue way vnto this higheſt Antichriſtian courſe. For I finde three ſeuerall Opinions in the Church of Rome, vpon this point.
               1. The first giueth all temporall dominion directly vnto the Pope, as the principall Souereigne of the World; from whom all Princes dependently hold their Crownes. Theſe are true Babylonians indeed; but all ſuch are actuall Traytors, againſt the dignitie, and ſupreame honour of the Crownes of Princes, vnder whom they liue.
               2. The ſecond giueth all ſpirituall power (not temporall) to the Pope; but yet indirectly drawing on a temporall power ouer Princes; in ordine ad ſpiritualia, in ordine ad Deum, &c. viz. that the Pope may depoſe an hereticall, or an irregular Prince, from his Crowne, as hauing authoritie ouer him, in this caſe, to depriue him of his eſtate. All ſuch Babylonians are habituall Traytors; diſpoſed, and alwayes reſolued; in

preparation of heart, to execute any Papall ſentence of depoſition, as far as they can, againſt their owne naturall Lords, and Souereigne Princes.
               3. The third opinion (denying the ſecond of theſe, as the ſecond denieth the firſt) giueth a meere ſpirituall authoritie vnto the Pope, to excommunicate a Prince, for his correction, and ſaluation, and to bring him to a penitent ſubmiſſion vnto God, and his Church; but without any ſuch temporall effect, as the ſecond opinion doth inforce. And hence it is, that the Oath of Alleageance in this Kingdome, ſo wiſely deuiſed, and neceſſarily enacted, though it ſubuert, and contradict the firſt, and ſecond Opinions, yet it leaueth this laſt, and third Opinion vntouched, neither affirming, nor denying it, becauſe all moderate Papiſts, that treate of the Popes power (as namely Doctor Barkley, and the more milde Babylonians in England) denying it in the firſt, and ſecond degree, doe yet conſtantly affirme it in the third. But theſe men find leaſt grace in Babylon (which is more delighted with the ſecond Opinion, and chiefly with the firſt) and therefore we ſee that, as the firſt groweth daily more ſtrong in Rome, ſo the ſecond hath lately gotten more aduantage in France (in the minoritie of the King) by the ſubtile Oration of Cardinall Peron; which our moſt excellent Souereigne hath cleerly refuted by his diuine, and learned Pen.
               To conclude, now, the third proofe of my aſſertion; you may perceiue that the large Dominion of Babylon (which the Ieſuits truly find in Rome; but falſely conceiue it to be there within a very little time onely, before her ruine) doth appertaine vnto the

CHVRCH, and not vnto the Citie; but ſo far forth, as it is the place, wherein the Pope doth reigne; ſo that, in it, his Succeſſors muſt continue (euen vntill the time of Antichriſt; when they ſhall be expelled out of the confines thereof) and there they ſhall exerciſe their domination, not onely with Saint Peters Keyes, but alſo with his two Swords. This is the power of Babylon, which the Reuelation doth truly foretell, and which theſe Ieſuites could not diſcerne therein. But as humane reaſon diſapproueth their idle conceits, and naked coniectures, ſo certaine experience, ioyned with diuine prediction, doth confirme our aſſertion in this point. And ſo I come vnto a fourth, and a more important, proofe thereof.
               FOVRTHLY, therefore, I proue it, out of the conformitie betwixt the prediction of Saint Paul, and the Reuelation of Saint Iohn; both contayning one ſenſe of matter, vnder different forme of words; the point it ſelfe being one, as proceeding from one Spirit.
               Firſt, then, it is the prediction of Saint Paul, that Antichriſt ſhall be reuealed, and deſtroyed, before the great Day of the generall Iudgement (2. Theſſ. 2.) which ſeemeth to enſue not long after the performance of that glorious worke. In like manner, Saint Iohn in his Reuelation, paſſeth from the deſtruction of Rome (vnder the name of Babylon: cap. 18.) vnto a deſcription of the new Ieruſalem (cap. 21.) following the ruine of the new, and ſecond Babylon (nothing being interuenient betwixt theſe two, but the gratulation of the Saints, for the fall of Rome, cap. 19. and a briefe recapitulation, made of things paſt; cap. 20.)

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
and ſo hee proceedeth immediately vnto the concluſion of this preſent world, cap. 22.
               Saint Paul doth farther aſſure vs (2. Theſſ. 2.3.) that Antichriſt ſhall be diſcloſed, before hee be deſtroyed; which ſheweth, that hee had an exiſtencie before his diſcouerie; and that hee ſhould grow, by a myſterie [2. Theſſ. 2.7.] vnto his greatneſſe, before hee bee diſcerned. Therefore Saint Iohn, according with Saint Paul, telleth vs [Apoc. 18.5.] that Babylon had a name written in her forehead, and it was a Myſterie. A great myſterie, indeed, that the ſucceſſour of a Fiſherman (as Hierome calleth him, writing vnto Damaſus) ſhould aſpire, by little, and by little, vnto ſuch an immenſitie of power, that Kings are his vaſſalls, and that, his owne Lord being finally depriued of his Imperiall Seate, this Beaſt ſhould enter vpon it, and exerciſe the old power vnder a new name.
               Saint Paul goeth forward, and informeth vs, that Antichriſt cannot be diſcloſed, nor aduance himſelfe vnto that eminencie, wherein hee ſhall excell all Potentates of the earth, vntill the ſupreame power of the Romane Emperours were taken away. For that power was then the chiefeſt, and therefore it kept downe the Papall Dominion, and reſtrayned the growth of the Pope; for Antichriſt could not be lifted vp, till the Emperour was caſt downe. This is the cleere, and euident purpoſe of Saint Paul in theſe words; HEE, which now withholdeth, ſhall firſt bee taken out of the way: and then that wicked man [Antichriſt] ſhall bee reuealed; for two ſuch powers could not conſiſt together, at one time, in the Imperiall Seate. That this withholder was the Romane Emperour, the very tenour

of the Text it ſelfe doth beare it; and the ſucceſſe of things doth giue witneſſe thereunto; and this was the common expoſition of the ancient Doctors; as namely, of Saint Chryſostome, vpon the very place; of Saint Hierome; Epiſt. 151. quaest. 11. and, long before them, of Tertullian; de Reſurrect. cap. 30.
               Thus the Chriſtians had a preſcience touching the period, and expiration of the Romane Empire, which the Pagans conceiued to be Eternall; and therefore Saint Paul deliuered this dangerous point in ſecret, and obſcure termes, leaſt the publike notice thereof ſhould miniſter cauſe of perſecution againſt the Church; as Saint Hierome doth collect.
               But let vs obſerue the words of Tertullian; for they containe a point of ſpeciall note. Quis (ſaith he) who is this that doth withhold? Hee anſwereth; Romanus ſtatus; the Romane, and Imperiall State. Now therefore, as by the word HEE [He, that withholdeth] S. Paul doth not vnderſtand an indiuiduall perſon, not Nero (who was then liuing) but a ciuill State, which had a ſucceſſion of Emperours therein,; ſo, by this word, THE man of ſinne; THE aduerſary, &c. Saint Paul doth not vnderſtand ſome one particular perſon, but a State (and a State Eccleſiaſticall, as wee ſhall ſee anon) hauing a ſucceſſion of Potentates (viz. Popes of Rome) ſucceeding in the Imperiall Seate (when the Emperour was taken away) and exerciſing ſupreame dominion therein. Thus farre Saint Paul hath conducted vs in the interpretation of this Babylon; that, by his prediction, wee might certainely vnderſtand, that this name agreeth vnto the Papall, and Eccleſiaſticall eſtate, ſucceeding vnto the Imperiall, in Rome.
               
               
                  For he, which withheld, being taken away, Antichriſt will appeare; and before, hee cannot (for two ſuch great powers cannot ſtand at once) and afterward, he ſhall immediately ariſe; for ſo, in the decourſe of all ages in the world, as one ſupreame power (in the foure Monarchies) did decay, ſo another did preſently exalt it ſelfe. Now, ſince Hee, that withheld, is taken away (to wit, the Romane Emperour, or Romanus ſtatus, as Tertullian ſpeaketh: for that, which now remaineth, is titular, rather then reall; ſcarce a member of the ancient bodie: and alſo the Pope ſitteth aboue this Romane Empire; as tranſlated into Germany by his meanes; and as a creature of his ordination; the Emperour, being by the Pope, and true Papalls, reputed, and ſtiled no other, then Electus, or an incomplete probationer, till conſecrated, and inaugurated, or approoued by him: and ſo a vaſſall, and a ſubiect vnto the Papall power) therefore, by the doctrine of S. Paul, that high, great, and glorious State, which immediately ſucceeded vnto the diſſolued Empire, is Antichriſtian; he, that holdeth it, is Antichriſt; and that Rome, wherein he ſitteth, is conſequently Babylon; and therefore, finally, this Babylon in my Text is not the Citie alone, but the Church alſo, or Eccleſiaſticall Rome, wherein the Pope is aduanced (after the Emperour) as the higheſt Potentate in the earth.
               And if the Pope be not the man (to wit, the man of ſinne; as Saint Paul ſpeaketh) or rather the Beaſt (as you ſhall heare by Saint Iohn) that entred vpon the Imperiall Seate, and Dignitie; who is that Man, or who is that Beast? For ſome one, or other wee muſt find, ſince hee, that withheld, is taken out of the way,
                  
ſo long before our time. If any man ſuppoſe, that the TVRK is that Antichriſt, which appeared vpon the decadencie of the Romane Empire, I anſwere; no: hee is not the Man, or Beaſt, of whom wee now enquire. Firſt, becauſe Antichriſt, ſucceeding in the Romane Empire, was to ſit in the Temple of God; ſo did not the Turk; but ſo doth the Pope, namely, in Eccleſia, or rather ſupra Eccleſiam. Secondly, becauſe Antichriſt ſhould poſſeſſe Rome, as the Seat, and Center of the Empire; ſo doth not the Turk; but ſo doth the Pope; not by a donation of Constantine, but by his inſinuation into that glorious Citie. Thirdly; becauſe Antichriſt ought to extoll himſelfe, if not in all, yet in the moſt principall, and eſſentiall parts of the Romane Empire; ſo doth not the Turk: but ſo doth the Pope; in Italy, Spaine, France, Germany, Poland, &c. ſo he did in England; but ſo he ſhall doe no more: ſo is my prayer, and ſo is my hope. Fourthly, and laſtly; the moſt generall, and approued opinion of the learned Doctors, in the Church of Rome, exempteth the Turke from the ſcandall, and infamous name of that Antichriſt, which is here intended by Saint Paul. And therefore, whereas Feuardentius (following the erroneous conceits of ſome leſſe iudicious Romaniſts) inclined ſtrongly vnto their fancie, that impute this crime vnto the Turke, hee was cenſured amongſt his owne Catholike brethren, in this diſgracefull manner; the opinion of Feuardentius is not onely falſe, but dangerous; and the authors, whom hee alledgeth, neuer thought, nor wrote any ſuch matter. Feuard. annot. in Irenaeum. l. 5. c. 30.
               Since therefore the Pope is truely that man of ſin,

who appeared, in his ſuperlatiue power, vpon the declination of the Romane Emperour (for thence wee inforce, by the verſe words of Saint Paul, that Antichriſt is come; euen as the Chriſtians proue, againſt the Iewes, that Chriſt came long agoe, becauſe the Scepter departed from Iudah; and then the Meſſiah was to be borne, according to the prophecie of Iacob) wee may conclude, that the Babylon, wherein hee ſitteth, is Rome; not the Citie alone, but the Church, which ſeemeth to be entayled vnto that fatall place, in the iudgement of her chiefeſt Doctors. Thus farre out of Saint Paul; and now we come vnto Saint Iohn.
               
               Secondly then, this prediction of Saint Paul is a fitting key to open the viſions of Saint Iohn, in this behalfe; in cap. 13. & 17. For, in his thirteenth Chapter, hee had a viſion of two diſtinct beaſts; the very ſame, which wee haue alreadie ſeene in the prophecie of Saint Paul. Behold therefore the deſcription of theſe Beaſts; and yet firſt vnderſtand (I pray you) what the name of BEAST doth generally purport, as well in this Reuelation of Saint Iohn, as in the prophecies of Daniel (whereof alſo I am now to take ſome ſpeciall notice) namely cap. 7. v. 4. Foure great Beaſts (ſaith hee) came vp from the Sea. Euery word hath weight, as I will ſhew you in the retrograded order of the Text. They came from the great SEA; ſignifying, that the conuerſions of publike States ſhould bring great troubles, and perturbations in the world. They came vp; or aſcended: for the great Monarchies had ſmall beginnings, and were aduanced vnto a very high eſtate. They are Beaſts; for theſe Monarchies did

with furie and violence, enter, increaſe, and gouerne in the earth. Laſtly; they are foure; whereof the laſt is the Romane Monarchy, thus characterized, and marked by Daniel; v. 7. The fourth Beaſt was fearefull, and terrible, and very ſtrong, &c. and it had ten hornes; which, in the twentie fourth verſe, are interpreted ten Kings; for the Romane Monarchie had a various, and difforme gouernment; of different nature, from all precedent Monarchies; till the Caeſars (who are here called the little horne) roſe vp; who, ſubduing a great part of their ſtrength, drew the principalitie vnto themſelues, and erected the Monarchie in their owne perſons: and this is the true, genuine, and proper interpretation of that text. Now I returne vnto Saint Iohn.
               
               The FIRST Beaſt, which Saint Iohn did ſee; Apocal. 13.11. &c. is the ſame Romane Monarchie; and expreſſed in this manner; A Beaſt aroſe out of the Sea, hauing ſeuen heads, and ten hornes, &c. and then followeth the perſecution, raiſed by this Beaſt, againſt the Church of God. This Beaſt was certainely the Romane Empire; which, in the publike gouernment (by the Senate, and by the people) and in the priuate afterward (by one perſon) was ſtill one, and the ſame Beaſt (hauing indeed ten hornes at the firſt; till, afterward, one little horne carried the ſway, when it grew vnto great power) that reuelled in Babylon, and domineered in the world; by whoſe Edicts, and Authoritie, the Chriſtians, ſo generally for many yeeres, ſuffered cruell deaths, and horrible tortures, for the glorious name of Ieſus Chriſt.
               When this Tragedie was ended, and that this firſt

                  Beast (though now growne more milde, and tamed by the knowledge of the true Faith) beganne afterwards daily to decline from his greatneſſe (and, at the laſt, to bee taken out of the way; according to the words of Saint Paul) then began a SECOND Beaſt, to come vp out of the earth; Apocal. 13.11. that is to ſay, ſome other great, and principall Potentate (for ſo the word Beaſt importeth here, as it doth in Daniel before) began to reare vp himſelfe; and therefore is here ſaid to come vp; as hauing an inchoation, and then an augmentation of his power; and it is, not without cauſe, ſaid here, that he came out of the earth (whereas the former Beaſt, verſe 1. came out of the Sea; as the other three Beaſts alſo did; Daniel 7.4.) becauſe, as hee is contrary to Chriſt (who came from heauen) ſo hee hath a different entrance into the world, from the former Beaſt (with Saint Iohn ſaw) and from the other three (which Daniel ſaw) becauſe thoſe foure Beasts had a tumultuous, violent, and troubleſome beginning of their Empires; which came, as it were, out of a raging Sea; but this Second Beast (here in Saint Iohn) hath a quiet, ſecret, peaceable aſcenſion (as it were out of the earth) comming vp with the milde aſpect of a Lamb; not ſuddenly aduancing himſelfe (like the other Beaſts) with terror, but cunningly inſinuating himſelfe into the hearts, and affections of men (as Ribera doth well expound this place) and is therefore well ſaid, to come vp out of the earth, becauſe, being little, & meane at the firſt (in compariſon of his future glorie) hee doth afterward attaine vnto a ſpeciall, and extraordinary power in the world euen, to doe all, which the firſt Beast could doe before him, v. 12.
               
                  Marke now this paſſage well. It doth appeare, that the First Beast (viz. the Romane Empire in the ciuill ſtate) was now taken out of the way. How doth that appeare? Becauſe this ſecond Beaſt did all, which the former could doe before him; therefore the former was gone; that is to ſay, the great Imperiall power of Rome was now decayed, and another aroſe vp after it, in as great dignitie, and power, as the other did obtaine. Theſe two Potentates [the firſt, and ſecond Beaſt] ſtood not together in their greatneſſe: two Sunnes ſhine not in one firmament: and the Pope did well eſpy this, when he compared the Romane Empire to the Moone, and the Romane Papacy to the Sunne; as being of greater excellencie; ſo that the Empire had her light from it, and loſt her light before it; as being not able to ſhine in the glorious preſence thereof. And this is true indeed: for, O thou poore Empire of Germany; what art thou before the conſpect, and ſhining light of the mightie Papacie of Rome, which leaueth thee an emptie Title, and poſſeſſeth the full power thereof? But I proceed.
               It doth now alſo appeare farther; that this ſecond Beaſt (who could not aſpire vnto the proportion of his greatneſſe, during the conſiſtencie of the former) is mounted vp into the Imperiall Dignitie, and Seate, (but after the expiration of the Romane Empire; for that Beast is gone; that ſupreame power is aboliſhed) as he hath inuaded his Dominion, to doe all, that the other could doe before him.
               
               If you aske how this came to paſſe? I anſwere; not by Sword, not by Conqueſt, not by forcible meanes; (for this Beaſt came out of the earth; in a

more meeke, and meane faſhion; and like a Lambe) but by a faire pretenſe of his Euangelicall Keyes; which afterwards became no leſſe powerfull then Swords, and two Swords [ſpirituall power; which was the firſt horne that grew; and then temporall power; which was the ſecond horne, annexed vnto the former: both which Powers they vnderſtand in the two Swords, Luc. 22.38.] and then the Beaſt, that appeared with the hornes of a Lambe before, ſpake like a Dragon (ſaith Saint Iohn) with the voice of blaſphemie; being now growne vp vnto high eſtimation, reuerently, and obſequiouſly intertayned in the World. All this falleth cleerely, and irrefutably vpon the Pope, and vpon the Pope alone; as beeing the next great, and Souereigne Potentate, ariſing vpon the decay of the Imperiall State.
               Wherefore the moſt excellent Maieſtie of our gracious King Iames doth prudently, and truly obſerue, concerning this SECOND BEAST; that it is the falſe, and hypocriticall Church, which doth exerciſe all the power of the former Beaſt: it teacheth the Kings of this Monarchie, and of this Seate, by what meanes they ſhall allure, and compell the people to obey their commands, &c. It ſhall perſwade them, that this hereticall Monarchie ought for conſcience ſake to be obeyed, by all perſons, in whatſoeuer it commandeth, as if it could not erre.
               
               Heere the Church, and the Pope doe import, really, but one thing: for the dignitie of this Church ariſeth from the Pope: and therefore hee is called alſo the Church; as wee ſhall ſee hereafter. Meane while wee obſerue, that this ſecond, or Papall Beaſt in Rome hath

the authoritie of the former (viz. the Imperiall) but vnder another title, in another kind, and carried with another courſe. Wherefore this Babylon, in my Text, being the ſeate, wherein this ſecond Beaſt (the ſpirituall Monarch) doth reigne, as the moſt puiſſant, and ſouereigne Lord in all the earth, I conclude now the third proofe of my aſſertion, as well by Saint Iohn heere, as by Saint Paul before; that the name of Babylon doth not extend meerely vnto the Citie of Rome (as the Ieſuites doe pretend) but vnto Eccleſiasticall Rome; as it is gouerned, and ſwayed by the POPE; vſurping the place, dignitie, and ſuperioritie of the former Beaſt therein.
               Now I come, in a word, or two, vnto the ſeuenteenth Chapter of Saint Iohn; where wee reade of a Beaſt, vnto whom the ten Kings (ariſing neere vpon the time of his aduancement) gaue their power, but afterward God inclineth them to worke the finall deſtruction of Babylon, wherein this Beaſt doth reigne. This Beaſt is certainly the great Antichriſt, as the Text doth inforce, and the Ieſuites doe confeſſe: the queſtion therefore is; whether this Beaſt be the ſame, heere, with the SECOND BEAST before; for if he be not the ſame, then that ſecond Beaſt is not Antichriſt; and, conſequently, the Pope (whom we preſume to be that ſecond Beaſt) is not Antichriſt; as we conceiue him to be.
               I anſwere therefore, that this Beaſt (Cap. 17. 12, 13.) is the very ſame with the ſecond Beaſt; Cap. 13. 11. whoſe exaltation, and qualitie is deſcribed heere in more preciſe, and ample tearmes, then before. For heere wee ſee his gradation, how hee came to ſo great

power; it was by the meanes of the ten Kings, who ſubmitted a part of their dignitie vnto him; but, finally, Babylon (wherein the Beaſt doth reigne) ſhall come vnto her ruine by theſe ten Kings; the ſame, not in perſon, but in ſucceſſion.
               Now it is apparant, that the man of ſinne, in Saint Paul (ſucceeding the Emperour) beeing the ſecond Beaſt, in Saint Iohn (as I declared before) muſt therefore be the Beaſt in this ſeuenteeenth Chapter; who is the Antichriſt, reigning in Babylon, with the ſubiection of his Kings; ſo that theſe three are all one indeed. For the Beaſt, Apoc. 17. beeing Antichriſt, is therefore alſo Saint Pauls man of ſinne; reuealed, when the Emperour was taken out of the way: and this I haue proued to be the Pope.
               The Emperour, then, being the firſt Beaſt (Apocal. 13.1.) it followeth neceſſarily, that the Pope is the ſecond Beast Verſe 11. And ſo, laſtly, it enſueth by cleere, and euident deduction, that the ſecond Beaſt (Cap. 13. 11.) is the ſame with this Beaſt (Cap. 17. 12.) the Pope (or Papall Empire) being ſignified, and intended in both; ſo that ſtill, this Babylon, in my Text, is Eccleſiasticall Rome; the ſeate of that SECOND BEAST.
               If any man ſay (and it is the onely cauill, which they can pretend) that the firſt Beaſt (Apoc. 13.1.) is the ſame with this Beaſt (Apoc. 17.3.) becauſe that firſt beaſt is deſcribed with ſeuen heads, and ten hornes (Apoc. 13.1.) and ſo is this Beaſt alſo; Apoc. 17.3. I anſwere; that the firſt Beaſt (which is certainly Imperiall Rome in her Ciuill ſtate) hath great conformitie, in power, and dominion, with this Beaſt, which

alſo is the very ſame with the ſecond Beaſt before) and therefore this Beaſt heere (Cap. 17. 3.) is deſcribed much according to the ſame faſhion, with the ſaid firſt Beaſt; becauſe of the reſemblance, and ſimilitude, which this doth carrie of that; hauing a like ſuperioritie, a like ſouereigntie, doing all, that the ſaid firſt beaſt could do (as it is ſaid preciſely of the ſecond Beaſt; Apoc. 13.12. being the ſame with this) and perſecuting the ſincere profeſſors of Chriſtian Religion, as the firſt alſo did perſecute the Chriſtian Martyrs: and as the firſt Beaſt had ten hornes (euen as Daniel alſo did foretell in the Romane Empire) ſo this Beaſt (which is Antichriſt) hath ten Kings, by whoſe ſubiection he doth ſupport his dominion; and, by their ſeruice vnto him, doth reigne powerfull, and ſhall continue in great honour, till theſe Kings (withdrawing their obedience from the Beaſt) ſhall alſo conſume his ſeate; which is the true, naturally, vnforced, and certaine interpretation of this Scripture. So that the ſimilitude of their ſeuen heads, and tenne hornes, doth no more prooue the ſaid first Beaſt (Apoc. 13.1.) to be the ſame with this Beaſt (Apoc. 17.3.) then that the firſt Beaſt is the ſame with the Dragon; who is alſo ſaid to haue ſeuen heads, and ten hornes; as it is Apoc. 12.3. Finally obſerue; that if the ſaid first Beaſt (Apoc. 13.1.) bee Antichrist (and ſo be the ſame with the Beaſt, Apoc. 17.) then it followeth, that after Antichriſt (whom yet the Papiſts hold to bee the laſt Potentate in the earth; and to reigne but three yeeres, and an halfe) another Beast, or another Potentate, muſt ariſe; hauing as great authoritie, and power as the firſt; for ſo it is ſaid; Apoc. 13.11, 12. I ſaw another Beaſt: and this

ſecond Beaſt did all, that the firſt could doe; which conſequence ſtandeth not (as you ſee) with their poſition.
               It remayneth therefore ſtill (and ſo ſhall it euer be) moſt cleere, moſt conformable to all reaſon, and iudgement (as a point moſt fairely deduced, without any difficultie, or abſurditie) that ſince the Pope reigneth thus in Babylon (vpon the excluſion of the Emperour, and decay of the Empire) therefore this Babylon is not the Citie alone, but Eccleſiaſticall Rome, as it is the ſeate of the Pope; aduanced, and bearing rule therein; according to the Prediction of Saint Paul, and the Viſion of Saint Iohn, both concurring (as you may euidently perceiue) in one, and the ſame iſſue; which being of ſpeciall importance, I haue therefore inſiſted very long vpon it; and ſo I haſten vnto the fift proofe of my aſſertion, wherewith I will ſpeedily conclude this whole point, and, with it, the firſt part of this diſcourſe.
               FIFTLY then, and laſtly, I proue my aſſertion to be true, in regard of the markeable corruptions, and abominations in Rome; for which ſhee ſhall bee deſtroyed by the iuſt, and ſeuere iudgement of God; as Ribera, and Viegas, doe both confeſſe, vpon the certaine, and indubious euidence of the ſacred Text. Since therefore all the iniquities, and impieties, for which Rome deſerueth the name of Babylon in this Scripture, are pregnantly, and notoriouſly found in Eccleſiaſticall, or Papall Rome (as I will demonſtrate in the next, and ſecond part of this Sermon; wherein we ſhall behold the ſimilitude betwixt the two Babylons; the Mother in Eaſt, and the Daughter in the

Weſt; the literall, and the ſpirituall) and ſince the iuſtice of God will puniſh Babylonian Rome, in her ſecond, and latter condition (after her Ethnicall eſtate is paſt) becauſe, in this latter condition, ſhe will imitate the wickedneſſe of Rome in her former, and ſo become a Babylon againe (as theſe Ieſuites inferre out of the Text) and indeed ſhe is now, and long hath beene, ſuch a Babylon in regard of theſe iniquities (whereof I ſhall preſently intreat) therefore Eccleſiasticall, or Papall Rome is Babylon; truely to bee ſtiled with that name, and iuſtly to be deſtroyed for that cauſe.
               The impieties, to be found in Babylon, are found in Eccleſiaſticall Rome: how can ſhe, then, auoid her title; but that ſhee is Babylon? or how can ſhee eſcape her ruine; but that ſhe ſhall fall? as the Angell doth heere proclaime; It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon, &c.
               
               Thus now, at the length, I haue finiſhed the fourth, and laſt interpretation of this name [Babylon] being the ſubiect of my Text, and contayning the ſinne of Rome. For as Salomon aſcended, by ſeuerall ſteps, vnto his Royall Throne, ſo, by certaine gradations, we haue paſſed, from one point vnto another, till we arriued vnto the true, certaine, and indiſputable knowledge of this myſticall name; which, in many Ages, hath ſo much exerciſed the wit of many learned men.
               FIRST; ſome conceiued, that this name was impoſed vpon the generall ſocietie of the wicked: but we haue prooued that it doth belong vnto a particular place.
               SECONDLY; ſome conceiued that this particular place is Rome indeed; howbeit in her Ethnicall eſtate onely, which is paſt long ſince: but we haue prooued that it is Rome in another eſtate alſo, ſucceeding after

the Ethnicall, by the teſtimonie of learned Ieſuits, founded vpon the plaine, and certaine ſenſe of this holy Writ.
               THIRDLY; whereas they lay the ſcandall of this name, and crime thereof, vpon the Citie alone (but not vpon the Church of Rome) and vpon the Citie alſo, after her defection from the Pope (but not before) therefore we haue prooued, that this myſticall name belongeth truly, and properly vnto Eccleſiaſticall, or Papall Rome, according to the preſent condition, wherein ſhe continueth, after many Ages, and ſhall ſo remayne, vntill her dolefull ruine. In a word then: this BABYLON is Rome, and no other place: it is Rome in her preſent condition alſo, and not onely paſt: it is Rome, not onely in regard of the Citie, fallen from the Pope, but as it is the Papall Seat, and flouriſhing vnder the Pope; whoſe power ſhall one day fall with her glorie; the Whore being burnt with fire, and the Beaſt being deſtroyed by the vnited forces of the ten Kings; who haue loued the Whore, and honoured her Beaſt, but ſhall mortally, yea immortally, hate them both.
               And now, in this explication of Babylon I doe ſo ſecurely, and confidently reappoſe, that I doe not eſteeme it probable onely, and in ſuch a meaſure, that no Babylonian can lay the like probabilitie vpon any other PERSON, except the Pope, to be the Antichrist, foretold by Saint Paul [2. Theſ. 2.3.] and to bee the ſecond Beast, foreſeene by Saint Iohn [Apoc. 13.11.] nor vpon any other PLACE, except Rome Eccleſiaſticall, to be this Babylon in my Text; but I eſteeme it to be ſo certaine, ſo cleere, ſo eaſie, and ſo fairely

deduced vnto the vnderſtanding of euery ingenious Auditour, that no Babylonian, though he barke at it, ſhall bite it in ſunder, nor euer be able, with Art, Learning, Iudgement, and Conſcience, ſufficiently to refute the ſame.
               Here then is place of admiration, as well as of commiſeration, to behold ſo many blind Babylonians, that doe not, or rather will not ſee the truth, but run on with preiudice againſt it, and neuer reflect, with an indifferent mind, towards it: abuſing their wit to folly, their learning to ignorance, their ſtudie to vanitie, their talent to loſſe, and their time to vnprofitableneſſe in this diſpute. Shall I then inueigh againſt their courſes in this behalfe? No; I will pray for them, with the earneſt zeale, and tender affection of my heart. O Lord, open thy truth vnto the knowledge of their hearts, and frame their hearts vnto the obedience of thy truth; that, ſearching for Babylon, they may finde it; finding it, may hate it; hating it, may flye it; flying it, may giue notice of it vnto others; that they, who are fallen, may come out of it; and they, who are falling, may not come into it; but liue in thy feare, and dye in thy fauour, to their vnſpeakable comfort, through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord; Amen.
            
            
               The SECOND Inquiſition; Why this name of Babylon is impoſed vpon Eccleſiaſticall, or Papall ROME.
               THough the greateſt difficultie, in my Text, bee now paſt (for that wee haue now a ſufficient

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
notice of Babylon; and doe vnderſtand, that Papall Rome is the ſpirituall Babylon therein) yet wee muſt diſcouer, what is the conformitie betwixt the old Babylon, in the ancient Prophets [Eſay, and Ieremy] and the new, in our propheticall Euangeliſt Saint Iohn; that the knowledge of the firſt may conduct vs vnto the knowledge of the ſecond.
               Wherefore, though the Ieſuites, finding Rome to be Babylon in two eſtates (the one Ethnicall, and paſt; the other Antichriſtian, and to come, as they ſuppoſe) do here compare Rome with Rome it ſelfe: Rome, in the latter condition, with Rome in the former; and ſo ſeeke out the correſpondencie of Antichriſtian Rome with Ethnicall Rome; yet I will now diſclaime that manner of proceeding, and rather follow the purport of the Scripture, then the practiſe of the Ieſuites in this kind. First; becauſe I doe not yet ſufficiently conceiue the ſaid twofold eſtate of Rome, in this Chapter (as they pretend) to be vayled vnder this name of Babylon; as if Rome neere twice here intitled with that name; but that ſhe is certainly called heere by this name, after the extinction of Ethnicall Idolatry, and after her reception of the Chriſtian Faith; and after the decay of the Romane Empire; and as ſhe was to be vnder Antichriſt; which eſtate, we ſay, is alreadie come, and the Papiſts expect it, as yet to come, neere vpon the end of the world. Secondly; becauſe Saint Iohn, in this Chapter (according to the viſion, offered vnto him) doth only compare Rome with Babylon (that famous Citie of Chaldaea, the laſt Seate of the firſt Monarchy) and compareth it with Babylon, not onely in the very wordes of the Prophet Eſay
                  
[21.9.] here repeated in my Text, and reinforced, to the ſame purpoſe, by the Prophet Ieremy [51.8.] but by many other ſentences, and paſſages, exemplified (as it were) out of thoſe Prophets, and tranſlated into this place.
               I proceed, therefore, now (according to my deſigne) to ſhew you the reſemblances (not all, but ſome) betwixt that Babylon in Aſia, and this in Europe (the firſt being ſo, in a litterall name; the ſecond, in a myſticall ſenſe) whereby we ſhall eaſily perceiue, that Rome doth truly communicate with her, in the ſimilitude of her name, becauſe ſhe doth aptly reſemble her, in the qualitie of her ſins; according to that excellent rule of Tertullian, in this behalfe; Scriptura diuina vtitur tranſlatione nominum, ex comparatione criminum; The Scripture doth vſe a ſimilitude of names, from the compariſon of crimes. So it is, Eſay 1.10. The Princes of Ieruſalem are called the Princes of Sodome. So it is, Ezek. 16.3. where the Father of the Iewes is called an Amorite, and their Mother an Hittite. Then he addeth; Sic & Babylon, &c. and ſo Babylon in the viſions of S. Iohn carrieth the figure, of the Romane Citie; being therefore great, proud in her Empire, and a perſecutor of the Saints.
               
               This is the compariſon (in three points, as you heare) which Tertullian framed betwixt Babylon in Chaldaea, and the Citie of Rome. But either Rome, in that Ethnicall ſtate, was not this Babylon (of which Saint Iohn doth ſpeake) or, at the leaſt, it being Babylon, afterward in another eſtate (as the Ieſuites confeſſe) we muſt now enquire, what are the crimes of Rome (as ſhe is Babylon in latter times) and how the

ſimilitude, therein, doth ſtand betwixt that litterall Babylon in the Eaſt, and this myſticall Babylon in the Weſt.
               And now, becauſe wee liue in the time of the euent of things, and ſee that, by experience, in Rome, which Tertullian could not foreſee in his iudgement (nothing being leſſe to be ſuſpected in his dayes, then that the Pope ſhould inuade the Imperiall Seate, and that Papall Rome ſhould be ſpirituall Babylon) and therefore, looking barely into the prophecie, could not compare it with the effects of the time (as we may do; this being the true, and proper meanes to expound all obſcure prophecies; as Irenaeus doth well obſerue; lib. 4. c. 43.) therefore I will proceed a little beyond the two crimes of pride, and crueltie (which Tertullian found in the Ethnicall State of Rome) and make an addition of ſome other offences, which went before in litterall Babylon, and now follow after in Papall Rome. The points, then of compariſon, betwixt theſe two, being many (for now plentie it ſelfe hath made mee poore) I will ſelect fiue, at this time; which alſo I ſhall rather briefly note, then copiouſly diſcuſſe.
            
            
               The FIRST Compariſon, betwixt Literall Babylon, and Papall Rome.
               
               THe firſt point, wherein this compariſon doth ſtand, is IDOLATRIE; it being a peculiar inuention of Babylon (as Saint Ambroſe doth relate; in Rom. 1.23. (and thence deriued vnto other Nations of the world. This ſinne of Idolatry is a regnant ſinne

in Eccleſiaſticall Rome; which is thence commended, and commanded vnto the whole Church of God; and this Idolatrie I note ſpecially in foure particulars.
               The FIRST particular inſtance of Romiſh Idolatrie, is in their Sacramentall adoration; where a creature is worſhipped in ſtead of the Creatour; bread in the place of the body of Chriſt (for the worſhip of Chriſts humane Nature floweth from the vnion therof with his diuine Perſon: and the ſame worſhip, which is due vnto Chriſt, as he is the Sonne of God, the Papiſts, therefore, giue vnto bread, as being tranſubſtantiated into his bodie; which, by concomitancie, is knit vnto his Diuinitie) and all this Idolatrie is founded vpon their falſe interpretation of theſe words; This is my bodie: that is, ſay they, The bread is now become his body, by a ſubſtantiall conuerſion: which is contrary to the nature of a Sacrament; where there is a corporall abſence of the thing it ſelfe, repreſented in the ſacrament, but yet it is ioyned, by ſacramentall vnion, with the ſigne thereof; as Irenaeus doth truly affirme; It is not now common bread, but the Euchariſt, conſiſting of two things; an earthly, and an heauenly; lib. 4. c. 34. Where are thoſe two things (in the Popiſh Euchariſt) thoſe two Res? For to ſay, there are the accidents of bread [colour, figure, taſt, &c.] and the ſubſtance of Chriſts body, it doth not ſatisfie this definition of Irenaeus; and it is repugnant to the plaine reſolution of an ancient Biſhop of Rome (Gelaſius by name) who ſaith expreſly, That the ſubſtance, and nature, of bread, and wine doe remaine in the Sacraments: vnto whom the learned Father, Theodoret, doth euidently

ſubſcribe; ſaying, That the mysticall Symbolls [of bread, and wine] goe not out of their proper nature, but doe remaine, in their former ſubſtance, after their ſanctification. Whence it is, that Cyprian firſt, and Auguſtine after him, ſpeake both in one ſentence; viz. Sacraments beare the names of the things, whereof they are Sacraments; there is the name of the thing, by Sacramentall appellation, and there is the thing by Sacramentall vnion: but there is not the thing it ſelfe, by ſubſtantiall mutation of the former element; for what abſurdities, and blaſphemies muſt then ſucceed? viz. Wormes breed out of the bodie of Chriſt; Dogs, and Cats eate the bodie of Chriſt; which things ſometimes doe, or may come to paſſe, vpon their reſeruation of this Sacrament, if their opinion thereof were true.
               But now, ſince, in the cleere purpoſe of Chriſt (according to the iudgement of the ancient Church) there is, in the Sacrament of his bodie, true, and ſubſtantiall bread (yet remaining after Conſecration) and the ſame is not, by any ſupernaturall operation, conuerted into the ſubſtance of his bodie (which yet the Papiſts pretend to bee the onely ſubſtance there, and vayled vnder the accidents of bread) what is, or can be, or euer hath beene, palpable Idolatrie, if this be not, to giue diuine worſhip (due vnto Chriſt, firſt, as he is God, and then to the Man-hood, as it is ioyned by perſonall vnion with the God-head) vnto a piece of bread (for ſo I am forced to ſpeake, in regard of the true ſubſtance thereof; though it be now no common bread, but Sacramentall, and, in a manner, diuine) vnto the worke of our hands, euen vnto that, which, being maſticated in the mouth, digeſted in the ſtomacke,

is finally eiected into the draught? Whoſe heart may not tremble in the apprehenſion of ſuch blaſphemous, and vnlearned follies?
               If any man ſay (as King Henrie the Eighth once ſpake to this effect) That, ſince I conceiue there is now no bread in the Sacrament, but onely the body of Chriſt; and doe found this my conceit vpon the words of Christ (ſaying; This is my body) and thereupon, out of this perſwaſion of my heart, doe giue diuine worſhip vnto the Body of Chriſt, which I ſuppoſe to bee vayled in the figure of bread, this is now no Idolatrie in mee, if indeed the bread it ſelfe doe ſtill remaine; for, in the act of my vnderſtanding, I worſhip not any bread, but the body of Chriſt alone.
               
               I anſwere; thy falſe opinion doth not excuſe thine Idolatrous act. For if a miſguided opinion could ſimply defend thee in this caſe, then the Pagans were no Idolaters, when ſome, in rude ignorance, worſhipped ſtockes, and ſtones, ſuppoſing the Idoll to bee a very God; or, at the leaſt, they, who were more acute, and learned, did conceiue that the Deitie did dwell, and inhabite therein (as Olympius, a Philoſopher, did inſtruct the people; Sozom. l. 7. c. 15.) and, therefore, according to their perſwaſion, they alſo committed not Idolatry, in the proſtitution of their bodies vnto Statues, and Images, which haue a powerfull force to inchant the mind.
               Againe; whereas ſome may perhaps imagine, that, if this bee an act of Idolatry in the Papiſts, yet it is a materiall Idolatry, rather then a formall, becauſe there is ſuch a Chriſt, and there is ſuch a bodie, to which diuine worſhip is due, though this bodie be not

thus ſubſtantially in the Sacrament, where they adore it; I anſwere; that, in the iudgement of Saint Auguſtine, the Iſraelites did thus adore the golden calfe; not taking it to bee God, but that God was preſent in it; yet their action was Idolatry; and ſo is this in the Papiſts, euen formall Idolatry, becauſe, though there were a Deitie, to be worſhipped, yet it was not to bee worſhipped in this matter, nor manner: and ſo, though there bee a bodie of Chriſt, which is to bee worſhipped, yet it is not in this place, not vnder theſe accidents; vnder which, and with which, there is bread ſtill, and therefore no bodie of Chriſt, and therefore not to bee worſhipped there; and conſequently, this Popiſh worſhip, though it bee intentionally done to Chriſts body, yet it is really done to the very bread; ſince bread is there, and the body is not there.
               If any man reply, and ſay; When Chriſt himſelfe conuerſed herevpon the earth (and might then truely receiue diuine adoration, in his humane nature) ſuppoſe, that a ſtranger had worſhipped Saint Iohn, in ſtead of Chriſt; was this Idolatry, when onely the partie was miſtaken (Iohn, for Chriſt) and the errour was onely in the application of the worſhip vnto the particular ſubiect, there being then a Chriſt to be worſhipped thus; though Iohn was not that Chriſt? This was not Idolatry; or, if it were any, it was materiall; it was not formall.
               
               I anſwere; that this Idolatrie is indeed purely materiall, in regard of the miſtaken ſubiect (ſince Chriſt was then vpon the earth, and was capable of this diuine worſhip in his humane nature, wherein hee then

liued heere, and wherein afterward he did ſuffer, and die heere) and this is not formall; ſince there was ſuch a Chriſt, and was then ſo to bee worſhipped, in the carnall preſence of his reall body. But this ſuppoſed caſe differeth very much from the Popiſh adoration: becauſe Chriſts body is neuer really preſent in the Sacrament (according to their fained conuerſion of the bread into it) there is no ſuch preſence taught by him, there was none ſuch beleeued by the ancient Church: but he is corporally in Heauen, he reigneth there, he remayneth there, and, by locall motion, hee ſhall from thence deſcend, viſibly, at the laſt day. Therefore; ſince there is no ſuch corporall preſence of Chriſt (as the Papiſts conceiue) in the Sacrament, but this is fiction of their owne, a falſe opinion of their owne, without the warrant of Chriſts word (nay againſt the warrant of the ſame) I conclude, that their adoration of Chriſts body there (which is not there) is Idolatry; cleere, and groſſe Idolatry; materially (becauſe Chriſts body is not there, but bread alone) and formally; becauſe they haue not his word for their warrant (that there is euer any ſuch preſence at all) but they haue falſly, fooliſhly, blaſphemouſly deuiſed this preſence, out of their owne braines, and ſo adore the worke of their owne inuention; which conceit, being totally erroneous (in matter; which is not there preſent: and in forme; which was neuer preſcribed vnto them, for any ſuch preſence) it leaueth them to be totally Idolatrous, both materially, and formally; pure IDOLATERS, without all poſſibilitie of defence. Where are now the reconcilers of light, and darkneſſe, that can reconcile a Proteſtant

with a Papiſt in this high, and important Myſterie? wherein, if Papiſts erre, they erre as intolerable Idolaters, worſhipping a breaden God: if Proteſtants erre, they are blaſphemers, hereticks, and vnſufferable wretches, to traduce the ordinance of Chriſt, & the practiſe of his Church. One of theſe two inferences muſt neceſſarily enſue; and, which is trueſt, I need not ſay, where the conſcience of euery auditour can eaſe mee of that paines. Wherefore I proceed vnto the other inſtances, which I will handle more ſuccinctly, for that this is a capitall point; vnto which therefore I haue aſſigned the firſt place in this diſpute.
               The SECOND inſtance, then, concerneth their adoration of Images (as they call them; but Idols, as they vſe them) vnto which they aſcribe the very ſame worſhip, which is due vnto the thing it ſelfe; of dulia vnto the Image of Saint Peter; of hyperdulia vnto the Image of the bleſſed Virgin; of Latria vnto the Image of Chriſt, or any repreſentation of God. So many, and ſuch adorations, as they giue vnto the very things (exhibited, and remonſtrated vnto them, reſpectiuely, in euery Image) the very ſame (no leſſer, nor other) they giue vnto the Images thereof; with the ſame reuerence of minde, with the ſame geſture of bodie, eleuation of eyes, extenſion of hands, contuſion of the breaſt, with genuflexion, proſtration, and whatſoeuer act is due, in their conceit, diſtinctly vnto Peter, Mary, and Chriſt himſelfe; and their reaſon is, becauſe, with one act of vnderſtanding, they aſſume the Image, and the thing it ſelfe, into their apprehenſion, there vniting them in one notice, and in one worſhip.
               
                  O ſubtilitie! which as the poore ignorant people cannot reach vnto (ſeldome, or neuer practiſing according to this rule) ſo the more ancient Papiſts did not attaine vnto it, in former ages; when Images were reputed hiſtoricall reſemblances, and Lay-mens Bookes, and then motiua obiecta; obiects, whoſe ſight did excite, and ſtirre vp the minde, vnto a contemplation of the things, repreſented in the ſame. But now theſe obſeruations, and courſes cannot content them; for, by a relatiue worſhip of the Image, terminated (forſooth) in the thing it ſelfe, they are aſcended vnto ſuch a ſpeculation, by their wittie foolerie, that Christ, and his Image haue one, and the ſame worſhip, from a Papiſt, in his ſoule, and body. Why then did Epiphanius deface an Image, for feare of Idolatry, if this bee none? Why did Serenus Biſhop of Maſsilia breake the Images, if this be not Idolatry? Yea Gregorie himſelfe, diſapprouing the fact of Serenus, doth yet reprehend the popular adoration of Images in that time; which certainly did not exceed (if it did equall) the Papiſticall in our dayes. And though Doctor Carrier (who ſeemed not therein to vnderſtand the Papiſts, or not himſelfe) pretendeth gloriouſly in his Letter to the Kings moſt excellent Maieſty, that the point of Images, and the worſhip thereof, is a ſmall matter, of none offence, &c. yet my eyes, my heart, do teach me otherwiſe; and therefore, notwithſtanding all their ſophiſticall diſtinctions, I muſt reſolue with Eraſmus; It is more eaſie to take Images out of the Church, then to define, by what reaſons they may ſtand therein.
               
               Finally; their doctrine, in this point, is ſo falſe

(contrary to Gods Word, to the iudgement of the ancient Fathers, to the opinion of many former Papiſts alſo) and their practiſe ſo wicked, that, in this odious, and execrable Idolatry, you may ſee the old Babylon reuiued in the new; which, varying from the Scripture, from the Church (yea from her ſelfe) commeth more neerely vnto the patterne of Babylon, whoſe name ſhe beareth, and (as you may eaſily ſee) ſhee beareth it not in vaine; but the daughter, daily going forward in the courſes of her Idolatry, wil, at the laſt, excell her Mother; notwithſtanding all her diſtinctions: to which ſhe may adde this; viz. There is a double Idolatry; Ethnicall, and Chriſtian; or rather Antichriſtian: as wee ſhall yet more euidently diſcerne.
               The THIRD inſtance concerneth their exorbitant, and irregular adoration of the Pope. For howſoeuer they delay the heate of the matter with the coole water of a moyſt, and emptie diſtinction (as the oppreſſed Emperour Barbaroſſa ſpake vnder the feet of the inſulting Pope; non tibi, ſed Petro; not to thee, but vnto Peter I ſubmit my ſelfe, euen to this baſe conculcation: to whom the Pope anſwered againe; Et mihi, & Petro; it is vnto Peter, and alſo vnto me: or elſe by ſome other euaſion of ciuill, religious, and diuine worſhip, or the like) yet, if wee conſider, with what opinion of his excellency (which they attribute vnto this Babylonian Idoll) they adore the Pope; what Diuinitie, in regard of his pretenſed office, they aſcribe vnto his inſolent perſon; and laſtly, with what power, and authoritie they inueſt him we may well perceiue, that this is Idolatry, and not of the meaneſt degree.
               
                  Hence it is, that, immediately vpon his election, ſo ſoone as euer he is now Sanctiſsimus, the moſt holy Lord (howſoeuer wicked before) the Cardinalls come to their ſeruice of adoration (for ſo is the very terme, impoſed vpon this ſolemne action) and, with moſt kiſſes of his ſacred feet (for he is greater then Kings, who vouchſafe vs the kiſſes of their hands) euery Cardinall doth performe his homage, in ſigne of ſubiection vnto the new aſpiring Potentate of the earth. And becauſe this action ſhould better expreſſe their Idolatry in this point, his new Holyſhip is aduanced vpon an Altar (the place of the God of their Maſſe; the Idoll of bread) and (as I haue vnderſtood by the relation of others) he is there, or thence adored, as the God of the Church, the God of the World of which preſumptuous Titles I ſhal ſpeak more in a more conuenient place of my diſcourſe. And the truth is, though this adoration may ſeeme too much, yet it is the leſſe to be admired in them, if we conſider, that, in the opinion of his Babylonian vaſſals, he is a pardoner of ſin, and a deliuerer from paine; that, can, by his Pontificial authority, draw ſoules out of Purgatorie; that can depoſe Kings; that can diſpoſe Kingdomes; that can abſolue ſubiects from the ſtrong obligations of Oath, and Nature; that can abſolue Princes from the bond of a iuſt, and neceſſary Oath, made vnto their Subiects (as in the caſe of our King Henry the Third, whence enſued the publike calamitie of this Kingdome) that can diſpenſe againſt the Scriptures; that can define matters of faith, as infallibly as the Scriptures; yea, ſaith Gregory de Valentia (a Ieſuite; for who, but a Ieſuite, were a fit Author for ſo ſtrange a ſpeech?) that cannot erre,

that muſt bee beleeued in his Pontificiall definitions, Whether he vſe diligence, or not, in vnderstanding, and determining the point; for wee beleeue that, if hee will pastorally define any thing, with purpoſe to bind the Church vnto his definition, he ſhall not, hee cannot erre therein. So writeth the Ieſuite in his Analyſis fidei. O ſure anchor of their Religion; the rocke (their petra) vpon which Chriſt buildeth his Church, and they their faith. Doe you maruell, then, at the outragious title, aſcribed vnto him, by a Canoniſt (the ſame being printed, and re-printed, and neuer corrected) that this ſecond Beaſt in Babylon ſhould beare the the ſtile of Dominus noſter, Deus Papa? Our Lord God the Pope? And doe you maruell, that, whom they ſo extoll in dignitie, more then all Kings, they ſhould ſo adore with worſhip, no leſſe then a God? If this be not Idolatry, what is Idolatry, and what doth deſerue that name? The child humbleth himſelfe vnto his Father; the ſubiect vnto his Prince; and this honour is due. If you will call it adoration (though the word be not receiued publiquely into ſuch vſe) I will admit it, becauſe it is a ciuill action, founded vpon the Word of God, and warranted by the examples of his Saints; in regard of a certaine diuine authoritie, which, by Gods holy ordinance, doth ſhine in their perſons. But ſince the Pope aſſumeth this honour (of an higher, and different nature alſo) without the warrant of Gods Word, and againſt the rule of Gods Word, with immoderate exaltation (as Gerſon ſpake of Popes in his time; volunt adorari, vt Dij; they will be adored as Gods; yea by Kings alſo, who are the Gods of this earth; by Gods owne approbation; for ſo

hee ſpeaketh alſo of inferiour Magiſtrates; Pſal. 82.1.) vnto which as he hath no proper right (by any warrant from God) ſo no mortall man (the greateſt Souereigne that is, or euer was; were he the onely Lord of all the World; as the Pope doth gladly beleeue of himſelfe; and there are ſundry Babylonian Paraſites, that applaud his inſolencie in this kind) can haue right by Gods Word, vnto the like; I conclude, therefore, that this adoration of the Pope (the God of Babylon) is Idolatry, and ſuch as is not to bee found any where, but in Rome, where the Pope ſitteth in the Temple of God, lifting vp himſelfe aboue all, that is called God. Saint Paul ſaith not, that, which Is God (to wit in nature; for ſo the Pope pretendeth a ſubiection vnto Chriſt) but that, which is called God (to wit in title, and office; as Kings are moſt properly) for, aboue all ſuch Gods, this man of ſinne doth exalt himſelfe (as you haue heard a little now, but ſhall heare more anon) howbeit alſo it is true, that he exalteth himſelfe aboue the God of Heauen, and earth; while he maketh the ſtate of Religion to depend vpon the oracle of his mouth, corrupteth the Sacraments, mutilateth them, depriueth the people of Gods allowance vnto them in the holy Cup, peruerteth the condition of the Church, maketh himſelfe a Monarch therein, trampleth vpon the Crownes of Kings, diſpenſeth againſt Gods Word, maketh that lawfull, which God made vnlawfull (in ſubiects to riſe againſt their Souereignes) maketh that vnlawfull, which God made lawfull (in the Cleargie to haue their wiues) and ſo, in theſe, and other courſes, ſetteth himſelfe againſt God, and aboue God, as ſome doe vnderſtand that Scripture;

2. Theſſal. 2.4. Both theſe expoſitions are true, and, according to both, the Papall Monarch doth ſo aduance himſelfe, that hee is adored with diuine worſhip, rather then ciuill, and humane.
               The Fourth, and laſt, inſtance concerneth their inuocation of Saints; which hath ſundry ingredients of Idolatry, of which it is compounded; as you may obſerue by foure particular points.
               The First point is, by taking away that right which is incommunicably proper vnto God alone, as the tribute of Mankind, payable onely vnto him, in the two duties of Prayer, and Thankeſgiuing: ſo that this very terme [of Inuocation] without iniurie vnto the diuine Maieſtie, cannot bee impropriated vnto Saints; as the Papiſts doe commonly vſe the ſame; de ſanctorum Inuocatione, beeing the title of Bellarmines diſpute: Li. 1. de Sanct. c. 15. Which word the Scripture (contayning the Mother-language of the children of Gods Church) doth peculiarly attribute vnto our Religious ſeruice of God; Inuoca mae, &c. Call vpon me, in the day of trouble, and I will deliuer thee; Pſ. 50.15. And, quemodo inuocabunt, &c. how ſhall they call vpon him, in whom they haue not beleeued? Rom. 10.14. For this cauſe the Scripture directeth vs euer vnto God in the Old Teſtament; and thus, according to the tenour of the New, all our petitions are framed in the name, and mediation of Ieſus Chriſt, our Lord: neither is there any one ſyllable in all the New Teſtament, teaching (by precept, or by example) any other courſe of Prayer, vnto, or by any other Mediator (of Redemption, or Interceſsion: there being but one of both) then onely by Ieſus Chriſt. As for the Old, though ſome

inconſiderate, and more dull Babylonians, did heretofore produce ſundry paſſages out of it, to prooue their inuocation of Saints, yet the latter, and more circumſpect, haue vtterly forſaken that courſe, as implying a contradiction; becauſe the ſoules of the ancient Fathers, being then in limbo, and ſecluded from the viſion of God (which viſion of God is the ground of their petitions vnto Saints, as therefore hauing a knowledge, in him, of our requeſts vnto them, &c.) they were then incapable of our requeſts. So then, neither in the Old Teſtament (as they confeſſe) nor in the New (as I dare confidently auouch) is there extant one precept, one example, one proofe directly, or indirectly, by any plaine aſſertion, or cleere deduction, that any ſuch prayer is to bee made by vs vnto Saints, or that any ſuch was euer made vnto them, by any Apoſtle, Euangeliſt, Paſtour, Doctour, or any faithfull Chriſtian whatſoeuer: till, at length, either vncertaine tradition was pretended without the written word, or humane perſwaſion (guided by carnall affection, and a peruerſe, but pleaſing, imitation of the Gentiles) gaue an entrance vnto this errour at the beginning; which, ſtanding rather by example of men, then by the Law of God, gained a daily increaſe; and finally, from a leſſer, to a greater degree, is come vnto ſuch an exorbitancie, that the Mother of Chriſt hath ten petitions made vnto her, in ſtead of two, that are made vnto her Sonne; beſides innumerable requeſts, tendered vnto inferiour Saints.
               The Second point is, that Papiſts take, hereby, Gods authoritie from him, and conferre it vpon the Saints; which is to make them Idolls, by aduancing

them in the place, and office of God: and this appeareth in all kinds of things, which wee can deſire of God. In things Spirituall; as, increaſe of grace, faith, defence from the Deuill, &c. which they intreate of Saints, not onely as ſuitors for them, but as collators of theſe benefits. Wherefore they pray thus vnto the bleſſed Virgin; Tu nos ab hoſte protege, Et horâ mortis ſuſcipe: Da nobis virtutem contra hoſtes tuos: Defend vs from the enemy; receiue vs in the houre of death; giue vs ſtrength againſt thine enemies. So that, in, and vpon the point of death, the mouthes of the ſicke (if able to ſpeake) ſound ſtill; Ieſus, Maria; (ioyning them both together; and it is well, that they giue the precedencie vnto the Sonne, ſince they often call vpon her, with theſe blaſphemous words; Monſtra te eſſe Matrem; Iure Matris impera: Shew thy ſelfe a Mother; command him, by the right of a Mother, &c.) or others, ſtanding by, ſound it in their eares with their loudeſt voyce, and ſtrongeſt ſides; which I haue ſometimes heard, and doe now remember, with vnſpeakeable griefe.
               In things Eternall; for they pray vnto Saints, that they would open heauen vnto them, and receiue them into their ioyes; and particularly vnto the bleſſed Virgin; to whom all the petitioners doe eſpecially reſort (euen with the plaine neglect of Chriſt) by reaſon of fabulous ſtories, and fond viſions.
               In things Corporall; for as particular Saints (in the ſimple dotage of theſe blind Babylonians) haue a particular care of certaine creatures, and a gift of cure for their maladies (ſo S. Anthony is for Hogs; S. Roch for Dogges; S. Low for Horſes; whereof I haue ſeene

a faire company, tyed about his Chappell, in the time of Maſſe, celebrated therein, that came for helpe vnto that Hoſpitall) ſo they haue a facultie, or power, to heale particular diſeaſes in men: for here, againe, S. Anthony is a ſpeciall Saint for the fire, which therefore beareth his name; but (not to be tedious alſo, in ſo ridiculous a point) S. Mumlyn is the onely Saint for teeth, neere the Citie of S. Omer: thither the tender Infants (vexed with breeding their young teeth) are carried in their mothers armes, and commended, by them, vnto the pittie of that obſcure Saint, from whom (vpon my certaine knowledge) one Infant neuer obtained remedie, but dyed, without any compaſſion, or reliefe, from any Saint; eyther hee, or ſhee.
               The Third point is, that, hereby, the Babylonians take Gods priuiledge from him, and beſtow it vpon others, by granting vnto Saints the knowledge of our cogitations, & hearts, which are the Sanctum Sanctorum, into which God alone, and no man (liuing in earth, or in heauen) can enter. But, ſay they, the Saints haue a fruition of God, and ſo, in him, a viſion of our hearts, and of other things; of which ſilly pretence, and wittie deluſion, I will ſpeake more in the fourth point; which doth preſently enſue. Meane while; if this fruition of God bee the cauſe, that they doe ſo confidently inuocate the Saints in heauen; then may the Father make a petition vnto his Child-Saint, who, deceaſing after baptiſme (wherein originall ſinne is forgiuen) before the commiſſion of an actuall ſinne, goeth certainely to heauen, and hath there the fruition of God; and, by viſion in him, may be a petitioner

for his Father, who is a petitioner vnto him. What is the impediment, or defect? what impeachment is there of this practiſe? vnleſſe they ſay; either that the Father is not certaine of the intention of him (or her) that baptized his child; and ſo the want of due intention maketh a nullitie in the Sacrament, and conſequently leaueth his child in the ſtate of damnation [ô pitifull doctrine; yet ſuch is theirs] or elſe, that ſo young a Saint deſerued not the grace to bee a Mediatour, to receiue petitions from vs in earth, nor to preſent them, with effect, vnto God in heauen. I haue ſpoken for the Babylonians, what I can, in this caſe; if they can ſay more for themſelues, they ſhall haue audience, when they pleaſe.
               The Fourth point is, that, hereby, they aſcribe ſuch an omniſciencie, or knowledge of all things (and that in an inſtant) vnto the Saints, whereof no creature (though beatified) is, or may be capable, by the euidence of Scripture, or conſequence of reaſon. Let vs then put the caſe, as a thing poſſible (which is very probable alſo) that, in one indiuiſible point of time, a million (yea many millions) of ſuitors make their petitions vnto the bleſſed Virgin, by prayers conceiued in the heart, or vttered with the mouth (for that is all one, in effect, ſince the Saints know our petitions in God) which need an immediate ſucceſſe; the ſame prayers alſo, being often diuers (and ſometimes contrary) in regard of the matters, which they concerne. Now conſider the abſurditie of the Babylonians in this behalfe; that the bleſſed Virgin inſtantly heareth (or rather ſeeth) all their prayer; inſtantly preſenteth them vnto God; inſtantly ſendeth ſuch a

varietie of helpes vnto her diſtreſſed ſuitors. This is not to beatifie a ſoule, but to deifie a creature; to make it a God, at the ſecond hand; to giue that knowledge of all things vnto a Saint, which, being in God, cannot, without communication of the God-head, bee deriued vnto any Creature. Therefore onely the Sonne of God, and the Holy Ghoſt, haue a knowledge of all things with the Father, becauſe the perſon of the Sonne is from the Father; and the perſon of the Holy Ghoſt is from them both; with the communication of Deitie to the Sonne in his generation, and to the Holy Ghoſt in his proceſſion. But ſince euery bleſſed ſoule remaineth in the condition of a creature, in ſubſtance (though glorious) in knowledge (though increaſed) therefore it hath a finite knowledge; for as the ſtate of beatitude requireth a great addition of knowledge, ſo the ſtate of a creature requireth a determination of knowledge; whereas the Babylonians extend it infinitely, by the viſion of God, in whom theſe ſoules ſee all things, as they ſuppoſe
               This generall errour is ancient, and the ſpeciall author of it is venerable; S. Gregory the Great: but not ſo great, that, without any Scripture to iuſtifie this point, we ſhould ſubſcribe vnto his aſſertion. Yea, but it is his faire concluſion, inferred out of a true poſition. How? Vident videntem omnia: the Saints ſee him, that ſeeth all things. What then? Ergo vident omnia: therefore they ſee all things. It ſeemeth to bee an ingenious, but it is no ſubſtantiall inference. Let vs examine the poſition, and then the concluſion, deduced out of the ſame.
               
                  As concerning the poſition; it is true: The ſoules in heauen ſee God, not ſenſibly, with any corporeall eyes, nor imaginarily, in any fancie; but intellectually, by immediate intuition (without any vayle, or other meanes) into the diuine Eſſence. But how farre forth? Not by totall comprehenſion of the Deitie, which they behold (for ſo the Sonne ſeeth the Father; and the Holy Ghoſt ſeeth them both) but by ſuch a participation of God, as a creature can receiue, and is neceſſary vnto the bleſſedneſſe therof; which conſiſteth in the fruition, and in the viſion of God.
               The concluſion, therefore, of Gregory (out of the ſaid poſition) is lame, and cannot ſtand by the ſtrength thereof; ſince hee onely ſeeth all things in God, who ſeeth God abſolutely, and fully, by comprehenſion of the Deitie; as Chriſt ſeeth his Father: but ſo, and in ſuch a plenitude of viſion, no creature can ſee the Creator. As for the ſoule of Chriſt, that is of an higher knowledge, becauſe the humane nature hath the viſion of God, by vnion with God, in the perſon of the Sonne.
               So then, the poore Babylonians are ſtill in the caſe of Idolatry; for they, by this falſly conceiued omniſciencie in the Saints, tranſlate them, or (to ſpeake in their owne language) tranſubſtantiate them into God. Neither doth their deuice of Speculum (that God is the looking glaſſe of the Saints, in whom they ſee things, as you heard before) relieue them from the crime of Idolatrie: for this conceit iſſueth from the former, and is all one with it in effect; and both are poore euaſions. For though God be a looking glaſſe vnto the Saints, yet he is voluntarium, a voluntary

one, to repreſent, what he will (in the freeneſſe of his pleaſure) not neceſſarium, a neceſſary one, to repreſent vnto the Saints all that, which is in the compaſſe of his excellencie, and knowledge: for then, why ſhould they not as well foreſee (or rather ſee) all future things, as well as all preſent things, in him? Finally; if they ſee all our prayers, and ſo all other things in him, by the very nature of their beatificall viſion (as the Babylonians doe fondly collect) why then doe ſome of the ancients teach, that the ſoules, in heauen, are informed by Angells (executing a miniſteriall office here in the earth) of ſundry occurrences, that paſſe here in the militant Church? Which opinion, ſtanding with good congruitie of reaſon (according to the paſſages of Scripture, and principles in diuinitie) doth therefore neceſſarily conclude, againſt the ſuppoſed omniſciencie of the ſoules (knowing all things in God by the viſion of his diuine Eſſence) that they haue ſuch a latitude of knowledge, as the Babylonians doe conceiue; but (as you ſee) without any ſufficient teſtimony of Scripture, or pregnant inference, well deduced out of certaine, and approoued grounds.
               Now, as you haue heard their Idolatry, in ſending vp emptie, and vnfruitfull prayers vnto the Saints (for they muſt conuert them into the nature, and dignitie of God, to make them vnderſtand the thoughts of our hearts, and the multitude of occurrences in this world) ſo behold their Idolatry alſo in murmuring out their Pater noſter vnto Saints (yea, before the Images of Saints) to whom they direct that excellent, and incomparable prayer; which though Chriſt

taught vs to poure out vnto his Father, yet many among them preſent vnto the Saints. Which practiſe of ſimple people, in the Church of Rome, I cannot ſay how farre the learned do maintaine (I haue not read, nor did I euer aske their opinion in this behalfe) but I find, that, vpon this deepe point, an egregious diſputation was held in Scotland (& it is related immediately after the martyrdome of Adam Wallace, in the Acts, and Monuments of the Church, publiſhed by Maſter Foxe) where ſome profound Doctors of Babylon did ſubſtantially reſolue, that primariò, formaliter, principaliter, vltimatè, & capiendo ſtrictè, this prayer may be ſaid onely vnto God; but ſecundariò, materialiter, minùs principaliter, non vltimatè, & capiendo largè, it may be ſaid vnto Saints. What is ſo abſurd, and impious, which, by diſtinctions, may not be defended in the Church of Rome? And why may not that prayer be directed by them vnto the Saints, ſince, Dominus being changed into Domina (our Lord into our Lady) the Pſalmes of Dauid, whereby hee comforted himſelfe in the Lord his God, are turned by the Papiſts, into an inuocation of our Ladie? And why may not both bee done by them, who find ſuch an exact conformitie, betwixt our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, and their S. Francis, that hee may alſo bee truely ſtiled; Ieſus Nazarenus, Rex Iudaeorum; Ieſus of Nazareth, King of the Iewes?
               But ſince there is no end, in the proſecution of their blaſphemous abſurdities in this kind, I will conclude this laſt point of Romiſh Idolatry (in their inuocation of Saints) and, finally, obſerue, that it is an idolatrie alſo in them, thus to transferre the peculiar, ſufficient,

and glorious Office of Chriſt his Mediatourſhip vnto any Saint; he, or ſhe; though his owne Mother, (towards whom though he bare a filiall reſpect, according to humane nature, yet you ſhall neuer finde in his acts, or words, any one paſſage, or inclination, which might ſeeme to intitle her vnto ſuch exorbitant honour, as the Babylonians aſſigne vnto her; by a boundleſſe, and groundleſſe ſuperſtition) and ſpecially, ſince, as neceſſitie did not compell them, ſo no good reaſon could perſwade them, vnto this ſeruice. Why? becauſe all, and more is to be found in Chriſt, then in any, or in all the Saints, in this behalfe. For what doe wee, or can wee, deſire in any interceſſor? Power with him, of whom hee doth intreate any thing: Affection to them, for whom hee doth intreate: and a ſufficient Capacitie of hearing, and receiuing their requeſts.
               Firſt, then for Power with God: haue all the Saints ſo much, as he, with the Father? who teſtifieth of him; This is my beloued Sonne, in whom I am well pleaſed. Matth. 3.17.
               Secondly; for Affection vnto vs; is any Saint more kind, more louing, more facill, and gracious? No: none is like vnto him. Why? Firſt; becauſe he tooke our whole nature (not the perſon of one man) and eſpouſed it to his owne perſon: it being truly indued with all naturall affections, and ſanctified with grace, without any meaſure of the Spirit. Therefore, in this regard, he is as neere vnto mee as any man; nay neerer then all men. And ſecondly; becauſe, in this nature, hee ſuffered for me, with paſſions of bodie, and ſoule; hee died for me; he ſatisfied

Gods wrath for me; and ſo bought mee for his owne: therefore, in this regard, I am more deare vnto him, then vnto his bleſſed Mother, or vnto all the Saints, that reigne with him in glorie. Hence it is, that He ſendeth vs not vnto them, but calleth vs vnto himſelfe; Come vnto me, &c. Matth. 11.28.
               Thirdly; as for his Capacitie of hearing vs; who can denie it to be infinite in him, who, being, God is infinite in euery thing? And as for his humane nature, who can ſufficiently iudge of the capacitie of it alſo, in this behalf, which, by the grace of perſonal vnion with God (and ſo by the glorie of extraordinarie viſion in him) hath ſuch a Sea of knowledge, as we are not able to comprehend in the litle ſhels of our vnderſtanding?
               Therefore, as Saint Peter ſaid; to whom ſhall wee goe, &c. ſo I ſay; to whom ſhall we rather goe, then to him, in whom all theſe things ſo happily concurre? Why ſhall I giue his honour away vnto another, and thereby take away my comfort from my ſelfe? So ſhal I be an iniurious Idolater againſt his excellencie, and my owne ſaluation; as they are generally in the Babylonian Church; where the moſt ſweet inuitations, and comfortable aſſurances of Chriſt vnto vs, are applied vnto his Mother: as; Come you all vnto mee: and; ſuffer little children to come vnto me; with other of like nature: which diuine ſentences I haue ſeene (for my euidence is from mine owne vnhappie eies) appendant, in papers, vpon Tapiſtrie, or vpon the walls of their Chappels, and aſcribed vnto her (vpon a Feſtiuall day, ſolemnely dedicated vnto her ſeruice) with this Motto; Intrate per me, enter in by mee [words peculiar, and meerely proper vnto Chriſt himſelfe]

fairely written, in capitall Letters, and placed ouer the doore; to inſtruct all men thereby, that came into the Chappell, that they muſt enter into the Church, by the inuocation of her name, and into Heauen, by the mediation of her Praier. Let them now diſtinguiſh, againe, with ſtrictè, and largè, primariò, and ſecundariò, &c. yet their conſciences cannot eſcape the crime of Idolatry in this courſe, which they eſteeme to be verie deuout, but we know it to be verie prophane.
               And thus much concerning the firſt generall point of compariſon [which is in the matter of Idolatrie] betwixt the old, and the new Babylon. I proceed, therefore, vnto the ſecond.
            
            
               The SECOND Compariſon betwixt Literall Babylon, and Papall Rome.
               
               THe ſecond point, wherein this compariſon doth ſtand, is PRIDE; a ſinne of ſpeciall note in the firſt Babylon; the Ladie of Kingdomes [Eſay 47.5.] but what is her end? Deſolation, and ruine. How, and for what cauſe? I will make the arrogancie of the proud to ceaſe, and I will cast downe the pride of Tyrants; faith the Lord; Eſay 13.11.
               But heere the ſecond Babylon exceedeth the firſt; the daughter, comming after the mother in the order of time, goeth before her in the degree of pride. Wee haue heard of the pride of Moab; he is exceeding proud; ſaith the Prophet Ieremie; 48.29. So I may ſay of this Babylonian Beast; his pride, his arrogancie, his faſtuous carriage of himſelfe toward the whole ciuill

State, and toward the whole Church, is ſuch, as may argue him to be the ſucceſſor of Tarquinius Superbus (in whom the Regall authoritie of ancient Rome did expire) rather then of Saint Peter, whoſe ſucceſſion, and Apostolicall power he doth pretend; but without conformitie to his Apostolicall doctrine in theſe things; who teacheth all men to bee ſubiect vnto the King, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , as to him that excelleth, or that is the chiefe, or (as the very word doth beare) that ouer-haueth; hauing, indeed, all others vnder him; 1. Pet. 2.13. Did not Saint Peter include himſelfe in this precept? Then he was not ſyncere. Or not his ſucceſſors? Then he was defectiue in this point. But the truth is; he was truly an humble perſon (though of a feruent ſpirit) and preſcribeth that doctrine, which hee followed, and his ſucceſſors embraced; acknowledging their due reſpect, and ſeruice vnto the Emperours; till the ſubiect became the Souereigne of his Prince, and a ſpirituall Paſtour was changed into a temporall Monarch.
               Likewiſe, for the Church of God, the ſame Saint Peter doth thus inſtruct all Paſtours; To feed the flocke of God, &c. [which is an Office now too baſe for ſo great a Monarch] and then, not to comport themſelues, as if they were Lords ouer the heritage of God; as it is 1. Pet. 5.2, 3. For what is more contrarie to an Apoſtolicall ſpirit, then pride, exaltation, aduancement of themſelues, with the contempt of others? For which cauſe, the Biſhops of Britaine (vpon the aduiſe of an holy perſon in thoſe times) reiected Augustine the Monke (whom Gregory the Great ſent into England) and refuſed to treate with him, when they diſcouered

the pride, and inſolencie, which appeared in his demeanure; as venerable Beda himſelfe (though very fauourable to the proceedings of Auguſtine) doth recount in the Hiſtorie of our Engliſh Church.
               Now let vs obſerue the Apoſtolicall ſtomacke (for what is not Apostolicall in that ſeat? a glorious name to inſnare poore ſeduced ſoules) of the holy Father in Babylon; and whether ſuch courſes, examples, rules, and ordinances of monſtrous Pride, were euer knowne, or doe remaine vpon the Records of Antiquitie, euen from the beginning of the World, vnto this preſent day, in any other Monarchie, Kingdome, or State, of whatſoeuer qualitie, or degree? This Luciferian pride (the fitteſt Epithete for the Papall; you muſt goe into Hell, and leaue the Earth, if you will finde the like) doth appeare in fiue particular inſtances, as being ſenſible demonſtrations of the ſame.
               FIRST; the pride of the holy Father appeareth in the particular facts of certaine Popes, vpon the preſumed Souereigntie of their Apoſtolicall ſeate. He was a Pope, that crowned, and decrowned Henrie the Sixth (the Germane Emperour) with his foot; ſhewing thereby, that, as the Imperiall Crowne was vnder the Papall, and ſubiect vnto his Dominion (euen vnder his foot) ſo it is in the Popes great power, vpon his holy pleaſure, to giue Kingdomes, and to take away Kingdomes; to erect Kings, and to ſuppreſſe them againe; as if they were the Tennis balls, wherewith his Holineſſe doth play. He was a Pope, who, in diſdaine of the Imperiall dignitie, made Henrie the Fourth attend, barelegged, and barefoot, with his Empreſſe and their ſonne, by way of penance, in the

Winter ſeaſon, at his Apoſtolicall gates. Hee was a Pope, that, treading vpon the necke of Fredericke Barbaroſſa, the Emperour, with his Apoſtolicall foot, inſulted gloriouſly vpon the poore deiected Prince, and profanely abuſed the ſacred Scripture to his Apoſtolicall purpoſe; Thou ſhalt walke vpon the Lyon, and Aſpe: the young Lyon, and the Dragon ſhalt thou tread vnder thy feet; Pſal. 91.13. It is no maruell then, that our King Henry the Second did humble himſelfe ſo farre, as to kiſſe the knee of his Legate, whoſe foote to haue kiſſed, is a matter of ſpeciall grace; according to the Conſtitutions of the Papall Church; as you ſhall immediately perceiue: for now wee inſiſt onely vpon the matters of fact, whereof I haue made a little remonſtrance in a few examples; referring you vnto the Hiſtories, which yeeld copious teſtimonies in this kind.
               SECONDLY, then, this pride appeareth in their owne Ceremoniall Ordinances, formally preſcribing the courſes of humilitie vnto Chriſtian Princes, in their attendance of the Apoſtolicall Father. There the Emperour holdeth his bridle, when the Pope rideth in Apoſtolicall pompe; there Kings, and Princes (being marſhalled according to the new Herauldry of Babylon) march before him in their rankes. Sometimes the Pope beeing aduanced vpon mens ſhoulders, in a goodly Chaire of Apoſtolicall ſtate, the Emperour, and Kings precede, in their due order, as ſo many Vſhers of his Holineſſe, who throweth abroad his Apoſtolicall benedictions vpon the people, with his ſacred fingers. This pride may yet ſeeme to be humilitie in compariſon of his glorious exaltation

in the Church of Saint Peter (for vnder his name paſſeth all this exorbitancie) where Monarchs, humbling themſelues vpon the ground, meekly kiſſe his Apoſtolicall feet, and then are afterwards admitted vnto ſo great a fauour, as to kiſſe his cheeke. All which was performed in the perſon of Charles the Eighth, the French King, vnto Alexander the Sixth, as Guicciar dine relateth in his firſt Booke; with humble ſeruice, in ſo great a Prince, deſerueth the note of baſe deiection vnto the Triple-crowned Beaſt. But thus the purpled Whore can either inchant with her cup, or ſubdue with her Sword, the greateſt, and moſt puiſſant Princes of the World. Where is the exemplum dedi, from Chriſt Ieſus in this caſe? The Vicar, and the Maſter ſtand in Diametricall oppoſition almoſt in euery point, as well as in this; the Maſter kiſſed the feet of his poore Diſciples; but heere the Vicar requireth the greateſt Monarchs vnto the kiſſes of his feet; he proudly challengeth this ſubmiſſion from them: and they baſely performe it vnto him; that ſo hee might appeare to bee, what hee is; euen Antichriſt, Lifting vp himſelfe aboue all, that is called God.
               
               THIRDLY, this pride appeareth by his vſurpation ouer the Crownes of Princes; and that in different manner. Sometimes, by a particular intereſt; as hee pretended in Scotland, to diuert thence the militarie forces of King Edward the firſt. Sometimes by donation, or ſurrender; as he pretended in England, by the ſubmiſſion of King Iohn, and therefore called his Sonne, Henrie the Third, by the ignoble ſtile of his Vaſſall: and, ſo, by artificiall inſinuations, and colourable

Titles, he intrudeth vpon ſeuerall Dominions; to make ſome ſpeciall challenge thereunto.
               If no ſuch oblique, and ſiniſter courſe may ſerue his turne, yet he hath two other wayes, to come vnto his deſigned ends: and that is; either INDIRECTLY, (and as hee is Paſtour of the Church) to take Kingdomes from their owners, for their offences, and to collate them vpon other Princes (as, for example, the Pope ſtirred vp Charles, the Earle of Angeow againſt Manfredus, the King of Sicilia, the true Lord, and poſſeſſour thereof by the gift of his Father, Fredericus the Second; and alſo the Pope ſtirred vp the ſaid Charle, againſt Cunradinus, the Sonne of Conradus, and Grand-child of the ſaid Fredericus, to depriue him of his life, and to diſſeize him of his lawfull inheritance in the Kingdome of Naples: both which Kingdomes he bountifully beſtowed vpon the ſaid Charles: in like manner the Pope dealt with Iohn d' Albret, King of Nauarre, and with our late renowned Queene Elizabeth, of bleſſed memory, and glorious name; though not with like euent) or elſe DIRECTLY, and as he is Lord of the World (from whom all Princes haue their dependent power) to beſtow them at his pleaſure, as iuſt occaſion ſhall mooue, and good diſcretion ſhall direct his Holyſhip in this caſe; which laſt opinion hath a daily growth in Babylon, amongſt the Paraſites of the Court. For you muſt diſtinguiſh, with Gerſon, betwixt Aula, and Eccleſia; the Court, and the Church of Rome.
               
               This Pride, in the head of the Church of Rome, deſcendeth vnto the members. For as the Cardinalls

(who are the great regotiatours in the publike affaires of the world) are the coſins of mightie Kings (who ſalute them by that affable, and gracious name; as being glad, and ambitious of the affection of theſe purpled Fathers in the Apoſtolicall Court) ſo the whole bodie of the ſhaued Clergy pretendeth an exemption from the lawfull iuriſdiction of their naturall Lords; as being ſubiects, ſecundum quid, after a certaine manner, or meaſure; and a body rather collected, and vnited vnder the Pope, then vnder their owne Souereignes; in whoſe Lands they receiued their firſt breath, and vnder whoſe protection, they enioy their liuelyhood, with the preſeruation of their liues.
               FOVRTHLY, this pride appeareth in his domination ouer the whole Church: as firſt; that all ſpirituall power (of order, and iuriſdiction) is deriued from his Apoſtolicall Seate; that hee can depriue, ſuſpend, excommunicate ſuch, as withſtand his pleaſure; that appellations may be made, and, in ſome caſes, muſt be made vnto him, from the ſentences, and cenſures of Biſhops, in all places of the world; that he may demand, and receiue a ſupply of monyes, and neceſſaries, for the vſe, and benefit of his Apoſtolicall greatneſſe; that hee is anſwerable to no power in the Church, or State; that hee may, by reſeruations, and prouiſions, beſtow Eccleſiaſticall benefices vpon whom hee will, in any part of the Chriſtian world; that he is greater then all the Church, and is, in truth, and effect, the very Church: which being eſſentially, in the whole ſocietie of Chriſtians, is repreſentatiuely in a lawfull Councell, and virtually in the Pope; ſo that, finally, the Church, their Mother, is the Pope,

their Father; who is the Lord, the Head, the Guide, the Paſtour, the Vniuerſall Biſhop of the Church. Which inſolencies, and oppreſſions, in the Holy Father, made Gerſon bitterly to complaine; That the Head of the Church was growen too heauy for the whole bodie thereof; and our learned Countrey-man, Biſhop Grosthead, to pronounce, That the Church would neuer be freed from the yoake of her Aegyptian bondage, but by the dint, and edge of a bloudie ſword.
               
               FIFTHLY, and laſtly, his pride appeareth in his great, and glorious titles; taken vp partly by himſelfe, and partly aſcribed vnto him by others, with gratefull appobation of the Apoſtolicall Seate. As for example; hee is a Vice-God (as in that inſcription; Paulo Quinto Vice-deo: where the numerall letters, V. L. V. I. V. C. D. make vp the fatall number of 666. containing the myſterie of Antichriſt his name, Apocal. 13.18.) but this is too little; therefore hee is plainly a God; nay that is too little alſo; he is our Lord God; as I ſhewed you once before; and yet ſometimes,
               
                  Nec Deus es, nec homo, ſed neuter es inter vtrumque; Thou, ô Souereigne of the World, art neither God, nor man (therefore Antichriſt; for Chriſt is both) but art, betwixt both, neither the one, nor the other. Hee is Dominus dominorum, quoad poteſtatem; the Lord of Lords, in regard of his power; though Seruus ſeruorum quoad humilitatem (ſaith bald Baldus) the Seruant of Seruants (and be it ſo; but in the ſenſe of Noah, in his malediction of Canaan; Geneſ. 9.25.) in regard of his meekeneſſe. O meeke, and humble Saint; whoſe ordinarie title hath beene his Holineſſe, his Bleſſedneſſe; more compatible with his Apoſtolicall

office, then his Maieſtie; which is, indeed, the pleaſing, and acceptable ſtile, vnto which their proud, and tyrannicall vſurpations doe aſpire. And therefore this was well attibuted vnto Paulus the fifth, by Ludouicus ab Alcaſar, the Ieſuite, in his dedicatorie Epiſtle, prefixed before his miſerable expoſition of this myſticall booke. Yet thou waſt more wiſe, and circumſpect, ô noble, and victorious Iulius Caeſar, that diddeſt refuſe the title of a King: and thou waſt more modeſt, ô Princely Auguſtus, that diddeſt reiect the title of a Lord. But behold, here is a greater then both; which accepteth all, alloweth all; as, indeed, challenging a great deale more. Let him then take one title more, to furniſh vp his glorious ſtile; hee is Lucifer in his pride, ambition, and inſultation ouer all States, Ciuill, & Eccleſiaſticall, as the pretended Lord of both.
            
            
               The THIRD Compariſon betwixt Literall Babylon, and Papall Rome.
               
               THe third point, wherein this compariſon doth ſtand, is INIVRIOVS VIOLENCE againſt the Crowne Imperiall, and Eſtates of Souereigne Princes; in which tempeſtuous courſes the Spirituall Babylon of Rome doth exceed the Literall in Chaldea; and the rather, becauſe the later had a ſpeciall commiſſion in this behalfe, which the former doth vainely pretend, by lame deductions, and inferences, but cannot prooue directly by the teſtimonie of any Scripture.
               The commiſſion of Nebuchadnezzer was vnder the

warrant of God himſelfe, as being the executioner of his ſeuere Iuſtice; and therefore God affoordeth him the title of his Seruant, not onely for his expedition againſt Tyrus [Ezek. 29.18.] but againſt his owne people; Ierem. 25.9. Now our Babylonian Monarch, not by the authoritie of Gods Word, not by any cleere euidence of reaſon, founded vpon the ſame, not by any example of his predeceſſors (or of any other Biſhop) in the more pure, and innocent ſtate of the Church, but, out of his owne appetite, and deſire of temporall power (which Chriſt gaue him not, which the ancient Popes challenged not, which they durſt not pretend, nor could they execute, till the decadencie, and expiration of the Romane Monarchy, in theſe occidentall parts) hath often thruſt the ſickle of his forged authoritie, into the harueſt of other mens Kingdomes.
               Witneſſe the diſtreſſed King of Nauarre, Iohn d' Albret (mentioned before) ſententially depoſed by the Pope, and a part of his Kingdome, thereupon, inuaded by his neighbour, the King of Spaine.
               
               Witneſſe my deare Countrey of England, in the time of that vnfortunate Prince, King Iohn; whoſe Kingdome was, by Papall authoritie, expoſed vnto the furie of the French; the King himſelfe, being compelled (like a ſilly man) to ſurrender his Crowne, vpon his knees, into the hands of an Apoſtolicall inſolent Legate; and ſo, remaining, for the ſpace of fiue daies, without a Crowne (committed now vnto the benignitie of the Church) hee receiued it againe, vpon ſuch baſe, and ignoble termes, as it pleaſed my Lord, the Legate, to impoſe vpon him: one whereof

was (if the Babylonians ſay true) that he ſhould hold it, by fealtie, from the Church of Rome, and, for acknowledgement thereof, pay an annuall tribute vnto the Pope: ſo wiſe, and skilfull are theſe men to fiſh in troubled waters; being now, not fiſhers of men, but fiſhers of Kingdomes.
               Witneſſe England againe in the time of King Henry the eight; who, by a Papall proceſſe of Paul the third, was depriued of his Kingdome, and his ſubiects commanded, by force, and armes, to eiect him out of the confines therof: the ſucceſſe whereof was, for a time, troubleſome to the King, but, in the end, inglorious to the Pope: the tenour of whoſe roaring Bull, and Capitoline thunderbolt, deſerueth your ſpeciall obſeruation, for that hee exciteth the ſubiects of England, againſt their King, by a moſt impudent, and ignorant application of the Scripture; Wee, being placed (ſaith hee) in the Seate of Iuſtice, according to the prediction of the Prophet [Ierem. 1.10.] ſaying; Behold, I haue ſet thee ouer the Nations, and ouer the Kingdomes to plucke vp, and to roote out, and to deſtroy, and throw downe, &c. This is a Text, which ſounded to his purpoſe; and therefore Carerius (de poteſt. Rom. Pont. l. 1. c. 3.) maketh this peruerſe gloſſe vpon that text; The Prophet Ieremy ſpeaketh this, in the perſon of Chriſt, vnto the Biſhop of Rome; that if Kings bee wicked, hee may puniſh, and correct them. A terrible correction vnto a King, to be depoſed from his Imperiall Crowne, by the Babylonian Beaſt, and to be expoſed vnto the crueltie of his owne ſubiects. This is their art, and this is their pietie, in the expoſition of the ſacred Scriptures, to bring them vnto their owne fancies.

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
But thou, Carerius, and thou, ô Paul; you lay violent hands vpon Chriſtian Princes, and vpon Gods owne Word. You ſay, that this was ſpoken by the Prophet, in the perſon of Chriſt [that ſo you might bring his title, in this point, vnto the Pope, as being his Vicar, and ſo endued with this power of depoſition, vnder Chriſt] but it is not ſo: for God ſpeaketh it preciſely vnto his Prophet. You ſay, that therefore the Pope is placed ouer all Kingdomes, to excommunicate Princes, to giue away their Kingdomes, &c. It is not ſo: but God giueth a commiſſion to his Prophet, to denounce his iudgements againſt ſundry Nations (as hee doth afterward) and to foretell their ruines; according to his propheticall, and paſtorall office, that God did impoſe vpon him to this effect.
               But I leaue theſe Babylonians, in their abſurd, and preſumptuous, interpretation of the Scriptures, and proceed vnto their tyrannicall actions. Witneſſe then, here againe, my deare, and natiue Countrie, vnder the moſt happy, proſperous, and gracious adminiſtration of our late Souereigne Queene ELIZABETH; twice depoſed by theſe furious Beasts; firſt, by Pius the fifth, who beſtowed her Kingdome, moſt liberally, vpon the King of Spaine (to get it by Armes, if he could) and this Pontificall donation ſtandeth in Azorius, the Ieſuite, for one principall inſtance, and preſident of the Papall authoritie in this behalfe. By vertue (or rather vice) of his Bull, the ſubiects were abſolued from their obedience; and thereupon ſome, taking vp Armes in the Northerne parts, came vnto alamentable, but a deſerued end; whoſe bloud, being ſhed by the Iuſtice of England, will be iuſtly required

of Babylon, the cruell Mother of her Children; and ſo ſhall the bloud of many Prieſts, and other Romiſh Catholikes, who dyed iuſtly for their tranſgreſſion of the Statute, made againſt Romiſh Prieſts (comming into England) & all perſons entertaining them; as culpable of higheſt treaſon. Why? for now the Popes Emiſſaries, the Prieſts, came with a reſolution to maintaine his proceedings: and they, whom the Prieſts reconciled, were now ſpirituall members of that Church, which ſought the perdition, and ruine of their Prince. Was it not now neceſſarie (and it was not done till now; vpon the thirteenth yeere of her reigne) to prouide the antidote of ſuch ſeuere Lawes, againſt the poiſon of ſuch vnnaturall Subiects? Secondly; ſhe was depoſed againe by Sixtus the fifth, vpon the time of the great inuaſion, to be executed by that inuincible Armado from Spaine, in the yeere 1588. Neere vpon which time (by the negotiation of Parſons, the Ieſuite) Allen was promoted vnto the dignitie of a Cardinall, for the better accommodation of all matters, in that execrable deſigne: who, therefore, wrote an Admonition to the Nobilitie of England; as full of fraud, falſhood, and impoſſibilitie, in that, which he vndertooke to aſſure, as of malice, treaſon, and villany againſt the perſon of his Souereigne Ladie; who, finally, had the glorie in their ſhame, to the contempt of Babylon, and admiration of the world.
               Witneſſe France, in the tyrannicall, and proud fury of Boniface the eight (who came into his Apoſtolicall Seate, like a Fox, reigned in it like a Lyon, and dyed like a Dog) againſt Philip, ſirnamed the Fayre, whom

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
that Babylonian Monarch (vendicating vnto himſelfe all power, Spirituall in the Church, and Temporall in the world) depoſed ſententially from his royall Dignitie, and State; diſpoſing the ſame, by his Apoſtolike liberalitie, vnto Albertus, King of the Romanes: but that Heroicall, and Magnanimous Prince preſerued, and maintained both, to the great ignominy, and contempt of the vſurping Beaſt.
               
               Witneſſe Germany, where Henry the fourth, by the Papall inſolencie of Gregory the ſeuenth (a true, and euident Antichriſt) was abandoned by his ſubiects, violently perſecuted by Henry the fifth, his naturall, vnnaturall ſonne; who, ſucceeding in that nominall Empire (the Pope being the reall Emperour) was afterwards, by the diuine vltion of God (though by the Apoſtolicall operation of the Pope) forſaken by his owne people; the Empire (ſuch as it was) being collated vpon another. What ſhould I ſay of Philippus, the Emperour (brother of the ſaid Henry) and Otho, Duke of Saxony, erected, by Pontificiall meanes, againſt the ſaid Philip? Who ſuffered both vnder the Babylonian Beaſt. What ſhall I ſay of Frederick the ſecond (ſonne of the ſaid Philip) perſecuted, circumuented, oppreſſed by the ſpirituall Fathers of Babylon? His ſonne alſo, Conradus, ſuffered like outrages by the Father of the Romane thunderbolts, exciting the Lantgraue of Thuring againſt him, and perſecuting the royall family of Barbaroſſa, till it came, finally, vnto that ruine, which the Babylonian Beaſt did long deſire, in his heart, and, at the laſt, did effectuate by his meanes. And now, by the way, wee may here obſerue the miſerable condition of Princes, who

muſt weare the Babylonian yoake, to their ſhame, or caſt it off, to their danger; ſtanding vpon the dreadfull tearmes of depoſition, murther, and other diſaſtrous calamities, when, one Prince being depoſed by Papall furie, another Prince (rather out of deſire of his Kingdome, then out of obedience to the Pope) is readie to inuade his Dominions; ſo that one of them is made the executioner of another, and all of them inſtruments of the Papall Tyranny; till, by this meanes, the Papal iuriſdiction, ouer them all, groweth ſtrong by preſcription [Nos ſanctorum, &c. being a better plea, for the Popes, in latter Ages, then it was in the time of Hildebrand, the Pope, who pretended the example of his predeceſſors, for the depoſition of Princes] and ſo, in proceſſe of time, all Princes (as the Popes doe cunningly affect) ſhall hold their Kingdomes, as donatiues of the Babylonian Seate.
               I am wearied (and ſo perhaps are you) in the proſecution of this vnhappie argument; wherefore I will gather vp my ſayles, and conclude this tedious Voyage with two remarkeable obſeruations.
               The firſt concerneth the Papall intruſion vpon the Citie of Rome it ſelfe, the centre of that Empire, whoſe circumference was ſo largely extended in the World; the proper, and peculiar ſeate of the Firſt Beaſt (Apocal. 13.1.) till the Second Beast (Apocal. 13.11.) by his artificiall proiects, and the popular applauſe of the Citizens, diueſted, and diſſeized the true Lord of his ancient right. For Leo, the lawfull Emperour of Rome, reſiding in Conſtantinople (as many of his Predeceſſours before him) was excommunicated by Gregorie the Second (bearing the name, but

not hauing the diſpoſition of the firſt) his ſubiects were releaſed (by Apoſtolicall diſpenſation) from their Oath of Alleageance; and, vpon theſe proceedings, the Romanes (like wicked Traytours) ſubmitted their Citie vnto the Pope (a more wicked Traytour then they) as vnto their Souereigne Lord; if that bee true, which the Ieſuite Azorius doth affirme; Inſtit. Moral. part. 2. lib. 4. c. 20. Thus, the old Lord beeing vniuſtly depriued, a new Lord entred vniuſtly into his place.
               The ſecond concerneth the Papall intruſion vpon Infidels (for hee muſt goe out of the World, that will goe out of his reach) vpon whoſe eſtates alſo, and Kingdomes, this Babylonian Monarch ſtretcheth out the line of his Apoſtolicall power. Witneſſe America (poore, diſtreſſed America) in the liberall donation of large, and ample Territories therein, vnto the Kings of Spaine. For he was a Pope (but a Catiline, a Iudas; the man of ſinne, or rather of all ſinnes) euen that execrable villaine, Alexander the ſixt, who, out of his meere motion, and liberalitie (as the Beaſt roareth in his Bull, to that purpoſe) did beſtow all the great, and mightie Kingdomes, in theſe parts, vpon Ferdinand, King of Arragon, and Elizabeth Queene of Caſtile, and vpon their heires for euer. Therefore Francis Lopez, in his generall Hiſtorie of the Weſterne Indies, lib. 1. cap. 19. expreſſing the title, and intereſt of the ſaid Princes in theſe rich, and ſpacious Kingdomes, ſetteth downe the Bull of Alexander the ſixt (who, out of his Papall authoritie, and particular affection to his Countrey, freely, and powerfully beſtowed them vpon the ſaid Princes, and their heires)

to this end, and purpoſe, That all men may vnderſtand (ſaith hee) that the conqueſt, and conuerſion of theſe Countreyes, which the Spaniards doe make, is by the authoritie, and donation of the great Vicar of Ieſus Chriſt. Is this, then, the title, and right, which Spaine pretendeth to haue in this new, and other World? Is this the colour, and pretenſe for the cruell, and infinite effuſion of bloud (humane, though not Chriſtian) in theſe miſerable Countreyes (whereof Benzo, an Italian, and Bartholomaeus à Caſa, himſelfe a Spaniard, doe ſo pittifully complaint) conuerted now (as you may perceiue) vnto Chriſtian Religion, ſo powerfully by the Sword? Wherefore I may truly ſay, that euery drop of Indian bloud, ſhed in this diſcouery, and conqueſt, ſhall be required of Babylon; as truly guiltie of the ſame; according to the prediction of the Angell; In her was found the bloud of all them, that were ſlaine vpon the earth; namely, in the Dominions of Infidels, as, well as of the Prophets, and of the Saints, in the Chriſtian World it ſelfe. Apocal. 18.24.
               And now, becauſe the diligent obſeruation of this particular prepareth vs vnto a fourth Compariſon, betwixt the Literall Babylon, and Papall Rome, therefore I pray you to caſt your eyes backe, a little, vpon this paſſage of the Scripture, that ſo you may looke forward, the better, vnto the ſequele of my ſpeech. Well ſaith the Angell, that the bloud of ALL MEN, ſlaine vpon the earth, was found in Babylon: for, in her is the bloud of theſe Indians; in her is the bloud of her owne Pſeudo-Catholikes, ſhed in England, by the Sword of Iuſtice; in her is the bloud of all them, that periſh in, for, or by her deſignes: in her is the bloud

of many Chriſtians, ſhed for the truth of Gods Word, in ſo many Countreyes; in her is the bloud of many thouſand perſons, ſhed vpon the contentions of her Popes; in her is the bloud of ſo many people, taking armes, vpon her incantations, againſt their Souereigne Lords; in her is the bloud of ſo many thouſand Chriſtians, in their vnlawfull warres againſt other Princes, vpon her prouocations; in her is the bloud of many poore ſubiects, againſt whom ſhe hath incited their owne Princes. Thus Rome began in the bloud of two brethren; it increaſed in the bloud of many neighbours; it was inlarged by the bloud of many Prouinces; it ſtood in the bloud of many ſubiects; it continued in the bloud of many people; firſt by Emperours; laſtly, by Popes: and it ſhall end in the bloud of her ſelfe, and her followers, as you ſhall ſee more cleerely hereafter, when wee come vnto the ſecond part of my Text. Meane while, I proceed vnto a new compariſon, which fitly taketh its beginning from the end of this diſcourſe.
            
            
               The FOVRTH Compariſon betwixt Literall Babylon, and Papall Rome.
               THe fourth point, then, wherein this compariſon doth ſtand, is CRVELTIE, bloudie crueltie, very ſpectable in that ancient Monarchie (the figure of the Papall) as the Scriptures themſelues (in the two Prophets; Eſay, and Ieremy) beſides ciuill Hiſtories, doe ſufficiently deduce vnto our knowledge; vnto which, for breuitie ſake, I muſt now remit you; as

men expert, and skilfull, in the ſacred Sriptures: it being a great part of your happineſſe, that you haue Gods Word in your owne tongue (which many other Nations, though bearing the name of Chriſtians, doe not enioy) to read it, and obſerue it, for your inſtruction, and vnſpeakable comfort. Well then; let vs leaue the firſt, and come vnto the ſecond Babylon; which, in this point of barbarous, and inhumane crueltie, exceedeth all example of Ages paſt, and preuenteth the example of all that are to come, vnleſſe it be in the perſecutions, which ſhe, perhaps, may yet raiſe againſt the Church of God: for the inſtruments of crueltie are in their habitations: which Iacob ſpake of his bloudie ſonnes; and I may ſpeake it of our more bloudie mother.
               Her voice is the voice of bloud; Surge Petre [Paule quinte] Occide, &c. Ariſe, O Paul the fift in name [but Peter in Office: ſo is euery Pope; and therefore none taketh that name vpon him; when, in their entrance vpon the Papacie, they leaue their former Chriſtian names, as comming vnto an Antichristian place] ariſe, and kill the Venetians (ſaith that flattering, falſe, cruell Baronius, their learned Cardinall) kill them with thy thunderbolts [which rarely kill any, but men of ſofter metall] deſpoile them of their Dominion, expoſe them vnto ruine, becauſe they dare ſo inſolently reſiſt thy great, and mightie power.
               Heere was a killing Text in deed; eſpecially, by vertue of SAINT PETERS name, who knew well how to handle a Sword; and becauſe hee cut off a ſeruants eare, why may not his ſucceſſours cut off a Princes head? For what Text, if it touch Saint Peter,
                  
doth not animate, and confirme theſe Babylonian Monarchs, vnto Depoſitions, Aſſaſſinates, Poyſons (though in their ſacred Hoaſt it ſelfe; as Henry the ſixt the Emperour knew very well by wofull experience) and, finally, to ruinate Chriſtian Princes, that dare withſtand their Antichriſtian pride?
               Yet wonder not at the former Text (for that perhaps may beare ſome ſhew of bloud) but wonder at this; that, Paſce oues meas [Feede my Sheepe; ſaith Chriſt vnto Peter; Iohn 21.16.] ſhould approue theſe killing courſes in the Pope, theſe violent depoſitions of Princes, theſe rebellious inſurrections of people. But it doth ſo: and in whoſe iudgement? euen of Bellarmine himſelfe; De Rom. Pont. lib. 5. cap. 7. Who thence inferreth a certaine, and neceſſary power in the Pope, to depoſe two ſorts of Princes; the one, hereticall, whom he compareth vnto cruell Wolues; the other, irregular, whom hee compareth vnto vnruly Rammes; and therefore (ſaith hee) ſince the Pope, is Paſtour of the vniuerſall Church, and hath an Office to feed the SHEEPE (that is to ſay, all faithfull Chriſtians) hee muſt haue a power to reſtraine, and reſiſt ſuch WOLVES, and RAMMES, as trouble, and infeſt the flocke. So that, in concluſion, Paſce in Bellarmine, and Occide in Baronius (according to the new Grammer, and Diuinitie of Babylon) meet both in one centre of ſignification, and in one iſſue of ſenſe. O skilfull Mercurialiſts, to draw bloud out of the veines of the holy Scripture. Yet theſe are the men, that opprobriouſly, and ſcornfully, obiect this textuall folly vnto the Diuines of the Reformed Church, in miſapplying the Scriptures vnto their miſguided

fancies. But now I proceed to make a ſufficient remonſtrance of bloudie crueltie in their myſticall Babylon, by foure ſeuerall, and inuincible demonſtrations thereof.
               FIRST, then, the crueltie of Babylon appeareth, in rayſing vp ſubiects againſt their naturall Lords, to the inualuable expenſe of Chriſtian bloud. England can ſay ſome thing in this behalfe, not onely in the more ancient times (as of King Iohn; who, with his people, ſuffered much by the inſtinct, and operation of Rome) but in theſe latter times, both of King Henrie the Eighth (againſt whom ſome noble Perſons conſpired, and ſome meaner Subiects rebelled, by the procuration of Rome, to the loſſe of their bloud, which ſhall be found in her) and in the Halcyonian dayes of Queene Elizabeth (by inſurrections in the North: by clancular, and ſecret Treaſons of damnable Parricides: by hoſtile inuaſions, reſolued againſt England, and in part effected in Ireland; all depending vpon Babylon, and iſſuing from her deſignes; which inſtructed her Prieſts to ſeduce the people heere from their iuſt obedience; whence enſued the iuſt execution of both, by the neceſſary prouiſion of the Lawes) and in the happy Reigne of our moſt gracious Souereigne Lord, King Iames; who therefore enacted a ſpeciall, and prudent Law (by conſent of the Peeres, and People of this Kingdome) to try, thereby, the alleageance, and fidelitie of his ſubiects: which Oath finding ſo much oppoſition, and impugnation, from the Babylonian Monarch, did miniſter an ineuitable neceſſitie vnto this State, to draw ſome bloud from ſuch Prieſts, as rather obſerued, and reſpected the Papall

Seate of Babylon, then the Royall Crowne of England. And this bloud, ſo iuſtly ſhed, will bee found, not in England, but in Babylon it ſelfe.
               But France may ſpeake much more, in that generall, and bloudie Maſſacre vnder Charles the Ninth, procured by Babylonian operations; and therefore, when the report thereof came vnto Rome, ſhee like a bloudie Whore (ſo the Scripture calleth her) applauded that Thracian, or rather Scythian crueltie of her children; ſang her Te Deum, in publique gratulation of that horrible fact, diſburſed her Indulgences, out of her ſpirituall Treaſures, for the benefit of the cruell Murtherers; and ſo ſent her gifts abroad, as reioycing in their ruine. Apocal. 10.11. &c. France can yet ſpeake more, which, in the end of the Reigne of Henrie the Third, and beginning of the Reigne of Henrie the Fourth, opened the veines of her bodie, and let forth ſtreames of her owne bloud, by the prouocation of Babylon, till it was ſtanched by the vnhappie ſubmiſſion of that great King vnto the Triple-crowne. Yet then alſo hee could not bee ſecure; for ſome principall Babylonians, ſuppoſing that the King confeſſed that with his mouth, which hee denied in his heart, Iohn Chaſtell (a young Diſciple of old Ieſuites) was ſuborned to offer violence vpon the ſacred Maieſtie of the Kings perſon; but could not performe that Tragicall act, which Rauilliac did afterwards effectuate with his moſt wicked hand. But I proceed.
               
                  Germany can ſpeake more, then any other Nation; whoſe terrible warres (ſtirred, continued, and ſupported by the meanes of Babylon) for many yeeres, in

the reigne of ſundry Emperours, embrued the earth with copious effuſion of Chriſtian bloud; making it a true Adamah (an earth red with bloud) and giuing it her originall name againe. As for Italy, ſhee cannot be ſilent in this caſe, if ſhe remember the bloudy faction of her Guelphs, and Gibelines, with ſundry warres, raiſed vp by Papall furie, and ſometimes managed by their owne perſons; forgetting, that they, who take the ſword, ſhall periſh by the ſword, Matth. 26.52.
               What ſhall I ſay of the Holy Land it ſelfe, which in tedious, and expenſiue warres (procured, enterpriſed by Papall motions; and what the Pope could not performe, with his owne temporall meanes to aſſiſt this warre, hee performed by the Spirituall Exchequer; diſpenſing his Indulgences thence, to further, and aduance the ſame) conſumed much treaſure of the Chriſtians, and more of their bloud? But you will ſay; it was an heroicall, and glorious act. I anſwer; looke vnto the Popes deſignes, and intentions therin, with the iſſue of that glory. You will ſay; it was a pious, and a religious act. I anſwer; the pretence is more ſpecious, then the enterpriſe is alwayes iuſt, in ſuch a caſe. For it may be diſputed; Whether, or how farre forth, it is lawfull for Chriſtian Princes, vpon the pure, and ſole title of Religion, to make ſuch warres vpon the Turke; who, by the power of the ſword, and by ſubmiſſion of the people, and by long poſſeſſion, hath ſuch an intereſt into thoſe lands; the matter of faith, and religion, neither giuing vnto any Prince, nor taking from any, the proprietie of his temporall, and worldly ſtate. Such is the doctrine of the ſacred Scripture; ſuch was the practiſe of the ancient Church.
               
                  SECONDLY, The crueltie of Babylon appeareth, in ſtirring vp perſecution againſt the profeſſours of Gods eternall, and inuincible truth; which no policie of man, no furie of diuells, can poſſibly extinguiſh; becauſe it is founded vpon the true rock, Chriſt Ieſus; and not vpon the pretenſed rocke (or rather ſtocke) of the Apoſtaticall Seate in Babylon. Now if I ſhould here make a particular account of her crueltie in this kind, againſt the perſons of many Martyrs, it would exceed the proportion of one, or many Sermons. Or, if I would make it yet more generall, by a ſuruey of perſecutions in many Countries, by ſword, and by fire (which burning zeale yet lodgeth in their Scythian hearts) the relation would bee as tedious, as it is vnneceſſary, ſince the hiſtories of ſundry Nations are extant in this behalfe, and a great part of them is diligently collected by the induſtrious pen of Maſter Fox in his Acts, and Monuments of the Church.
               But why doe I repaire vnto more ancient times, for proofe of their crueltie? The ſound whereof hath ſo lately paſſed the Seas from miſerable France, vnto happy England; the ſecure, and comfortable harbour of many diſtreſſed ſoules. O France, ſtill cruell vnto thy ſelfe: the bloud is yet warme in thy fields, which the Cadmaean brethren (thy vnfortunate children) haue lately ſpilt in mutuall, and inteſtine conflicts. But by what incantation? Of Babylon; whoſe powerfull operation in the malignant, and actiue ſpirits of the Ignatian ſect, hath ſo bewitched thee, to ſacrifice thy bloud vnto her Altars; for, in her, God ſhall find it, when the iuſtice of heauen ſhall heare the cry of the earth. Haſt thou not yet ſeene, by ſundry ouertures

(ô miſerably ſeduced France) the iniuſtice of thy proceedings, in the infelicitie of thy ſucceſſe? Euery ſeuerall drop of the Hugonots bloud hath had a reſurrection into ſo many new ſeuerall Hugonots, which haue ſprung, and riſen out of the ſame. So truely is the bloud of Martyrs the ſeed of the Church. Remember thy S. Bartholomew; thy Sicilian veſpers, in that great, and dreadfull maſſacre; when, in the verie inſtant, and moment of the hotteſt perſecution, God gaue thee a preſent, and prodigious ſigne of the future, and ſtrange euent. For many are yet aliue in Paris, who ſaw, to their admiration, that, beyond the courſe of nature, and aboue the iudgement of reaſon, a white thorne tree, in a certaine Churchyard of that populous Citie, was ſuddenly cloathed with a garment of white bloſſomes, as in the moneth of May. Sundry were the coniectures vpon this ſigne, acccording to their ſeuerall inclinations; ſome ſuppoſing, that God gaue thereby a ſufficient notice vnto the Romiſh Catholikes, of the new glorie, and flouriſhing eſtate of their Church; others conceiuing, that God did thereby miniſter a comfortable hope, or rather a certaine aſſurance, vnto the Proteſtants, that, when, in humane iudgement, they might ſeeme to bee vtterly deſtroied, and brought to finall ruine, yet God, againſt, and aboue the opinion of mortall men, would reſtore them vnto a more happy condition, then euer they did enioy before; with an vnexpectable augmentation, and rare increaſe. Now (ſaith Thuanus; a more moderate Papiſt; but yet no Hugonot) if wee caſt our eyes vpon the iſſue of this bloudie fact, the ſucceſſe may eaſily ſhew, which interpretation was more true,

and proper in this behalfe. Thus you haue heard the generall crueltie of Babylon, in ſundrie Nations; but particularly in France; the publike Theater of Tragedies in this kind.
               And now, my natiue Countrie of England; remember thy bloud, which Babylon hath ſhed; and wherewith ſhe is not yet ſatisfied; that horſe-leech hath not yet her fill. The heate, which is in the ſtomackes of ſome Babylonians, breaketh out in the fire of their mouthes, when they dare vomit vp the malice of their hearts, and ſpeake of fire and faggot, while their owne neckes (by power of the Lawes, ſtanding in force) lye vnder the danger of the ſword. Babylon cannot put off her cruell nature; ſuch Mother, ſuch Children; a Panther is not more cruell to a man, then a true Babylonian vnto a ſincere Chriſtian. O Lord; if ſinners may bee ſuitors for grace, and fauour at thy mercifull hands, deliuer not thy poore children into the power of Babylon againe.
               THIRDLY, the crueltie of Babylon appeareth in the deſtruction of her owne children; when, one Pope riſing vp againſt another, and a third againſt them both, euery Peter betooke himſelfe vnto his ſword; one excommunicating, and depoſing another, with ſuch a generall diſtraction of Europe, that (as our Country-man, Tho. Walſingham, doth relate) two hundred thouſand perſons loſt their liues in theſe bloudie contentions of the Antipopes; ſo that the Church may more iuſtly ſay vnto the Pope; Thou art a bloudy Father vnto mee, then Zipporah could ſay truly vnto Moſes; Thou art a bloudy husband vnto mee: for ſhee cut off onely the fore-skin of her child, to

ſaue the life of Moſes; but the Church loſt many of her childrens liues, to ſaue the glorie of the Pope; whoſe bloud ſhed for, and by Babylon, muſt alſo bee found in her.
               FOVRTHLY, the crueltie of Babylon appeareth in her approbation of the moſt execrable treaſons; as namely, in Henry the fifth (the Emperour) againſt his owne Father, Henry the fourth; which prodigious fact, as Babylon did incenſe him vnto, ſo ſhe commendeth in him, for an act of ſingular pietie, and deuotion vnto the Church, as preferring his ſpirituall Mother before his naturall Father. But by whoſe pen doth this incredible villany appeare? euen of Baronius himſelfe; a Babylonian flatterer, a ſycophant, extolling that fact with praiſe vnto the heauens, which the heauens bluſhed to ſee, and the earth trembleth to remember.
               But what teſtimony can France affoord vnto vs in this kind? I ſpake before of Babylons exultation, and ioy vpon the newes of that bloudie maſſacre. Well Babylon; thou haſt thirſted after bloud (as Tomyris ſaid to Cyrus, when ſhee threw his head into a veſſell, filled with bloud) drinke thy fill of bloud, by thy barbarous crueltie; thou ſhalt, one day, drinke thy fill of bloud by the diuine vltion of the greateſt Iudge; now thou drinkeſt other mens; then thou ſhalt drinke thine owne.
               But I let paſſe this example (though neuer to bee forgotten) and I come to one (in ſtead of all) which requireth your beſt attention, and due ponderation; and that is, the murther committed by Iames (falſly ſirnamed Clement; as Polydore Virgil ſaith, that many

Popes alſo beare their names vntruly; Pius, yet wicked; Clemens, yet cruell, &c. as, in Greeke, the ſame word ſignifieth a bow, and life; whereupon Heraclitus ſaid well; A bow hath the name of life, but the worke of death; ſo had this Clement; ſo haue many Popes) vpon the perſon of Henry the third, the French King, of vnhappy condition, and name alſo; euen as that of Caius was in the family of the Caeſars; few of them came vnto a mature, and peaceable end.
               Now, though I cannot certainely ſay, that Babylon, or ſome ſpeciall agent for her, did particularly inſtigate this Clement vnto that bloudie fact, yet I may more truly ſay of him, that hee was plenus Babylone, full of Babylon in his heart (and ſo, for her ſake, was incited vnto that odious treaſon) then Campian (more rhetoricall in his flaſhes, then ſubſtantiall in his proofes) ſaith of Pultrot, who killed the Duke of Guiſe with a ſhot, that he was plenus Beza; full of poyſon, drawne from the breaſt of Beza; who neuer gaue counſell before, nor approbation afterward, vnto that act of Pultrot, as Mariana the Ieſuite hath approoued that execrable fact of Clement: yea, Sixtus Quintus himſelfe gaue extraordinary applauſe thereunto, vpon the firſt arriuall of that newes in Babylon. Marke it well, as a matter of ſpeciall importance, for ſundry cauſes. For whereas the Kings moſt excellent Maieſtie, in his learned, and accurate writings, publiſhed by himſelfe, to iuſtifie the Oath of Alleagance (impugned by Babylon) did worthily obiect vnto the Romaniſts the approbation of this horrible treaſon by Sixtus, in his Oration, pronounced vnto the Cardinalls, in his Conſiſtorie, to this purpoſe; Bellarmine doth

confidently anſwere, that this Oration was neuer deliuered by the Pope; that hee, liuing in Rome, heard no mention of it; that the Cardinalls, conuerſing then in the Court, proteſted, that they neuer had any knowledge of the ſame; and ſo the point is vtterly denied, and muſt bee reputed for a deuice of ſuch, as were the enemies of the Church.
               
                  O bloudie Citie; it is all full of lyes, ſaith Nahum the Prophet, of Nineuch, and I may now ſo ſpeake of Rome: for here is lying added vnto murthering; impudencie vnto crueltie: what veritie then, what equitie, what conſcience can you expect from her?
               Note therefore, that amongſt ſome Romiſh Prieſts, that tooke, and defended the Oath of Alleageance (though, for this cauſe, they haue beene cenſured, publikely in the Sermons of ſome Ieſuites, by the name of Wolues; ſuch as had no commiſſion to teach, to abſolue, to miniſter the Sacraments, &c. as hauing loſt their whole authoritie, by taking this Oath, and perſwading others to doe the like, to the high preiudice, and impugnation of S. Peters Seate, from whence it was deriued) there was one William Warmington, Chaplaine vnto Cardinall Allen, vpon the very time, that this panegyricall Oration proceeded from that vaine-glorious Pope; who, by his Pontificiall excommunication, depoſed our late gracious Queene, and now, in a ſolemne ſpeech, commended the murther (by way of admiration) which Clement had perpetrated vpon the ſacred perſon of that vnhappy Prince.
               This Warmington therefore, in a booke, publiſhed for the defence of the ſaid Oath, doth freely, and ingenuouſly

confeſſe, that, this Oration being vttered, in the Conſiſtorie, by Sixtus, the Pope; his Lord, and Maſter (being then, and there preſent) was earneſtly requeſted, by ſome of the Cardinalls, to recollect the ſpeech of his Holineſſe, and to commit the ſame to writing; which he (being a man of ſingular memorie) did accordingly performe, with the commendations, and thankes of the ſaid Cardinalls; affirming, that, to their beſt remembrance, this coppie, preſented vnto them by Cardinall Allen, did truely containe, word for word, the verie Oration, pronounced vnto them by his Holineſſe; ſo that this was the originall, and Mother-coppie, whence ſo many tranſcripts were made, and iſſued forth into the publike view. And he ſaith further, that his ſpeciall friend, Maſter William Rainolds [author of Caluino-Turciſmus] remaining then in the Low Countries, and receiuing a tranſcript of the ſaid coppie from him, conceiued the ſaid ſpeech to bee a certaine approbation of that fact; as, indeed, the forme, and matter thereof doe ſufficiently euince.
               O Bellarmine; where is thy conſcience of the truth? O Sixtus; where is thy tender reſpect of Chriſtian bloud? yea more, of Princes? and yet more, of the firſt borne, and eldeſt ſonne of thy Church? O Babylon; where is thy ſhame, that dareſt thus admire, approoue, extoll (without one word, or ſyllable of diſlike; that ingenuitie is not in thy whoriſh breaſt) ſuch a murther, ſo wickedly executed, and vpon ſo great a Prince?
               FIFTHLY, and laſtly, the crueltie of Babylon appeareth, by her doctrines tending to the effuſion of

bloud. She can depoſe Kings from their States: ſhee can abſolue Subiects from their Alleageance; ſhe can beſtow Kingdomes at her pleaſure: ſhee can ſtirre vp hoſtile inuaſions: ſhee can authorize ſecret murthers of Princes, by Daggers, Poyſons, or any other deteſtable meanes; as you ſhall heare in my ſecond Sermon, from Mariana, a Ieſuite; as farre from the true nature of Ieſus, as neere vnto his ſacred name.
               Hence it is, that many Emperours, and Princes, in ancient times, fearefully obſeruing the powerfull incantations of Babylon, and that their liues, with their eſtates, ſtood (by vertue thereof) in perpetuall danger (for he may eaſily take away the life of another, that contemneth his owne; as many inchanted Babylonians doe) were therefore compelled, by humane feare, to entertaine that vnitie, and correſpondencie with her, in outward tearmes, which they hated, and contemned in their inward thoughts. For as Porſenna, the ancient King of Hetruria, was induced to ſpare the life, and farther torment of Mutius (a confident, and glorious Romane; who offered priuate violence vnto his Royall perſon) when hee heard Mutius ſolemnely proteſting; that the death of Porſenna was certainly concluded vpon, by a number of Romanes, no leſſe reſolute vnto that action, then himſelfe, and no leſſe reſolued to ſuffer any torment, then to aduenture vpon any perill, for that end, and purpoſe; and thereupon Porſenna, deſiſting from his warres, made a peace with the Romanes, out of feare, and not of loue: ſo there haue beene ſundry Princes, in former Ages, that perceiuing this vehement, and formidable inclination in the Romanists, to act any

villanie, and to ſuffer any penaltie, ſo that they might attaine vnto their deſired end [to ſubuert Kingdomes, to depoſe Kings, to lay violent hands vpon their perſons, &c.] were thereby inforced to ſubmit themſelues vnto the Babylonian Monarch; rather chooſing to liue vnder his tyrannie, then to die by his deſignes. Thus alſo euery man, that ſtandeth in ſpeciall oppoſition vnto Babylon (the Mother of Murthers) may truly ſay with Dauid; There is but a ſtep betweene me, and death. 1. Sam. 20.3. Howbeit, that ſhould bee the reſolution of euery Chriſtian Prince, in the behalfe of Gods truth, which was the reckoning of vertuous Hester, in the behalfe of her people; If I periſh, I periſh.
               
               Yet feare not, O Religious Princes; it is Gods cauſe, which you maintaine; therefore hee will alſo maintaine you: he will defend the defenders of his Faith: hee hath a better guard of holy Angels about your Royall perſons. The diffidence of his preſeruation, in any ariſeth from the imbecillitie of faith, not reſting vpon his word, and promiſe. If the noble aſpect of Scipio bred ſuch an awfull reuerence in the hearts of theeues, and murtherers, that they did therefore rather admire his vertue, then ſeeke his life, when they came into his preſence; doubt yee not, but that God will worke ſuch an impreſſion of feare in the hearts of Babylonian Traytors, that they ſhall not dare attempt, or (at the leaſt) not effectuate any courſe of violence, and iniquitie, againſt your ſacred Perſons.
               Finally, to conclude this point of Romiſh crueltie; let no faithfull, and ſincerely affected Nazianzen an

earneſt Preacher, a zealous Writer, a well deſeruing Prelate, or Miniſter in the Church) deſpaire of Gods protection, though a Murtherer dare vndertake to aſſaile him in any priuate manner, or ſecret place; as ſometimes it fell out in the caſe of that learned, conſtant, and glorious Biſhop; related by himſelfe, in the deſcription of his owne life. Be couragious, then, in the behalfe of Gods eternall truth: feare not the crueltie of Babylon; death is the debt of Nature, by the deſert of ſinne: to die for Gods cauſe, it is an act of glorie in this World, and it hath a reward in Heauen. Let thy tongue, therefore, ſpeake; and thy pen write; and thy heart pray; let not our feare of Babylons crueltie increaſe their hope of our ruine. I ſay, then, vnto euery ſouldier of Ieſus Chriſt in this ſpirituall warfare, as the Angell vnto Gedeon; The Lord is with thee, thou valiant man. Iudic. 6.12.
            
            
               The FIFT Compariſon betwixt Literall Babylon, and Papall Rome.
               
               THe fift, and laſt point (which I now reſolue to touch) in this compariſon, is, IMPIETIE of life. As for the old Babylon, ſhe was incurable in her ſinfull courſes. We would haue cured Babylon, but ſhee would not be cured; Ierem. 51.9. It followeth therefore; Her iudgement is come vp to Heauen. It came downe from Heauen alſo: for God ſtirred vp the ſpirit of Cyrus to execute his vengeance vpon the Ladie of Kingdomes, and the hammer of the World.
               
               As for the new Babylon, ſhee anſwereth fully vnto

her type: for as Rome went before in Babylon, ſo Babylon followeth afterward in Rome. I ſpeake not now of the common people, nor of any Lay perſons of more eminent qualitie; I come vnto the Cleargie it ſelfe; and not in the more ignoble ſort, but in the higher degree of the Cardinalls; of whom as Caluin ſaith truly, that, Vnà cum ſuo capite ſenſim creuerunt [theſe principall members of the Romane Church grew vp by little, and little, into this amplitude of power, and dignitie, together with their head] ſo, together with the increaſing impietie of the Popes, they increaſed alſo in their impietie of manners. The Hiſtories are extant; their conditions are knowne; I leaue therefore the members, and come vnto their head himſelfe; in compariſon of whom the Monarchs of Literall Babylon may ſeeme to bee iuſt, and holy; as God teſtifieth of Ieruſalem, that ſhee had iuſtified Samaria in all the abominations, which ſhee had done, Ezek. 16.
               Doe you now expect of mee a Catalogue of their names, and a repetition of their crimes? Platina, the Writer of their liues (an Authour of their owne, that had experience of many matters in Babylon) can tell you that, which is no leſſe odious for you to heare, then tedious for me to ſpeake. But deſcend from ancient Writers vnto Baronius (though one of the moſt perfidious, and diſſolute Hiſtorians, that euer tooke pen in hand) euen their owne Cardinall Baronius; and you ſhall ſee the tender hearted man, melting into teares, vpon the recordation of Papall impieties; and particularly of Iohn the Twelfth. You ſhall find Baronius lamenting the condition of the Church vnder

ſuch Heads, and wondering that ſuch an impure, and wicked wretch ſhould aſſume ſo gracious a name, as that is both by ſignification, and by the perſons, that did ſometimes beare the ſame. Wherevpon hee ſaith, that, in his opinion, the Pope did thereby intend to deceiue the World, which might ſuppoſe, that there was a man, ſent from God, whoſe name was Iohn. So writeth he of that Boy-Pope; that egregious Varlet, who, by the meanes of a Whore, ſate in the Whore of Babylon; as a fit Incumbent of that Apoſtolicall See.
               Now if I would proſecute the Hiſtorie of thoſe Popes alone, who did vntruly weare the garment of this name (which might ſeeme to couer the turpitude of their liues) it were more eaſie to finde a beginning, then an end of my diſcourſe: for Babylon had many Iohns (beſides a Ioane) but few of them good; and the laſt of that name (Iohn 21. or 23. for the Papists diſagree vpon the number of theſe Popes) had ſuch accuſations produced, and verified by Oath, againſt him, for matters of doctrine, and of life, in the great Councell of Conſtance, vpon the yeare 1414. that, as the name of Tarquin was hatefull in Rome, ſo the name of Iohn became execrable in the Church; and no Pope delighted to take it vpon him, ſince the time of that Councell.
               But why doe I, or rather why ſhould I take fruitleſſe paines in this behalfe, yea, diſaduantagious alſo vnto mine owne cauſe? For now I pray you to obſerue diligently, with me, two paſſages in Bellarmine, very artificially framed; the one to preuent our beliefe;

the other, to peruert our iudgement. In praefat. lib. de Summo Pont.
               
               For firſt, being to treate of the impieties of his holy Fathers (ſuch, ſo prodigious, ſo innumerable, as perhaps no State of Pagans can parallel, much leſſe of Christians; be they Princes, or bee they Prelates) marke how cunningly hee ſeeketh to bring his Reader into a ſuſpition of all Hiſtories; which he had rather accuſe of falſhood, then wee ſhould accuſe his Popes of impious, and wicked life. Thus therefore writeth the learned Cardinall; Quidam parùm probi Pontifices: &c. Some Popes, being of little honeſtie, did ſometimes poſſeſſe, and gouerne the Apoſtolicall Seate. Parùm probi? Away with that tearme of diminution: improbiſsimi, impijſsimi, diaboliſsimi, &c. were fitter words for ſuch monſters, whoſe villanies no tongue can ſpeake with modeſtie, nor pen deſcribe. But let vs proceed. Who were thoſe parùm probi? He telleth you: Stephanus the ſixt, Leo the fift, Chriſtophorus the firſt, Sergius the third, Iohannes the twelfth, Alexander the ſixt. Then he addeth; alijque non pauci. Speake more plainly, Bellarmine, mince not the matter; ſay not, non pauci [not a few others] but a great multitude of Popes; for ſo there was, if their owne Hiſtorians may deſerue our beliefe. But heere the Cardinall caſteth in his doubt; Si vera ſunt, que de eorum vita, & rebus geſtis, apud hiſtoricos eorum temporum ſcripta leguntur: If (ſaith he) thoſe things be true, which the Hiſtories of thoſe times record concerning the liues, and actions of theſe Popes. If they be true? His deſire was to denie all the accuſations;

but, hauing not abilitie to diſprooue the matters, he draweth the Hiſtories into queſtion, and breedeth a ſecret dubitation in the minde of his Reader. This is the firſt paſſage in Bellarmine: and he is more ingenuous, and modeſt in this caſe, then Baronius is often in the like; not only drawing an obſcuritie, or ſome doubt vpon ſuch Hiſtories, as diſtaſte his palate, and are againſt his purpoſe, but ſometimes diſclayming them, correcting them at his pleaſure, forging others, without any apparant euidence; with many ſuch indirect, and prepoſterous courſes; which the Venetian Authours (while the controuerſie depended betwixt their State, and Paul the fift) doe carefully note in that diſhoneſt Authour; whom the Spaniards, the Benedictines, the ſaid Venetians, and ſundrie Romane Catholickes, vpon ſeuerall occaſions (all tending to one crime of iniurious falſitie) doe brand moſt deeply in this behalfe. And thus hauing ſpoken ſome thing of theſe two Cardinall Brethren [the Castor, and Pollux of the Romane Church] I will end with him, with whom I did firſt begin.
               His ſecond paſſage, therefore, is of more excellent note. Hee would diſcredit the Hiſtories, as falſe: hee could not: behold now a greater aduantage vnto his Church, if they be true. How can that bee? Is hee ſo skilfull a Workeman, that hee can make a Mercurie out of euery blocke; be it neuer ſo crooked, and knottie? He is: for marke his dilemma. If thoſe Hiſtories be falſe, then they make nothing againſt vs. If they bee true, yet they make very much for vs. How can this be? Becauſe the wickedneſſe of the Perſons doth prooue the ſanctitie, and perpetuitie of their Seate:
                  
ſo that the iſſue of my labour (in ſhewing their impieties) would be the preiudice of my cauſe.
               Heare therefore the Cardinall ſpeaking in his owne words; Nihil est quòd haeretici, &c. It is to no purpoſe (ſaith he) for the heretickes to take ſo much paines, in ſearching out the vices of certaine Popes. Why ſo? For we confeſſe that they were not few. A good confeſſion: though before we heard him ſpeake in another Language; Si vera ſunt; if thoſe things were true. Well: now they are true: now he confeſſeth the accuſation: but why? For hee hath inuented a new defence of the Seat by the old offences of the perſons. Heare him, therefore, againe in his owne words; Tantum abest, &c. This is ſo farre (ſaith he) from obſcuring, or diminiſhing the glorie of this Seate, that thereby it is rather exceedingly amplified, and increaſed; for that thereby we may perceiue, that it conſiſteth by the ſpeciall prouidence of God. So he.
               But I perceiue no ſuch matter; howbeit I perceiue that nothing was ſo abſurd, which ſome Philoſopher would not maintaine: and nothing is ſo true, and forcible, which theſe Babylonians will not either denie, or elude. And farther I perceiue, that recitaſſe, confutaſſe est; to recite their opinions, is to refute their follies.
               And laſtly I perceiue, that as it is Gods ſingular patience to ſuffer theſe Monarchs of Babylon a while, ſo there is a time of wrath to come (and it cannot bee farre off) when the Whore muſt periſh by fire, and her Beaſt muſt yeeld vnto the Sword. For as in this Sermon, you haue heard of a Babylon [the ſinne of Rome] in the ſubiect of my Text, ſo, in the next, you

ſhall heare of a cecidit [the puniſhment of Rome] in predicate of the ſame.
               Meane while I conclude, by due, and true remonſtrances in the firſt, and ſecond Inquiſitions [two diſtinct parts of my diſcourſe; the one ſhewing, by good, and pregnant reaſons, that Rome, in her preſent condition, is the Babylon in my Text; the other declaring the conformitie betwixt the Literall Babylon, and Papall Rome; and ſo expreſſing the congruitie of this title of Babylon, applied here vnto Rome] that ſince Rome doth imitate (nay much exceed) the ſinnes of Babylon, therefore ſhee doth iuſtly, and muſt neceſſarily, beare her name; agreeing vnto it, in regard of the Church, and the Citie, as both are vnder one, and their common head, the Pope. This was the cleere intention of the Angell; this is the certaine expoſition of this Scripture. Wherefore as Simeon, and Leui are called fratres in malo [Gen. 49.5.] brethren in euill, ſo Babylon, and Rome are ſorores in malo, ſiſters in euill; like in condition, and in qualitie, to their owne confuſion; as the name of the firſt doth originally import, and doth likewiſe ominate vnto the ſecond.
            
            
               
                  Obſeruations pertaining to Faith, and Manners, framed vpon the paſſages in the two former Inquiſitions.
               
               NOw I come thirdly, and laſtly, vnto ſuch Obſeruations (according to my promiſe, and proiect in the 
                     Pag. 4. beginning of this Sermon) as doe kindly, and proper enſue vpon the precedent paſſages of my diſcourſe;

and they are ten: which I will proſecute with ſuch conuenient breuitie, as the matter of each will particularly beare.
               FIRST, then, as the Church of God doth ſtand ſpecially indebted vnto him for this diuine Booke of the Reuelation, wherein wee may plainely diſcouer the preſcience of God, in things to come, and the care of God in the adminiſtration of his Church, ſo, it being more darke vnto the ancient Fathers [ſo many ſyllables, ſo many mysteries therein] and breeding more admiration, then bringing vtilitie vnto them, by the great obſcuritie thereof (ſo that the Pen-man of this ſacred Booke might truly ſay, Scripſi, & non ſcripſi; I haue written, and not written, I haue reuealed, and yet concealed, the future condition of the Church) therefore, now wee ſtand bound vnto God in a new, and farther obligation, for that wee, in the ſucceſſe of time, and euent of things, haue attained, in ſundrie particulars of greateſt conſequence (and namely, in this myſterie of Babylon) vnto ſuch a perſpicuous, and infallible vnderſtanding of this Booke; which is the Beniamin of Ieſus Chriſt (the principall Author thereof) the Sonne of his right hand; the laſt borne, in the whole Iſſue of the Scripture, which hee begate vnto his Church; the concluſion of that Oracle, whence we deriue our Faith.
               This Booke is, therefore, vnto vs, the apparant Seale of Gods prouidence, a ſtrong bulwarke of our Faith, an incurable wound of the Babylonian Monarch, a certaine expugnation of the Antichriſtian Church. For though the learned Ieſuite Ludouicus ab Alcaſar, in his copious expoſition of this Booke, doth

ſo peruert the ſenſe, and purpoſe of the Holy Ghoſt therein, by laying the name of Babylon vpon Rome in her Ethnicall eſtate alone, & pretending that this fall is only in a ſpirituall manner, by falling from her ancient Idolatrie, vnto the Faith of Chriſt, and therefore concludeth his expoſition of this Booke in theſe brauing words; Maximâ ſum voluptate perfuſus, &c. I am filled with ſingular contentation, and ioy of heart, becauſe, through the fauour of God, I haue now cleerely diſcerned, how glorious this Booke of the Reuelation is vnto the Romane Church; yet wee may contemne his folly, or rather commiſerate his blindneſſe in this caſe. But wee will leaue him vnto the cenſure of Ribera, ſo well diſcerning that this Babylon is Rome, in another eſtate, ſucceeding after the intertainment of Chriſtian Religion, and that this fall is by a great, and finall ruine of that Idolatrous Citie, that hee pronounceth them to be worſe then very fooles, that will not ſee, and confeſſe this point.
               The truth is this (good Chriſtian hearers) that though Ribera firſt, and Viegas after him, doe confidently deny, that Rome is Babylon now, or that the Church of Rome euer ſhall ſo bee, or that the Citie it ſelfe, while ſhee remaineth in ſubiection to the Pope, ſhall deſerue that name, yet, by making ſuch a plaine, and faire confeſſion (which the very euidence of the Text, with the due coherence of all circumſtances therein, did neceſſarily extort from their pens) that Rome is Babylon alſo in another, and 
                     ••
                   ſecond eſtate; and that it ſhall bee ſo full of Idolatry at home, and communicate it abroad; and that ſhee ſhall haue great negotiation of Merchants; and that ſhee ſhall haue

another Empire, largely patent, and greatly potent in the world; therefore not onely a ſtrong ſuſpition, but a manifeſt conuiction muſt fall ineuitably vpon Papall Rome (as wee haue deduced by many ſubſtantiall proofes, againſt the vaine, and poore ſurmiſes of Ribera, and Viegas to the contrarie) the true Babylon (of which I haue ſpoken heretofore) that ſhall come vnto the lamentable fall, whereof I ſhall ſpeake hereafter.
               This conſequence Ludonicus ab Alcaſar, either well perceiuing, or vehemently ſuſpecting it to enſue vpon the ſaid confeſſion of his brethren, hath therefore caſt a new myſt vpon the matter, drawne a vayle before our eyes, contradicted their expoſition, wreſted the ſacred Text vnto his fooliſh, and ridiculous fancie (as if the ſtate of this Babylon, and her fall, were paſt) that ſo wee might not diſcerne the true Babylon, which is now preſent, nor her certaine fall, which is yet to come. But let mee here ſpeake a word, or two (for I am to paſſe vnto other matters) touching this learned grando; Ludouicus ab Alcaſar. If this Babylon be Rome, onely in her Ethnicall eſtate; and if Rome haue not any other fall, but only a mysticall fall; viz. by falling vnto Chriſtian Religion from that eſtate (which eſtate hath now beene extinct, neere vpon the ſpace of one thouſand & three hundred yeres) and yet it appeareth, in the frame and tenour of the ſacred Booke of the Reuelation, that no ſpeciall and notable matter of propheticall prediction therein, doth interuene, or come betwixt the ruine of Babylon (which is deſcribed hiſtorically, Chapter 18. there being a prolepſis only, or briefe anticipation thereof, Chapter 14.8.) and the conſummation of the world (for, after the fall of Babylon,
                  
Chapter 18. S. Iohn proceedeth, Chapter 19. to an applauſe of the Saints, for her deſtruction: then, Chapter 20. to a recapitulation of things paſt, with a declaration of the generall Iudgement, being then ſhortly to come: then, finally, Chapter 21. and 22. to a deſcription of the heauenly Ieruſalem, and the happy condition of the Saints therein, &c.) it muſt neceſſarily follow, that this voluminous Ieſuite of Alcaſar (this man of the Land of Nod) in the tohu, and bohu [the vanitie, and inanitie] of his large, and copious Commentarie vpon this diuine Booke, hath left open ſo wide a gap of one thouſand & three hundred yeres (or neere vpon that ſpace) alreadie paſt, beſides that time, which is yet to come in the ſtate of the Church, and of the world, without any ſufficient matter, of Hiſtoricall prediction, to fill vp the ſame. And yet who doth not perceiue, by the beginning, and the ending of this Booke, that it doth, in the paſſages thereof, generally containe a perpetuall, and a continued Hiſtorie of the Church, in her whole decourſe; euen, from the time of Saint Iohn, vnto the end of the world?
               Farewell, then, gentle Ludouicus ab Alcaſar, with your little wit, and leſſe honeſtie: and ſo I returne (my benigne, and courteous Auditors) vnto you againe.
               Reioyce you, therefore, in this ineſtimable Booke; embrace it with gratitude; conuerſe in it with diligence; admire what you vnderſtand, and, what you vnderſtand not, admire it the more; ſearch it with induſtrie; enter into it with praier; deſpiſe not the opinion of others; preſume not vpon your owne; let not

the obſcuritie of ſome things, yet vnknowne, make you neglect the vtilitie of ſo many things (and, particularly, this myſterie of Babylon) alreadie knowne therein. Read it, reuerence it; repute it (as it is) the ſacred Oracle of God, committed vnto his Church, to ſuſtaine her patience, and to confirme her faith.
               SECONDLY; wee haue great cauſe to commend Gods goodneſſe, and to applaud our owne happineſſe in the certaine, and cleere diſcouerie of Babylon in this diuine, and myſticall Booke. For as the Starre did lead the Wiſe-men to find out Bethlehem, where Chriſt was borne, ſo this Scripture doth guide, and conduct vs vnto the knowledge of Babylon, wherein Antichriſt doth reigne. Rome ſhall not, therefore, infatuate vs with her glorious title of the Mother-Church; for now wee know her to bee the Mother of Fornications: ſhee ſhall not inſult with the faire priuiledge of the Apoſtolicall Seate; for now wee know her to be an Apoſtaticall Synagogue: ſhee ſhall not beare vs downe with the ſupremacie of a Papall Head-ſhip; for now wee know, who is the Second Beaſt, intruding vpon the Seate, and Dominion of the former, with a larger challenge of power; extenſiuè, in place, and intenſiuè, in degree: now we know, who hee is, that aduanceth himſelfe ouer Kings, and Emperours; ouer States, and Crownes; ouer Church, and Commonwealth, by his falſe Keyes, and pretenſed Swords.
               THIRDLY; whereas this Romiſh Babylon cryeth out vpon our ſeparation from her Societie, wee are warranted, nay wee are commanded thereunto, by the voyce of God himſelfe; Goe out of her my people;
                  
and the reaſon is not there taken only from her ſinnes, in that ſhee is Babylon, but from her puniſhment alſo, in that ſhee ſhall fall; for ſo it followeth; that you bee not partakers in her ſinnes, and that you receiue not of her plagues; of which I am to treate, when I come vnto the predicate of my Text.
               Meane while you may obſerue, that this Exodus, this departure out of Babylon, is Corporall (and not ſpirituall onely) unto ſch, as haue Locall communion with her, and dwell within her walls: but it is Spirituall onely, and not corporall, vnto ſuch, as, dwelling in England, France, &c. haue doctrinall communion with her; and are members, depending vpon her head: ſo that this word her [goe out of her] importeth not onely her ſite, and place, but her ſocietie, and errours. Goe then ſpecially out of theſe, ô you his people, whether within, or without her walls; whether you bee in Rome (where God hath ſome people, euen by the teſtimony of the Text) or whether in any other part of the world. And ſince ſhee caſteth you out of her ſocietie, deſire it not; for it is vnto your owne danger; ſhee doth that for you, which God requireth you to doe for your ſelues.
               And now let mee, in a few words, addreſſe my ſpeech vnto rhetoricall Campian, inſulting vpon the Proteſtants, with his termes of deriſion, and contempt; Audito nomine Eccleſiae hoſtis expalluit, ſaith hee: our aduerſarie waxed pale, when hee heard the very name of the Church; as if the Proteſtant could produce no Catalogue of names, for any viſible

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
exiſtencie, and lawfull ſucceſſion of his Church; which Rome onely hath, and the Proteſtant hath not. How ſhallow, weake, malicious, and vnlearned a pretence this is (either againſt vs, or for themſelues) it is now no conuenient time, nor proper occaſion to diſpute: I will attend both, as it ſhall pleaſe God, in his prouidence, to direct mee in this behalfe.
               But vnto Campian I returne my anſwere, truely, fairely, and pertinently, by the verdict of my Text. Audito nomine Babylonis hoſtis expalluit; our aduerſarie waxed pale, vpon the very name of Babylon: it troubled his wit; it vexed his heart; it is a terrour vnto his ſoule: for hee liueth in that, from which hee ought to flye, if hee haue any part in Gods people.
               
               Now, as the cauſe of our ſeparation from Rome is neceſſarie, in many reſpects, and is grounded here, vpon ſuch a principle, as cannot bee denied, ſo wee need not depart from Rome, but becauſe ſhe is Babylon, and as ſhe is Babylon, as ſhe is departed from God, and from his truth (ſtanding vpon his Word) and as ſhe is departed from her ſelfe, as ſhe was in the more pure, and ancient times, in which no Catalogue of names can bee produced, to iuſtifie any ſucceſſion in thoſe doctrines, wherein wee iuſtly diſſent from them, and they vniuſtly from the Primitiue Church. O how gladly would we returne vnto Rome, if ſhee would returne vnto her ſelfe? Shee will not doe the one; therefore wee cannot doe the other.
               To conclude this point; ſince the iniudicious auoydance of one errour draweth vs into the danger of another

(Arrius was in oppoſition vnto Sabellius; and Eutyches vnto Nestorius; but all in errour) let men be well, and ſoundly aduiſed in their departure from this Babylon, leſt they erect a new Babylon, compounded of their owne fancies, by Anabaptiſticall furie, and Anarchicall paritie, through a miſpriſion of things, vpon falſe, vnlearned, and dangerous principles; namely, that the way, to come neereſt to the truth, is to goe fartheſt from the Pope: that the Church of Chriſt muſt ſtand in an vniuerſall contrarietie vnto Rome: that the meanes, to bring things vnto a medietie, and proper ſtate, is to runne into an oppoſite, and contrarie courſe; as, to bring a crooked ſticke vnto ſtreightneſſe, you muſt wreathe, and force it the other, and the contrary way. Which inſtance being made to this purpoſe, by a learned man (ſtanding in the tearmes of inconformitie to the Church of England) Maſter Hooker (that Oracle of Theologie) made anſwere vnto him very well; that the Church of England was alreadie come to her medietie, and ſetled eſtate; but, by this inſtance, it ſeemeth that the ſaid learned man, with ſome others (running a way of extreame oppoſition) were yet to come vnto ſome other medietie, and condition, after they had thus bowed things vnto a contrarie courſe. And, to ſay the truth (vpon certaine experience) to auoyde the Scylla of one ſhipwracke, ſome men runne indiſcreetly vpon the Charybdis of another; being ſo tranſported with intemperate Zeale, that, without Learning, Wiſdome, or Conſcience, they impute the name of Poperie vnto any thing, that they ignorantly diſtaſt,

and caſt the aſperſion of a Papiſt vpon any perſon, that they maliciouſly diſaffect. Such ciuill warres in the Church haue their end without triumph; of which point I ſhall ſpeake more anon.
               FOVRTHLY; great is the happineſſe of our Church, and State, being deliuered from the yoake, and tyrannie of Babylon, which held them both in ſeruitude, and captiuitie, for many yeeres. For if any Land may iuſtly complaine, that cruell Lords haue had the dominion ouer them; ENGLAND might complaine of this indignitie, and did often complaine of it, with many, and bitter teares; and particularly in the Reigne of King Henrie the Third, whom (as Matthew Paris doth relate) the Babylonian Monarch ſtiled his Vaſſall, and England his Iade; for ſhee did beare his burthens of oppreſſion, in ſundry expilations, and deepe exhauſtions of her Treaſure. Afterward, in the reigne of his Sonne (King Edward the firſt) hee ſent forth peremptory interdictions vnto all the Cleargie of this Land, requiring them vpon vertue of their obedience vnto the Apoſtolicall Seat, not to contribute their Subſidies, and iuſt reliefe, vnto their Souereigne Lord, the King; directly, and cleerly againſt the preſcription of Saint Paul vnto all Chriſtian ſubiects (though vnder vnbeleeuing Princes) inſtructing them to giue tribute, vnto whom they owe tribute, Rom. 13. O the rare Diuinitie of Babylon! The Cleargie of England muſt giue monies vnto the Pope, if hee require them; but not vnto the King, if he forbid them.
               Vpon this occaſion enſued a rebellious oppoſition

in the Archbiſhop of Canterburie [Peckham by name] againſt his lawfull Souereigne; that victorious, and puiſſant King (as, indeed, the Pope ſeldome wanted a Prelate in that See, to concurre with him againſt the King) to the iuſt prouocation of his Royall diſpleaſure, and no ſmall inconuenience of the whole Cleargie in this Land.
               But leauing temporall things (wherein this Iland ſuffered great calamitie, and vexation by the Babylonian Monarchs; drawing monies out of mens purſes, and withdrawing their obedience from their naturall Lords, and Kings) I come vnto ſpirituall things, wherein your deliuerance, from Babylon, pertaineth vnto the ſoule, and miniſtreth vnto you matter of higher contemplation; as namely, that you are freed from dangerous errous of falſe doctrines; from the oppreſſion of conſcience, wherein the Pope did reigne, and tyrannize; from the vncomfortable, and ridiculous ſeruice of God in an vnknowne tongue; from proſtitution of the bodie, and ſoule vnto ſtocks, and ſtones; from Idolatrous adoration of a breaden God; from the vexing feare of fained Purgatorie; from the vaine hope of Babylonian Pardons; and finally (in a word) from the vanitie of vncertaine traditions, with a number of ſuperſtitions, and fopperies, whoſe obſeruation was with great difficultie and little profit; yea rather with ſingular detriment, vnto the glorie of God, and perfection of his Church. Which things being iuſtly caſt out of this Church (as Chriſt expelled abuſes out of the Temple; Iohn 2.15.) you haue a peaceable ſtate of conſcience toward God, in the

ſweet libertie of his truth, vnder a gracious, and learned Souereigne; a ſincere Profeſſour, and a conſtant Protectour of the ſame.
               FIFTLY; they beare a ſpeciall obligation to God for his ſingular mercie, whom hee hath drawne out of the ſocietie of Babylon, and from the contagion of her cup; which, with Circaean intantations, metamorphizeth men into beaſts, intoxicating them with her venimous dregges; till God, of his meere grace, ſeeking them, who had loſt themſelues, take away the veile of errour from their eyes, and make them vnderſtand, from whence [Apoc. 2.5.] and to what, they are fallen. Though they wanted his preuenient grace, and therefore fell, yet they had his excitant grace, and therefore roſe againe: and if they haue aſſiſtant grace, none are more humble in their minds, none are more carefull of their wayes, none are more gratefull vnto God, none are more ſeruiceable vnto the Church. Let not the elder brother repine at the reuerſion and entertainment of the younger: why ſhould man ſhew his enuie, where God doth ſhew his pittie? Acknowledge thy owne infirmitie in thy brothers fall: commend Gods grace in his reſtitution to his eſtate; the neerer he was to Hell, the neerer he may be to Heauen.
               SIXTLY; whereas many, out of the inſufficiencie of knowledge, or weakneſſe of iudgement, or neutralitie of Religion (ſetting vp the ſaile of their conſcience vnto the wind of time) incline ſtrongly vnto Rome, or proſtitute themſelues wholy vnto her communion; let them conſider, that it is BABYLON (hated of God, and ordained to deſtruction) which

they embrace: and though they liue corporally in England, France, &c. that yet they liue ſpiritually in her; that they are members of this Citie, and that therefore they muſt weare the liuerie of her name; they are BABYLONIANS, in their true, and proper title. Let them, then, reiect the name of a PAPIST (the inuention, they ſay of LVTHER, but well accommodated, for many cauſes, vnto the vaſſals of the POPE) let them contemne the impoſition of it (though they cannot auoid it) but yet they ſhall neuer decline this title, which the ſacred Scripture it ſelfe, ſo anciently, ſo notably, ſo ineuitably doth faſten vpon them, to their outward ſhame, and inward griefe. Let them glorie in Rome, which the Scripture declareth to be Babylon, if it be any glorie to triumph in her, that, from exaltation (as the name of Rome doth ſignifie in the holy tongue) ſhall come to confuſion; as the name of Babylon doth import: the name is changed (Rome into Babylon) the ſtate is changed; glorie into ſhame. Know then, O vnhappie children of the Romane Synagogue, that you are Babylonians, carrying the name of your Mother, according to the verdict of Scripture, as well as Papiſts, carrying the name of your Father, according to the proofe of reaſon. So then we will ſpeake with the Scripture, and not with Luther; you are Babylonians; this is your name; anſwere vnto it; for by it, you ſtand indicted at the Barre of the diuine iudgement.
               SEVENTHLY; if Rome be Babylon, and we

muſt goe out of it, why doe ſome men perſwade you to goe vnto her, or, at the leaſt, to meete her? As if the differences in Religion, betwixt you, and her, were not ſo materiall, but that you may relinquiſh your opinions; or elſe not ſo reall, but that you, and ſhee, by the aduiſe of ſome Modificators, and temperate men, might bee reconciled together.
               But I will diſcouer the impoſſibilitie of their deuiſe, by foure euident, and perſpicuous Reaſons.
               
                  Firſt; there are many points, which admit no reconciliation; eſpecially ſuch, as concerne the Subiect; namely, whether the thing, vpon which we diſpute, ſimply bee, or bee not at all. As for example; the Papiſts diſpute amongſt themſelues, whether Purgatorie bee in Hell; whether it haue a corporall fire; whether Deuills be the Tormentors; whether a ſoule bee in it for ten, or one hundred yeares, &c. but they diſpute not, among themſelues (by way of doubt) whether there bee a Purgatorie or not; for they differ onely about the Praedicata, or attributes, thereof, whereas they all agree concerning the Subiect; that there is an eſtate of ſoules in temporall paine. Now wee denie the Subiect it ſelfe; and therefore the queſtion, propoſed betwixt vs, and them is; Whether there be any PVRGATORIE or not? Which either is, or it is not; and ſo there is no reconciliation in the differences of this nature, betwixt vs, and them: for, betwixt eſt, and non eſt [it is; and it is not] there is no middle thing.
               
                  But if the queſtion be de Praedicato, how this, or that agreeth vnto the ſubiect (as namely, what reall preſence of Chriſts bodie is in the Sacrament) heere, perhaps, ſome reconciliation might haue beene deuiſed in this behalfe, had not they, in this (and ſo in many other points) excluded all meanes of reconciliation alſo, by their definitions, reſolutions, and modifications of the Praedicate, in ſuch a manner, as cannot conſiſt with the truth of Gods Word, and euident principles of reaſon. As namely, they haue defined the reall preſence to be by Tranſubstantiation of the Elements into the bodie and bloud of Chriſt, hauing an inuiſible exiſtencie vnder the formes of Bread and Wine. This modification, beeing thus concluded by them, and now reputed an eſſentiall Article of Faith, there is no meanes of reconciliation in this caſe alſo; nor in many other points, of like qualitie, and condition vnto this; for what communion hath light with darkneſſe?
               
               
                  Secondly; therefore, they haue, by certaine Councels (the infallible, and irreuocable Oracles of their Religion) ſo defined, and ſo reſolued theſe, and many other things, that, if wee cannot come to them, in their points (in regard of certaine falſhood, or of vncertaine truth in them) they cannot come to vs, in our points, in regard of their owne principles, from which, if they once depart, they renuerſe, and ouerthrow the very foundation of all their faith, ſtanding wholy

vpon their late Councels, and Popes.
               Whence it is, that they giue vs no leaue to ſpeake dogmatically, and problematically of the meaneſt point in their Religion (as of Purgatorie, Indulgences, &c.) in ſuch a manner, as that the point may haue a ſuppoſed truth, or that it may haue a poſſible falſhood; but they bind vs to receiue it indiſputably, as to be beleeued by neceſſitie, and vpon the certaine perill of ſaluation; and the reaſon is, becauſe (as Bellarmine teacheth; De Laicis cap. 19. §. Quintò) There is one, and but one rule of faith, whereby wee beleeue all, and euery point of faith; namely, the Word of God, expounded by the Church; meaning their late Romane Church. Therefore it is all one danger, to deny all their Articles, or to deny but any one Article [Indulgences, or the like] reſolued by a Councell, and ſo propounded by their Church; which, if ſhee had a certaintie of errour in one point, ſhould haue an vncertainetie of truth in all. Where then is the meanes of reconciliation, or what reconciliation can you make, while they inſiſt in this courſe? You muſt come wholy to them, for they will not come, in any one part, or parcell, vnto you; and that were not a reconciliation with Rome, but a ſubmiſſion vnto her.
               
                  Thirdly; the Babylonians haue aſſumed vnto themſelues the onely power of calling Councells (the moſt proper meanes to determine all matters of Religion, by the verdict of Gods Word,

and teſtimony of his Church) the onely ſuffrages to define; the onely authoritie of doing, and proceeding after their owne pleaſure; and, finally, an vnqueſtionable infallibilitie to oblige vs vnto that, which they canonically reſolue, and conclude. Where then is the meanes of reconciliation? If they could retrograde, and goe backe from any point, alreadie determined by them, or from this courſe of determination, it would bee as great a miracle vnto vs, as the retroceſſion, or going backe of the Sun, in the dyall of Ahaz.
               
               
                  Fourthly, and laſtly, the Babylonians themſelues defie this buſineſſe of reconciliation; they ſcorne it as ridiculous; they deteſt it as odious; they reiect it as impoſſible. Therefore when Caſſander (as being a moderate Pontifician) entred vpon this deſigne, the rigid, and more ſeuere Babylonians (as namely Iohannes à Louanio) wrote vehemently, and ſharply againſt this attempt; whom Bellarmine [de Laicis cap. 19.] doth follow, inſiſting in the ſame ſteps. Whence it is, that Maſter Robert Parſons, the Ieſuite, writeth, in his Treatiſe of Mitigation, preciſely in this manner; Wee agree with the Proteſtants in this, that there can bee no agreement betwixt vs, and them, in Religion. Chap. 2. num. 5.
               Wherefore I may well approoue the aduiſed, and iudicious anſwere of Beza vnto the late, vnhappy French King, Henrie the fourth; That hee would endeauour to reconcile the perſons [Proteſtants,

and Papiſts] but not their Religions; the firſt being a charitable office; the ſecond an impoſſible worke.
               To conclude this obſeruation, then; be not deceiued by the pretenders of Reconciliation, who would intangle your mindes with this vnlearned, fooliſh, and erroneous proiect; as Vlphila, a Biſhop of the Goths, did ſometimes inſnare the credulous, and ignorant people; aſſuring them, that the differences, betwixt the Catholikes, and the Arrians, did conſiſt rather in the forme of words, then in the ſubſtance of matter; as Theodorit doth report; lib. 4. cap. 37.
               Now as the Reconcilers of the two Religions doe iuſtly deſerue your cenſure, ſo the ſecret Babylonians, that hold outward conformitie with England, and inward correſpondencie with Rome, are to bee lamented, as well as deteſted; being no leſſe dangerouſly affected in the ſtate of their owne ſoules, then againſt the ſtate of this Church. Theſe are men, that ſtand like a needle in a dyall; North, and South: perſonally in England, affectionately in Rome: heterogeneous members of both, and neither Church: amphibia, creatures liuing in the two Elements of Sion, and Babylon: they ſpeake both languages, of the Iewes, and Philiſtines: they comport themſelues ſo wiſely, that the preſent times may beare them, and the future receiue them: men more ſubtile for themſelues, then ſincere to any. It were to bee wiſhed, that, as men belieue (if ſuch men

doe belieue any thing) ſo they would confeſſe: For with the heart wee belieue to righteouſneſſe, and with the mouth wee confeſſe to ſaluation.
               
               EIGHTHLY; ſince Papall, or Eccleſiaſticall Rome, is that Babylon, which Saint Iohn doth here propoſe, and exhibite in liuely colours vnto our view, I cannot, without indignation, or rather compaſſion, obſerue, that this truth (being of ſuch cleere euidence, and of ſo great conſequence for the conſolation of Gods Church, afflicted by her, and confuſion of Babylon, triumphing in her pride, malice, and crueltie vpon vs: as alſo prouoking the diuine Maieſtie, by her monſtrous Idolatries, by her falſe doctrines, by her baſe ſuperſtitions, by her taking from the people the key of knowledge in the holy Scriptures, with many more abſurd, and impious courſes) ſhould bee ſo little regarded by ſome (vngratefull therefore vnto God for this ſacred Reuelation, made vnto his Church) or ſo much queſtioned by others: who either, out of negligence, ſearch not into this truth; or, out of a puzzeled vnderſtanding, cannot comprehend it; or, out of a preiudice, will not diſcerne it; but, like men in a ſecure, and pernicious Lethargie, with heauie and drowſie ſpirits, raiſe not vp their thoughts vnto a more acute penetration of ſo excellent, and ſo neceſſarie a point; for the prediction whereof, ſo long before, wee owe much vnto the prouidence of God, and for the diſcouery of it, now ſo long after, in theſe our dayes, wee owe much vnto his goodneſſe.
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
And I doe more earneſtly preſſe all Diuines in this Church, vnto a ſerious, and diligent contemplation of this myſterie (now ſo reuealed vnto vs, which was concealed from our fathers) becauſe they ſhall thereby inable themſelues, with more ſufficiencie of meanes, to confirme many in the truth; and to recall many from their errours; when they ſhall, by good diſcourſe of reaſon (founded vpon the circumſtances of this Scripture; comparing it with other Scriptures, and with the euents of time; the ſucceſſe of things, in later Ages, concurring with the prediction in former) cleerely, and fairely perceiue that Rome (as now ſhee is, and long hath beene, vnder the gouernment of the Pope) is the Myſticall Babylon, the Mother of Whoredomes, the Seate of the Second Beaſt, the verie Synagogue, wherein Antichriſt doth reigne. For defect of which certaine knowledge in the vnderſtanding, and ſecret perſwaſion of the mind therein, a greater gap is left open for the entrance of Babylon into many hearts: whereof I could ſay ſomething by the particular experience of my vnhappy ſelfe.
               Since therefore, I doe ſo well apprehend the force, and efficacie of this truth (for which I giue moſt humble thankes vnto my benigne, and gracious Lord, and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt) I doe more willingly excite, and ſtirre vp my learned Brethren, to ſettle their iudgements vpon a perfect, and exact knowledge thereof; being able,

and readie, by ſpeciall demonſtration, and ſtrength of diſcourſe, to explicate the ſame in particular manner, and forme, omni poſcenti, to euerie one, that ſhall aske a reaſon of their aſſertion, and beliefe in this point; wherein now the Ieſuites themſelues (Ribera, and Viegas) haue carryed vs ſecurely, and firmely, beyond the ſpeculation of Auguſtine, and ſome others (conceiuing this Babylon to bee the generall ſocietie of the wicked, and no particular place) and beyond the deciſion of Hierome; ſuppoſing it to bee Ethnicall Rome, and ſo to bee alreadie paſt; at which wee doe not meruaile, ſince Hierome by experience, ſaw that State paſt, but could not, by diuination, foreſee this to come; namely, that the Pope ſhould bee the Second Beaſt, and that Rome ſhould bee Babylon vnder him; a matter not imaginable in thoſe more happie times.
               Therefore, though the ſaid Ieſuites, going beyond Auguſtine, confeſſe this Babylon to bee Rome, and, going beyond Hierome (yea beyond the moſt generall conceit of other Babylonians) confeſſe it to bee Rome, in a new, ſecond, and latter eſtate (after the entertainment of Chriſtian Religion therein) but deny it to bee ſo, in regard of the Church at all, or of the Citie, as it now is, and while ſhee ſhall ſo remaine vnder the Pope; yet wee ſee them ſo wrapped vp in ſundrie inextricable difficulties, to maintaine this their determination of the

point, that, till wee come vnto the perſpicuous, and ſolid reſolution thereof (by laying ſo great a power of Babylon, which they ſaw in it, vpon the Papall Souereignety; and ſo large a Dominion, which they ſaw in it, vpon the extenſion of his authoritie in the world; and ſo much Idolatry, which they ſaw in it, vpon the ſuperſtitious, & fooliſh practiſes of the Romane Church; and ſuch a correſpondency with the world, which they ſaw in it, vpon the communication of her Wares, and negotiation of her Merchants with it, together with the dependencie of of States, and Churches vpon it) there is no meanes, in congruitie of reaſon, and in ordinarie ſenſe, to vntwine, and looſe the doubts, which ariſe thereupon, and bind vp theſe men ſo faſt; viz. How Rome, within the ſpace of three yeeres, or therevpon (with which limits of time they circumſcribe the reigne of Antichriſt; out of a falſe, and erroneous opinion of the Ancients) ſhould attaine vnto ſuch a vaſt power, and ſo ample a Dominion in the world; with ſuch groſſe Idolatrie, diffuſed ſo copiouſly from thence, into the world; with ſuch a ſubiection of Kingdomes, and Prouinces vnto it: which things, though they ſaw truely, and affirme conſtantly (by the certaine, and infallible euidence of the Text it ſelfe) yet they would not, or they could not (by reaſon of their foreſtalled conceit, which they haue of the holy Father, and of his Apostolicall State) behold, and diſcerne them there, where onely

they are to bee found; where onely, the Scripture doth aſſigne them; where onely, the palpable euents, and cleere ocurrences of the time diſcouer them; where onely reaſon, and her diſcourſe, doth bring them forth vnto ſufficient notice.
               Hee therefore, that now ſeeth not this truth, hath a ſhallow head; and hee, that, ſeeing it, will yet diſſemble it, hath an hollow heart. Such men therefore I may truely compare vnto Achan; for as hee tooke the Babyloniſh garment, and couered it in his Tent [Ioſh. 7.21.] expecting a more conuenient time, to make ſome further vſe thereof; ſo they lay vp Babylonian doctrines, and ſuperſtitions, in their hearts, expecting a time, to make more publike practiſe thereof; as opportunitie may giue them ſecuritie in this behalfe; men, therefore, that looke downeward vnto the changeable times in the earth, but not vpward, vnto immutable eternitie in heauen.
               NINTHLY; ſince Rome is Babylon, therefore vnitie, and peace, and concord ſhould reigne in the Church of God (which ſhee laboureth to vndermine with her policie, and to ruinate with her power) that all may conſpire in a ſacred expedition, to performe the word, and worke of God, againſt Babylon; the denne of that accurſed Beaſt. For, if the diuerſitie of tongues hindred the ſetting of Literall Babylon vp, the diuerſitie of hearts will hinder the pulling of Spirituall Babylon downe. Let vs pray, then, for

the peace of Ieruſalem; let them proſper that loue it: let euery man endeauour to cure domeſticke wounds, and make none; that euery honeſt heart may beare witneſſe vnto it ſelfe, and ſay with the wiſe woman of Abel, in her Apologie for her Citie; I am one of them that are peaceable, and faithfull in Iſrael, 2. Sam. 20.19.
               TENTHLY; and laſtly, I conclude with a Morall obſeruation vpon this point. Since Rome is degenerate from her ancient ſtate, in purer times (when ſhee was a profeſſour of the truth, and a protectour of them, that repayred vnto her for defence thereof) hauing loſt her Excellencie, and forfeited her Name (by a ſorrowfull change of Glorious Rome, into Impure Babylon) wee may therefore conſider, that the Grace of GOD is not tyed to any place, not fixed to any Citie, not bound vnto any Kingdome; but as hee giueth it freely, by his fauour, ſo hee taketh it away iuſtly for our ſinnes. Hence it is (according to the conſtruction of this point, by Ribera, the Ieſuite) that this Rome (now faithfull, in his opinion) may become, and ſhall become Babylon heereafter, in her Idolatrie, Dominion, Power, Riches, &c. (though indeed ſhee is now ſo, in all theſe things; neyther can it bee preſumed, by any reaſon, that ſhee ſhould become ſo within a little time, euen the ſpace of two or three yeeres, as they ridiculouſly conceiue, but neceſſarily ſuppoſe,

for their owne diſcharge) and that ſhee ſhall be a Cage of vncleane Birds, and that ſhe ſhall truly deſerue this name of Babylon, by the confluence of all Impieties, that ſhall then reigne therein. Which future (as he pretendeth, but preſent, as we ſee) eſtate of Rome, and change of her name, in the change of her condition, hee approoueth by the inſtance of Ieruſalem (as I noted before) once a faithfull Citie, the place of Gods ſpeciall delight, &c. yet afterwards a rebellious Citie, a Where, in her Idolatries, and ſinnes: wherewith, afterward, ſhe prouoked him vnto his fierce, and vindictiue wrath.
               And indeed, well might this calamitie fall vpon Rome, if it fell vpon Ieruſalem [How is the faithfull Citie become an harlot? thy ſiluer is become droſſe, thy wine is mixt with water: Eſay 1. 21.] ſince Ieruſalem was priuiledged with more Immunities, by Gods owne conceſſion, and teſtimonie, then euer was that fatall Citie of Rome; howbeit, vnder the Emperours, ſhee boaſted of her eternitie, and, vnder the Popes, ſhee braggeth of Saint Peters Chaire, as beeing faſtened vnmoueably vnto her ſides; for ſo doth Bellarmine conceiue, and earneſtly preſſe this point (de Rom. Pont. lib. 4. cap. 4.) as a moſt probable opinion, and piouſly to bee beleeued. And though ſhee may bee burned in the time of Antichrist (ſaith hee) yet that ſhall not bee till the end of the World: yea, by their computation of Antichriſts reigne, perhaps within a yeare,

or two before it, ſince Antichriſt (reigning but three and an halfe) cannot preſently ſubdue other parts of the World, and bring his power againſt this Citie.
               But leauing Bellarmine, with his fellowes, intangled in the bird-lime of their owne abſurdities, let vs not maruell at this mutation in Rome, which we now behold (the name of it being thus tranſlated into Babylon, ſince the dignitie, and glorie, and luſtre of her ancient vertues are now extinguiſhed by the inundation of her ſinnes, mentioned before, leading her into the Sea of her perdition) nor at the mutation of Ieruſalem, of which you heard before (her name ſignifying, they ſhall ſee peace, but ſhee ſaw, and felt the miſerie of warres, for her great and many ſinnes) let vs, I ſay, not maruell at the one, or other, but let vs feare the like vnto our ſelues, if God leaue vs vnto our ſelues, to dye, and to periſh in the courſe of our ſinnes. Hee may take away the kingdome from vs, and giue it vnto another Nation: hee may remooue our Candlesticke, and place it in another Region: ſo may Albion (this white and faire Countrey of England, wherein wee dwell) looſe her name, and be turned into a black, darke, and diſmall Land; and then alſo God may be glorified in our deſtruction, as he hath beene glorified in our preſeruation, and great felicitie; euen to the admiration of all Lands, and enuie of ſome, that haue complotted, but could not effect, our ruine.
               
                  Therefore, while wee haue the light, let vs walke in it, and caſt away the workes of darkneſſe, that Gods truth may euer dwell in our Land; that, as wee haue receiued it from our Fathers in peace (though they left it vnto vs by their bloud) ſo wee may tranſmit the ſame vnto our Children, and bee euer readie alſo to ſeale it with our bloud; if God ſhall vouchſafe vs that double honour; to beleeue in his Sonne, and to ſuffer for his ſake.
               
            
            The end of the firſt Sermon.
         
         
            
            
            THE SECOND SERMON. WHEREIN IS DISCVSSED the Second Part of this Text; Namely, the PREDICATE, expreſſing the puniſhment of ROME; It is fallen; it is fallen.
            
               AS Zarah firſt appeared in the birth, but, retyring himſelfe, gaue way, and paſſage vnto Pharez, to come, before him, into the world [Gen. 38.29.] ſo the Puniſhment of Rome (being firſt here in order of place, but laſt in order of ſenſe) hath reſigned its prioritie vnto the Sinne of Rome, in the method, and diſpoſition of the parts, which I haue followed in the purſuite,

and diſcuſſion of my Text. Now therefore I come, from the Subject, to the Praedicate; from Babylon, to her fall; from the Sinne of Rome, to her Puniſhment; ſo confirmed, ſo ratified, and entayled therevnto, that no wit (though ſubtile) no learning (though great) no policie (though deepe) no Art (though curious) no ſtrength (though mightie) ſhall bee able to diuert, nullifie, and preuent the ſame; as hereafter we ſhall in due place, moſt cleerely diſcouer and diſcerne.
            As for the Subject, BABYLON; whether it bee Rome, or not; and in what eſtate; and for what cauſes; the ſerious, and diligent tractation thereof required a large extent of time, to ſpeake ſufficiently, and exactly thereof; to inſtruct the ignorant, to confute the aduerſaries, to diſſolue doubts, and to ſettle the conſcience of euery intelligent, and indifferent hearer, in a very plaine, and certaine apprehenſion of the truth: for that was my deſire; and, I hope, it is my ſucceſſe. But now, being to treate of the Praedicate [IT IS FALLEN] which is ſo certaine to enſue, and ſo eaſie to vnderſtand, I will ſpeake thereof with ſuch breuitie, as may not be obſcure, and ſuch length, as may not be tedious vnto you. And becauſe method doth make the diſcourſe more eaſie, and the memorie more firme (as well in the hearer, as in the ſpeaker)  I will propoſe this order for my ſpeech: Firſt; I will ſpeake of the time of this Puniſhment; why it is expreſſed in the preterperfect tenſe; it is fallen; as  if it were alreadie paſt. Secondly; of the Duplication; why it is ſet forth with this Ingemination: it is fallen, it is fallen; ſince it ſhall fall thus but once; with

a finall, and irrecouerable ruine. Thirdly; of the qualitie, and condition of this ruine; how it is a fall, and what the Spirit of God doth intend thereby.
            
               The FIRST point; concerning the Time, in the preterperfect tenſe; It is fallen.
               
               
                  THe word it ſelfe, according to the originall Text, being in the aoriſt, ſignifieth a fall in a time indeterminately, or vncertainly paſt; & is more aptly rendred, is fallen, then hath fallen; as (Ioh. 11.14.) our Sauiour ſaith of Lazarus; 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ; he is dead; as it is to be tranſlated in that place: where (as in my Text) is imported an act, (which is paſt, and done) with a CONTINVANCE in that ſtate. For Lazarus did die, and then continued in the ſtate of the death: ſo here; Babylon IS FALLEN, and remaineth in the condition of her ruine: from whence ſhee ſhal not haue her reſurrection to worldly glorie: (though Lazarus had his reſurrection to temporall life) for ſhee ſhall fall, and neuer riſe againe; as wee ſhall afterwards perceiue.
               But now, as the bleſſed Virgin deſired to vnderſtand of the Angel; How ſhall this be? Luc. 1.34. that ſhee (being a Virgin) ſhould yet conceiue a ſonne; ſo, how can this be that Babylon, being in her Imperiall ſouereigntie, at the time of this Praediction (which yet, in the very letter, carrieth the forme of a relation, and report) and now being, after ſo many hundred yeeres, in her Papall eminencie ſtanding then and not being fallen yet, ſhee ſhould notwithſtanding be here

ſaid, to bee alreadie fallen; as if that were then paſt, which is not yet come?
               I frame my anſwere out of the learned diſputation of Epiphanius, haereſ. 79. where he doth well obſerue, that Eſay (the Euangelicall Prophet) foreſaw ſome things, which were then to come, as if they had beene alreadie paſt; and that they are expreſſed rather in the manner of a Narration, then of a Prediction; and this was chiefly for two cauſes. Firſt; to helpe the weakeneſſe of the Prophets faith; and, ſecondly, to declare, thereby, the firmeneſſe of Gods promiſe; in whoſe preuiſion, counſell, and purpoſe, the things were alreadie paſt vnto, and before him, though they were yet to bee fulfilled, in their act, and execution, vnto, and before men.
               Theſe two reaſons hold due proportion, & iuſt correſpondency in, & with our preſent caſe: where S. Iohn (the Euangelical Prophet of the new Teſtament) doth vnderſtand, by reuelation of the Angel (or rather of Ieſus Chriſt himſelfe; as it is Apoc. 1.1.) that the proud and tyrannical Babylon is fallen; that God hath executed his fierce wrath vpon that vſurping Citie.
               FIRST, then, God did, by this forme of ſpeech, confirme the faith of his ſeruant then, and of vs now, that the length of time might not ſhake the conſtancie of his, and our faith, in expectation of this euent, but that, with patience, we might attend the certaine pleaſure of God, though to bee fulfilled in an vncertaine time. So in the Prophet Eſay: chap. 53. verſ. 4.5. &c. Hee was deſpiſed: hee carried our ſorrowes: he was wounded for our tranſgreſsions: hee was afflicted, &c. thus Eſay wrote of the ſacred Paſſion of our Lord

Ieſus Chriſt, which enſued neere vpon the ſpace of eight hundred yeeres, after the time of this Prediction (or Narration rather: for ſo it is in the tenour of the words; which doe rather Hiſtorically relate, then Prophetically foretell) and thus the Prophet (and, with him, the faithfull Iewes) doth comfort himſelfe, in the ſecure expectation of ſo great a bleſſing, in the ſolid ſtabilitie of this faith: in which, or rather by which, hee ſaw that with the eye of his ſoule, which he neuer ſaw with the eye of his bodie. The thing was infallible; but the time was not ſo reuealed vnto him (at leaſt, hee neuer reuealed it vnto vs) as vnto Daniel, that excellent and glorious Prophet, Dan. 9.25. This example alone might ſuffice in this behalfe; but that we haue another, more anſwerable to our preſent purpoſe, as being the very type, and true figure thereof; Eſay 21.9. Where the Prophet, by viſion, doth vnderſtand the ruine of Literall Babylon, expreſſed, and ſet downe in the very like forme of words; Babel is fallen: all the Images of her Gods hath hee broken vnto the ground. There God doth ſupport the faith of Eſay, and of his children; to whom hee doth ſo cleerely reueale (as if the act were abſolutely paſt) the deſtruction of that potent, rich, and ſtately Citie; which was Gods Scourge to afflict his people, and his Hammer to ruinate the Citie of Gods delight, and Temple of his preſence. In like manner, God doth, here in my Text, giue great conſolation vnto S. Iohn, his ſeruant, and vnto vs, his brethren, in the ſeene (rather then foreſeene) ruine of myſticall Babylon; which, in her Imperiall ſtate, did, for certaine ages, with Heatheniſh crueltie perſecute,

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
ſpoile, murther Gods Saints, with copious effuſion of their bloud, which was the Seed of his Church: and in her Papall ſtate, hath for many Ages, with Antichriſtian furie, afflicted, tormented, killed many a member of Ieſus Chriſt; which, for loue of his truth, and feare of his Name, could not, and would not participate in the Cup of her incantations, wherewith ſhee bewitcheth many Kings and Kingdomes in the World.
               The point, then, which I here obſerue, is this: that our faith maketh vs happie, and ſecure: our faith lifteth vs vp, aboue ſenſe and reaſon: our faith is Iacobs ſtaffe, whereby we paſſe ouer, and through the Iorden of this World: our faith is Manna, which feedeth vs in the Wilderneſſe of this World, and neuer ceaſeth, till wee come into the Canaan of Heauen: then, and not before, her Commiſſion doth expire. For as Barzillai conducted Dauid ouer Iorden, but went not with him to Ieruſalem; ſo faith carrieth vs out of this miſerable World, but goeth not with vs into the heauenly Kingdome, where the fruition of God, and viſion of his eſſence, exclude the nature of beliefe.
               Two things therefore (here by the way) are fit for our inſtruction, to know them, and for our meditation, to contemplate, and ruminate thereupon. FIRST; the excellencie of Faith in it ſelfe: it maketh vs ſecure in things to come, as if they were alreadie paſt; or, at the leaſt, it maketh them preſent vnto vs, by bringing, and preſenting them inwardly vnto our mindes. Wherein Faith differeth from Hope: for as Faith exceedeth Hope in the extent of the obiect (Hope looketh onely vpon things deſirable,

and good; Faith vpon all things, generally, that are reuealed by God) ſo where they meet in one obiect (the ſame thing being belieued by Faith, and deſired by Hope; as life eternall &c.) they haue a different relation thereunto: for that is preſent vnto Faith, which is future vnto Hope: Hope carrieth vs vnto the things; Faith bringeth the things vnto vs. For as Dauids Worthies brake through the Hoſt of their Enemies, and brought water out of the Well of Bethlehem vnto him, for which hee longed: ſo Faith aſcendeth into all places bee they neuer ſo high; deſcendeth into them, be they neuer ſo deepe; flieth vnto them, be they neuer ſo remote; pierceth into them, bee they neuer ſo cloſe, and bringeth vs the thing, which wee long for, by an effectuall, liuely and forcible demonſtration thereof vnto the ſoule. Hope therefore doth comfortably attend; Faith doth infallibly aſſure: Hope ſuſtayneth vs in the expectation; Faith putteth vs in the poſſeſſion.
               SECONDLY; the benefit of Faith vnto vs: it is the eye of a Chriſtian ſoule, and (as Luther well obſerued) the reaſon of a Chriſtian man; Credo, Domine: I beleeue, O Lord; Marke 9.24. To which purpoſe well ſpeaketh one of the Ancients; Fides credat, intelligentia non requirat: Let Faith beleeue, let not the Vnderſtanding ſeeke: Nay, Credendo intelligimus, non intelligendo credimus: wee beleeue not, by vnderſtanding; but we vnderſtand by beleeuing. By this is Abraham iuſtified, Rom. 4.17. for aboue Hope (the hope of humane reaſon) he beleeued vnder Hope; the Hope of diuine Faith.
               By this Saint Paul doth liue; I liue by Faith in the

Sonne of God: Gal. 2.20. By this Saint Iohn conquereth all worldly things; this is the victorie, that ouercommeth the World; euen our Faith. 1. Iohn 5.4. To conclude, therefore, according to the ſubiect of my ſpeech: Let Babylon extoll her ſelfe, and oppreſſe others; let her aduance her ſelfe, and deiect others: let her proceed in her Crueltie, Idolatry, and Pride, &c. Yet for all theſe things, God ſhall bring her to iudgement. I beleeue it; I am certaine of it; for hee aſſureth mee that ſhe is alreadie fallen. Faint not then (O Religious, and Chriſtian hearts) vnder her tyrānie; but comfort your ſelues in her aſſured, and infallible ruine; which God doth certifie, and Faith doth apprehend, and time ſhall manifeſt, at the laſt: but beleeue this; for, if you beleeue not, you ſhall not be eſtabliſhed: Eſay 7.9. Therefore I ſay vnto all my brethren, as Iehoſhaphat vnto his ſubiects; Put your trust in the Lord your God; beleeue his Prophets, and you ſhall proſper. 2. Chron. 20.20.
               Now, therefore, ſince Faith is of this excellencie in it ſelfe, and bringeth this benefit vnto vs (as that, by it, wee enioy things yet to come: by it wee behold things farre diſtant: by it wee are riſen againe, before we be dead: by it we are aſcended into Heauen, while wee are yet in the Earth: by it wee are happie, though we be yet in the vale of miſerie) let vs make three vſes of this incomparable gift of God.
               
                  First; to prayſe God for this grace, and particularly in this ſubiect, whereof I now intreat: that as hee hath reuealed vnto vs the ruine of our capitall enemie [BABYLON] in his holy word, and by his owne ſonne, ſo hee hath giuen vs an aſſurance of Faith to beleeue it confidently, and ſo ſtrengthened our faith

by the certaintie of the prediction, as if we had ſeene it alreadie fulfilled with our eyes. Therefore, againſt her power, and glorie, and dominion, and reputation, and all outward ſplendour, and, finally, the concurrencie of her friends, or ſlaues, to ſupport her greatneſſe, whereby ſhe may ſeeme to ſubſiſt by a ſolid, and inconcuſſible foundation of her eſtate (the ſame being ſtrengthened by the depth of policie, and adorned with all varietie of Learning; as Saint Gregorie himſelfe did foreſee, that the Miniſters of Antichriſt were the Locuſts, Apocal. 9.7, 10. hauing Crownes on their heads, ſignifying literature, and knowledge: hauing alſo ſtings in their tayles, ſignifying power, and abilitie) I ſtill oppoſe Gods purpoſe, reuealed in his Word, that cannot be fruſtrate, and my Faith, founded vpon his Word, which cannot be erroneous. For as Saint Auguſtine doth ingeniouſly, and grauely collect out of the Prophet Daniel, that the reſurrection of the dead (ſo cleerely foretold by him) ſhall certainly be effectuated in due time, becauſe other things, in that Prophet (ſo long before ſet downe in his Propheſie) haue had their reall, and actuall accompliſhment, according to his prediction (which being true in the reſt, cannot faile in this) ſo my Faith is eſtabliſhed firmely here in this point, by diligent obſeruation of all othet paſſages in this Booke (once very obſcure, but now daily more, and more cleere) becauſe other things being ſo notably diſcouered in their euent, and the predictions of this myſticall Scripture being made ſo apparant in the ſucceſſe of time; I may not, I will not, I cannot doubt of the adimpletion of this particular, but that Romiſh Babylon ſhall finally come vnto her

fatall ruine, as ſhee is alreadie fallen in Gods certaine Preuiſion, eternall Counſell, and immutable Decree.
               
                  Secondly; we ought to nouriſh this faith by all poſſible meanes; eſpecially, by reading the holy Scriptures, and conferring one place thereof with another, which is a ſingular key to open vnto vs their ſenſe, and meaning; according to the preſcription of the two learned Fathers, Saint Hierome contra Pelag. lib. 1. c. 4. and Auguſt. de doctr. Chriſt. lib. 2. c. 9. & lib. 3. c. 26. So this particular; the collation, and compariſon of the Scriptures (one part of the Reuelation with another: the predictions of Saint Paul with the Viſions of Saint Iohn) together with the obſeruation of manifold occurrences in the Ciuill and Eccleſiaſticall ſtate, from time to time, ſince the declination of the Empire, and corruption of the Church (as the Hiſtories of each may ſufficiently deduce vnto our knowledge) doth notably diſcouer this Babylonian Myſterie vnto vs, with the beginning, progreſſe and decadencie of her eſtate.
               THIRDLY; ſince Faith is the ſpeciall gift of God, who ſanctifieth vnto vs the outward meanes to increaſe, and confirme the ſame, wee muſt humbly ſue vnto God by deuout, and earneſt Prayer, with the Kingly Prophet Dauid; Pſal. 119.18. Open mine eyes, O Lord, that I may ſee the wonderfull things in thy Law. Otherwiſe, as the Iewes reade the old Teſtament, and yet cannot find Chriſt therein; ſo men may may reade the new, and cannot ſee ſee Antichriſt therein. Why? becauſe their hearts are hardned, their vnderſtandings are foreſtalled with preiudice, the veile is ouer their

eyes, they walke in darkneſſe, and will not ſee the light. For ſuch I will pray that God would open their hearts, that they may entertaine his ſauing Truth. But for my ſelfe, and others, who haue bin in the like condition with mee, (whoſe eyes were blinded with the glorie of Babylon; for as Zebul ſaid vnto Gaal, Iudic. 9.36. the ſhadow of the Mountaynes ſeeme men vnto thee; ſo the ſhadow of many things ſeemed a ſubſtance of verity vnto vs) I will thanke God, for that he hath opened our eyes to ſee this myſterie, and miſery of Babylon; that ſhe is fallen, that ſhe is gone into perdition, that God hath deſtroyed her for euer. Credo Domine: O Lord, I beleeue thy Word, not my owne reaſon; which I captiuate into the obedience of faith; and therefore I pray with thine Apoſtles; O Lord, increaſe our faith; (Luke 17.5.) that we may beleeue thy Word.
               And thus much bee ſpoken concerning the firſt cauſe, why the Fall of Babylon, which is yet to come, is expreſſed by a time alreadie paſt.
               SECONDLY; by this forme, and tenour of ſpeech, God doth euidently declare vnto his Church the truth, and certaintie of his promiſe in the deſtruction of Babylon; that we may repoſe ſecurely in this expectation of her ruine: his dixit is a fecit: it is ſpoken, and it is done, in regard of his infallible Word, and conſtant promiſe.
               And that wee may more cleerely vnderſtand this point, we muſt obſerue a double kinde of Propheſie in the holy Scriptures. The FIRST is a Propheſie of Commination: as God did threaten the fall of Niniueh within fortie dayes; but hee threatned her fall,

that ſhe might not fall: for the effect of ſuch a Propheſie dependeth vpon our comportment, and carriage thereupon toward God by Repentance; and therefore it hath a condition (implyed here, though not expreſſed; as ſometimes it is, Ieremie 18.7, 8.) vpon which the execution doth ſtay, or go forth, according as we performe, or neglect the ſame. So that this Propheſie is conditionall, and not abſolute: it contayneth Gods ſentence, and not his Decree: and therefore it is expreſſed in the future tenſe; Nineueh ſhall fall. In this caſe the Propheſie is changeable, if we be changed; and therefore God calleth vs to Repentance, that we may eſcape his iudgements. And though this kind of Propheſie be not now particularly directed againſt thy Countrey, nor thy perſon (as, in the holy Scriptures, it is often ſo directed againſt ſuch a Nation, ſuch a Citie, and ſuch a man) yet as the generall comminations of God againſt ſinners doe include vs, and will take hold vpon vs, if wee returne not vnto God with the teares of true repentance; ſo the particular examples of his comminations, denounced, and executed againſt ſome Cities, and ſome perſons, doe, by equall reaſon, and a like cauſe, appertaine vnto vs; according to the rule, and obſeruation of our bleſſed Sauiour; Except you amend your liues, you ſhall likewiſe periſh. Luk. 13.3, 5. When Nineueh is threatned by Ionah, England is threatned: when her ruine is declared by Nahum, how can England be ſecure? Pares culpâ, cur impares poena? why is ſhe vnlike to Nineueh in puniſhment, who is ſo like to her in ſinne? wee feare the deſtruction, and not the ſinne: the effect, and not the cauſe. But it is the

Lords Mercies that wee are not conſumed.
               
               The SECOND is a Propheſie of Predestination (as I may call it) depending indeed vpon our ſinne, but yet reſolued by God, as well as declared; in which reſpect it is abſolute, and not conditionall, once decreed, and neuer reuoked: concluded in Gods immutable counſell; foreſeene in his infallible preſcience; and it is rather pronounced, then denounced by him. Therefore it is expreſſed, either in the time paſt (as heere in my Text, and Eſay 21.9.) or in the time preſent, though the effect doe not yet appeare. For wee may obſerue, that, in the Propheſie of Ionah, (there being a commination againſt her, at that time) it is deliuered in the future tenſe; Nineueh ſhall fall: but, in the Propheſie of Nahum (there being now a reſolution of God, declared concerning her ſubuerſion) it is deliuered in the preſent tenſe: the Horſeman lifteth vp the bright Sword: a multitude is ſlaine: they ſtumble vpon their corpſes. Chap. 3.3. and then, in the ſeuenth Verſe; Nineueh is destroyed. So that, (in this kind of Propheſie) theſe two tenſes, to wit, the preſent and the preterperfect, haue a coincident ſenſe, and purpoſe, concerning an infallibilitie of the euent. Whence it is, that the Prophet Eſay ioyneth them both together in the Paſſion of Chriſt, and Myſterie of our Redemption; ſaying of him, that he is deſpiſed; he is a man full of ſorrowes; he is brought, as a ſheepe vnto the ſlaughter; Eſay 53.3.7. as well as, hee was oppreſſed; he was afflicted, &c.
               
               Thus wee ſee, by the conference of Scriptures, that the fall of Babylon here, certified vnto vs in the time paſt [it is fallen] doth truly import an ineuitable

euent; a ſentence neuer to bee recalled; proceeding from a decree, neuer to bee changed; becauſe God hereby doth inſinuate vnto our knowledge, that ſhee would not bee renewed by repentance, and that hee would not conferre that grace vpon her, but leaue her to periſh in the courſe of her owne ſinnes.
               And this truth is farther aſſured, and amplified, by al the circumſtances, preceding her ruine; accompanying her ruine; following her ruine, in three ſeueral chapters; 17.18.19. in ſuch large and ample termes, that the very Image of Babylon, in all theſe things, is effectually and liuely exhibited, thereby, vnto our eyes; as a matter of preſent action, rather then future accompliſhment; rather to be ſeene, then to be beleeued.
               Wherefore, the promiſe of God being thus verified vnto vs, in this forme, and manner of ſpeech, let vs (by the way) make a little reflection vpon this point, for our vſe and obſeruation; as being of ſo great conſequence, for the benefit of Gods children, and aduancement of his truth. Firſt, then, the fidelitie of Gods promiſe herein doth exclude, and confute their errour, who ſuppoſe that this is a prophecie of Commination onely, and not of Reſolution againſt Romiſh Babylon; as though ſhee might turne from her ſinnes, and conſequently, God might turne from his wrath. In which opinion S. Hierome himſelfe was involued, as it appeareth, in his darke, vncertaine, and perplexed diſcourſe, touching Babylon, and her ruine, in the concluſion of his ſecond book againſt Iovinian; whoſe errors did then begin to poſſeſſe many in Rome, and to intangle them in his ſnare, compoſed artificially out of ſundry paſſages of the Scripture. Wherevpon

S. Hierome maketh a patheticall Apoſtrophe vnto Rome in this manner; I will ſpeake vnto thee, O Rome, which by the confeſsion of Chriſt, haſt blotted out of thy forehead, the blaſphemy written therein. There, the name Babylon is laid vpon Ethnicall Rome, as if Rome were afterward to bee diſcharged for euer of this ſcandall; which miſpriſion, and errour I haue refuted in my former Sermon. But let vs proceed with S. Hierome, who addeth immediately, by way of acclamation; O potent Citie; O Lady-citie of the world; O Citie, commended by the voyce of the Apostle; interpret thine owne name: according to the Greekes, it is a name of FORTITVDE: according to the Hebrewes, it is a name of SVBLIMITIE; Keepe that, then, which thou art called: let vertue make thee high, let not pleaſure make thee baſe. All this pertaineth to her honour, and exaltation; but then hee giueth his aduice vnto her preſently, in the very next words; Thou mayeſt, by thy repentance, eſcape the malediction, which our Sauiour hath threatned vnto thee in his Reuelation. No, not ſo, S. Hierome, by your leaue: ſhee ſhall not eſcape: this is not a ſimple Commination againſt Rome, which may bee preuented, but a reſolution, which muſt be fulfilled. And now to conclude this obſeruation; I here diſcouer ſome perplexitie (as I ſaid before) and vncertaintie, yea, perhaps, contradiction in this Rhetoricall paſſage of this learned Father. For ſince he doth confeſſe, that, howſoeuer Chriſtian Rome had wiped away the infamie of her Ethnicall eſtate, and doth, notwithſtanding, immediately affirme, that the Commination of Chriſt (ſpecified here in my Text, and more largely diſcourſed in the reſidue of this

Chapter) is yet in force againſt her, and that it is yet to be executed vpon her, if ſhe, by repentance, ſhall not diuert and euacuate the ſame; one of theſe two things muſt neceſſarily here enſue: namely, that either ſhee will bee Babylon againe, in ſucceeding ages, and iuſtly deſerue this ruine (and ſo S. Hierome, by the former words, doth not diſcharge Rome from the name of Babylon, for the time to come, but onely in that her preſent ſtate) or elſe that God ſhall puniſh her in the time to come, for her ſinnes alreadie paſt; which I doubt how it may ſtand with the Truth, and Iuſtice of God, as I haue more largely deduced in my former Sermon. And ſo leauing it vnto your iudicious cenſure, what you will determine of S. Hierome in this caſe (ſince this iudgement is laid vpon Rome, in the name of Babylon, and for her Babylonian ſinnes) I end this obſeruation with the confeſſion of the learned Ieſuites, as well as of ſome ancient Fathers, that Rome being Babylon, ſhall be certainly deſtroyed; howbeit, not by Antichriſts power, as they conceiue, but for Antichriſts pride, as we haue partly ſeene heretofore, and ſhall ſee more hereafter.
               A Second vſe, to be made of this point, is, for the conſolation of Gods children: ſhee curſeth them, ſhee excommunicateth them, ſhee depoſeth Kings, ſhee diſpoſeth Kingdomes, ſhee expoſeth both to ruine, ſhee abſolueth ſubiects from obedience, ſhee ſtirreth forraine powers againſt them, ſhee burneth, ſhee drowneth, ſhee ſpareth no meanes to extirpate them out of the world. Comfort now your ſelues in Gods promiſe; ſhee is fallen, with him: ſhee ſhall fall before vs: for Gods Word ſhall not fall. Againe, ſhee taketh

vpon her to foretell our ruine, and deſtruction. Pererius, a learned Ieſuite (but a blind Babylonian) in his expoſition of Geneſ. 15.16. complaineth bitterly of the perſecution of Catholikes in England, which (ſaith he, meaning England) though ſhe remaine in the courſe of her ſins, yet ſhe enioyeth great felicitie; but he recollecteth himſelfe with that ſpeech of God vnto Abraham; the ſinnes of the Amorites are not yet full; ENGLAND (ſaith hee) though full of ſinne, hath not yet fulfilled the number of her ſinnes: but, when they are come to their height, ſhee ſhall certainely periſh: and, if any man thinke, that this time is not farre off, hee, in my opinion, is not farre from the truth. Now though wee are to learne ſomething of our enemies (but more by the examples in ſacred Scripture) that we may repent and change our liues, that ſo God may ſhew his mercie, and compaſſion towards vs, yet two things I obſerue here; the one for their reproofe; the other for our comfort. The firſt is for their reproofe; for (as S. Auguſtine doth truely note) the Deuill, to gaine the reputation of Preſcience, and Deitie, foretelleth ſuch things, as hee is reſolued to effect, and bring to paſſe, by his owne power, and meanes; if God giue permiſſion vnto his deſire: ſo the Ianizaries of Babylon, the progenie of Loiola (Frogges in the Reuelation, 16.13. as ſome haue ingeniouſly conceiued, for that a Ieſuite is, ordinarily a politicke, and actiue Polypragmon; and ſo an Amphibion, that conuerſeth in two elements of Ciuill, and Eccleſiaſticall affaires; of the Church, and of the ſtate) may ſeeme to bee Prophets in foretelling the ruine of my deare, and natiue Countrey, whereas they foretell that, which

themſelues do proiect, and labour to atchieue; and it had been effectuated long before this time, but that he hath had mercy vpon England, who will ſhew none to Babylon, and hath not left this other better world of Brittaine vnto their pernicious deſignes.
               The ſecond is for our comfort; they haue prophecies of our deſtruction; but written in their owne wicked, and treacherous hearts; and therefore I may ſay vnto ſuch a Prophet, as Nehemiah vnto Sanballat; Neh. 6.8. It is not done [ſaith hee; it ſhall not bee done, ſay I] according to theſe words, that thou ſayest; for thou faineſt them of thine owne heart: Thy prophecies are vagabond lies, flying vp and downe in wandring papers of no weight, or value; but this our prophecie (or rather S. Iohns, or rather Christs by him) is regiſtred in the ſacred Scripture of infallible truth. So that wee may ſay ſecurely (concerning the ruine of Babylon) with our (not their) S. Peter: 2.5.19. Wee haue a moſt ſure word of a Prophet, to the which wee doe well, that wee take heed: for Babylon ſhall fall (ſince Gods Word cannot fall) the ſentence is paſt, the execution is at hand.
               And thus much of the firſt point, to bee obſerued here in the ſecond part of my Text; namely, the TIME of Romes puniſhment; which, being then, and yet to come, is expreſſed by the Angels proclamation, in the time alreadie paſt.
            
            
               
               The SECOND point, concerning the duplication of her puniſhment; It is fallen; and againe, it is fallen.
               
               
                  AS our bleſſed Sauiour ſent forth his Diſciples, two, and two; Luc. 10.1. ſo he ſetteth forth the notice of Babylons ruine, by a doubled voyce: And as the Law of the Decalogue was written twice by the finger of God; ſo the fall of Babylon is proclaimed twice by the mouth of Chriſt. The reaſons whereof, with ſuch circumſtances, as deſerue due ponderation in this caſe, I will examine with perſpicuous breuitie, and ſo proceed to the maine ſubſtance of my Text.
               The FIRST reaſon is that, which S. Ambroſe vpon the Reuelations (or the Author of that Commentarie, which is graced with his name) doth aſſigne in this manner; Babylon is ſaid twice to fall, becauſe a great multitude fell from her communion, and entertained the Christian Faith; and becauſe ſhee ſhall bee puniſhed, in the laſt day, with eternall death. So he reſolueth, that Babylon falleth twice, but he neuer came once neere vnto the truth of the point; for he ſeemeth either to ſpeake of Babylon, as it is the myſticall Citie of ſinne, and not as the particular Citie of Rome; or elſe he meaneth, that this fall doth ſignifie the fall of Rome from Paganiſme vnto Chriſt; which, being a fall of ſingular felicitie, and ioy differeth much from the fall intended in this place; which is a fall of great miſerie, ſorrow, and feare; as you ſhall perceiue anon, when I come vnto the third part of

my Sermon; where I am to treate directly of this point.
               Therefore I come now vnto a SECOND expoſition, which ſeemeth to be ingenious, but is not ſubſtantiall: namely, that Rome hath a double fall: the one in reſpect of Gods truth and grace, wherein ſhee ſometimes ſtood, and from whence ſhee is long ſince fallen. But though ſhee bee ſo fallen, yet this fall is included in the ſubiect of my Text [BABYLON; which implyeth the condition of Rome in her ſin] and not in the praedicate; IT IS FALLEN: which ſignifieth her eſtate in her puniſhment, ſo that the ſecond fall of Rome is her extreme ruine, by the vindictiue Iuſtice of God. And indeed this the fall, here to bee vnderſtood; for that (as I ſaid before) the Angel ſpeaketh here of the puniſhment, & not of the ſin of Rome; and ſo this ſecond fall enſueth vpon the firſt: for, becauſe ſhee is Babylon (fallen from Gods truth) ſhee ſhall therefore haue another fall (expreſſed here by repetition) and periſh by Gods iudgement.
               THIRDLY, then, this Fall is heere repeated, to ſhew the certaintie of the euent, as written in the Booke of Gods immutable Decree: Pharaoh had two Dreames, which differed in forme, and reſemblance, but agreed (and were one) in the ſenſe thereof, and purpoſe of God; Gen. 41.32. &c. The ruine of Rome is here expreſſed by one word, twice vttered, but with the ſame meaning, and the ſame intention; that as the Dreame was doubled vnto Pharaoh, becauſe the thing was eſtabliſhed by God, ſo the ſubuerſion of Rome is inculcated here in my Text vnto vs, becauſe this thing is eſtabliſhed by God, and ſhall bee performed

infallibly in the due and appointed time. Therefore, as before, her fall was notified in the preterperfect tenſe [ſhe is fallen] ſo here it is ratified in the duplication of the ſame word; it is fallen; it is fallen. For who could reaſonably, and probably conceiue, according to the euidence, and appearance of things, in that time (or long after) that Rome, ſo glorious in the Empire, ſo venerable in the Church, ſo potent in Kingdomes, ſo rich in eſtate, ſo renowmed in fame, ſhould come to this deſpicable, and deplorable end?
               Thankes, therefore, be vnto our God, who, as hee can, and will humble her Pride, abaſe her Glorie, breake her Power, diſſolue her Strength, and defeat her Policies, to her confuſion, and the honour of his Name; ſo hee hath now ſo cleerely reuealed, and ſo certainly aſſured this Truth, and the certaintie thereof, vnto vs, for our comfort; that now we enuie not her greatneſſe, becauſe wee know her fall: wee feare not her malice, becauſe wee ſee her miſerie: wee regard not the inſolent venditation of her ſuppoſed eternitie, becauſe wee perceiue the dolefull expiration of her eſtate.
               But here, by the way, wee may obſerue, to our admiration; that many Babylonians ſhould not yet diſcerne, and feare this extreame vaſtation, ſo certainly to fall vpon that miſerable Citie; ſo conſtantly pronounced, ſo vehemently reiterated by the Angell vnto Saint Iohn; and that, being ſimply gulled with the falſe opinion of her Ethnicall eſtate (alreadie paſt) they ſhould bee ſo blind, and obdurate, in the knowledge, and acknowledgement of ſo cleere, and ſo euident a truth.
               
                  Notwithſtanding, when I reflect vpon the iudgements of God, inflicted vpon other people, I ſee, that, before their fatall deſtruction, they haue ſuffered an extraordinarie defect in humane policie, and ordinarie wiſdome, (the iuſtice of God concurring with the merit of their ſinnes) ſo that they could not carefully preuent an eminent, and imminent danger, nor wiſely foreſee the ſame. So the Lord himſelfe doth giue his owne teſtimonie of the excecation of the Edomites (otherwiſe an ingenious, and circumſpect Nation) in this manner: Is wiſdome no more in Teman? Is counſell periſhed from their children? Is their wiſdome vaniſhed? Ieremie 49.7. And that this their excecation proceedeth from God, hee himſelfe doth declare by the Prophet Obadiah; Verſe 8. Shall not I, in that day, euen destroy the Wiſemen out of Edom, and vnderstanding from the Mount of Eſau? Whence it is, that they could not diſcerne a falſe friend from a true enemy; who vnder the pretenſed termes of loue, and vnitie, did ſupplant, and vndermine their State. Therefore it is ſaid in the Verſe, immediately going before: the men, that were at peace with thee, haue deceiued thee: whereupon the Lord paſſeth his Diuine cenſure vpon Edom in theſe words; there is none vnderſtanding in him. For as the Philiſtims put out Samſons eyes, and then made him grind for their vſe, ſo GOD permitteth the ſecret, and malicious enemies of ſome Nation, to put out the eyes of their wiſedome, by ſugred deluſions, and then make them to ſerue vnder the burthens, which they impoſe vpon them.
               FOVRTHLY, and laſtly; this duplication of Babylons fall, is to ſhew the conformitie betwixt the

Old Teſtament, and the New, in this behalfe; and that one Spirit, in ſundry Ages, did, in the like manner direct, and aſſiſt the Church. For thus wee reade (as I noted once before) in the Prophet Eſay, Chap. 21. Verſe 9. Babell is fallen, it is fallen. Thus the Antitype of new Babylon anſwereth to the type of the old; the Spirit to the Letter: the thing to the figure. For as the Seraphims cried one to another in the ſame words, holy, holy, &c. Eſay 6.3. ſo the two Teſtaments haue mutuall conſonancie of words in this point; to ſignifie thereby vnto vs, that, this being ſpoken once (nay rather twice) of Literall Babylon, and being fulfilled in her; it, beeing now ſpoken againe the ſecond time of the Mysticall Babylon, ſhall be completed in her likewiſe; ſince, by the Hiſtoricall euidence of things, that are alreadie paſt, wee may ſecurely repoſe in the Prophetical prediction of things, that are yet to come. It is ſtill the ſame God that pronounceth it; the ſame Spirit that reuealeth it: the ſame Prouidence, that guideth all things to their certain, and determined euent.
               Hence therefore we may deduce, for our inſtruction; that the preſidents of the Old Teſtament ſhould direct, and informe vs vnder the New, to truſt in God, whoſe Truth is ſtill the ſame; to loue God, whoſe Goodneſſe is ſtill the ſame; to feare God, whoſe Iuſtice is ſtill the ſame; who, by the examples of his ſeueritie in the Old Teſtament, frameth vs vnto the reuerence of his Name, and obedience of his Will, in the New; as Saint Paul himſelfe doth grauely, and diuinely teach vs; 1. Cor. 11.6. Theſe are enſamples to vs; and againe, Verſe 11. All theſe things came vnto them for enſamples, and were written

to admoniſh vs. If, therefore, Babylon heare of a ruine, denounced by Eſay, Let Rome feare her ruine reuealed by Saint Iohn. And let vs alſo conceiue (for it is a truth, and worthy by all meanes to be receiued) that as a generall deſtruction of my people in the Old Teſtament, is an admonition to any Kingdome or Nation in the New, ſo a particular deſtruction of any perſon there, is an example, and premonition vnto me, and to thee, and to euery one in his degree, qualitie, and place, to auoid the like ſinne, by which the former periſhed, and fell, through the exemplarie iuſtice of God; eſteeming his caſe to be a prediction of ours; as if our very names, and perſons, were expreſſed in that Scripture, and in that example; as indeed it is, really, though not verbally; not in ſuch apparant, and identicall tearmes, as the ruine of Myſticall Babylon heere is diſcouered in the ruine of Literall Babylon there.
               And ſo much of the ſecond point, which I propoſed before in the diſtribution of my Text, and haue now explained in the orderly purſuit thereof.
            
            
               The THIRD point, concerning the nature, and qualitie of this ruine; what this Fall of Babylon doth heere import.
               
                  NOw I am come vnto the ſubſtance of the matter: for the former points (concerning the time paſt, & the Duplication of the fal) are accidents, & circumſtances of the Fal, whereof I now intreat, but yet ſuch, ſo proper, and ſo effectuall, as that they bring

an eſpeciall light thereunto; and therefore I haue handled them before, as being acceſſorie helpes for vs, to vnderſtand the principall point it ſelfe.
               As for the word [Fall] it is plaine, and eaſie, but very ſignificant, and Emphaticall in this place; it being a fall of ſpeciall, and extraordinary note; as wee ſhall perceiue, in the third ſenſe, and acception of the ſame.
               FIRST, therefore; according to the primarie, and ſimple meaning of the Letter; it doth import a locall motion, whereby ſome thing of an higher place, or of a firme conſiſtencie before, is lapſed into a lower (properly vpon the Earth) or ſo diſſolued into pieces, that it doth not cohere, and ſtand in the former qualitie, and manner: as the houſe fell vpon Iobs children [Iob 1.19.] though by a violent meanes; and the walls of Iericho fell downe [as it Ioſh. 6.20.] though by a miraculous meanes; ſignifying in a ſenſe allegoricall, the fall of Impietie at the ſound of Gods Word.
               Though Babylon ſhall haue a fall, of a more markable nature (as anon you ſhall heare) yet this fall doth likewiſe appertaine vnto her, in her glorious Churches, in her ſumptuous Monaſteries, in other magnificall Palaces of his Holineſſe, and his Cardinals (whom hee maketh Princes in all Lands; as ſome haue blaſphemouſly applyed that Text: Pſal. 45.16.) in the ſtately houſes of the Citizens, and finally in her walls; the carkaſſe of that proud, and inſolent Citie.
               O that ſpatious, ancient, and venerable Church of Saint Peter: it was ſometimes a Sanctuarie, and protection of the miſerable, diſtreſſed Citizens of Rome
                  
(as Sozom. doth relate, lib, 9. c. 9. and Saint Augustine himſelfe doth inſinuate; De Ciuit. Dei, lib. 1. c. 1. & 4.) when the furious, and barbarous Gothes ſpoyled, and ranſacked, the Citie, and made a cruell maſſacre of the people. But now it is defiled with Babylonian Merchandize:) and, when the Day of this vengeance doth come, it ſhall fall; it ſhall bee caſt downe to the ground; it ſhall haue no Sanctuarie for its owne protection. That ſhall be verified in her, which was fulfilled in the deſolation of the Temple; One ſtone ſhall not be left vpon another. And this is the firſt fall of Babylon in this place.
               SECONDLY; this Word doth ſometimes note the act of death; whence the name of a carkaſſe (in the Hebrew, Greeke, and Latine) is deriued in the ſeuerall originals; for that, by death, wee fall and cannot now ſtand) and wee fall into the earth; as the Centre of grauitie, to which all heauie things doe tend, and where they haue their reſt.
               Now death is either naturall, or violent. NATVRALL; as Pſal. 82.7. You Princes ſhall fall like others: that is; you ſhall dye (as it is in the words, next going before) and as you had one Geneſis by birth, ſo you ſhall haue one Exodus by death, with the pooreſt, and meaneſt of the people. Heere is ſomething for our Humiliation; the ſtrong, the rich, the mightie man ſhall fall, and fall into the earth; the mother, out of whoſe ſubſtance he is framed, and into which he ſhall be diſſolued againe. What is my condition? I am a piece of clay, moulded into humane ſhape, what is my end? I muſt fall into the matter, and principle of my beginning, O that I could euer thinke of

this fall into the earth, by my death; that I might neuer fall from Heauen by my ſinnes.
               This fall is no ſpeciall iudgement vnto the Citizens of Babylon, which is a generall neceſſitie of all men in the World. But let vs obſerue ſomething for our Conſolation, and then wee ſhall ſee more. For our fall by death is not without hope of a Reſurrection, and that alſo vnto eternall glorie (for the reſurrection of the dead is the confidence of Chriſtians, as Tertullian ſpeaketh) but the fall of Babylon (by the Sword, by fire, by extreame deſolation) hath no hope of a ciuill reſurrection, to ariſe, after her fall, vnto any ſplendour, or dignitie againe: and therefore I may ſay of her, as Iacob of his eldeſt ſonne, the firſt-borne of his ſtrength; thy dignitie is gone, Gen. 49.4.
               The ſecond kind of fall by death, is VIOLENT; and now we come neerer vnto the point. This kinde of fall is often remembred in the ſacred Scriptures; but, out of many places, I will ſelect a few, as Exod. 32.28. There fell of the people about three thouſand men; when Moſes handled the peoples cauſe, with God, by Prayer; but Gods cauſe, with the people, by Swords. And Pſal. 36.12. They are fallen, that worke iniquitie.
               
               This fall may well be applied vnto Babylon, becauſe her ruine is not onely locall (for houſes and walls) but perſonall, for the Inhabitants themſelues (Clericall, and Laicall (who, dwelling within her precincts, ſhall fall by the extreame furie of the Sword, which ſhall deuoure their fleſh, in the Day of the LORDS vengeance.
               Tremble, therefore, O yee vnhappie Citizens,

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
at the voice of the fatall ruine of that vnfortunate place; your knees may ſmite, the one againſt the other (as Balſhazzars, Dan. 5.6.) with the extremitie of your iuſt feare, for that diſaſtrous calamitie, which ſhall fall vpon you, or vpon your poſteritie, and ſucceſſion. Therefore depart out of her; it is Gods owne premonition vnto you; and they, that are his people, will depart out of her, either corporally, to ſaue their liues, or ſpiritually to ſaue their ſoules. And, as for you, that are yet immaculate, and not defiled with her contagion, heare not her inuitation, be not intangled with her voice. She cryeth; Venite; come vnto me, the mother of the faithfull: but Chriſt ſaith; Exite, goe out of her, my people, that you bee not partakers of her plague; for ſhe is the Mother of Fornications. And ſo much of the ſecond fall of Babylon, which hath now prepared vs vnto the third.
               THIRDLY, then, this word doth ſignifie ſuch a ruine, as is without recouery, with extreame vaſtitie, horrible miſerie, vnſpeakable deſolation; which Babylon ſhall more ſenſibly feele, then we can truly declare; res ſuperat fidem; the matter exceedeth beliefe: humane beliefe, that ſtandeth vpon reaſon, but not Diuine, which is grounded vpon reuelation; as I ſhall haue ſpeciall occaſion to declare more fully, in my enſuing Diſcourſe.
               Meanewhile, to iuſtifie this laſt acception, and ſenſe of this Word, according to the tenour of the holy Scriptures, I produce vnto you certaine inſtances, very agreeable to our purpoſe. For if wee ſpeake of the perſons, inhabiting in Babylon, then Dauid writeth

aptly of ſuch falling; Pſal. 36.12. They [mine enemies] are cast downe [they are fallen; in the words immediatly before] and ſhall not be able to riſe. But, if we ſpeake of the place it ſelfe; Iericho is an example in this caſe Ioſh. 6. The walls fell downe; man, and woman, young, and old, with all the cattle, were deſtroyed therein. And to fill vp the meaſure of the calamitie thereof, ſhee was to lie buried in the Tombe of her owne ruines; and a curſe laid by Ioſhua vpon the man, that ſhould repaire, and reedifie the ſame. To conclude; the pitifull (but vnpitied) vaſtation of this Babylonian Citie, her dolefull fall (to follow the preſcript euidence of my Text) is reſembled in the iuſt affliction, which fell vpon the Citizens, and Citie of Sechem, which Abimelech deſtroyed, and ſowed the place thereof with Salt; Iudic. 9.45.
               Such ſhall bee (if any patterne can exemplifie her caſe) the fall; the fatall end, the wofull period of this great, and glorious Citie. It is finall; for I reade of none after it; it is ſingular; for I reade of none ſuch before it.
               For, to paſſe by the conflagration of Rome by the Gaules (when ſhe was yet in the time of her minoritie, and youth) and to come to the ſtate of her declination, in the time of Honorius, the Emperour, vpon the yeare of Chriſt 414. we find in the Ciuill and Eccleſiaſticall Hiſtories, that Alarichus, King of the Gothes, tooke the Citie of Rome (rather by Famine, then by the Sword, as Saint Hierome doth relate) burned ſome part thereof, ſlue the Citizens, deſpoyled them of an infinite abundance of riches; but (as I noted before) gaue them their liues, that could take Sanctuarie in the great and magnificent Church of

Saint Peter. After his deceaſe (which happened within a ſhort time after this expilation of Rome) his kinſman Ataulphus returned vnto Rome with a mightie power, reſoluing to put all the Citizens to the ſword; to raze the Citie vnto the very foundations; to erect another in ſome commodious place, and to impoſe the name of Gothia vpon it: from which reſolution he was diuerted by the humble ſupplications, and gentle perſwaſions of his deerely beloued wife Placidia, ſiſter vnto Honorius: and ſo Rome did then eſcape that ruine, vnto which ſhe is yet reſerued, and which ſhe ſhall certainly feele in the due appointed time.
               Afterward, vpon the yeere 450. Genſericus, King of the Vandals, ſo ſacked, and ranſacked the Citie of Rome, that, for ſome time, it remained without any inhabitant to dwell therein. But much more grieuous, and fearefull was her deſolation by Totilas, King of the Goths, vpon the yeere 547. a great part of the walls being caſt downe, the houſes burned, the Citizens killed; ſo that neither man, nor woman remained therein; as Bellarmine himſelfe (out of Blondus) doth briefly recite C. de Pont. Rom. l. 4. c. 7.) but to a very poore, and ſimple purpoſe; as you ſhall heare anon in the paſſage of my diſcourſe.
               Meane while, deſcending neerer vnto our times, I ſmile at the fearefull apprehenſions of Pope Alexander the ſixth (vpon the yeere 1494.) when hee was troubled, and all Rome with him, at the militarie approach of Charles the eight of France; and therefore vpon a treatie of peace, hee accepted the Articles, impoſed vpon him by the victorious Prince, for the time (but with a perfidious heart, as the ſequell of things

did diſcouer) who thereupon was receiued into Rome with tender demonſtration of ſingular reſpect, and loue; otherwiſe, hee had certainly imitated the preſident of the conquering Gaules ancient times, and burnt the whore with fire; which worke did rather appertaine vnto his ſucceſſours in the Crowne of France; as time, the mother of truth, ſhall one day reueale to fulfill that, which Truth, the Sonne of eternitie (Chriſt Ieſus himſelfe) doth here foretell.
               But, leauing Rome in that paſſion of feare, let vs behold her in the paſſion of ſenſe, vpon the yeere 1524. when the Imperiall Armie of Charles the fifth (marching vnder the conduct of the Duke of Burbon, who was fatally ſlaine before the walls of Babylon) firſt ſurpriſed the Suburbes, and then inuaded the Citie it ſelfe; in whom it is doubtfull (ſaith Guicciardine, lib. 18. which Hiſtorie well deſerueth your reuiew) whether bare more rule; the humour of crueltie to kill, or the appetite of lust to deflower, or the rage of auarice to ſpoile. What honour, and reuerence did theſe Catholike Souldiers performe then vnto the holy Father, and his worthy Prelates? As for him, hee was made a priſoner in his owne Caſtle, and redeemed himſelfe from farther dangers at a great proportion of monyes, and remained in cuſtodie, vntill it pleaſed the Emperour, out of his ſpeciall grace, to releaſe him againe. As for them; many of them were ſet vpon Aſſes, and leane Moyles, with great dignitie, and contempt, hauing their faces reuerſed to the crowpe of the beaſts; and ſo, being apparrelled with the habites, and markes of their dignitie, were made a ſpectacle of deriſion in the publike view; while ſome other Cardinalls being

naked, and ſoled along with buffets and baſtinadoes, redeemed their liues with deepe exhauſtion of their plate, and treaſure.
               Now, if in theſe calamities of Rome, which are the praeludia, and, as it were, the figures of her future deſtruction, wee ſee ſuch furious actions of hoſtilitie againſt her, not onely by barbarous enemies, but by them, who carrie the names, and titles of Chriſtian, and of Catholike, by particular ſtile, what incomparable crueltie will ſo many ſeuerall Nations exerciſe againſt her, with implacable hatred vnder the Enſignes of ſo many ſeuerall Princes, enraged againſt her, for her violation of their Crownes, & ſtirred vp by the ſpeciall iudgement of God? O vnexemplifyable fall; I want termes to expreſſe it. And therefore as the Painter, being to repreſent, by a liuely Image, the behauiour of the father of Iphigenia (lamenting, and bewayling her pitifull death) drew a veile before his face; that being a more proper ſignification of his griefe, which could not be expreſſed in any ſhape, or colour, ſo I will in ſilence admire, (and I would condole it alſo, but that I find the Saints reioyce thereat: Cap. 19. 1. 2, 3.) this fall, (I ſay) of Rome; and thus by ſilence, as wanting all words, I ſhall ſpeake more, that if I could deliuer the nature of it in many.
               Thus now, at the laſt, I haue made an interpretation of this fall; comparing it with other falls, which were ſome ſhadowes of it; Rome being her owne type herein. Howbeit as the Prophet [Eſay 9.1.] calleth it a light affliction of ſome Tribes of Iſrael, by Tiglah Pieſar, in compariſon of the greater captiuitie afterward, vnder Shalmaneſer, ſo the former fals of Rome
                  
were light in compariſon of this fall; nay rather they were concuſſions, and ſhakes, this onely is the fall, and ruine thereof.
               Conſider therefore the very words of the Text, wherewith I will finiſh this part of my Diſcourſe; Chap. 18. It is become an habitation of Deuils; reward her, as ſhe hath rewarded you; fill her the Cup double: her plagues ſhall come in one day; death, ſorrow, and famine; ſhee ſhall be burnt with fire: no man buyeth her ware any more: her Merchants ſhall howle and cry, &c. Then Chapter 19.3. her ſmoake roſe vp for euermore. And ſo much of the fall; namely, for the manner and qualitie of the ſame. Whereby you may perceiue the ſimple ſubtiltie of ſome learned Papiſts, who ſuppoſe this fall of Rome to bee meerely ſpirituall (in falling from Ethnicall Idolatry vnto Chriſtian Religion) and not a materiall fall, by outward ruine; as Ludouicus ab Alcaſar doth vainly dreame; ſtanding in a fooliſh oppoſition heerein vnto the iudicious reſolution of Viegas, and Ribera; his more ingenious, and exact compeeres.
               Now, for concluſion of this whole matter, I muſt take notice of foure Queſtions, which are appendant, and belonging vnto this fall; by faire diſcuſſion wherof, I ſhall exempt, and take out of your minds, certayne Doubts, which may ariſe (and perhaps are alreadie riſen) in your apprehenſion of this fall.
               
            
            
               
               The FIRST Queſtion.
               FIrſt, therefore, if you deſire to vnderſtand, by whoſe meanes, and operation, Babylon ſhall thus fall, and who ſhall bee the inſtruments of Gods vindictiue Iuſtice in this behalfe; I anſwere, from the ſacred Oracle of God himſelfe; that it ſhall bee executed by the vniforme, and powerfull concurrencie of many Kings, and States; concerning whom three things are markeably deliuered in this Propheticall Word of God.
               
                  First; there is obſerued their beginning, and exaltation; Apoc. 17.12. The tenne hornes, [to wit, of the Beaſt: Verſe 3. which is the ſecond Beaſt in Babylon, ſucceeding in the place of the firſt: Apoc. 13.11.] are ten Kings, which yet haue not receiued a Kingdome to wit, in the time of Saint Iohn] but ſhall receiue power, as Kings, at one houre with the Beast. For, as the ſeuerall Dominions of the Kings, and States in Europe, were members of the great and mightie bodie of the Romane Empire, which was diſſolued afterward into theſe parts, of which it was formerly compounded, and made; ſo theſe Kings, and States, aroſe neere vpon the ſame time, which is here called one houre; not in an exact meaſure of time, but in a conuenient propinquitie, and neerneſſe of time, according to the phraſe of holy Writ; wherein the word houre is taken in this ſenſe; as 1. Theſ. 2.17. Wee were kept from you, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , for an houre: and Philem. 15. Oneſimus departed from Philemon his Maſter, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , for an houre: and Saint Iohn 1.2.18. Little children; it is 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the last houre, &c. It followeth;

that they receiued this power at one houre with the Beaſt; beauſe as the Imperiall dignitie, and glory did decay, by fraction, & partition of the potent Empire, ſo the ſecond Beaſt in Babylon, [the Papall State] beganne to aduance it ſelfe, and to ſucceed, by a pretenſe of Eccleſiaſticall Supremacie, in the place of the former Beaſt [the State Imperial] as he began to decreaſe; according to the prediction of S. Paul; which I haue touched before in the precedent Sermon, vnto which, I muſt therefore, remit you for the more cleere vnderſtanding of this point. But now you may ſee, what theſe Kings are; whence, when, with whome, and from whom, they tooke their Royall dignitie, and power.
               
                  Secondly, there is obſerued the ſubiection, and ſubmiſſion of their power vnto this ſecond Beaſt, whoſe Eccleſiaſticall glorie, and eſtimation, did inſnare the ciuill Dominion of theſe Kings: for ſo it followeth, Verſe 13. They ſhall giue their power; and authoritie vnto the Beaſt; vpon which he cunningly intruded, by faire pretenſes of his ſucceſſion vnto the Prince of the Apoſtles, and of his immediate function vnder Ieſus Chriſt; whoſe name hee abuſed to the corruption, and ſuppreſſion of his Euangelicall Truth. Thus theſe Kings became his inſtruments alſo, to ſerue his turne, in the oppugnation of Chriſts Doctrine, and in the perſecution of his members, as the prediction, in the fourteenth Verſe, doth truly beare, and the euent of things doth notably declare. And now they were made the hornes of this ſecond Beaſt, that is to ſay, his ſtrength and corroboration (as this word horne doth often ſignifie, in the Scriptures; but more

ſpecially in the Booke of Pſalmes, as in the Prophecies of Daniel) whereby hee ſhould ſubſiſt in power, honour, and command: for all theſe things ſhall decay in the Beaſt, when theſe Kings ſhall withdraw their obedience from him, and reſume their owne power; which as they did fondly ſubmit vnto him, ſo hee doth proudly vendicate vnto himſelfe; for ſo hee was foretold by Saint Paul, that he ſhould lift vp himſelfe aboue all, that is called God.
               
               
                  Thirdly; there enſueth their action of hoſtilitie, and enterprize of warre againſt Babylon, wherein this Beaſt doth reigne; for ſo it is written; Verſe 16. The ten hornes, which thou ſaweſt vpon the Beaſt, are they, that ſhall hate the Whore [what? are they like Amnon, whoſe loue to Tamar turned into hatred?] and ſhall make her deſolate, and naked, and ſhall eate her fleſh, and burne her with fire; the old puniſhment, which in the Law of Nature, was inflicted vpon Whores, Geneſ. 38.24. Here is a ſtrange Metamorphoſis; Friends changed into Enemies; ſetters vp into pullers downe, Defenders into Expugnators; Babylons louers into her haters; the ſtrength of the Beaſt into his ruine. This is the Lords doing (as you ſhall heare anon) and it is meruailous in our eyes.
               
               Meanewhile, I cannot paſſe forward, vnto the diſcuſſion of other points, without a ſerious conſideration of this; namely, that theſe Kings, thus ſubmitting their Royall power vnto the Beast (partly to take a Crowne by his donation; partly to hold it ratified by his confirmation: partly to hold it) vpon tearmes of fealtie to him; partly to acknowledge all their Dominion to be deriued from his plenitude of power; partly

to ſuffer him to execute forreigne iuriſdiction in their Realmes; partly to ſtand in awe of his ſentententiall depoſition; partly to ſuffer an expilation of the goods, and reuenues of their ſubiects, iſſuing forth of their Kingdomes, to the ſupportation of Babylon; partly to permit their Clericall ſubiects to be exempted from their Regall authoritie; and many other courſes, whereby the proud vſurping Beaſt doth either cloſely, like a Fox, inſinuate into their Crownes, or violently like a Lion, inſult vpon the ſame; by their owne folly, tenderneſſe, and ignorance in the beginning; that ſo Gods Word might be fulfilled herein) I ſay, I cannot neglect the obſeruation of this point; that now theſe Kings (not the ſame in perſon, but in ſucceſſion) ſhould beginne to bee wiſe, to vnderſtand his tyrannie, to ſee their owne miſerie, and to reuenge theſe wrongs with fire, and with ſword, without compaſſion, and without remorſe. Leo; a Biſhop of Rome, but in more happy times (yet one, that, in ſome things prepared a way for the aduancement of this ſecond Beaſt; which, from a Pygmie became an Hercules, and by ſeuerall augmentations, grew vp more, and more, from ſmall beginnings, vnto the full proportion of his greatneſſe, wherein he ſtood long, but now beginneth to fall) thou, O bleſſed Leo, by the venerable authoritie of thy graue, and gracious perſon, by thy perſwaſiue Eloquence, and gentle intreates, diddeſt once diuert the hoſtile inuaſion of Attila (King of the Hunnes) from Rome (not then Babylon) and thou waſt a Sauiour vnto her (as many of the Iudges in ancient Iſrael were called) not by a Sword, but by thy word, full of power, and efficacie in thy religious

mouth. But now this Spirit, this excellencie ſhall not bee in thy ſucceſſours, when the fatall houre of her laſt deſolation, and fall, is come; for the wrath of theſe Kings ſhall bee ſpecially incenſed againſt this Beaſt; a Lyon indeed, not in heroicall fortitude, and Chriſtian magnanimitie, but in crueltie, oppreſſion, inſultation; ſtirring vp theſe Kings vnto this furie, which no perſwaſion, no eloquence, no policie can appeaſe.
               And now, to conclude this point; I find two obſeruations, that attend this laſt paſſage of my diſcourſe. The FIRST concerneth a dogmaticall errour, and falſe opinion, preuailing very much in the Synagogue of Rome; to wit, that Antichriſt ſhall deſtroy Rome: which falſe opinion by miſinterpretation aroſe out of the true doctrine of S. Paul, viz. That Antichriſt ſhall not be diſcloſed, vntill the Romane Emperor were taken out of the way; which then withheld, and ſo kept downe all other power, that Antichriſt could not exalt himſelfe. Hence the ancient Fathers (as namely S. Hierome; epiſt. 151. quaeſt. 11. and, long before him, Tertull. in apologetic. cap. 32. whoſe iudgement alſo S. Auguſtine doth follow, de Ciuit. Dei, l. 20. c. 23. but vpon another ground, taken, and miſtaken out of the Prophet Daniel) doe very truly deduce, and inferre, that the Romane Empire ſhall not bee deſtroyed, vntill the comming of Antichriſt; and therefore they ſeemed reaſonably to ſuppoſe alſo, that it ſhall bee deſtroyed by him; and ſo, conſequently, that Rome it ſelfe ſhall ſuffer her finall ruine by his power, and by his meanes. Which erroneous deduction ſeemeth to haue had a generall applauſe in the ancient times of

the Church; as wee may ſee by the teſtimonie of Lactantius, who liued in the time of Conſtantine the Great, vpon the yeere 320. Thus therefore hee writeth; Inſtitut. diuin. l. 7. c. 25. That the end of the world will not come, till the destruction of Rome: and that the abominable Tyrant [Antichriſt] ſhall performe that worke. But as Lactantius, with many other Chriſtians, was infected with ſundry falſe appehenſions (as, in this very Chapter, That the world ſhould ſtand but two hundred yeres after their time; and elſe where; That Chriſt ſhould reigne a thouſand yeeres on the earth, &c.) ſo, in this particular conceit, he, and others, digreſſed apparantly from the truth, as wanting the cleere euidence of times, and the ſucceſſe of things, to helpe them in the right interpretation of the Scriptures, in this propheticall kind.
               It is then a very certaine, and pregnant truth, which Tertullian, Auguſtine, Hierome, Chryſoſtome, and others did conceiue, that the Romane Empire ſhould ſtand, till the reuelation of Antichriſt (according to the prediction of S. Paul.) And againe, it is true, in a great part, that Antichriſt hath deſtroyed it; for the Popes were a ſpeciall meanes to exclude the Emperour out of Italy, and Rome (which they haue inuaded) and, erecting a new Empire in the Kings of France, and after in Germanie, they finally made this Nominall Emperour, of Rome, a Reall ſlaue of Babylon; though ſometimes with great reluctation, and oppoſition of the Emperours, as he was able to reſiſt; whom therefore the Popes did gladly ſuffer to bee depriued of their rights in Italy; the ſame being a Countrie, ſpecially accommodated for the aduantage, and ſecuritie of his

greatneſſe, becauſe there are ſundry formes of gouernments, and many particular ſtates therein: In regard whereof, as one hath a diligent eye to obſerue, and hinder the increaſe, and inlargement of another, ſo, if any of them oppoſe his Holineſſe, hee is readie, with his thunderbolts, to ſhake that State in pieces, and to raiſe vp other Princes there, to make an execution of his ſentence. And becauſe he doth pretend ſome particular intereſt in the goodly, and rich Kingdome of Naples, he therefore inſtalled the Kings thereof, with this caution and reſeruation, That they ſhould neuer take the Empire vpon them; fearing, thereupon, the potencie of ſo neere a neighbour, as being preiudiciall vnto his triple Crowne. This was a matter of ſpeciall exception, taken againſt Charles the fifth, in his election vnto the Imperiall State; though not purſued, becauſe there was no remedie againſt ſo mightie a Prince; who, as hee ſeemed to accept the Empire, againſt the ancient prouiſion of the Popes, ſo he ſeemed vnmannerly to reſigne the ſame vnto Ferdinand, his brother, and to eſtabliſh him therein, without the notice, and approbation of the holy Father. Thus farre, then, we agree with the iudgement of antiquitie, touching the Romane Emperour, and Antichriſt, becauſe it agreeth very well with the prediction of Saint Paul. But the predictions of Saint Iohn doe ſufficiently refute the laſt opinion (which ſeemeth to be inferred out of the former, by an emptie, and barren ſpeculation) to wit, that the Citie of Rome ſhall bee deſtroyed by Antichrist, and his aſſociats; as Lactantius lib. 7. c. 16. doth erroniouſly conceiue. For the Second Beast in Rome is Antichrist himſelfe, to whom the ten

Kings gaue their power; and Babylon ſhall be deſtroyed, not by this Second Beaſt, but for this Second Beaſt; the ten Kings not being now his helpers, and aſſiſtants in this ſubuerſion of Babylon, but his enemies, & aſſailants, to ruinate Babylon, (wherin he reigneth) becauſe of his abominable comportment therein; as the context of the Scripture it ſelfe doth infallibly demonſtrate, and conclude. And therefore, as in many other points, concerning Babylon, and Antichriſt, the ancient Chriſtians were much deceiued; ſo particularly in this, namely, to imagine, that he ſhould deſtroy Rome, who is the Man (or rather the Beast) that beareth rule therein, as in the very Seate, and Center of his Dominion.
               The SECOND obſeruation, which from thence I frame, and tender vnto your religious hearts, is a Morall truth; namely, that God doth often puniſh our ſinnes, by ſuch meanes, and inſtruments, as were ſeruiceable vnto vs therein, to the accompliſhment of our deſires. So wee read, Ezek. 16.37.39. &c. that whereas the Iewes committed ſpirituall fornication with the Idols of Aegypt, and Aſſyria, and reappoſed more in the helpe of the Aegyptians, and Aſſyrians ſometimes, then in the protection of God; therefore he threatneth to giue them into their hands; who, being inſtruments of their ſinnes againſt him, ſhould bee alſo inſtruments of his iudgements againſt them. Sundry are the examples in this kind, which I cannot now produce: but leauing the ponderation of this point vnto your owne hearts, I aduiſe you, in the tender feare of God, ſo to pleaſe him in all your wayes, that not onely all men, but all his creatures may bee

diſpoſed, and inclined by him to our incolunitie, and preſeruation. So ſaith the Wiſeman: When the wayes of a man pleaſe the Lord, hee will alſo make his enemies at peace with him, Prou. 16.7. To this purpoſe ſpake Eliphaz, in Iob. 5.23. The ſtones of the field ſhall bee in league with thee, and the beaſts of the field ſhall be at peace with thee; But if wee ſinne impenitently againſt him, euery creature in heauen and earth, is readie preſt by his inſtinct, and motion, to reuenge the iniurie done vnto him, who is the Creator of heauen and earth. And ſo much concerning the firſt queſtion; I come therefore vnto the ſecond.
            
            
               The SECOND Queſtion.
               SECONDLY; if you require of me, what are the cauſes, for which theſe ten Kings ſhall take vp their Armes againſt Babylon; I anſwere (partly out of the euidence of the Scripture, and partly out of the demonſtration of reaſon) that three principall cauſes concurre in this behalfe.
               The FIRST is a meritorious cauſe, by congruitie, and condignitie (as they vſe to ſpeake of the merit of their workes) in regard of her ſinnes (which I haue touched heretofore, in the compariſons betwixt the Miſticall, and the Literall Babylon) which, being a burthen vnto the earth, cry for vengeance vnto heauen. And now here is a collection of her ſinnes; the old, and the new come into one reckoning, and account. They were paſt in act, but remained in guilt; wherefore it is ſaid, Apoc. 18.5. Her ſins are come vp vnto

heauen, and God hath remembred her iniquities; for though hee alwayes remembred them in his prouidence, and knowledge, yet now hee declareth his remembrance by the execution of his Iuſtice.
               Thus we perceiue, that God hath a time, to permit ſinnes, and a time to puniſh ſinnes (the former, and the latter ſinnes together) of any ſtate, or of any perſon, when our repentance bindeth not vp the hands of his iuſtice, but our continuance, addition, and renouation of ſinne, draw the ſword out of the ſcabbard, and compell him vnto the manifeſtation of his wrath; as it is here in the fall of Babylon; whoſe ſins are bound vp together, in this great, and fearefull iudgement.
               But ſince ſhe will make no benefit of this inſtruction (as being obdurate in the courſe of her ſinnes, and prepared for deſtruction) let vs obſerue it (brethren) for our owne vſe, ſince wee know the iuſt ſeueritie of God, which leadeth vs vnto ſpeedie repentance; leaſt he arraigne vs at the barre of his Iuſtice, for our ancient & for our latter ſins. This obſeruation pertaineth, firſt, vnto a Kingdome, and State; hee doth not forger her ſins, though he remember them not preſently in iudgement. After many hundred yeeres, he called Amalek vnto an account; I remember (ſaith he vnto Saul) what Amalek did vnto Iſrael; how they laid wait for them in the way, as they came vp out of Egypt; therefore he ſent Saul vpon an expedition againſt the Amalekites, to deſtroy them from the face of the earth. O that my natiue Countrey would take notice of this at the heart, and not adde ſin vnto ſin, new vnto the old; prouoking God vnto great indignation againſt her. But two things comfort me here: the one; that God

will ſpare the Land, becauſe hee hath many faithfull ſeruants therein, that mourne for the ſins of England; and that (as Eliphaz ſpeaketh in Iob 22.30.) the innocent ſhall deliuer the Iland. For it is not the Sea, that can defend vs from inuaſion; it is not any Caſtle, that can ſaue vs from the enemy (and ſin within the Land, is of greater force to deſtroy it, then any foe without) but ſome righteous men are in the Iland, and God doth ſpare it for their ſake. The other is, that (according to Dauids option, and choyce) wee ſhall rather fall into the hands of the Lord, then of men, for the puniſhment and caſtigation of this Land.
               This obſeruation pertaineth, ſecondly, vnto the Church; which, falling in her inward puritie, cannot ſtand long (as Gregorie noted) in her outward glory, If wee haue not a place in the conſcience of men (by our effectuall doctrine, and our exemplarie life) that wee haue a manſion in their very hearts, then the Law, our Gouernment, our Temporalties, all outward prouiſion for the Miniſters of the Church, ſhall make them but a weake conſiſtencie, and a feeble ſtation in the world. Let not our ſins preuaile againſt vs, to prouoke God, and we ſhall not feare the complotments of any mortall man, whoſe breath is in his nostrills.
               
               This obſeruation pertaineth, thirdly, vnto euery particular perſon, of whatſoeuer qualitie, or condition; rich, or poore, high, or low. For, for if thou addeſt the ſins of thy age, vnto the ſins of thy youth, (for which Dauid intreateth pardon of God; Pſalm. 25.7.) and makeſt an accumulation of thine iniquities, of latter vnto former, without remorſe of thy

conſcience, and feare of Gods diſpleaſure, ſaying; I ſhall haue peace, although I walke according to the ſtubborneneſſe of mine owne heart, thus adding drunkenneſſe to thirſt; know then, that the Lord will not be mercifull vnto thee, but then the wrath of the Lord, and his iealouſie, ſhall ſmoake againſt thee, and euery curſe, that is written in his booke, ſhall light vpon thee, and the Lord ſhall put out thy name from vnder heauen. Deut. 29.19, 20. yea out of heauen alſo: that is; hee ſhall declare, that thy name was neuer written there; according to that in the Pſalme; Let them be put out of the booke of life. Pſa. 69.28. And ſo much concerning the firſt cauſe, why theſe ten Kings aſſemble againſt Babylon, to worke her fall.
               
               The SECOND is an efficient cauſe; and that is, God by his iuſtice; his iuſtice being prouoked by her ſins; according to that of the Prophet Eſay 42.24. Who gaue Iacob to the ſpoile, and Iſrael to the robbers? Did not the Lord, becauſe wee haue ſinned againſt him?
               
               Thus we haue a connexion of the firſt, and ſecond cauſe, in this one ſentence, which meete in Babylons caſe. For firſt, wee heare of the meritorious cauſe of her fall, Apoc. 17.2. The Kings of the earth haue committed fornication with her, and the Inhabitants of the earth are drunken with the wine of her fornication; to wit, in her Eccleſiaſticall State. Then, ſecondly, we heare of the efficient cauſe of her fall: v. 17. God hath put in the hearts of the ten Kings to fulfill his will, and to doe with one conſent, for to giue their Kingdome vnto the Beast: How long? Vntill the words of God bee fulfilled. What then? They ſhall hate the whore, and make her deſolate, and naked, and burne her with fire. Vpon what motion? From God; as the Text doth plainly

beare. And therefore our moſt learned, and prudent Souereigne doth truly and aptly obſerue in this place; The hearts of the greateſt Kings, as well, as of the ſmalleſt ſubiects, are in the hands of the Lord, to make them his inſtruments, and to turne them, as it ſhall pleaſe him to employ them. Here then I note three things.
               FIRST: though Kings may bee carried by their proper motion of malice, or auarice, or of ſome other affection, in their warres againſt ſome people, and in bringing them to ruine; yet therein we may obſerue, and muſt confeſſe, that it is digitus Dei, Gods finger, or rather Gods hand in this worke. So Nebuchadnezzar himſelfe (a cruell, proud, inſolent Prince) in his warres, did ſo performe the will, and purpoſe of God therein, that God himſelfe giueth him the title of his ſeruant, and commendeth his ſeruice done vnto him, not only againſt his enemies (a people that knew not his Lawes) as it is Ezekiel 29.18. but alſo againſt his owne people; Ieremy 25.9. And ſo in his ſacred expugnation of Babylon, theſe Kings are Gods ſeruants; they doe their worke from him; and hee doth his worke by them. Therefore Saint Ambroſe (or whoſoeuer is the Author of that Commentarie vpon the Reuelation) doth ingeniouſly deliuer his iudgement vpon the words of my Text [Babylon is fallen: it being here the voyce of God to declare it; & the hand of God to effect it] that, in this caſe, dixiſſe Dei, feciſſe est: dixit enim cecidiſſe Babylonem, quia ipſe fecit, vt caderet. The ſpeech of God is the worke of God: for hee ſaid, that Babylon is fallen, becauſe he brought it to paſſe, that Babylon ſhould fall.
               SECONDLY; we may heere conſider, that, as

there is mercie in God to receiue vs vnto grace, ſo there is Iuſtice in him to puniſh our ſinnes. Marci
                        •
                     
                   knew not this; but, becauſe of different operations, proceeding from God, hee made a diuerſitie of Gods; one good, another iuſt, or rather cruell; one the maker of the body, another of the ſoule; one, whom he would loue; another, whom he would feare; one in the Law, another in the Goſpell. But wee know one God alone; onely good, onely wiſe, onely gracious; whoſe mercie is free, and proceedeth from himſelfe; whoſe iuſtice is right, and is prouoked by vs: for as wee haue malum culpae, to offend him, ſo hee hath malum poenae to afflict vs. Amos 3.6. Eſay 45.7.
               THIRDLY, and laſtly; though Reaſon may ſeeme to perſwade vs (as it perſwadeth Babylon her ſelfe) that ſhe is ſo ſtrengthened by the confederacy of Princes (as, in many dangers, ſhee hath not neglected the tearmes of prudencie in this behalfe) by the amitie of her Friends, by the diligence of her Negotiators, by the policie of her Counſellours, by the art of her Learning, by the abundance of her Riches, and, finally, by a generall confluence of all outward meanes, for the ſupportation of her Eſtate, that ſhee ſhall neuer fall (for ſo ſhe ſaith in her heart; I ſit being a Queene, and am no Widdow, and ſhall ſee no mourning; Apoc. 18.7.) yet Faith aſſureth me, that her owne Friends, her owne Vp-holders (her hornes) theſe ten Kings, her old Louers, ſhall bring her downe to the Earth; to fall ſo low, that ſhee can fall no lower; I meane not in place, and ſituation, but in condition, and eſtate. Now; if Rome aske; or if my owne reaſon

demand of me; how can this be? I anſwere; God hath ſaid it, and hee will doe it; I haue heard his Word, and now I doe expect his Worke. Away then with quomodo (how can this, or how can that bee?) when God ſpeaketh, and God aſſureth vs, and God reuealeth his Will vnto vs. This Word commeth in with incredulitie, and want of faith; as the diuine Preacher Saint Chryſostome doth excellently note vpon the queſtion of the Iewes; Iohn 6.52. How can this man giue vs his fleſh to eate? Therefore I reſt vpon the truth of God; that is it, which I beleeue, and I am no farther ſcrupulous, in regard of many improbabilities, and difficulties, which reaſon ſuggeſteth, and preſenteth vnto me in this point. If I haue (as now I haue) Gods Word, that this Worke ſhall be performed, I am not curious to inquire of the manner, and meanes, how hee will bring the ſame to paſſe. And ſo much concerning the ſecond cauſe of the fall of Babylon, by the cooperation of theſe Kings.
               The THIRD is an excitant cauſe; inward, in reſpect of the iuſt wrath of theſe Kings; but outward, in reſpect of the prouocation thereof, by the indignities, and iniuries of Babylon, againſt the Potentates of the Earth. Now, as in the firſt, and ſecond cauſes, I had the plaine teſtimonie of Scripture; ſo heere, in this third, I haue the certaine aſſurance of ſtrong reaſon to confirme, and ſettle my iudgement therein; for now I beginne to diſcouer ſome impulſiue cauſe, ariſing from Babylon, that ſtirreth vp theſe Kings vnto the execution of Gods Worke.
               
                  Firſt, therefore, Babylon hath treaſonable doctrines

againſt the ſtate, and dignitie of Kings (though they were the hornes, and ſtrength of the ſecond Beast therein) as namely; to depoſe Kings from their royall ſeates; yea, to take away the faire Titles, wherewith ſhe had inueſted them before; as this Beaſt had once taken vpon him to depriue Francis, the French King, of his Title of the most Chriſtian King, and to tranſlate it vnto Henry the Eighth of England (as Guicciardine, their owne Hiſtorian, doth record) though afterward, with greater furie and indignation, hee proceeded againſt the ſame Henry, who had beene a principall horne, to corroborate, and confirme the Maieſtie of the Triple Crowne. Againe, this Babylon expoſeth the perſons of Princes vnto priuate violences, and publike impugnation by their owne ſubiects, as well as their States, vnto the Rapine, and Inuaſion, of forreigne power. Laſtly; this Babylon doth aduance her Beaſt aboue all ciuil Lords, and Souereignes; not onely by an indirect authoritie ouer them, in caſe of Hereſie, and for ſpirituall ends (to which opinion onely, and no farther a multitude of Babylonians doe incline, though with the peremptorie cenſure of the Beaſt himſelfe, and violent oppugnation of his chiefe Adherents, in that behalfe) but by a direct, and ſuperiour authoritie ouer them, as Lord of Lords, and King of Kings. So Boniface the Eighth, intruded vpon the Crowne of France, but found the ſtrong oppoſition of Philippus Pulcher, to his great diſgrace. So Sixtus the Fift, (that ſubtile, and inſolent Beaſt) diſdayned the Workes of their Learned Bellarmine himſelfe, becauſe he did not attribute this direct Omnipotencie vnto the Pope (as a true, and lawfull Superiour

of all Kings) and therefore did conceiue a purpoſe to ſuppreſſe, and extinguiſh his Writings, that ſeemed to limit, and circumſcribe, the tranſcendencie of his power; as D. Barkley (a Pontifician in other points) doth relate in his very impugnation of Bellarmines opinion; that being alſo falſe, ſcandalous, and dangerous vnto the ſtate of Chriſtian Princes, and, in ſome reſpects, more abſurd, then the other, which Bellarmine did before reiect; though, in his Reply vnto D. Barkley, hee ſeemeth to incline (like a Cardinall now) vnto the challenge of his holy Father Sixtus, and from an indirect power, groweth toward a direct; which doctrine paſſeth freely amongſt the Canoniſts; is much imbraced by the Ieſuites; is diligently furthered by the Popes; and doth daily gather ſtrength in Babylon. No maruell then, if, as the proportion of Hercules his bodie was collected by the quantitie of his foot; ſo, by theſe foote-ſteps of Antichriſtianity, Chriſtian Princes doe now beginne to diſcerne, and diſcouer the ſecond Beaſt himſelfe; and to be excited iuſtly vnto the ruine, and perdition of his eſtate.
               
                  Secondly; Babylon hath treaſonable practiſes againſt the liues and ſtates of Princes; and theſe ſame iſſuing alſo out of her very doctrines, by a powerfull incantation of bewitched ſoules; as namely out of Purgatorie, Indulgences, Merit, Satisfaction, and the like; beſides a blind, and vnqueſtionable obedience, whereby many ſtand more ſpecially deuoted, and alſo obliged vnto this Beast.
               
               Now therefore, though it bee ſo, that Chriſtian Princes ſhould be more iealous of Gods honour, then their owne ſtate; of his glorie, then their owne ſafetie;

of his truth, then their owne liues; (and certainly, for theſe cauſes, God ſhall raiſe them vp, vnto this ſacred expedition, againſt Babylon, and her Beaſt) yet now their own cauſe ſhall incite them forward to the ſame; their ſtate, ſafetie, and liues, being in danger, by the baſeſt Vaſſall of this Purpled Whore. For if his Holyſhip may iuſtly depoſe a Prince, from his Royall Seat, by a Papall ſentence, and if execution thereof cannot otherwiſe proceed; then that may well follow, which Mariana (a learned, but a wicked Ieſuite) doth preſcribe in this caſe; namely, that ſuch a Prince may bee lawfully empoyſoned [if it were in their very Sacrament it ſelfe, Papiſts know the practice of this villany] or, by ſome clandeſtine, and ſecret meanes, depriued of his life. And the truth is, that, if the generall, and current doctrine of Babylon (for depoſition of Princes) bee ſound and ſubſtantiall; then ſuch practiſes (and ſpecially for defect of ſome other courſe, to put the Papall ſentence in execution) are by the verdict of good reaſon, and by faire conſequence of that doctrine, to bee maintayned, and to bee performed; which horrible, and damnable impietie, is conuinced by the teſtimonie of Gods Word, by the pietie of the ancient Church, and by the iudgement of ſundrie Papiſts themſelues; not ſo deeply, and dangerouſly infected with the leauen of Babylon, in this point, and therefore leſſe neere, and deare vnto the Triple-crowned Beaſt.
               
               And thus you haue a deciſion of the ſecond point; namely the cauſes (with the ſeuerall branches thereof) why theſe ten Kings ſhall conſpire in this action,

for the fall of Babylon; and therefore I will now proceed vnto the third.
            
            
               The THIRD Queſtion.
               THIRDLY, then, if you require of me; when the ten Kings (theſe glorious ſtarres in the firmament of the World) ſhall meete in this coniunction, which ſhall be ſo fatall vnto Rome; I anſwere; it is a curioſitie to enquire the time, and temeritie to define it. For who can looke, without his perill, into the Arke of the Diuine prouidence? Wherefore, in an vncertaine point, I will follow the greateſt certaintie, which the Scripture itſelfe, and my beſt obſeruation, will direct mee vnto in ſo doubtfull a caſe. The points, which I tender vnto your conſideration, are foure.
               FIRST; this fall of Rome (deſcribed Chap. 18.) is not long before the period, and concluſion of the World; for (as I noted in my former Sermon) the Saints reioyce for her ruine, Chap. 19. then, Chap. 20. there is a recapitulation of things paſt in the ſtate of the Church, with a deſcription of the generall Iudgement: then, in the two laſt Chapters, enſueth a deſcription of celeſtiall Hieruſalem, and the happie condition of the Triumphant Church; the ſtate of the Militant being now conſummate, and ended (as it ſeemeth) in, or vpon, the fall of Babylon; as being one of the laſt glorious, and obſeruable Acts, preceding the generall Reſurrection of the dead. Howbeit I cannot

determinately affirme with Lactant. lib. 7. cap. 25. that the World ſhall receiue her end immediately vpon this vaſtation of Rome; which, (as he falſly ſuppoſed) ſhould be performed by the great Antichriſt; and conſequently, according to his account, and the generall opinion of the Ancients, the World cannot ſtand longer, then the ſpace of three yeares, or therevpon, after the fall of Rome; ſince he, and they, did generally conceiue, that the Reigne of Antichriſt was confined within the compaſſe of three yeeres, and an halfe. But as their ſpeculations in this kinde had no ſufficient ground, and the very courſes of times, with the ſucceſſe of things therein (beſides the more cleere, and certaine expoſition of Propheticall Scriptures in this later Age) doe foundly conuince the ſame; ſo they inferre with them this palpable abſurditie, that, they, who ſee this extinction, and ruine of Babylon, ſhall haue an infallible knowledge, that the World ſhall determine, and end within the ſpace of ſuch a time (the fire, in Romes deſtruction, giuing them this light) which conſequence as it is euident, vpon their ground, ſo it needeth no refutation; ſince it implyeth ſundry points of markeable errour, which I leaue vnto your prudent cenſure.
               SECONDLY; her fall attendeth the complement, and full number of her ſinnes; according to a ſemblable caſe, Gen. 15.16. When the ſinnes of the Amorites are full, &c. when the latter times of Rome haue filled vp the meaſure of her iniquities; when this Harueſt is ripe, then commeth the Sickle of Gods vengeance: or (to follow the very words of GODS Spirit) this fall ſhall come vnto Rome, when the words

of God are fulfilled (Apoc. 17.17.) concerning her tyrannie, pride, and inſolencie; which muſt haue their due courſe, before her fatall end.
               THIRDLY, then, we may reaſonably conclude, that the time of her fall is neere at hand; for what can future Rome adde vnto the ſinnes of the former? —eadem facient, cupient
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      minores, (as the ingenious Poet ſpake of Imperiall Rome, vpon fifteen hundred yeeres agoe) they, that come after, ſhall deſire, and doe the ſame things with them, that went before. What Tyrannie, what Oppreſſion, what Perſecution, what Antichriſtian Pride, what Inſolencie againſt Princes, what Deluſions, what Impoſtures can wee expect from Rome hereafter, which wee haue not already found?
               FOVRTHLY, and laſtly; wee may obſerue, that, as the myſticall condition of this Babylonian Rome is, by cleere remonſtrance (made by learned, and iudicious men) notoriouſly diſcouered vnto all the World, ſo the hornes of the Papall Beaſt haue begun to fall from his head; his power being thereby much abated, and neuer likely to bee recouered againe; but one horne, after another, ſhall be plucked off. Wherefore, as I may certainly conclude, that the Turke ſhall not deſtroy the ſtates, and dignities of theſe ten Kings, (whatſoeuer Zanchius, a learned, and profound Diuine, did conceiue to the contrary; for which he ſuffered ſome oppoſition, as, in the ſecond part of his Miſcellanea, it may appeare; and whatſoeuer Melancthon himſelfe deliuered in his publike Lectures; that all Germanie ſhould bee poſſeſſed by the Turke) and my reaſon is grounded vpon the Scripture; ſhewing,

that the ten Kings, which aroſe with the ſecond Beaſt in Rome, ſhall deſtroy Rome at the laſt (and therefore if the Turke obtaine their Kingdomes, it muſt be after the fal of the Rome, which they muſt firſt ruinate) ſo I may very reaſonably, and probably affirme, that the Kings, which are alreadie fallen from the Beaſt [the Pope] ſhall neuer returne vnto him againe, to giue their power, a ſecond time, vnto him, and to ſubmit their Royall States vnto the Papall Crowne.
               But if Babylon ſhould aduance her ſelfe in England againe (which wee haue no cauſe to feare, nor Papiſts reaſon to hope) yet that ſhall not hinder the accompliſhment of this worke: for Babylon muſt fall; it is decreed by GOD; it ſhall bee performed by theſe Kings.
               Notwithſtanding; ſince Babylon is full of malice, and indignation, playing, firſt, the Foxe, to enter into the Lords Vineyard, that ſhee might be a Lyon, afterwards, to kill the Keepers thereof; let vs not be ſecure in obſeruing her courſes, nor fearefull to ſuſtaine her conflict. Let vs be prepared for that, which may not, perhaps, be prepared for vs; Wee muſt not bee wanting to Martyrdome, though it may bee wanting vnto vs: ne deſit animus Martyrio, ſaith Saint Cyprian; Let vs not want a mind to die for the truth of Chriſt; hee may be an habituall Martyr euer, that is an actuall neuer; in preparation of mind, not in paſſion of bodie; in will, and not in worke: as Saint Bernard ſpeaketh of Saint Iohn the Euangeliſt, that hee was a Martyr in will, though not in worke; whereas the Innocents were Martyrs in worke, but not in will; and

Saint Stephen in both. But here let no man deceiue himſelfe with a ſudden apprehenſion of Martyrdome, as a matter of little difficultie to vndergo; but let him conſider rather, that multi ante perſecutionem Leones, in perſecutione cerui; many are Lyons in the time of peace, but Harts in the time of perſecution (as one of the Ancients ſpake, by experience of thoſe times) that many, who ſpeake gloriouſly of their reſolution, appeare cowards in their performance (as the hiſtorie of Doctor Pendleton, and Maſter Sanders may teſtifie) and finally, that they, whom God calleth vnto ſo great a worke, ſhall bee prepared by him with gifts, conuenient for that purpoſe. Therfore Saint Ambroſe (writing vnto his ſiſter Marcella; Epiſt. 44.) ſaith modeſtly of himſelfe; becauſe God knew me to be weake, hee hath not yet giuen the Deuill power ouer my bodie. And though I ſhould deſire martyrdome, and offer my ſelfe vnto it, perhaps he doth iudge mee yet to be vnable for ſo great a ſtrife, and therefore doth exerciſe mee with other labours, and diuers afflictions; but hath not tried mee in this kind. O the rare humilitie of ſuch an excellent ſpirit! Let vs, then, by his example, bee willing, not boaſting; readie, not deſirous, to dye for the cauſe of God, if Babylon ſhould yet againe try vs in the fire of her perſecution, before ſhee come to the fire of her owne ruine. And ſo much of the third point; namely, the time; when Babylon ſhall be deſtroyed by theſe Kings.
            
            
               
               The FOVRTH Queſtion.
               THe FOVRTH, and laſt queſtion concerneth the ſtate of the Pope, of Papists, and of Poperie, vpon this fall of Babylon; whether hee, and they, and it, ſhall come vnto a finall extirpation with Babylon; or what may bee conceiued, probably, of each, in the diſcourſe of iudgement, and reaſon, by deduction out of the ſacred Scripture it ſelfe. This queſtion, then, hath three ſeuerall branches, as you heare, and therefore I will treate of them all in order, as it ſhall pleaſe God to aſſiſt mee with the celeſtiall illumination of his bleſſed Spirit.
            
            
               The FIRST Branch of the fourth Queſtion; concerning the POPE.
               
               WE doe not now enquire concerning the Perſon of the Pope (whether a Iohn, as many were, or a Iohne, as one was ſuppoſed to be) but concerning the State, place, office, and dignitie of the Pope, and as hee is the Second Beaſt in Babylon; inuading there the Imperiall Seat, and, by another forme, or colour of gouernment, vſurping the Imperiall power; as the ancient Fathers doe vſually ſpeake of Antichriſt (according to the tenour of the Scripture it ſelfe, in this behalfe) and as the experience of latter ages doth really verifie, and exhibite the truth of their iudgement herein, vnto our eyes.
               I anſwere then; that as Bellarmine doth vainely flatter himſelfe (lib. 4. de Pont. Rom. cap. 4.) concerning

the time of this ruine of Babylon (namely, that it ſhall not be vntill the end of the world, and in the time of their chimericall, and imagined Antichriſt, whoſe reigne, enduring three yeeres, and an halfe, is ended by the ſecond comming of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, as they ſimply pretend) ſo hee doth delude himſelfe, and others, when he ſaith, that, in the time, and after the time of her ruine, the Pope ſhall bee called, and indeed ſhall be, Romanus Pontifex, the Biſhop of Rome. For the truth is apparant, by the tenour of the ſacred Booke of the Reuelation, that the Papall Beast is the cauſe of the expedition, made by the tenne Kings againſt Babylon; that this warre, made vpon Babylon, is in regard of the pride, oppreſſion, and other ſinnes in Babylon, as ſhee is borne vp, and ſupported by the ſecond Beaſt; whoſe Dominion was aduanced by their ſubmiſſion vnto him, and ſhall bee ſuppreſſed by their concurrencie againſt him. It is not, then, a quarrell againſt the Citizens, or the edifices of Rome, but againſt her vſurpations, exerciſed by the Triple-crowned Beaſt therein. Neither had theſe Kings performed their deſigne, if, when they burnt the Citie of Rome, the Beaſt ſhould ſtill remaine. Therefore, as Babylon it ſelfe ſhall fall, ſo the power of her Beaſt ſhall be deſtroyed by theſe Kings, as being coupled, and commixed with the ſame. For as the ruine of Literall Babylon was accompanied with the ruine of the Chaldaean Empire, ſo the fall of Myſticall Babylon ſhall bee accompanied with the fall of her Beaſt; whom theſe Kings will now permit no more to tyrannize, with Papall dominion, in the Ciuill, or Eccleſiaſticall State; for as the power of the Beaſt ſtandeth by theſe Kings,

ſo it ſhall fall by theſe Kings. This is vnderſtood in the words of the Scripture; Apoc. 18. No man buyeth her ware any more of her; that is to ſay; The traffique of the Whore, and ſpirituall negotiations of her Beast (by Pardons, Diſpenſations, and other fornications, as they are called) ſhall ceaſe vpon her ruine, made by theſe Princes of the earth. Whereas, then, Bellarmine ſaith, the Pope ſhall ſtill continue Biſhop of Rome; I anſwere; not by any Souereignety, and Dominion; which Bellarmine perhaps may pretend, that Antichriſt ſhall not permit him actually to exerciſe in that time; but wee affirme, by demonſtration of the Scripture, that the ten Kings ſhall depriue him of that power in the world, which he formerly enioyed by their conceſſion; which ſhall then expire. Notwithſtanding, if Sibylla doe truely propheſie of Rome, that it [being once 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ; ſtrength, and power, as S. Hierome deſcanted vpon her name] ſhall afterwards become 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a ſtreet, (as Lactantius doth record; Inſt. l. 7. c. 25.) the Biſhop of Rome may, perhaps, remaine then in the qualitie, and place of an ordinarie Biſhop; but ſhall not bee receiued any more, as vniuerſall Paſtour of the Church; not as the Beaſt was before; not with ſuch latitude of power; not inſulting againe ouer States, and Churches. And, if the prophecie of Hildegardis (a ſacred Virgin, of great reputation, vpon the yeere 1150.) be of any force, the Biſhop of Rome ſhall bee reduced vnto the condition of other Biſhops, &c. as I haue ſeene, and read in a very faire, and ancient Manuſcript of parchment, concerning the predictions of that religious perſon. If therefore I may expreſſe a graue matter by a light example

(namely of Sir Thomas Moore; who, hauing reſigned his office of the Lord Chancellour, came himſelfe, vpon the next Sunday, vnto the Pew of his Ladie, in the Pariſh Church of Chelſey; ſpeaking vnto her in his facetious, and wittie manner; Madame; will you goe? My Lord is gone; which were formerly the vſuall words of her gentleman Vſher; when the Lord Chancellour departed out of the Church) ſo may I ſay in this caſe; when Babylon ſhall be waſted with fire, and the Beaſt ſhal be deſpoyled of his power; Our Lord the Pope is gone; but yet the Biſhop may ſtill remaine. And then Chriſtians may reckon ab vrbe euerſâ, as Pagans did, ab vrbe conditâ; when the power, honour, and glory of Babylon, and her Beaſt, ſhall periſh, and bee extinguiſhed, by the concordable operation of theſe great, and puiſſant Kings; who therefore will continually ſuppreſſe it, that it may neuer increaſe, and gather ſtrength againe.
            
            
               The SECOND Branch; concerning PAPISTS.
               
               I Speake not now of ordinary Papiſts, but chiefe Babylonian Papiſts; that is to ſay, ſuch, as haue a ſpeciall vnion, and coniunction with the Pope, in thoſe things, which appertayne vnto the Myſticall impietie of this ſecond Beast. Wherefore the name of a Papist is taken either from Poperie, which hee doth defend, or from the Pope, to whom he doth adhere.
               In the firſt acception; I eſteeme him a Papiſt, that, leauing the Pope in the principall, and eſſentiall

points of the Papacie, doth yet beleeue ſundry errors, defined, reſolued, and maintayned in the Romiſh Church, vnder the gouernment, and adminiſtration of the Pope; of which kinde of Poperie, and ſort of Papiſts, I ſhall treate more particularly in the third Branch, which doth immediately enſue.
               But now (in the ſecond acception) he is really, and formally a Papiſt, who is vnited vnto the Pope, not in regard of the Popes perſon, but in regard of his ſeat, place, and dignitie, which he vſurpeth in Babylon; and therefore doth eſpecially beleeue, and follow the Pope in ſuch particular points, as depend vpon his Papall Office; as namely; The Popes temporall Superioritie ouer all Princes, as being the chiefe, and, in truth, the onely Souereigne of the World (which is the peculiar, and intimate character of the Antichriſtian Beaſt) or, at the leaſt, if he haue not this temporall power ouer all Princes directly, as their Lord, yet indirectly, as Paſtour of the Church, to depoſe, and dethrone them, (which indirect authoritie doth yet inueſt him with a pretended iuriſdiction ouer all the World; and is a more ſubtile inſinuation of the Babylonian Beaſt) and that he hath an infallible iudgement, as Pope, in the controuerſies of Religion, to bind the whole World vnto his definition, vpon paine of Eccleſiasticall cenſure (which opinion, being greatly imbraced in their Church, and daily increaſing, ſuffered much oppoſition by the Sorboniſts, and generally by the Church of France) and that, from this Papall ſeate, all Christians haue the practice, and benefit of Indulgences (the peculiar Ware of Babylon) that this Apostolicall, and Supreame Seat hath power to diſpenſe with Oathes, and

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
with Mariages in certaine degrees of conſanguinitie, and affinitie, and that all Chriſtians muſt haue recourſe vnto her for Diſpenſations, Abſolutions, &c. that, vnto this ſeat belong Appellations, from all parts of the Chriſtian World, as vnto the higheſt Authoritie vpon Earth (by which courſes they exhauſt much treaſure of all Kingdomes, and vexe the ſubiects with tedious, and expenſiue trauels) that this Beaſt hath power to call generall Councels, and to ratifie, or nullifie their Decrees; and other Babylonian doctrines, belonging to the myſterie of the ſecond Beaſt. In this ſenſe, and acception of a Papist, King Henry the Eighth, in his iuſt, neceſſary, and conſcionable diſceſſion from the Church of Rome, vpon the point of his vnlawfull Mariage with the Ladie Katherine, his Brothers Wife (which, by Papall Diſpenſation, was contracted againſt the Word of God, and Law of Nature; eſpecially as her caſe did ſtand) was now no longer a Papiſt; becauſe he reiected the Pope in theſe Myſteries of the Papacie, and in all points, that had dependencie vpon his Seat, Office, and pretenſed Authoritie in the Church. Whence it is, that this magnanimous Prince (iuſtly prouoked, but vniuſtly handled by the holy Father) writeth vnto Charles the Fift, and to all Chriſtian States, in theſe very words; Orbis intelligat varias PAPISTARVM fraudes, &c. and againe; ne Papa Regum authoritate ad extir pandas creſcentis Euangelij radices, &c. abuti poſsit. So that, though this King remayned ſtill a Papiſt in the firſt acception (howbeit he made an happy entrance alſo to the purgation of ſundry abuſes in the Church; as by taking away ſome ſuperſtitious Feaſts, ſome highly reſpected Images,

ſome much adored Relikes; the Word of God was tranſlated into the vulgar tongue; and many other things were done in his time, for the reformation of blind, and ignorant ſtupiditie in the Church) yet notwithſtanding, in the mayne, and eſſentiall things, which ſpecially giue the true denomination of a Papiſt, he is to be exempted cleerely from the crime, and contagion of this Title. And yet as Iehu did performe the Worke of God, impoſed vpon him, for the ruine of Baal, and that Idolatry, but departed not from other ſinnes of Ieroboam, and the Kings of Iſrael, ſo this excellent Prince deſtroyed the Baal of Rome, and his power, within the confines of this Kingdome, but, in many other things, hee ſtill followed the doctrines of Rome: but yet ſo, as he conceiued them (though vntruly) to bee built vpon the Word of God, and conformable to the iudgement of the ancient Church.
               I anſwere therefore, FIRST; that, when theſe ten Kings ſhall take vp their Armes againſt Babylon, many Papiſts [of the ſecond, and worſt degree, and acception] ſhall firmely combine with the Pope [the ſecond Beaſt] and ſhall ſeeke his defence, againſt the incurſion of theſe mightie Kings: ſuch Papists, I meane, as ſpecially the Ieſuites are, and the Canoniſts, and all ſuch, as adore this Beaſt for his ſuppoſed excellencie, and glorie; ſo that, by the oppoſition of their owne force, and by their excitation of their Adherents, they ſhall make all poſſible (but yet a vaine) reſiſtance againſt this generall enterpriſe of theſe potent Kings; becauſe they loue, reuerence, defend with writing, propugne with their power, and (aboue all

other Papists) maintayne, to their vttermoſt, this ſecond Beaſt in Babylon; as their deareſt Lord, and higheſt Potentate of the Earth; to whom (as they ſay) all men muſt be ſubiect, vpon the neceſſitie of their ſaluation.
               SECONDLY, therefore; I inferre, that, ſince the Beast himſelfe ſhall fall with his Babylon (as being a fall not only of one particular place, but of ſome great power) theſe Papists alſo, concurring in his defence, and oppoſition of theſe Kings, ſhall certainely come vnto a finall ruine. For as theſe Kings ſhall bring the Beaſt vnto deſolation, ſo they will not ſuffer ſuch to liue, as ſhall, by doctrine, iuſtifie, and magnifie the power of this Beast (which they hate, and will deſtroy) or; by politike meanes, ſeeke his aduancement, or, by forcible contradiction, procure his ſupportation, and defence, againſt their inuincible armes, which, by Gods owne warrant, they ſhall take vp againſt Babylon, and againſt the Antichriſtian vaſſals, that admire the glorie, and follow the poyſon of the ſecond Beaſt therein.
               As for other Papiſts (of inferiour note, and not of this marke, or ſtampe) I will deliuer my iudgement in the third Branch; vnto which, therefore, I addreſſe my ſpeech.
            
            
               The THIRD Branch; concerning POPERY.
               
               THough this word [Popery] ſeemeth to include all erroneous doctrines in the Papal Church (which are many in number, and not reconciliable with the

truth of Gods Word) yet we muſt diſtinguiſh heere, as wee haue before; for that ſuch points, as depend vpon the Popes pretended office, and beare ſpeciall reference thereunto (as namely they are, for which ſome Papiſts haue their principall denomination, as I did obſerue in the ſecond branch) are truly, and really Popiſh, not in regard of the perſon of this, or that Pope (as Hereſies doe moſt generally carrie the name of their inuentor; and, in this caſe alſo, it were not hard to ſhew, that ſome Popiſh doctrines had either their beginning, or elſe their principall corroboration from certaine Popes, and might therefore well be ſtamped with their names) but in regard of the Papall See, office, dignitie, and vſurped ſuperioritie of this ſecond Beaſt; and therefore ſuch points of their doctrine, and practiſe, iſſuing from the Pope, as he is Pope (and not as he is this, or that particular perſon) and being a part of the Myſterie of Iniquitie (which Saint Paul did foreſee) are Popiſh, and Poperie, and therefore this kind of Poperie (connexed to the Papall Seate and Office) will haue a certaine end, and determination, with the fall of the Pope; this ſecond Beaſt; whoſe ruine is implied in the fall of Rome it ſelfe. And therefore we may heere, not impertinently, obſerue, that, in the points of Popery, all are not of one, and equall degree; but ſuch doe ſpecially beare the marke, and cogniſance of Antichriſtianitie, as do more highly aduance this beaſt in his pretended authoritie ouer all Kings, and ciuill States, ouer all Churches, and Eccleſiaſticall perſons; in, and ouer the conſciences of men (in which he ſetteth vp his Dominion, to reigne therein) and finally, whereby hee doth moſt neerely

oblige, and tye men vnto him, by the glorious oſtentation of his great, and ſacred power.
               Secondly, there are other points of Poperie, not vniuſtly ſo called; as being defined by Papall Councels (whoſe infallible Decrees depend vpon the Popes aſſent) as being parts of that corrupt bodie of erroneous doctrine, which is taught in his Synagogue, ſuſtayned by his authoritie, defended by his Writers, propugned by ſecular Princes (as ſeruants of the Pope; though ſtiled by more honourable names) finally, ſuch as tend to the confirmation of the Pope, and that Babylonian Church, in which the myſterie of iniquitie (beginning long agoe) hath now fully declared it ſelfe, in ſo great an Apoſtaſie, and defection from the truth. And if you require a ſpeciall catalogue of theſe Popiſh errours, they are (for the greateſt part) compriſed in the twelue Articles of the new Creed, framed, and propoſed by Pope Sixtus quartus [in Bulla, ſuper forma iuramenti profeſsionis fidei] which containe the principall errours of the Papall Beaſt, and of the Papiſts, miſerably ſeduced therein from the integritie of Gods Word, and extreamely different from the Catholike ſenſe of the more pure, and ancient Church.
               I anſwere therefore; when God ſhall deliuer his Church from the Aegyptian bondage, which it ſuffereth vnder this Babylonian Beast, that, in due probabilitie of reaſon, if not all, yet many of theſe more groſſe, abſurd, and enormious errours (now predominant in the Church of Rome) ſhall be corrected by the more ſound, and Chriſtian iudgement, euen of thoſe, who liue in the outward communion of the

                  Romiſh Church (for there neuer wanted ſome more Religious ſpirits, that did diſlike, oppoſe, and ſeeke to redreſſe the growing, and growne errours therein) and that Chriſtian Princes ſhall willingly concurre to the reformation of Popiſh errours, when a more free, and indifferent courſe ſhall be opened for a generall Councell (then can be yet obtained, while this Babylonian Beaſt doth reigne) to treate, diſpute, and conclude vpon things, which appertaine vnto the peace, and puritie of the Church.
               To conclude this paſſage therefore, I ſhall intreat your prudent, and iudicious conſideration of three markable points, which I now tender, and preſent vnto your religious hearts.
               The FIRST; that the Church of Rome (as it ſtandeth at this day) offending rather in additions vnto Gods truth (in regard whereof they fooliſhly call ours a Negatiue Religion; which doth truly deny, and iuſtly impugne their additions) then in ſubtractions from the ſame (though they erre alſo in this kind; taking lawfull authoritie from the ciuill Magiſtrate; taking halfe the Communion from the Laitie; taking away the Word of God from the people, by concealing it in an vnknowne tongue, &c. and ſo in other things; againſt which, therefore, our doctrine is affirmatiue, in oppoſition of their errours) I ſay, that the Church of Rome doth hold, and teach the fundamentall points of Chriſtian Religion, poſitiuely, in the Articles of the Creed (though it haue ſome doctrines, that, by force of conſequence, may ſeeme to contradict the ſame) and that this Church of Rome doth well, and ſoundly conceiue of many great, and principall points (as

namely, of the two Natures, and one Perſon of Chriſt; as learned Zanchius himſelfe doth confeſſe; de Incarnat. lib. 2. cap. 9. and elſewhere) but it doth erre chiefly, and dangerouſly, in the Office of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, by deſtroying the merit of his Paſſion, and by falſe application thereof; not onely by the meanes of Holy water, and other Babylonian inuentions, but by ſuch meanes, as are contrarie, and repugnant thereunto; as namely, by the paines of Purgatorie; where our Satisfaction concurreth with his, and his is applied by ours; as the Booke of Cardinall Peron, paſſing vnder the name of Maſter Henry Conſtable, doth blaſphemouſly teach. Finally then; her many truths cannot iuſtifie her prodigious errours; her many errours cannot infringe her certaine truths: but the truths therein cannot ſo ſecurely ſaue, as the errours therein will greatly endanger the ſoule of any Babylonian captiue, inthralled, and inſnared with the perill of truly Popiſh errours.
               The SECOND point, therefore, is this; that all particularities, which beare the name of Poperie, in the cenſure, and iudgement of ſome men, are not ſo in truth; but are ſo eſteemed by reaſon of their ignorance, and precipitation, and for want of experience in the Monuments of venerable antiquitie; as being carried with the affection of Aëtius, who (as Socrates doth report; l. 2. c. 28.) conuerſed not in the Bookes of ancient Writers, but reiected ſuch, as were of greateſt reputation in the Church; following the ſophiſticall concluſions of his owne captious braine. Hence it is, that the intemperate Anabaptiſts condemne the baptiſme of Children, as the inuention of a Pope.

Hence it is, that the peſtilent Trinitarians profanely teach, that the doctrine of the Trinitie is the fable of a Pope, and that therfore this popiſh myſterie is aptly ſignified in the triple Crowne. Hence it is, that the certaine, and indubious diſtinction of a Biſhop, and a Presbyter (the firſt hauing a paternall ſuperioritie ouer the ſecond, in the adminiſtration of the Church) is, by ſome Aërian ſpirits, branded with the note of a Popiſh Hierarchy; as being ignorant in the perpetuall gouernment of the Church, or preſumptuous againſt all ages, and all ſucceſſion in the ſame. Hence it is, that the few, innocent, conuenient Ceremonies in this Church (iſſuing from the practiſe of the reuerend, learned, and holy Fathers) are ſcandalized with the contemptuous name of Popery. But by whom? By men commonly of vnlearned hearts, ſtrong paſſions, and weake iudgements; ſo that (as I obſerued before) whatſoeuer thing they diſlike, it is Popery; and, whatſoeuer perſon they diſtaſt, hee is Popiſh in their poore conceits. Much like, though not in hereticall opinion, yet in ſimple carriage, vnto the followers of Artemon, who taught that Chriſt was a pure Man, without any diuine Nature; and pretended that this true, and ancient doctrine was firſt corrupted by Zepherine, a Biſhop of Rome, as Euſebius doth relate l. 5. c. 25. So ancient is this courſe. To end this point therfore; I wiſh all men, of ingenious mindes, to conceiue wiſely of Popery, what is ſo to bee eſteemed; and all men of religious hearts, to deteſt it with a good conſcience, grounded vpon a ſufficient knowledge.
               The THIRD, and laſt point is this; that wee

cannot probably conceiue, by any deduction of reaſon in humane diſcourſe, that all, and ſingular Articles of Popery (which are, indeed, erroneous, and may therefore iuſtly deſerue that name) ſhall euer be totally, and fully purged out of the Church of God (after the ruine of Babylon) but that there will be variable, & contrarie iudgements of learned men in ſome matters (truly deſeruing reformation) vntill the finall diſſolution of this preſent world; ſo that, in this caſe, wee muſt beare what we cannot amend; and rather enioy our ſolid vnitie in things of greater importance, then, vpon euery difference in things of leſſer moment, make a peruerſe diſtraction in the Church of God, and an vnhappy rent in the ſeameleſſe coate of Ieſus Chriſt, our Lord; remembring, to tolerate that for vnitie, which yet wee hate in equitie; as Saint Auguſtine doth diuinely ſpeake.
               And thus much concerning the Praedicate in my Text; the FALL of Babylon, diſcouered in this my ſecond Sermon. I ſhould now entertaine you with ſome obſeruations in the concluſion of this, as I did in the end of the firſt; had I not, in the perpetual courſe of this Sermon, (vpon incident paſſages) taken ſome occaſion, by the way, to make application of the ſeuerall points vnto your hearts; to ſhew you the prouidence of God in his ordination of this fall; his loue of his Church in his prediction of this fall; his vengeance againſt ſinne, in his operation of this fall: our comfort in knowing this fall; our patience in attending this fall: our inſtruction to preuent our owne fall by his Iuſtice (which will enſue vpon our fall from his Truth, and Grace) an aduertiſement to Papiſts
                  
to leaue their Locall communion with Babylon (if they dwell within her walls) or Spirituall communion, if they be deuoted vnto her Beast; ſince both muſt goe into perdition; and therefore, finally, here is an admonition vnto ſuch, as decline from the comfortable truth of Gods Word, vnto the darke ſuperſtition of Babylonian errours, to conſider well, and ſeriouſly in their hearts; I goe to BABYLON; which ſhall bee burnt: I ſubmit my ſelfe to that BEAST, which ſhall be deſtroyed: What feare, what ſuſpition, what terrours will then poſſeſſe thy ſoule? what ſecuritie haſt thou in ſuch dangers? what comfort in ſuch frights? what happineſſe haſt thou, when thy Mother Church of Rome, and thy Father-Pope therein, ſhall come to ſo great a ruine? Canſt thou be innocent, when they are guiltie? Haſt thou no ſinne, when they are puniſhed? Canſt thou ſtand, when they fall? O conſider this, yee that forget God, leſt he take you away, and there be none to deliuer you.
               
               But ſince theſe particulars are touched more exactly before, therefore I will conclude this Sermon (and ſo my whole Text) by ſtirring vp all degrees, and conditions of men, vnto the performance of Gods deſigne; that, what we yet heare in Verbo, prophecied in Gods Word [It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon, &c.] wee may once ſee in Opere; fulfilled alſo in Worke.
               FIRST, then, I begin with them, who are the peculiar inſtruments of Gods Iuſtice in this behalfe; the ten Kings, as the Scripture it ſelfe doth ſpeake. O Noble, and Heroicall Princes, Gods Vice-gerents (armed with his power, and ſacred with his owne name)

you haue the ſpeciall place in this warfare; God hath preſt you vnto this ſeruice, and not onely warranted, but required you vnto it. You are ſent againſt Rome (as Saul againſt Amalek) to deſtroy it with fire, and ſword. It is no voyage vnto the holy Land (where Chriſt did ſuffer for our ſinnes) but to impure Babylon; in which as it may be truly ſaid alſo, that Chriſt himſelfe did die, in ſundry reſpects (but then ſhee was in her Ethnicall ſtate) ſo, in it, Chriſt doth ſtill ſuffer, in regard of his Truth, there oppreſſed; in regard of Antichriſt, there aduanced; in regard of the Faithfull, by him perſecuted; for it is done vſually through the operation of this Second Beaſt, abuſing the authoritie of Kings, and Princes, to this wicked purpoſe. There hee ſitteth, that trampleth vpon your Crownes, and Scepters; there hee ſitteth, that depoſeth you from your States; there hee ſitteth, that abſolueth your ſubiects from the two indiſſoluble bonds, of Oath, and Nature; there he ſitteth, that diſpoſeth your Kingdomes, at his pleaſure, that exciteth your owne people againſt you (by the curſes of his Excommunications, that ſtirreth vp your friends, and neighbours) to make warre vpon your hereditary lands. Now the time is come [it is paſt with God] it is now at hand, that you may, you muſt, you ſhall take vp a temporall againſt his ſpirituall Sword; diueſt him of his pretended power, expoſe him vnto ſcandall, ignominy, ruine, extreame deſolation; reward her [or him; it is all one in effect; the one doth imply the other] euen as ſhee hath rewarded you, and giue her double, according to her workes; and, in the cup, that ſhe hath filled to you, fill her the double; as it is: Apocal. 19.6.
               
                  Now if you require of me the names of theſe ten Kings (I meane not the names of their Perſons, but of their States) I cannot, I dare not deale ſo punctually in this caſe, as ſome, who preſume, by particular commemoration of their ten Kingdomes, to muſter vp the names of theſe ten Kings, that ſhall effectuate this great, and glorious worke. It may bee a queſtion (and ſo it is with mee) whether this number of ten may bee taken in that diſtinct, and preciſe accompt; or whether it be not a certaine, for an vncertaine number, as the Scripture doth vſually ſpeake; or rather, whether, in theſe numbers of ſpeciall perfection (the Septenary, the Decenary, the Centenary, the Millenary) a whole, and vniuerſall companie is to be vnderſtood, or not. And I doe the rather ſo conceiue it to be vnderſtood, becauſe Saint Auguſtine himſelfe hath framed this opinion in my breaſt. For this learned Father, treating of the perſecution by Antichriſt, and the conſummation of the World (enſuing preſently therevpon) ſuppoſeth, that (in the Prophecie of Daniel, chap. 7.8.) the little horne, ariſing amongst the ten hornes of the fourth Beast (which certainly is the Romane Empire) and plucking away three of the former ten hornes, is ANTICHRIST; who, as Lactantius ſaid before Saint Auguſtines dayes (out of the common errour of thoſe times) ſhall ſubdue three of theſe ten Kings (for ſo the ten hornes are interpreted, Verſ. 24.) and conioyne his power with the other ſeuen, to deſtroy the Romane Empire, and to

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
ſacke the Citie of Rome. Inſt. lib. 7. cap. 16. Which errour was ſo pregnant in the time of reuerend, and conſtant Athanaſius, that, therefore, he thence inforceth a probability againſt Conſtantius (the wicked Arrian perſecuting Emperour) to bee the ANTICHRIST; as hauing ſundry markes of him; and, in particular, hauing ſubdued three Kings; Britannio, Gallus, and Magnentius, who ſtriued with him for the Imperiall Crowne. Athanaſ. in Epist. and ſolitar. vitam agentes. Now though in this point, they were all inuolued, and wrapped in a miſpriſion of that Scripture (for that little horne is not Antichriſt, as they were perſwaded; nor the Turke, as ſome more lately haue imagined; but Iulius Caeſar, and his ſucceſſors, who tranſlated the Empire of Rome, from the publike ſtate, vnto a particular perſon) yet Saint Auguſtine proceedeth with better aduice, when he commeth vnto a reuiew of thoſe ten Kings in the Prophecie of Daniel (who yet are not the ſame, as you may very eaſily obſerue, with our ten Kings, in the Reuelation of Saint Iohn) and therefore hee writeth in this manner; Vererime ſanè fateor, &c. I confeſſe that I am in feare, leaſt perhaps we bee deceiued in the ten Kings, whom Antichriſt ſeemeth to find, as ten perſons; and ſo he may come before we be aware, there being not then ſo many Kings in the Romane World. For what, if, by this number of TEN, the whole company of Kings be ſignified, after whom hee is to come? as by the Millenarie, Centenarie, and Septenarie numbers, the vniuerſitie

of things is often imported in the Scripture. So Saint Auguſtine; De Ciuit. Dei, lib. 20. cap. 23.
               By this his prudent, and remarkeable obſeruation (fitly to bee applied vnto my preſent purpoſe) I may very reaſonably collect, that a great, and generall number of Kings (whoſe ſtates were ſometimes members of the Romane Empire; whereof they haue inuaded a part, by their particular Dominions, but Antichriſt the whole, by his ſupreame power) ſhall ariſe, in a confederacie, and expedition, to burne the Whore [Babylon] and to ſubdue the Beast [the Pope] and ſo to accompliſh that Royall worke, vnto which God hath alreadie conſecrated them in his holy Word.
               SECONDLY; I direct my ſpeech vnto you, my Fathers, and Brethren, of the ſacred Tribe of Leui; you, who beare the ſiluer Trumpets, and blow the alarme; you, that take vp your ſpirituall armes (for the weapons of our warfare are not carnall; but yet mightie through God; 2. Cor. 10.4.) againſt this odious Whore, and execrable Beaſt: fight againſt them with a learned tongue: that is not enough; fight alſo with your aduiſed Pen: it conquereth more, then Alexanders Sword. O deteſtable ſilence in ſo neceſſarie a cauſe; hatefull modeſtie, in ſo needfull an enterprize; curſed feare, in ſo iuſt a quarrell; which is Gods in Heauen, and ſo many Kings in earth. Thou calleſt others to fight, and ſitteſt thou ſtill? and in ſo needfull a time? Remember that of the Poet;
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     :
               
               A good, and faithfull Miniſter will bee writing

with his hand, aduiſing with his head, & fighting with his tongue. Let Rome vnderſtand her ſinne; that ſhe is BABYLON [one word, but a ſtinging word; it compriſeth all iniquities] and let her know her ruine [that ſhe IS FALLEN] to come in act, but paſt in his preuiſion, who hath confirmed it by his decree. Tell theſe Kings, that, if they be now auerſe from this worke, yet God ſhall incline, and bow their hearts vnto it, as Alarich
                        ••
                     
                   was inwardly vrged, and compelled to take Armes againſt Rome. Sozom. lib. 9. c. 6. Tell the whole world, that though it ſeeme a difficult worke, yet it is Gods worke, vnto whom nothing is impoſſible; and that it is reuealed in his Word, in which nothing can faile; therefore Babylon muſt fall, and fall thus; for his Word cannot fall, who giueth vs certaine aſſurance of this infallible ſucceſſe.
               THIRDLY; I ſpeake vnto you; noble in deſcent, great in dignitie, rich in goods; Starres of greater light in the firmament of the State (but borrowed from the primigeniall, and originall light of the Sunne therein; the glorious Souereigne thereof) you that by proper valour, can performe much your ſelues, and, by ſpeciall example, may prouoke others: if God ſhall call you vnto this employment, attend your Princes, goe with their perſons (or go vpon their commands; for I know not, whether they ſhall goe, perſonally, to this war, or not; certaine I am, that they ſhall go in their power, in theis people, in their treaſure) ſet forward this great deſigne: it is not to accompany Caeſar, to conquer

Prouinces for the glory of Rome; nor Alexander, to ſubdue the Perſian Monarch; it is no ſuch politicke attempt for humane ends; but it is the worke of heauen, and earth, conſpiring in her deſtruction, who inſlaueth you with her tyrranny, poyſoneth you with her hereſie, defileth Gods name with blaſphemy, conculcateth all royall dignitie with her pride, murdereth Gods Saints with her crueltie; worke therefore her ruine, that ſeeketh yours.
               FOVRTHLY; I ſpeake vnto you, who are Subiects of an inferiour degree; I doubt not, but (in regard of your Chriſtian pietie, and zeale) I may ſay of you, as Deborah of her magnanimous people, Praiſe the Lord, for the auenging of Iſrael, and for the people, that offered themſelues willingly. Iudic. 5.2. Many Volones ſhal then appear to offer themſelues in this ſacred expedition. There is no neceſſitie of diſputation, in this caſe, whether, in ſuch a war (ſo iuſt, and lawfull) voluntary, or mercenary warfare may be approued, or not. And you, that are preſſed vnto this warre, by your rightfull Princes, ſhall not be troubled with that ſcruple (which ſo much vexeth the Schooles) how farre, in what cauſes, with what limitations, a Souldier may fight, vpon the commandement of his Prince (ſince the authoritie of vndertaking warre is in the King; the miniſtry of executing it is in the Subiects; as S. Auguſtine writeth; contra Faustum l. 22. c. 75.) for you ſee, that the proclamation, and ordination of this warre is from the vnqueſtionable authoritie of God himſelfe; and therfore as you ſhall ſerue your

Souereignes, ſo they ſhall ſerue God therein. This warre, therefore, is honourable, religious, neceſſary, and to be preferred before a baſe, cowardly, and profane peace. If Iehoram ſpeake of peace, yet Iehu will heare of none, becauſe hee is the miniſter of Gods Iuſtice. Pax ab illis, non cum illis, ſaith S. Bernard of wicked perſons; ſo I ſay here; haue peace from Babylon, in not medling with her ſocietie; you can haue no peace with her, in treating with her vpon ſweet, and amicable termes.
               FIFTHLY, and laſtly; I end with that, which is the beginning of euery ſucceſſefull enterpriſe; Prayer. Souereignes muſt pray with Moſes, while their Subiects fight with Amalek. Constantine the Great attributed his victories vnto the force of prayer; and therefore hee had a Tabernacle in his Campe, framed according to the modell of a Church. Theodoſius conquered a puiſſant enemy (Maximus, in name, and power) by the preuayling vertue of prayer. Let prayer alſo arme the Souldiers of this warre; it is more defenſiue, then any Shield, and more offenſiue, then any Sword. And you, that go not forth with them in perſon, to fight againſt Babylon, yet fight alſo by your praiers, for their ſafetie, and ſucceſſe. Hee, that hath not an hand able to fight, nor a tongue learned to preach, may yet haue an heart well affected to pray. Pray then, pray all, for the peace of Ieruſalem, and the ruine of Babylon; cry with one voyce, and cry ſtill, cadat, cadat, [let it fall] till wee heare, actually, cecidit, cecidit, it is fallen.
               And though God doth more reſpect, herein, the

goodneſſe of the cauſe, then of our perſons, in the iſſue of this warre, yet let vs be armed with pietie, vertue, grace; that we may be more fit, and proper inſtruments for his purpoſe; according to Gods owne precept; Deut. 23.9. When thou goeſt out with the hoaſt againſt thine enemies, keepe thee then from all wickedneſſe. So ſhall our warres proſper abroad, & peace continue at home, with the aduancement of Gods truth, both there, and heere; which the Lord of all mercies conſerue vnto vs, and vnto our poſteritie after vs, euen till the glorious appearance of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt; Amen.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            A Correction of the Errata.
            
            
               In the FIRST Sermon.
               PAge * 10. Line 28. put out third p. 11. l. 2. Read 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . p. 11. l. 8. read vnto for vpon. p. 15. l. 21. read excecation, p. 24. l. 12. mere for nere. p. 25. l. 10. and I doubt. * p. 29. l. 2. put out foure. p. 31. l. 22. read diſ
                        •••
                     ſions. * p. 33. l. 2. it being. * p. 45. l. 4. read time of Antichriſt, woording to the common doctrine of Babylon; when.* p. 49. l. 26. read vnto Mahomet, and the Turke.* p. 5
                     •
                  . l. 17. read Apocal. 13.1.* p. 55. l. 6. read fourth in ſtead of third p. 57. l. 15. powerfully. l. 18. naturall. * p. 73. l. 5. put out moſt. * p. 83. l. 19▪ read they haue not ſuch. p. l. 91. l. 8. which for with.* p. 127. 29. and in a ſecond.
               
            
            
               In the SECOND Sermon.
               Page 10. Line 11. Read: So in this. p. 19. l. 24. as it is the. p. 20. l. 14. this is the fall.* p. 24. l. 5. any people▪
                  * p. 31. l. 28. indignitie.* p. 32. l. 25. read then, in ſtead of that. p. 36. l. 1. and in ſtead of as. p. 38. l. 28. ſome of them, in ſtead of they. *p. 39. l. 29. they were, for he was.* p. 48. l. 10. his fleſh. * p. 50. l. 18. footeſteps for ſtooleſteps.
               
            
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
   