
      
         
            
            
            DAVNGEROVS POSITIONS
AND PROCEEdings,
published and practised within this Iland
of Brytaine, vnder pretence of Reformation, and
for the Presbiteriall Discipline.
            
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            
               My sonne feare the Lord and the King: and meddle not with them that
are seditious.
               Prou. 24. 21.
            
            
               They despise gouernement, and speake euill of them that are in authority.
               Iude.
            
            LONDON
Imprinted by Iohn Wolfe.
1593.
         
         
            
            
            An aduertisement to the Reader.
            
               THE Author of this Treatise was required by
some persons of honor, who might dispose of
him and his labours: to set downe by way of an
historicall narration, what hee had obserued
touching certaine positions holden, and some enterprises
atchieued or vndertaken, for recommending,
and bringing the Presbiteriall Discipline into this Iland
of Brittaine, vnder pretence of reformation. The performance of
which dutie, when hee had vndertaken and was entred into it: hee
found the worke to grow farre greater vpon him, then at the first, he
did imagine. Insomuch as although in the beginning he verily supposed,
tha hee might easily haue contriued his matter into a few
sheetes of paper: so that as many coppies, as were to bee disposed,
might easily and in very short time haue beene written forth: yet by
the necessary length of the Discourse, as it fell out, and through his
manifold quotations, hee was constrained, (as the time required) to
procure for the better dispatch, that some fewe copies might bee printed.
And albeit there is no meaning, that this Treatise (laboured
but for the priuate satisfaction of some fewe especiall persons) should
otherwise continue then as an vnpublished Copie: yet the writer of
it wished to haue it signified, that nothing is alleadged therein, which
is not to be found either in Bookes and writinges published to the
view of the world, (such as he thinketh will not be disclaimed,) or in
publike records, or else is to be shewed vnder those parties own hands
that haue beene either the principall procurers, fauorers, or dealers
in those thinges, whereof hee intreateth. Which asseueration of his
thus made, he will be ready, (as he sayth) God assisting him, to iustifie
at any time for the satisfaction of such, as shall make doubt of it.
And doth further protest with all sinceritie: that he hath not (willingly)
detorted any thing in this whole Discourse, to make either the
cause it selfe, or the fauorors thereof more odious, then their owne
wordes and deeds shall necessarily inferre, and enforce against them,
with all indifferent and considerate Readers. Farewell in Christ.
            
         
         
            
            
               The Contents of the first Booke.
               OF two sorts of men that especially disturbe the Church of England,
and of the drifts of them both, by way of a Preface. Chap. 1. Fol. 1.
Of the course held at Geneua, for reformation of religion, and of the
Doctrine which vpon that occasion hath beene broached. Chap. 2.
Fol. 7.
               Of the proceeding of some Scottish Ministers: according to the Geneuian
rules of Reformation. Chap. 3. Fol. 9.
               How the Geneuian Doctrine, or principle for Reformation, hath beene amplified,
by certaine pretended Reformers in Scotland, Chap. 4. Fol. 14▪
               
               The obiections against the doctrine, reported of in the former chapter with
the Consistorian answeres vnto them. Chap. 5. Fol. 16.
               The proceedinges of certaine Scottish Ministers, according to the groundes
mentioned in the two last chapters, for setting vp of the Consistorian
Discipline, and of their vrging of our English Disciplinaries, to follow
their steppes. Chap. 6. Fol. 18.
            
            
               The Contents of the second Booke.
               The Doctrine of certaine English Ministers, which they learned at Geneua,
and published of purpose to have procured the like course for Reformation
in England, to that which was in Scotland. Chap. 1. Fol. 34.
               Our English Disciplinarians, doo imitate the Scottish, in their desire of the
Consistoriall gouernement, sauing that they are more bewitched with a
kind of dotage after it. Chap. 2. Fol. 41.
               Our pretended English reformers doo imitate or rather exceede the Scottish
Ministers in reuiling and rayling against all that doo encounter them
Chap. 3. Fol. 44.
               The speeches of the said pretended reformers, concerning England: the State:
the present reformation, and gouernement of the Church. Cha. 4. Fol. 47.
               Some of their vndutifull and consistorian speeches concerning her Maiestie
&c. Chap. 5. Fol. 48.
               Some of their rayling speeches against the high court of Parliament, and all
others generally that do maintaine the present gouernment of the Church
of England. Chap. 6. Fol. 50
               Some of their Disciplinarian speeches concerning the Lordes of her Maiesties
most honourable priuy Councell. Chap. 7. Fol. 52.
               Some of their rayling speeches against the Magistracy in England, the Iudges,
Lawyers, and lawes both ciuill and ecclesiasticall. Chap. 8. Fol. 54.
               Some of their consistoriall sayings, as touching our Religion, Communion
booke, Sacraments and ceremonies. Chap. 9. Fol. 55.
               How they doo charge the present gouernement with persecution. Chap. 10.
Fol. 56.
               
                  
Some of their consistorian speeches of the Clergy of England, assembled, as
occasion hath required, in the Conuocation house. Chap. 11. Fol. 58.
               Some of their presbiterial speeches of the Bishops of England professing the
Gospell. Chap. 12. Fol. 58.
               Some of their vncharitable wordes against all the Clergy in England, generally
that mislike their designements. Chap. 13. Fol. 60.
               Their especiall drift in their said rayling speeches, as outragiously published
as if they were meere Iesuites, and peraduenture to as dangerous a purpose.
Chap. 14. Fol. 61.
            
            
               The Contents of the third Booke.
               The practises of certaine English reformers for Discipline, from the yeare
1560. vntill the yeare, 1572, chap. 1. Fol. 65
               The secret meetings for Discipline, and the matters handled in them heere
in England from 1572. till 1583. chap. 2. Fol. 67
               A forme or booke of discipline is drawne, and a resolution agreed vppon,
how far they might proceede for the practise of it, without breaking the
peace of our Church. chap▪ 3. Fol. 69
               About the yeare 1583. they fell againe to the practise of their discipline, and
of a consistorian question, chap. 4. Fol. 73
               Their Booke of Discipline is reuiewed: it was after sent abroad about 1587
it was put in practise, in Northamptonshire and many other places, cha. 5
Fol. 75.
               A Synode is held at Couentry, 1588. many questions are resolued, the booke
of discipline is subscribed vnto, chap. 6. Fol. 85
               The booke of the pretended discipline is made perfect at Cambridge, certain
Synods are kept, and of their estimation, chap. 7 Fol. 88
               Vpon some detecting of the premisses some were called into question: they
refuse to be examined: all they were charged, which is in effect confessed,
chap. 8. Fol. 91
               
                  Cartwright is called for, by authority: a Synode is held in London: it is there
resolued that he shall refuse to be examined vpon his oath. chap. 9. Fol. 93
               Further proofe for their practise of their discipline: collected out of the rules
of their subscribed booke, chap. 10. fol. 94
               Further proofe for their practise of their discipline out of the articles they
subscribed, cha. 11. fol. 98.
               It is confessed that they agreed to put one point of their booke in practise
without her Maiesties assent: what it is: and of strange names giuen to
children, cha. 12. fol. 102
               A second point of their booke confessed to be agreed vpon, for the practise
of it, without her Maiesties assent, cha. 13. fol, 105
               Mo points of their booke put in practise: fasts: calling of ministers: presbiteries:
censures, &c. cha. 14. fol. 112
               They haue ioyned themselues into an association or brotherhood, and doo
appropriate to their meetings the name of the church, cha. 15. fol. 120
               A ridiculous pretence of lawes: with a capitulation of the summe of this
third booke, cha. 16. fol. 125
            
            
               
               The Contents of the fourth Booke.
               Some of them seem to grow desperate, & propound to themselues a strange
example to follow, for the aduancing of their discipline, Cha. 1. Fol. 129
               Of their doctrine for making a reformation themselues, and how the people
must be thrust into that action, Cha. 2. Fol. 133
               They would haue the Nobility and the inferior Magistrates to set vp their
Discipline: and of their supplication with a hundred thousand handes,
Cha. 3. Fol. 135
               Presuming vppon some vnlawfull assistance, they vse very violent wordes,
Cha. 4. Fol. 138
               Vpon Cartwrights comming to Prison: some strange attempts were looked
Cha. 5. Fol. 141
               One Edmond Copinger took vpon him to work Cartwrights &c. deliuerance:
hee pretendeth an extraordinary calling, and acquainteth diuers with it:
one Gibson a Scot, P. Wentworth, Cartwright, Wigginton, Charke, Trauers,
Egerton, &c. Cha. 6. Fol. 143
               How Copinger and Arthington came acquainted with Hacket: of their conference
with Io. Throg. Copingers letter to Io. Throg. and his answere, Cha. 7
Fol. 152
               
                  Copinger to Hacket of an appearance in the Star-chamber: his letter to Vdall:
Why Cartwright &c. refused to conferre with him: Cartwright resolued
some questions of Copingers: Of eight Preachers that did fast and pray
for Copingers successe, Cha. 8. Fol. 156
               Of Hackets first comming to Wigginton: of his gadding vp and downe: &
of the designement to haue beene executed in the Starre-chamber, cha. 9
Fol. 159
               A preparation towards the intended disloyalty: two of Copingers Letters to
M. Charke, and to another: Cartwrights & Wiggintons commendation of
Penries being then in London, Cha. 10. Fol. 161
               Of the trayterous intendments which were towardes the Court, Cha. 11
Fol. 166
               That of long time, some such attempts as Hacket made for discipline: were
of great likelyhood purposed, Cha. 12. Fol. 168
               Briefe collections: whereby it may summarily appeare: that certaine Ministers
in London did know what Copinger intended, Cha. 13 Fol. 171
               The cunning dealing of certaine Ministers in London, how notwithstanding
they wished Copingers plot to goe forwarde: yet they might be (if it
were possible) without the compasse of Law, Cha. 14. Fol. 173
               If Hackets treasons had preuayled for the pretended Discipline, how they
might haue beene defended by the Disciplinary doctrine, Cha. 15. Fol. 176
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            Thou shalt not rayle vpon the Iudges,
               Exod. 22. 28. neither speake euill of
the Ruler of the people.
            The Lord keepe mee from laying my hand on him.1. King. 24. For hee is
the Lordes annointed.
            Who can lay his handes vpon the Lordes annointed,1. Xing. 26. and bee
guiltlesse?
            Speake not euil of the King: no,Eccle. 20. not in thy thought▪
            
            Let euery soule bee subiect to the higher powers:Paule to the Rom. 13. for there is no
power but of God: and the powers that bee, are ordayned of God.
Whosoeuer therefore resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance
of God: and they that resist shall receiue to themselues iudgement.
Ye must be subiect, not because of wrath onely, but also for conscience
sake.
            We call vpon the euerlasting God for the health of our Emperors,Tertul. in Apologetico.
alwaies beseeching Almighty God, to send euery of them
long life, happy raigne, trustie seruantes, valiant souldiers, faithfull
Councellors, orderly Subiectes, and the world quiet: and
whatsoeuer people or Prince can wish for.
            One night with a few firebrandes,Tertul. in Apologet. would yeald vs reuenge
sufficient, if it were lawfull with vs to requite euill with euill.
But God forbid, that eyther they, which take part with God, should
reuenge themselues with humaine fire, or bee grieued to suffer
wherein they be tried. If wee would not practise secrete reuenge,
but professe open enmity, could we lacke number of men or force
of Armes? Are the Moores thinke you or the Parthians, or any
one Nation whatsoeuer, moe in number then we, that are spread
ouer the whole world? We are not of you, and yet wee haue filled
all the places and roomes which you haue: your Cities, Ilandes,
Castles, Townes, Assemblies, your Tentes, Tribes, and Wardes,
yea the very Palace, Senate, and Iudgement seates▪ For what

warre were wee not able and readie, though wee were fewer in
number then you, that go to our deathes so gladly, if it were not
more lawfull in our religion to be slaine then to slay? We coulde
without armes neuer rebelling, but onely diuiding our selues
from you, haue done you spight inough with that seperation. For
if so greate a multitude as we are, should haue broken from you,
into some corner of the world, the losse of so many Citizens woulde
haue both shamed you, and punished you. Belieue me, you would
haue been afraide, to see your selues alone and amazed as amongst
the dead, to see silence and desolation euery where, you would haue
had moe enemies, then inhabitantes, where now you haue fewer
ennemies, by reason of the multitude of your Citizens, that are
almost all Christians.
            
               Saul had not innocencie,August. con. .lit. Petil. lib. 2 cap. 48. and yet hee had holynes, not of life,
but of vnction.
            After the Priest had reproued the attempt,Chrisost. de verb. Esa. vidi dominum. and the king
would not yeeld, but offred Armes, shieldes, and speares, and vsed
his power: then the Priest turning himselfe to God: I haue
done (saith he) my duty to warne him, I can goe no further. For
it is the Priests part onely to reproue, & freely to admonish (with
words,) not to assaile with arms, not to vse targets, not to handle
speares, not to bend bowes, nor to cast dartes, but onely to reproue
and freely to warne.
            Pateat quod noxium est,Mir. lib. 2. adu. Iouinianum. vt possit conteri cum patuerit.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE FIRST BOOKE OF
DISCIPLINARY GROVNDES
and Practises.
            
               CHAP. I.
               Of two sortes of men that especially disturbe the Church of England,
and of the drifts of them both, by way of a Preface.
               
                  AS it is said of Caiphas, when hee tolde his
companions the Pharisees and the rest,
that it was expedient for them, that one
man should die for the people, Hoc a seipso
non dixit, sed prophetauit, &c. so in mine
opinion it may well be said of the Pope,
when he gaue to the Kings & Queenes
of England this Title, to bee called Defenders of the faith:
he spake not this of himselfe, but prophecied. For if any
Christian King or Queene might euer bee truely so tearmed,
(as in deed it is a stile that containeth a great and the
most royall part of all their kingly offices,) surely of all the
Princes that since that time haue raigned, it is verified
most properly in her most excellent Maiestie: Whether
you respect the Reformation of Religion, which her
Highnesse hath made in this Church of England (according
to the noble examples of Moses, Iosua, Dauid, Salomon,
Iosaphat, Ezechias, Iosias, &c.) or whether you respect, not
onely the reliefe, which strangers persecuted at home for
the profession of the Gospell haue here receiued: or her
Maiesties great and vnspeakeable charges, for the ayding
and assisting of other Christian States, Princes, and countries:
that for their profession of the same right Religion,
are mightily afflicted, by certaine Gyantes of the earth,

the souldiers and members of that Antichrist of Rome.
               
               So as in these and many other respects (which do concurre
with them) I neither doubt that her Maiesty (whom
the Lord protect with his mighty hande long to raigne ouer
vs) shall bee for euer renowned amongst the most famous
Queenes, that euer liued in the worlde: or that the
Church of England, so refourmed by her Highnesse, is
presently at this day the most Apostolike and flourishinge
Church, simply, that is in all Christendome. Howbeit let
a Church be as richly planted as euer any was, before, or
in the Apostles times: Let either Moses with his Aaron,
or Dauid with all his Councellors, gouerne both the
Church and Common-wealth, as godly as euer any was
gouerned: yet such is, and euer hath been, the malice and
cunning of Sathan: as that he wanteth not at any time, either
will or meanes, to slaunder, to depraue, and to endanger
the same. He hath his Core, Dathan, and Abiram, that
if need bee,Numb. 16 dare presume to tell both Moses and Aaron,
they take too much vpon them. Hee is able to set the children
of one father, the seruants of one master, the subiects
of one Prince, and the members of one Church; at dissention,
at deadly hatred amongst themselues. As occasion
serueth, hee hath his Shemeis to curse King Dauid,
                  2▪ Sam. 16 also his
murmurers, complayners, mockers, makers of sectes, such
as despise gouernement,
                  Iude 2. Pet. 2 which are presumptuous: men that
stand in their lewde conceits: such as feare not to speak euill
of those things they know not, and of them that are in
dignity, that is, of Princes and great men, be they neuer so
high in authority.
               The experience which wee haue hereof at this day in
the Church of England, is more then pregnant: partly
through the diuelish and traiterous practises of the Seminary
Priests and Iesuites: and partly by reason of the lewd

and obstinate course, held by our pretended refourmers,
the Consistorian Puritanes: both of them labouring with
all their might, by rayling, libelling, and lying, to steale away
the peoples harts from their gouernours, to bringe
them to a dislike of the present state of our Church, and
to drawe them into parts-taking: the one sort, for the embracing
of such directiōs, as should come vnto them from
Rome: the other for the establishing of that counterfeit and
false Hierarchie, which they would obtrude vppon vs by
the countenance and name of the Church at Geneua.
               
               The which proceedings of both the sorts of disturbers,
are so much the more dangerous, in that they deale so secretely,
and haue combined themselues, together with
their Proselites, into such a league aud confederacy; as get
out what you can your felfe by meere chance (as they say)
for the discouery of their actions, and attempts; you shall
bee sure that neither the one sort nor the other will detect
any thing. Nay matters beeing detected in some sort to
their handes, they will vtterly refuse to bee examined, as
law prescribeth: or if they take any oathe, it is as good neuer
a whit as neuer the better, they dally so exceedingly
with it.
               For vnder pretence of not accusing themselues, if they
finde any thing to be come to light, which may any waies
touch them, they will vtterly refuse for the most part to
answere it, either vpon oath or without oath: saying, that
neither by the Lawes of God, nor man, they are bound so
to answere. Vnder colour whereof they exempt themselues
from the ordinary course helde in iustice, for criminall
causes, throughout all the world: which is, that before
witnesses be produced against any supposed offender, the
party accused shall first answere to the accusation, yea, or
nay, &c. as wee vse in England, and that in matters of life

and death (but in these without an oathe) hee must first
pleade guilty or not guilty.
               And as they deale for themselues, so doo they for their
confederates, their fauourers, relieuers, abetters, and receiuers:
affirming it to be against the rules of charity, to bring
their Christian brethren and frends into any daunger, for
doing of those things, which both the sorts of these seducers
haue drawne them into, and doo themselues iudge to
be religious and iust.
               From these points all the Iudges of the land, and diuers
Diuines that haue dealte with them, as yet cannot bringe
them: both the sorts are so setled in this seditious doctrine
of Rhemes,
                  Annotat. Rhemish▪ vppon the 23. of the Actes of the Apostles. which is as followeth, vz. If thou be put to an oath,
to accuse Catholikes, for seruing God as they ought to doo, or to vtter
any innocent man, to Gods enemies and his, thou oughtest first
to refuse such vnlawfull oathes: but if thou haue not constancie,
and courage so to doo, yet know thou that such oathes binde not at
all in conscience and law of God, but may and must be broken vnder
paine of damnation.
               
               Now in these confederacies, what course should be taken
for the preuenting of such daungers, as may thereby
ensue, I referre it to be throughly considered by those that
haue the gouernement both of the Church and Common-weale
committed vnto them. But before they can be
preuented they must be vnderstood. Concerning the Seminary
Priests and Iesuites: their very comming into the
land doth declare their traiterous intentions. What alleageance
and loue soeuer they pretend (vppon their apprehension)
to her Maiesty and their countrey, it is very well
knowne, they doo it but for the time, rebus sic stantibus, &
that their comming hether, is to no other purpose, but to
make away for the Pope and the Spaniardes; the sworne
and mortall enemies, both to this state, and to all other

that doo professe the right refourmed religion of Christ.
               But for the other sort of practitioners, their proceedings
and designements, are not so well, as yet discouered. Their
pretences doo carry a greater shew of good meanings: &
many (that are indeede truely zealous, little suspecting
what hookes doo lie hidde vnder such faire baites) are
dayly carried (as we see) headlong with them. In respect
whereof, you are to be aduertised, that as it is an easie matter
by looking to the said Popish and Spanish practises, to
knowe in generality, their Seminaries dealinges here amongst
vs, be they in particularity neuer so secrete: so are
there certaine men in other countries, of the same humors
with our pretended refourmers, whose courses and proceedings,
as wel for the matters they desire, as for the manner
of attaining of them, they propound to themselues, as
the fittest patternes for them to followe: and namely the
Ministers of Geneua, but more especially some of the Ministers
of Scotland: as may hereby appeare.
               
                  As we haue beene an example, to the Churches of France and
Scotland (sayth M. Cartwright) to followe vs; so the Lorde
would haue vs also to profite, and be prouoked by their example.
An other also in this sort.A Letter of P. A. 
                  Nobiles quidam praecipui huius regni
mecum egerunt, vt author essem regi meo de tollendis omninò
Episcopatibus, vt exemplum posteà posset manare in vicinam Angliam.
Certaine of the chiefe Noble men of England (who I
thinke nowe are gone,) dealt with mee (by the instigation
no doubt of some of our Ministers, Anno, 1583.) to persuade
the King of Scotland my maister, to ouerthrowe all the Bishoprickes
in his countrey, that his proceedinges therein might bee an
example for England adioyning.
               
               Vpon a certaine repaire of terme thousand in armes to
the King of Scots at Sterling, Anno, 1585. whereupon the
Bishoprickes were indeed suppressed, Knewstubbe
                  Knewstubbe▪
                   a Consistorian

Minister of Suffolke, did write thus to Fielde: I
would bee glad to heare somewhat of the estate of Scotland: it
doth more trouble me then our owne: For I am conceiuing some
hope vpon the change of their former proceeding.
               
               It also appeareth that there is great and ordinary intelligence,
betwixt their and our especiall presbyterie ministers,
for the better, and more ready compassing of such
deuises and platformes, as are sought for, by our said ministers
so busily amongst vs. The best of our Ministerie (sayth
Iames Gibson a minister of Scotland to a brother in England)
are most carefull of your estate,
                  Gibson to Ed. Cop. 
                  and had sent for that effect,
a Preacher of our Church this last summer (1590.) of purpose, to
conferre with the best affected Ministers of your Church, to laye
downe a plot, how our Church might best trauell for your reliefe.
And again: The Lord knows what care we haue of your Church
both in our publike and priuate praiers, &c. For as feeling members
of one bodie, we reckon the affliction of your Church to be our
owne.
               
               One Dauison in like manner (an other minister of that
countrey) taketh vpon him to iustifie the proceedings of
our malecontent ministers here:Dauison against R. B. (as it shall herafter more
plainely appeare) and for the better incouraging of them
in their peeuishnes,Pag. 29. hee telleth them, that the iust defence of
their holie cause of Discipline must not be left, which hath no lesse
warrant to bee continued perpetuallie within the Church, vnder
this precept; Feede my sheepe: then hath the preaching of the
word and ministration of the Sacraments.
                  Pag. 29. Hee doth also publish
it, so as the world might take notice of it: that the good
brethren of England,
                  Pag. 20. 
                  are of the same minde with them of Scotland:
& that both their causes, are most neerelie linked together.
               
               Lastly there is almost nothing more ordinary in all the
Consistorian discourses and libels of our owne countreymen,
whether they bee printed here or in Scotland, then to

presse vs with the examples of Geneua and Scotland, and to
inueigle the people of England, with (I knowe not what)
great commendation of the proceedings and platformes
of some of the ministers in both those places.
               Which points considered, & being required by those
that might command me, that whereas certaine writings,
and letters were come to my handes, concerning some
courses taken by our saide more friendly disturbers, then
the Iesuites are, but yet very great disturbers; I should
make the same in some sorte knowne: I thought it
my best way, for the discharging of my duety therein, first
to lay downe before you, the examples, patternes, & proceedings
of those Ministers and Churches, which those
our factious crew, propound to themselues to follow: &
secondly (that I may not bee enforced to passe by them,
asRefor. no enemie. B. 2 one saith, D. B. was in his sermon at Paules crosse) to
make it most apparant vnto you, how artificially and effectually,
they haue already by imitation expressed them.
Whereby you shall perceiue, that although by reason of
their said combination and secretnesse vsed, many things
lie hid from those in authority, which they haue done already,
in the setting forward of their pretended discipline:
yet there will fall out so much to bee disclosed, as laying it
to their patternes, you may easily discerne (notwithstanding
all their goodly pretences) what to iudge of their
proceedings, and whereat in truth they doo ayme.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               Of the course held at Geneua, for reformation of religion, & of
the doctrine which vpon that occasion hath beene broached.
               
                  IT seemeth, that when the Gospell began first to
be preached by Farellus, Viretus, and others at
Geneua, they coulde haue beene well content

with the gouernement of the Bishop there, if hee would
willingly haue reiected the Pope, and ioyned with them
for the reformation of Religion. This appeareth by M.
Caluins wordes to Cardinall Sadolete. Talem nobis Hierarchiam
si exhibeant, in qua sic emineant Episcopi, vt Christo
subesse recusent, vt ab illo tanquam vnico capite pendeant, & ad
ipsum referantur: in qua, sic inter se fraternam societatem colant,
vt non alio modo, quàm eius veritate, sint colligati: tum vero nullo
non anathemate dignos fatear, si qui erunt qui non eam reuerenter
summa
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      obedientia obseruent. If they doo bring vnto
vs such an Hierarchie or priestlie gouernement, wherein the Bishops
shall so rule, as that they refuse not to submit themselues to
Christ, that they also depend vpon him, as their onely heade, and
can be content to rèferre themselues to him: in which priestlie gouernment
they doo so keepe brother lie societie amongst themselues
that they bee knit together by no other knot, then by the trueth:
then surelie if there shall be anie, that shall not submit themselues
to that Hierarchie or priestlie gouernement, reuerentlie and with
the greatest obedience that may be, I confesse there is no kinde of
Anathema, or curse, or casting to the diuell, whereof they are not
worthie.
               
               Thus farre then, it must needes be thought, that the Bishoppe
was offered by suche as soughte to refourme that
Church: which offer he refusing (as I gesse) to accept of,
they dealt (as it appeareth by the issue) with the inferiour
magistrates and people,Cal. to Sadolet. to make such a reformation themselues,
as they required of them. Whereupon the Bishop
beeing Lord of the City, and hauing aswell in his handes,
the Soueraigne ciuill Iurisdiction ouer it, or (as M. Caluin
speaketh) Ius gladij & alias ciuilis iurisdictionis partes, &c. as
the Ecclesiasticall; they saide, He was a thiefe and an vsurper;
and so of themselues, with such assistance as was procured,
did thrust him from both those authorities. Euen like (in

my opinion) as if a Christian Prince, being possessed within
his dominions of the supreame Iurisdiction, as well in
Ecclesiasticall as in ciuill causes, might vpon the like occasion
be serued in the same maner: or, to preuent all exception,
as if some Prince of some perticular state or City in
Germanie,
                  Ioach. Camerarius. Phil. Mela. Georg. Maior de vita eius. taking vpon him, together with his principality,
the calling of a Preacher, Bishop, Superintendent or Ruler
of many perticular Churches, (as George the Prince Anhault
did) should in such a case (as the Bishoppe of Geneua
was) be depriued of both.
               The means which was vsed, for such their abandoning
of their Bishop, was this. When they perceiued that the
Bishop sought, by force to encounter their proceedinges,
and that (as Sleydan noteth) hee had excited the Duke of
Sauoy, to that ende, to assist him: they ioyned themselues
into a more neere amity with Berne. So as the Duke and
the Bishop comming together to besiege the City; they
were both repulsed, Bernatibus illis auxilium ferentibus, The
force of Berne assisting the Geneuians. Since which time (as
I suppose) it hath been a principle, with some of the chief
Ministers of Geneua,
                  Whittingham in his Preface to Goodmans booke. Knox. (but contrary to the iudgement of all
other reformed Churches, for ought I know, which haue
not addicted themselues to followe Geneua) that if Kinges
and Princes refused to refourme Religion, the inferior magistrates
or people, by direction of the ministerie, might lawfullie, & ought
(if need required) euen by force & armes, to reform it themselues.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               Of the proceeding of some Scottish Ministers: according to the
Geneuian rules of Reformation.
               ACcording to the refourming rule, mentioned in the
ende of the former Chapter, (to omit some other examples)

certaine Ministers in Scotlande with their adherents
(being meere subiects) haue taken vpon them of later
yeares,Knox in his hist. of the church of Scotland, pag 213 by a violent and forcible course to reforme Religion.
               In which course M. Knox a man trayned vp at Geneua, in
the time of Mary Queene of England, and very well instructed
for such a worke, did shew himselfe to bee a most
especiall instrument, as it appeareth by a very strange letter,
written by him from Diepe, AnnoKnox pag. 213. ibid. 1557. Wherein hee
sheweth, that his opinion and motion of that matter, was
not grounded, onely vpon his owne conceit, but vpon the
graue counsailes, and iudgement of the most godly and
learned, that then liued in Europe. (He meaneth the Geneuians,
Caluin, and the rest there.) Vpon this Letter and some
other, to and from the sayd Knox, An
                  Knox p. 217 
                  oath of confederacie
was taken amongst his followers, in Scotland; and a testification
was made of their intents by a kind of subscription.
               Immediately after, they prescribed alsoKnox p. 218 
                  Orders for Reformation,
to be obserued through all that whole Realme,
Anno, 1558. and writ aKnox p. 234 memorable letter to the Religious
houses, in the name of the people, that they should either
remoue thence by such a day, or else they woulde then eiecte
them by force.
               
               Shortly after (a Parliament being there holden by the
Queene Regent) theyKnox p. 256 
                  protested to the same, that except they
had their desires, &c. they would proceed in their course:
that neither they nor any that ioined with them, should incurre
therefore any danger in life, or landes, or other politicall paines:
and that if any violence happened in pursuite of those matters,
they should thanke themselues. Afterward, (the Queene Regent,
seeing all the disorder, that was then, proceeded from such
of the ministers) sheeKnox p. 258. 
                  summoned them to haue appeared
at Striueling: which they refusing to doo, were therevpon

by the Queenes commaundement (as it is there tearmed)
put to theKnox. pa. 2
                        •
                     
                   
                  Horne: and all men (vnder paine of rebellion)
were inhibited to assist them. But all this notwithstanding,
their friends did sticke vnto them. And presently after, vppon
a Sermon to that purpose, preached by M. Knox, in
Saint
                  Hollindshed pag 366. Knox 262 
                  Iohnstowne, for the ouerthrowing of Religious houses:
they fell the same day to their worke: and within two
dayes had quite destroyed andKnox. p. 263 rased in that towne, the
houses of the Blacke Fryars, of the Grey Fryars, and Charterhouse
Moonkes, downe to the ground. And so they
Thynne pag. 366. Buchanan. proceeded, breaking downe images and altars, in Fife,
Angus, Meruis, and other parts adioyning.
               This course beeing knowne, and therevpon the sayde
Queene threatning to destroy Saint Iohnstowne, theyKnox p. 265 writt
vnto her, affirming that except shee stayed from that crueltie,
they should be compelled to take the sword of iust defence, and protested,
that, without the Reformation, which they desired,
they would neuer be subiect to anie mortall man. Then they
Knox p. 268 writte to all their brethren, to repaire vnto them: likewise
to the Nobilitie, vppon paine of
                  Knox p. 272 
                  Excommunication, to
ioyne with them: saying, that it was their duety to bridle the
furie and rage of wicked men, were it of Princes, or Emperours,
Knox pag. 269.
               Vpon these letters, diuersKnox p. 274 repaired to Saint Iohnstowne,
from sundry places: in so much as when Lyon Herault in his
coat armor, commaunded all men, vnder paine of Treason, to returne
to their houses, by publike sound of Trumpet, in Glasco; neuer
a man obeyed that charge, but went forward to their associat
                        •
                     .
TheyKnox p. 27
                        •
                     
                   writte in like manner to the Bishops and Clergie,
that except they desisted from dealing against them, they
would with all force and power, execute iust vengeance and punishment
vpon them: and that they would begin that same warre,
which God commanded Israell, to execute, against the Cananites.
               
               
                  
ThisKnox p. 276 manner of proceeding, they tearmed to be, the resisting
of the enemie. After (vpon conditions with the Queene)
this great assembly at Saiut Iohnstowne, departed thence.
But before the seuering of themselues, they entred into a
Knox p. 283 league by Oath, that if any one member of their congregation,
should be troubled, they should all concurre, assist, &
conuene againe together, for the defence of the same.
               
               Presently after (vpon a new quarrel against the Queenes
dealing) an other concourse was made of these reformers▪
at Saint
                  Knox p. 288 
                  Androes: where, by M Knox perswasions in his
Sermon, they made the like hauocke, that was before at
Saint Iohnstowne, and did cast downe, spoyle, and destroy,
both the houses of the Fryers, and the Abbayes in that
towne. So dealt they also within a very short time, with
the Abbay ofKnox pag. 298. 299. Thynne, 367 
                  Scone, the Fryars at Striueling, at Lithquo, &
at Edenburgh, the Queene
                  Knox p. 300 being fled thence for feare. They
kept the field
                  Knox p. 306 
                  two moneths, and tooke away to themselues
theKnox p. 308 
                  coyning Irons, (beeing as the Queene alleaged, a portion
of the patrimonie of the crowne.) andKnox p. 308 
                  iustified the same.
TheyKnox p. 317. entred into a League, that though the Queene sent
for them, they woulde neuer come to her after that time:
without the consent of their company.
               After, theKnox p. 330 
                  Queene Regent made a Proclamation of her
desire of peace, and that the state of the Realme, might at
the last be at quiet: but theyKnox p. 333. confuted it: & did animate
those of their faction (with all their might) to bee alwaies
ready, & to stand vpon their guard. They gaue the Queen
the
                  Knox p. 362 
                  lie diuers times, and vsed her with most despightfull
speeches. And at the length they came to that boldnes, as
that they tearmed the Queenes partKnox p. 364 
                  a faction: and renouncing
their obedience vnto her, protested, that whosoeuer
should take her part, should be punished as Traytors, when so
euer God should put the sword of Iustice, into their hands.
               
               
                  
Within a whileKnox p. 372 after, they consulted with their Ministers,
especially M. Wilcocke, and M. Knox, for the deposing
of the Queene Regent, from her gouernment: who assuring
the rest, that it was lawfull for them so to doo, processe was
made, sentence was giuen, and shee wasKnox p. 378 depriued from
all her regiment, by a formall acte, which is set downe in
the same storie, penned by Knox, and in some part printed
after in England.
               Not long after this: the Queene Regent dyeth. And then
they had a Parliament by the consent of the french King,
and their Queene his wife. In thatKnox p. 468 
                  Parliament, held Anno,
1560. they refourmed Religion, and set out a Confession
of the Christian faith: but the said King and
                  Knox p. 500 
                  Queene denied, to
confirme, or to ratifie the actes thereof, when they were mooued
thereunto. Which thing, (said the confederates, vpon intelligence
giuen them) we little regarded: or yet doo regarde: for
all that we did, was rather to shew our duetifull obedience, then to
begge of them any strength to our Religion. And whereas it
was obiected, that it coulde not bee a lawfull Parliament,
where there was neither Scepter, Crowne, nor Sworde
borne: they made light of it:Knox p. 50
                        •
                     
                   saying, that those were rather,
but pompeous and glorious vaine ceremonies, then anie substantiall
points, of necessitie required to a lawfull Parliament. I might
proceed much further, in the ripping vp of these and such
like practises, for reformation of Religion. But because
some peraduenture, will labour to excuse these manner of
proceedings, and to colour the same, with some pretence
of zeale, and great desire they had, to bee deliuered from
Popish Idolatry and Superstition: I haue rather thought
it conuenient to let you vnderstande, howe farre they are,
from making any such pretences in their owne behalf, and
with what new Diuinity-positions, M. Knox and M. Buchanan
haue amplified the Geneua resolution (before mentioned,)

to the iustification not only of all their said attempts
and actions, but of many other of the like nature, which
(since those times) haue beene there also practised.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               How the Geneuian Doctrine, or principle for Reformation, hath
beene amplified, by certaine pretended Reformers in Scotland.
               
                  REformationKnox p. 216 Knox appel. fol. 28. of Religion, doth belonge to
more, then the Clergie and the King.
               Noble menKnox app. 25 ought to reforme Religion,
if the King will not.
               ReformationKnox to the Comminalty s. 49. 50 of Religion, belongeth
to the Comminaltie.
               The Comminaltie,ibid. fol. 47 concurring with the Nobilitie, may compell
the Bishops to cease from their tirrannie.
               Theibid. fol. 55 Comminaltie by their power, may bridle the cruell
beasts (the Priests.)
               Theibid. fol. 55 Comminaltie, may lawfullie require of their King, to
haue true Preachers: and if he be negligent, they iustlie may themselues
prouide them, maintaine them, defende them, against all
that doo persecute them, and may detaine the profits of the Church
liuings, from the other sort.
               God hathKnox histo. pag. 343. appointed the Nobilitie, to bridle the inordinate
appetites of Princes, and in so doing, they cannot be accused, as resisters
of authoritie.
               It is theirKnox appel, fol. 33. dutie, to represse the rage and insolencie of Princes.
TheKnox appel. fo. 28. 30, &c. Nobilitie and Comminaltie, ought to reforme Religion,
and in that case▪ may remoue from honours, and may punish such,
as God hath cōdemned, Deu. 12. (he meaneth Idolaters, &c.)
of what estate, condition, or honour soeuer.
               TheKnox appel. fol. 30 punishment of such crimes, as touch the Maiestie of God,
doth not appertaine to Kinges and chiefe rulers onelie, but also to

the whole bodie of the people, and to euerie member of the same,
as occasion, vocation, and abilitie shall serue, to reuenge the iniurie
done against God.
               The peopleKnox appel. fol 35. are bound by oath to God, to reuenge (to the vtmost
of their power) the iniurie, done against his Maiestie,
               The cruell murthering of the Archbishoppe of Saint Androwes,
in his bed-chamber, 1545. by three priuate gentlemen,
because (as they told him,) he had beene, and so remained
an obstinate enemie to the Gospel,Historie of the Church of Scotl. pa. 187. is sought to be
iustified lately in print, to bee a godly acte: & incouragement
is giuen for others, in the like case to commit the like
outrage.
               Princes, forKnox histor. pag. 372. iust causes may be deposed.
               It is notknox to England and Scot. fol. 77. birthright onely, nor propinquity of bloud, that maketh
a King, lawfullie to raigne aboue a people, professing Christ
Iesus.
               If Princesknox ibid▪ folio 78. be tyrants, against God and his truth, their subiects
are freed from their oaths of obedience.
               Populus regeBuch. de iure regni page. 61. est praestantior & melior: the people are
better then the King, and of greater authoritie.
               
               PopuloIbid pag 13. ius est, vt imperium cui velit deferat: the people
haue right, to bestow the Crowne at their pleasure.
               
               Penesibid pag. 25 populum est, vt leges ferat: sunt reges veluti tabulariorum
custodes. The making of lawes, doth belong to the
people: and Kings are but as the Masters of the Rolles.
               
               The people,ibid pag. 58. haue the same power, ouer the King: that the
King hath ouer any one person.
               It wereibid pag. 40. good, that rewardes were appointed by the people, for
such as should kill tyrants: as commonly there is, for those, qui
lupos aut vrsos occiderunt, aut catulos eorum deprehenderunt:
that haue killed either wolues or beares, or taken their
whelpes.
               Theibid pag 62. people may arraigne their Prince.
               
                  
Theibid pag. 70 Ministers may excommunicate him.
               He, thatibid pag. 70 by excommunication, is cast into hell▪ is not worthy
to enioy any life vpon earth.
               And wheras there are sufficient, and sound obiections,
made, by such as haue truely reprooued these dangerous
assertions: Behold I pray you, their answers, worthy to be
known and remembred, to the euerlasting discredit of the
authors, framers, and partakers with them.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               The obiections against the doctrine, reported of in the former
chapter, with the Consistorian answers vnto them.
               
                  Obiection. CVstome,Buc. de iur. egni▪ pag. 49. is against such dealing with Princes.
               
                  Answere. There is nothing more daungerous to bee followed
(publica via) then custome.
               
                  Ob. We mustKnox appe. fol. 26. obey Kings, be they good or bad.
               
                  Ans. It is blasphemie to say so.
               
                  Ob. IeremieBuch. de iure regni. pag. 53. commaunded obedience to Nabuchodonozer.
               
                  Ans. The example is but singular.
               
                  Ob. God placethIbid. pag. 57 tyrants sometimes for the punishment
of his people.
               
                  Ans. So doth he priuate men sometimes to kill them.
               
                  Ob. Theibid. pag. 57 Iewes dealt not so with their Kings.
               
                  Ans. Their Kinges were not first elected by the people; and
therefore they might not: but ours haue nothing but from the
people.
               
                  Ob. Shew anibid. pag. 57 example out of the Scriptures, that subiects
may vse their gouernours in this sort.
               
                  Ans. The argument is not good: it cannot bee shewed in the
Scriptures, therefore it is vnlawfull. Possum apud multas nationes,

plurimas & saluberrimas recensere leges, quarum
in sacris litteris nullum est exemplum. I can shewe sundrie
good and wholesome lawes, in diuers countries, of the which lawes
there is no example in the Scriptures.
               
                  Ob. Saint Paulibid pag. 50 doth commaund vs to pray for Princes.
1. Tim. 2.
               
                  Ans. Wee may punish theeues, and yet wee ought to pray for
them.
               
                  Ob. Saint Pauleibid p. 50. 55 doth command vs to be subiect and
obedient to Princes. Tit. 3.
               
                  Ans. Paule writt this in the infancie of the Church. There
were but fewe Christians then, and not many of them rich, or of
abilitie, so as they were not ripe for such a purpose.
               As ifIbid. pag. 56 a man should write to such Christians as are vnder the
Turke, in substance poore, in courage feeble, in strength vnarmed,
in number fewe,Note this Diuinity and generallie subiect to all kinde of iniuries:
would he not write as Paul did? So as the Apostle, did respect the
men he writt vnto: and his wordes are not to be extended, to the
body or people of a common wealth, or whole Citie.
               For imagine (sayth
                  ibi. p. 56. 57 
                  hee) that Paul were now aliue, where
both the King and people do professe Christianity, and that there
were such Kings, as would haue their becks to stand for lawes: as
cared neither for God nor man: as bestowed the Church reuenues
scurris & balatronibus vpon iesters and rascalls, and such as gibed
at those that did embrace the more sincere Religion: what
would he write of such to the Church? Surely except he would dissent
from himself, he would say, that he accounted no such for Magistrates:
hee would forbidde all men for speaking vnto them, and
from keeping them companie: he would leaue them to their subiects
to be punished neither would he blame them, if they accounted
no longer such for their Kings, as by the law of God, they could
haue no societie withall. And thus farre the answearer.
               
               There are diuers other obiections against those reformers:

which receiue almost as desperate answers. But I
will not at this time trouble you with them, especially if
you will giue me leaue to aduertise you, that this new Diuinity
of dealing thus with Princes, is not onely helde by
Knox and Buchanan, but generally (for ought I can learne)
by most of the Consistorians of chiefe name beyonde the
Seas, who (being of the Geneua humor) doo endeuour by
most vniust & disloyall meanes, to subiect to their forged
presbyteries, the scepters and swordes of Kings and Princes:
as Caluin, Beza, Hotoman, Vrsinus, (as he commeth out
from Newstadt). Vindiciae contra tyrannos, Eusebius Philadelphus,
&c. For the further fruit of which Consistorian Diuinitie,
(besides that which is sayd by some of the Ministers
of Scotland) I referre you to the consideration of such
stirres, as haue hapned of late yeares, in some other countries.
And thus farre concerning the iustification, which is
made of the Scottish reformation. Now I will leade you
backe againe, where I left: vz. to certaine of the Ministers
further proceedings there; vppon these aforesaide maine
grounds and principles.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               The proceedinges of certaine Scottish Ministers, according to
the grounds mentioned in the two last chapters, for setting vp
of the Consistorian Discipline, and of their vrging of our English
Disciplinaries, to follow their steppes.
               
                  THe ParliamentKnox hist. pag. 502. of Scotland before mentioned
Chap. 3. of An. 1560. being dissolued,
there was then a booke of Discipline, or
newe kingdome of Christ (by their seuerall
presbyteries) drawne and compiled
after the Geneua fashion, by M. Knox and others. Which
booke, vpon the offering of it to their associates and fauorites,

to be allowed, receiued, and publikely practised, was
by them reiected, and tearmed to bee in truth, but a deuout
imagination. Whereupon now riseth, an occasion of a new
historie, how (after they had obtained reformation of religion,
as touching the true preaching of the worde, and
administration of the Sacraments) they also dealt and preuailed
in the ende, for the establishing of their Discipline
and Consistoriall gouernement.
               ItKnox hist pag. 468. 
                  appeareth, that in the foresaide spoyles of Abbayes,
Fryeries, and Cathedrall Churches, &c. euery man almost
did seeke his priuate commoditie. Which beeing espied
before by the saide Ministers, they misliked it: (as finding
the pray taken out of their teeth:) but yet they were gone
so far belike, as that there was no remedie. They told them
of it in their sermons in some sort then, as it should appear.
Marry nowe, when they came to the ende of their trauaile,
the hope of their glory, the erecting of their gouernment,
and their raigne ouer all, and doo finde themselues
crossed therein▪ blame them not, though they were not a
little angry. ThenKnox hist. pag. 
                        •
                     03. they gaue it out against their owne fauourers
afore, that some were licentious: some had greedilie
griped the possessions of the Church: others thought they would
not lacke their part of Christs coate, yea, and that before that euer
he was hanged.
               
               Of a Noble man,Ibidem. that refused to subscribe to their Discipline,
(as they call it) they writ thus. He had a very euill
woman to his wife: if the poore, the schooles, and the ministerie
of the Church, had their owne, his Kitchen would lacke two parts
and more▪ of that, which he vniustlie now possesseth. And generally
to the like effect: there were none within this Realme,
more vnmercifull to the poore Ministers, then were they, which
had greatest rents of the Church. But in that we haue perceiued
the old prouerbe to be true: nothing can suffice a wretch. And againe,

                  the bellie, hath no eares. TheyIn the conclusion of their booke of Discipline. threatned the greatest
men of the lande, with Gods heauy punishments, if they
should reiect that Discipline, ascribing it to their blind affection,
to their respect of carnal friends, to their corrupt iudgement,
and to their former iniquities, and present ingratitude.
ButKnox histo. pag. 504. (notwithstanding, that some refused to subscribe to
this booke, which made the Ministers so angry:) yet by
sundry cunning deuises, raylings, threatnings, &c. many
yeelded thereunto, and did promise, thereby to set the same
forward, to the vttermost of their powers.
               
               This subscription thus in sort obtained, they began to
put the same in practise. TheyDeclaration B. 1. 2. 
                  appointed to haue their assemblies
both particular and generall. TheyKnox histo. pag. 523. exercised iurisdictions,
and appointed one Saunderson to be carted for adulterie:
but he was rescued. A greatibid. pa. 527 vprore arising in Edenburgh,
about the making of a Robinhood, they of the Consistorie did excommunicate
the whole multitude. The Bishops
                  ibid. pa 531. seeking to encounter
and represse them in their practises, they professed
that they would not suffer their pride and Idolatrie. They
ibid. pa. 334 caused diuers places (as they tearmed them) of superstition,
to be burnt: I thinke they meane some Bishops houses)
asKnox Iust. 534. 
                  Palsay, the Bishop also narrowly escaping them.
               The Bishops hauing embraced the Gospel, it was at first
agreed euen by the brethren, with the consent of the Regent,
that the Bishops estate should be
                  Declaration B. 2. 
                  maintained and authorised.
This endured for sundry yeares: but then there was no
remedie, the calling it selfe of Bishops was at last become
Antichristian, and downe they must of necessitie. Whervpon
ibid B. 2. 
                  they commanded the Bishops (by their owne authoritie)
to leaue their Offices and their Iurisdictions.
               
               Theyibid. B. 2. decreed in their assemblies, that Bishops shoulde
haue no voices in Parliament: and that done, they desired of
the King, that such Commissioners (as they should sende

to the Parliament and Councell) might from thence forth
be authorized in the Bishops places, for the estate. They also
directed their Commissioners to the Kings Maiestie: commanding
him and the Councell, vnder paine of the censures of the
Church (meaning excommunication) to appoint no Bishops
in time to come, because they (the brethren) had concluded, that
state to be vnlawfull.
               
               Hereof as it seemeth they writt to Geneua, their newe
Rome, or Metropolitane Citty. From whence they were
greatly animated, and earnestly perswaded, to continue in
that course. Beza
                  Epistola 79. the Consistorian Patriarche, assureth
them that they had done well, and mooueth them, ne vnquam
illam pestem admittant, quamuis vnitatis retinendae specie
blandiatur: that they would neuer admit againe that plague,
(meaning the calling of Bishoppes) although it might allure
them, with colour of keeping vnitie.
               
               After they had discharged the Bishops, (as it hath beene
noted) they agreed amongst themselues, to haue their
                  Declaration B. 3. 
                  Superintendents.
But that deuise continued not long: for in the
ende it was determined, that needes all Ministers of the
word, must be equall. And then (especially) their Presbyteries
began to flourish. They tooke vponDeclaration B. 1. them (with
their adherents) to vsurpe the whole Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction.
They altered the lawes after their owne appetite. They assembled
                  Act of Parliament ca. 4. 
                  the Kings subiects, and enioyned Ecclesiasticall paines
vnto them. They made Decrees, and put the same in execution.
They vsed
                  Ibid. cap. 2. 
                  very trayterous, seditious, and contumelious words,
in the pulpits, schooles, and otherwise, to the disdaine and reproch
of the King, and being called to answere the same, they vtterlie
disclaimed the Kings authoritie: saying, he
                  Decl, A. 3. 
                  was an incompetent
Iudge, and that matters of the Pulpit ought to be exempted
from the iudgement & correction of Princes. TheyDecl. B. 3. 
                  prescribed
lawes to the King and State. They appointed
                  Decl. B. 3. 
                  Fasts throughout

the whole Realme, especially when some of their faction were 
                        •
                     o
mooue any great enterprise.
               
               With these manner of proceedings, the King there, and
the State, finding great cause of iust discontentment and
danger: after diuers consultations and good deliberation,
order was taken about the yeare, 1582. for the checking
& redressing of them. His Maiesty began to take vpon him
his lawfull authoritie, belonging to all Christian Princes,
in causes Ecclesiasticall. Wherupon he caused the foresaid
courses, held by the Ministers, to be examined and looked
into. And they were found to be such, as that some of them
were remoued from their charges,
                  Declaration 1582. 
                  some were imprisoned, & some
indighted. Commaundement was also giuen, that they should not
proceede, in the execution of their Ecclesiasticall censures, as they
had done. A Proclamation was made in diuers of the chiefest
places in the Realme, for discharging the Ministers of their foresaid
conuentions and assemblies, vnder paine, to bee punished as
Rebels. They were published in that Proclamation, to be
vnnaturall subiects, seditious persons, troublesome and vnquiet
spirites, members of Sathan, enemies to the King, and the Common-wealth
of their natiue countrey: and were charged to desist
from preaching, in such sort as they did, amongst other matters
against the authoritie in Church causes, against the
calling of Bishops, & for the maintenance of their former
proceedings.
               But the issue of the Kinges good intention to haue refourmed
these disorders, was this: In August 1582. his
Highnesse being drawn vnto a certain Noble mans house
to be feasted in Rutheuen: there he was surprised & restrained.
                  Act of Parliament▪ 1584. cap. 7.
Which attempt was qualified and tearmed (in a Declaration
set out, 1582. to iustifie the same) to be onely a repaire
of the Kings faithfull subiects, to his Highnes presence, and to remaine
with him,
                  Declara. 1582 
                  for resisting of the present dangers appearing to

Gods true religion, &c. and for the remouing from his Maiestie,
the chiefe authors thereof.
               
               After a time, the King deliuered himselfe out of their
hands, that so had restrained him: and by the aduise of his
three estates assembled in Councell, (notwithstanding the
saide qualification or pretence of repayre) the action in it
self was iudged and published in December,
                  Act of Parl. 1584. cap. 7. 1583. to be Crimen
lesae Maiestatis, the Offence of Treason: and some were executed
for it, others fled, and diuers of the Ministers, that
had bin dealers in that matter, pretending they were persecuted,
escaped into England.
               
               With this his Maiesties course for Reformation, the
Disciplinarian faction was greatly displeased: and did proceede
in their Consistorian humour accordingly. In an assembly
of Ministers and Elders (forsooth) at Edenburgh,
shortly after, the State of the Realme was stoutly encountred.
For although the King,Declar. 1582 with the aduise of his estates,
had resolued the saide fact of surprising his Maiesties person,
to be treasonable, yet the brethren did not onely authorise
and avow the same, but also, esteeming their owne iudgements, to
be the soueraigne iudgement of the Realme, did ordaine all them
to be excommunicated, that would not subscribe vnto that their
iudgement.
               
               About the same time,Act of Parl. 1584. cap. 7. or not long after, vz. in Aprill,
1583. there was another most treasonable conspiracie and rebellion
attempted at Sterling, and intended to haue beene further executed
and prosecuted against his Highnesse person: and all vnder
pretence of Religion, and chiefly (in shewe) for the
Consistorian or Presbyteriall soueraignetie.
               With these and many more such vnduetifull insolencies,
the King and State there, beeing greatly mooued: a
Parliament was called, and held in May, 1584. wherein
order was taken, for a generall Reformation in causes Ecclesiasticall,

throughout the whole Church of Scotland.
               
               The KingsAct of Parl. cap. 2. lawfull authority in causes Ecclesiasticall,
so often before impugned, was approued and confirmed;
and it was made treason, for any man to refuse to answere
before the King, though it were concerning any matter,
which was Ecclesiasticall.
               The thirdibid. cap. 20 estate of Parliament, (that is, the Bishoppes)
was restored to the auncient dignity: it wasibid. cap. 3. made treason, for
any man after that time to procure the innouation or diminution
of the power and authority of any of the three estates.
               
                  The foresayd
                  ibid cap. 4. 
                  iudgements, Senates, and Presbyteriall
iurisdictions were discharged: and it was enacted in these
words: that after that time none should presume, or take vppon
them to conuocate, conuene, or assemble themselues together, for
holding of Councells, conuentions, or assemblies, to treat, consult,
or determine in any matter of estate, ciuill or Ecclesiasticall, (excepting
the ordinary iudgements:) without the Kinges especiall
commandement.
               
                  It was
                  ibid cap. 7. 
                  further then ordayned, that none of his Highnesse
subiects, in time comming, should presume to take vppon them by
worde or writing, to iustifie the most treasonable attempt at Ruthuen,
or to keepe in Register or store, any bookes approouing the
same in any sort.
               An Acteibid. cap. 8. was also made, for the calling in of Buchanans
Chronicle, and his booke de iure regni apud Scotos.
               
               
                  Lastly (sayth the Acteibid. cap. 8. of Parliament it selfe.) Forasmuch
as through the wicked, licentious, publike, and priuate speeches,
and vntrue calumnies of diuers his Highnesse subiects, to the
disdaine, contempt, and reproach of his Maiestie, his Councell,
and proceedinges, stirring vp his Highnesse subiectes thereby, to
misliking, sedition, vnquietnes, to cast off their due obedience to
his Maiestie. Therefore it is ordained, that none of his subiects

shall presume, or take vpon them, priuatelie or publikelie, in sermons,
declamations, or familiar conferences, to vtter any false,
slanderous, or vntrue speeches, to the disdaine, reproach, and contempt
of his Maiestie, his Councell, and proceedings, or to meddle
in the affaires of his Highnesse vnder paine, &c.
               And thus you haue seene some part of the practise of
the Geneua resolution in Scotland, for their booke of Discipline;
and reformation in Religion. But yet I must needes
draw you on a little further.
               Presently, after that the sayde Parliament was ended,
notwithstanding the kings maiesty, had in the samecap. 1. of that Parliament, &c. most
royally & religiously cōfirmed with great sincerity the articles
of true Religion, for preaching the worde, and administration
of the sacraments accordingly, and had likewise
vnited to his Crowne, the supreame authority in all causes
within his Realme, aswell Ecclesiasticall as Ciuill: yet (because
their Presbyterial soueraignty was therby abridged)
diuers very spitefull, disloyall, and slaunderous speeches
were cast abroade, by them and their associates, against his
Highnesse.
               
                  For they
                  Declar. A. 2. 
                  gaue out, as though the King had beene declined
to Popery, and had made Acts to derogate the free passage of
the Gospell: that he endeuoredThinnes addition to Hollinshed. pa. 446. D. A. to extinguish the light of the Gospell:
that there was left nothing of the whole auncient forme of
iustice and pollicie in the spirituall state, but a naked shadow, with
many other the like reprochfull and calumnious reportes,
which they spread abroad in their owne Country.
               
               Diuers ofArchbishop of Saint. Androwes Letter, and of other Preachers. the chiefe Ministers of that faction likewise
that were fled out of Scotland into England, for feare of punishment,
in respect of many their great and haynous offences,
pretended (as it hath beene noted) that they fledd
hether, because they were persecuted at home for their
consciences, and could not be suffered to preach the Gospell.

OneM. Hutchinsons Letter and as he is readie to be deposed. 
                  Dauison (a Scottish Minister) so rayled against
the King of Scots in the pulpit, at the parish Church of the
olde Iury in London, that vpon complaint made thereof,
by the Lord Ambassador of Scotland, direction was giuen
to the Lord Bishop of London, for the silencing of all the
Scottish Ministers in the City.
               And this disloyall and slaunderous course was helde,
both in Scotland and England, so farre as theyThinnes addition, page. 446. durst, from
May, vntill Nouember following.
               At what time, this stratagem here ensuing was wroght
(as I am perswaded) by the Consistorians instigation. The
Kingibid Thinn. of Scotland, being vpon occasion of a contract, nere
Striueling: heard of certaine enemies (as hee then accounted
them) comming towards him. Whereupon his Maiesty
raysing such power as hee could, conuayed himselfe to Striueling.
Where before he looked for them, ten thousand men presented
themselues in armes. They pitched their Tents before the
towne the first of Nouember, and there made a Proclamation
in their owne names, commanding all the Kings subiects
to assist them. Many pretensesThe Proclamation is there also set downe. are alleaged of that their
attempt. And these namely: that whereas there had beene
Acts and Proclamations a little before published against the Ministerie
and Clergie, inhibiting their Presbyteries, assemblies and
other exercises, priuileges, and immunities: and that the most
learned and honest were compelled, for safetie of their liues and
consciences, to abandon their Country, &c. Nowe the afflicted
Church might be comforted, and all the said Acts lately made in
preiudice of the same, might bee solemnely cancelled, and for euer
adnulled. This Proclamation thus knowne, the King fortified
the towne as he could: but to no purpose. For within
two houres assault it was wonne. The King thereupon,
was enforced to flye vnto the Castle. The Conquerours of
the towne, placed their ensignes before the blockehouse of the

Castle, and so ordred the matter, that there was no way for any in
the Castle to escape their hands.
               
               
                  Wherupon (a parley being concluded) the King desired
by his Commissioners three petitions: The first, That
his life, honor, and estate might be preserued. The second, That
the liues of certain of his friends with him might not be touched.
The third, That all things might be transacted peaceably. The
other side, by their Commissioners likewise desired other
three petitions: The first, That the King would allow of their
intention, and subscribe their Proclamation, vntill further order
were established by the estates, &c. and that he would deliuer vnto
them, all the strong Holds in the land. The second, That the
disquieters of the Common-wealth might be deliuered vnto them
and abide their due tryall by Law. The third. That the old guard
might be remooued, and another placed.
               Vppon mutuall relation from the Commissioners on
both sides, the parties that were assembled in armes, did
yeeld vnto the first and third of the Kings petitions: and
the King graunting to all theirs, as there was no remedy,
committed himself into their hands, and had a new guard
immediately appointed to attend him.
               And thus the Presbyteries of Scotland by the Kings subscribing
to the foresaid Proclamation,This appeareth by Iames Gibsons conference with the King: penned by himselfe, and deliuered abroad in many Copies. recouered againe a
great part of their strength. But not all (as it seemeth) vpon
the sodaine: which was the occasion of a new stirre. For
presently after the sayde Noble victory, the Scottish Ministers
that were in England, (hauing al their former disloyalties
vppon composition remitted:) made their repayre
without delay into Scotland: where finding not such readinesse
as they expected, for a more authenticall repealing
of the statutes made in the foresaid Parliament, 1584. they
began (notwithstanding the Kings late goodnes towards
them,) to exclaime in their Pulpits, with most proud and

bitter Inuectiues against him.
               One Iames Gibson, compared his Maiesty publikely in
his preachings, vnto Ieroboam, tearmed him a persecutor, and
threatned him, that if he tooke that course, he should be the
last of his race.
               
               
                  And being called for such his disloyall speeches,Gibson hath penned this matter as Cō
                     sistorianly, as Catiline himselfe could haue done it. 
                  before
the King & Councell, the xxj. of December, 1585. he very
boldly iustified the same: saying to his Highnesse, As long
as you maintayne these cursed Actes of 1584. the tyranny of Bishops,
&c. Ye are a Persecutor. And againe, As Ieroboam for the
leading of the people of Israell from the lawes of the house of Iudah,
and from the true worshipping of God, to serue Idolatry, was
rooted out, he and all his posterity: so should the King) if he continued
in that cursed course, maintaining those wicked Acts against
God) be rooted out, and conclude that race, &c.
               
                  What else hath fallen out since that time, by reason of
the raines, which now (as it hath beene noted) these zealous
brethren haue gotten to themselues, and how moderately
and duetifully they doo proceede, in the practise of
their Presbyteries, and Consistorian Kingdomes: the articles,
which the King not long since offred vnto the Ministers,
to haue beene subscribed vnto by them, doo sufficiently
declare and make manifest.
                  The coppie of these articles, was deliuered abroad by some of her Maiesties priuie Counsell. Ex malis moribus nascuntur
bonae leges: Out of ill maners spring good and wholsome lawes.
The chiefe and especiall pointes of the sayde articles are
these: that all Preachers there, should yeelde their obedience to
the Kings Maiesty: that they should not pretend any Priuiledge in
their allegeance: that they should not meddle in matters of State:
that they should not publikely reuile his Maiesty: that they should
not draw the people from their due obedience to the King: & that
when they are accused, vpon their facts or speeches, or for refusing
to doo things, &c. they should not alledge the inspiration of the
holy spirit, nor serue themselues with colour of conscience but confesse

their offences as men, and to craue pardon as subiects, &c.
               It is great pitty, that so worthy a Christian King, should
be driuen to require such a subscription in his owne kingdome,
especially of those men, that should be lights to the
rest, and the chiefe examples of all duetifull obedience: It
is more to be pittied, that (for ought I can learne) his Maiesty
cannot as yet obtaine so much at their handes. But
most of all it is to be lamented, that no man can gesse (for
ought I know) how far this Gangrene will spread it selfe.
               At the first, they found but faults against the Bishops, but
after they ouerthrewe them. The Anabaptists in Germany
began with the Bishops and Clergy,
                  Bullinger. 
                  but they ended with the ciuill
Magistrate. Consider of Buchanans dealing, whether he maketh
not the like assault against Princes, that his companions
did against Bishops; as in deriding their titles, misliking
their pompe, and in glancing at their reuenues. He tearmeth
Epistle to the king of Scots before his booke de iure regni &c the honorable phrases of Maiesty, Highnesse, and Lordship,
solaecismos & barbarismos aulicos, that is, vnlawfull &
corrupt kinds of speech, which are vsed in Court, and doo proceede
(as he sayth) from flattery. Hee gibethDe iure regni pa. 17. at the state which
Princes take vpon them, when they shewe themselues to
the people, comparing them to Childrens puppets, which are
garishly attyred.
               
               AfterIbid. pa. 34. also, he insinuateth that a good Prince should appeare
& come abroad, only defended with his innocencie, non superbo
spiculatorum & 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   caetu, sericatis
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   nebulonibus
stipatus: not with a proud company of guarders, and of
pensioners, and of silken knaues. He would haue Kings to content
themselues with lesse reuenues and seruice, commending
the Discipline of Laconia, where it was strange to haue one man
pull off an other mans sockes, at his going to bedde: and likewise
the example of Pelagius, that first discomfited the Saracens
in Spaine: in that he had his house, not built after the fashion

now a dayes, with many stately roomes of honor, but was
contented with one place for himself, his fire, his friends, and his
cattell, (after the Irish fashion.)
               But to let passe these contempts and pointes of Anabaptisme:
one thing more is likewise to be considered in these
Scottish reforming ministers, which they haue sucked from
their Mother-City Geneua. They cannot be content, to haue
raysed vp sedition and troubles at home, to haue slandred
both far and nere, the most Godly reformation of Religion,
which their King had made there, and to erect (you
haue seene how) in place thereof a meere counterfeit plot
of a new Popish tyranny, such a one as hath already quite ouerthrown
the auncient estate of that Church, & wroght
more mischiefe in that Country in thirty yeares, then the
Pope of Rome had done before (as I thinke) in fiue hundred:
But they presume also, much further then becommeth
them, to cast some of their contentious and disloyall
seedes into England.
               
               VulpeculaMelancton. (cauda amissa) reliquis vulpibus callidè persuasit
vt similiter & ipsae caudas refecarent, ne sola turpis & deformis
in suo genere videretur. The Fox (hauing lost her tayle) craftely
persuaded the other Foxes, that they would likewise cut off their
tayles, least she herselfe alone, should seeme the foule and deformed
beast of all that kinde. And hence it commeth (as I take it)
that to bring the flourishing estate of our Church in England
into the same misery, that theirs is brought into, they
rayle, deuise, and clap their handes, to set vs here together
by the eares.
               
               
                  Some of them say, that
                  Dauison in the name of the rest, in a booke of his lately published. Page. 2. our Church is still vnder the bondage
of an Antichristian gouernement: that our Bishops are a
hurtfull relique of Romish confusion: that
                  pag. 29. they thrust with side
and shoulder to make hauocke of the Church, by a disguised persecution,
and that they do tyrannize aboue their brethren with violence

                  pag. 28. and crueltie.
               They vse these words of her excellent Maiesty. Alacke
good
                  pag. 28. 
                  Princesse, the true report of thinges commeth seldome to
her eares. And do very grossely insinuate, nay indeed plainly
affirme, that there are in Court some crafty
                  pag. 12. 
                  miscreants, which
doo abuse her Maiesty, whom they resemble to Ioab, Iesabell, Haman
and Gehasi.
               
               They doopag. 3. 
                  iustifie the proceedings of our disturbers here, &
animating
                  pag. 21. 
                  them to go forward, as they haue begun, doo tell
them, that both their causes (vz. their owne in Scotland, and
of our factions in England) are most nerely
                  pag. 20. 
                  linked together:
and doo
                  pag. 29. 
                  promise, that they will not cease to commend their troubled
state vnto God, in their priuate and publike prayers. They
pag. 20. compare our hindring in England of the pretended Discipline,
vnto the hinderance, which Gods enemies made, vnto
the building of Ierusalem. They seeke vnder handpag. 21. to steale
away the harts of her Maiesties subiects, especially of those
that haue beene, and still are seduced, by our Consistorian
Schismatikes: by putting them in hope of one Darius, that
after a time shall giue full authority for the sayde building of Ierusalem.
Which manner of dealing, there is no Darius liuing,
could take in good part, if the like practises were vsed
by others amongst his people.
               GOD of his infinite mercy, graunt vnto her Maiesty, a
long, a prosperous, and a happy raigne ouer vs: and so
knit the harts of all true English men, vnto their Queene
of Saba, their Hester, and their most royall Elizabeth, that
without the expectation of any Darius whosoeuer, they
may euer continue her most loyall, faithfull, and obedient
subiects, rather wishing in their soules, that the world with
her Maiesty should end their dayes together, then once to
take ioy, by the least imagination of any future change.
Amen.
               
                  
And thus much of the manner and wayes vsed by certaine
Scottish Ministers, for Reformation and Discipline.
Which pointes or Consistorian proceedinges, I haue not
touched (as God knoweth) with any minde or intent, to
dishonour the state of that Country. Besides, much may
well be sayd (I assure my selfe) in excuse of such of the laity;
as ioyned in the premisses. For I finde they were led
with a very great zeale. They had beene so long imprisoned
in the darkenesse of Popery, that when the Gospell
appeared vnto them, it so dazeled their eyes, as that for very
gladnesse they considered not well, what they did, so
they might enioy it. Their goods, their lands, their wiues
and their children, nay their liues (in respect therof) were
not greatly deare vnto them.
               Moreouer it is manifest, how long they were exercised
with great feare and many perplexities, what entertainement
and continuance the Gospell should finde amongst
them. In which case euery man may easily coniecture, how
easie a matter it was for them, to be miscaried by their teachers
& Preachers: perswading them, that by Gods commandement
they were bound to vndertake that course, &
withall not omitting great threates of excommunication
& damnation, if they refused so to doo. They found their
sayd Ministers doctrine very good and sound, in the chiefe
points of saluation, and who would then haue suspected
them in matters of lesse importance?
               So as whatsoeuer was done amisse by them, as touching
their proceedings mentioned, I doo (wholly in a manner)
ascribe it to their Ministers of the Geneua learning. Vnto
whom also it ought of right to be imputed, that I or any other,
either haue, or hereafter shall haue, any occasion at all
so much as once to make mention of the least thing, that
might be any waies offensiue to the meanest of that natiō.
               
                  
For what had I, or any other priuate man in England,
to doo with their matters, otherwise then to haue prayed
for them: had their sayd Ministers, but onely taken vppon
them to haue iustified their sayde proceedinges, by their
owne Lawes, customes, and priuiledges▪ and could haue
contented themselues to haue gone no further? Marry
nowe that the chiefest of them,Buchanan. The historie of the church of Scotland. Knox. for the excusing of themselues,
and that they might shew, whose schollers they are,
haue presumed to publish (and that in print) such strange
& seditious doctrine, as doth tend to the like disturbance,
and indeede to the vtter ouerthrow of the freest and most
absolute Monarchies, that are or can be in Christendome,
not omitting withall, to solicite and incourage our pretended
reformers in England, to proceed as they haue begun,
in following their steps, contrary (I am sure) both to the
word of God, and to all the lawes and customes of this
Realme: I am in very good hope, that there is no man of
any sound iudgement, who will be offended with mee, in
that to disclose, and thereby to preuent such mischiefes, as
might otherwise ensue with vs, I haue beene bolde to lay
downe (but yet out of their printed bookes) some of the
proceedinges of the sayde Ministers of Scotland, which at
this time our owne Preachers in England, of the Disciplinarian
consort, (as nowe it followeth to bee shewed) doo
take vppon them to imitate, and haue already proceeded
further in them, then some of their fauorers will acknowledge
or (I thinke) doo as yet suspect.
               The end of the first Booke.
            
         
         
            
            THE SECOND BOOKE OF
DISCIPLINARY GROVNDES
and Practises.
            
               CHAP. I.
               The doctrine of certaine English Ministers, which they learned
at Geneua, and published of purpose to haue procured the
like course for reformation in England, to that which was in
Scotland.
               
                  AS you haue hearde in the first Booke,
howe M. Knox beeing at Geneua in
Q. Maries time, laboured and afterward
proceeded to reforme Religion
in Scotland by force and armes:
so did sundry English men, that then
liued there in like sort, according to
the Geneua resolution in that point, endeuour as much as
lay in them, to haue kindled the like stirres at that time
here in England. To which especiall ende, they did write
hither sundry letters and bookes, wholy of this argument:
vz. that the then Councellors; the Noble men; inferiour Magistrates;
and (rather then faile) the very people; were bound before
God to ouerthrowe the superstition and Idolatrie that was
then in the Land, and to reforme Religion, whether the Queene
would or no: yea though it were by putting her to death: Out of
two of these English bookes, I haue collected these seditious
and consistoriall propositions following.
               
                  
All men,Goodman. Page 73. councellors, noble men, inferior magistrates, and
people are bound and charged, to see the lawes of God kept, and to
suppresse and resist Idolatrie,ibid. pag. 74. by force.ibid. pag. 77.
               
               If the magistrates shall refuse,ibid. pag. 196 to put massemongers and false
preachers to death, the people (in seeing it performed) doo shewe
that zeale of God, which was commended in Phinees, destroying
the adulterers, and in the Israelites against the Beniamites.
               
               To teach,ibid. page 30. that it was not lawfull in any case to resist the superior
powers, but rather to submit our selues to punishment is a dangerous
doctrine, taught by some, by the permission of God for our
sinnes.
               It is not sufficient for subiects,ibid. page 63. 43. 59. 72. not to obey wicked commandements
of their Princes, but to withstand them also, in dooing the
contrarie, euerie man in his vocation and office.
               Shieriffes,ibid. page 87. 88, 89. 90. Iaylors, and other inferior officers, ought not onely
not to cast the saintes of God in prison (hauing commandement
thereunto by the Prince) for feare of loosing their offices: but to
withstand euill, to support them, and to deliuer them, to the vttermost
of their power.
               If we see a sheepe in daunger to be deuoured of a wolfe,ibid. page 90. wee are
bounde to deliuer it: euen so to our power wee are bound to put to
our hands, to deliuer the children of God, when wee see them pitiouslie
in danger, by Gods enemies.
               It is the office of Councellors,ibid. page 34. page 35. to bridle the affections of Princes
and gouernors: Noblemen were first ordained to bridle Princes.
Noblemen haue their honour of the people, to reuenge the iniuries
of their Kings,Obedience. page. 107. and not for their lustie hawking, nimble dicing &
carding, singing and dauncing, open bragging & swearing, false
flearing and flattering, subtle picking and stealing, cruell polling
and pilling, &c.
               The authoritie,Obedience▪ 25. which Princes haue, is giuen them from the
people: Kings, princes, and gouernours, haue their authoritie of
the people: and (vpon occasion) the people may take it away again,

as men may reuoke their proxies and letters of Atturney.ibid. pag. 105.
               
               Subiects do promise obedience, that the Magistrate might help
them:Goodman, pag. 190. which if he doo not, they are discharged of their obedience.
               If Magistrates without feare transgresse Gods laws themselues,
and command others to doo the like;ibid. pag. 119. 139. then haue they lost that honour
and obedience, which otherwise their subiectes did owe vnto
them: and ought no more to be taken for Magistrates, but be examined,
accused, condemned, and punished as priuate transgressors.
               Iudges ought by the lawe of God,Obedience, pag. 111. to summon Princes before
them, for their crimes: and to proceed against them, as against all
other offenders.
               Euill Princes ought (by the lawe of God) to bee deposed,Goodman, 144. 145. and
inferior magistrates ought chieflie to doo it. Examples allowed
of Kings deposed
                  Obedience, 110. Edward 2, Richard 2. Christierne of Denmarke,
&c.
               It is lawfull to kill wicked kings and tyrants:Obedience, 99 103. and both by Gods
lawe and mans lawe, Queene Mary ought to haue beene put to
death;Goodman, pag. 99. as being a tyrant, a monster, a cruell beast, &c. Examples.
The subiects did kill the Queenes highnesse Athalia:
                  Obedience, pag. 113. 
                  Iehu, killed
the Queenes maiestie Iesabell: Elias, beeing no magistrate,
killed the Queenes maiesties chaplaines,ibid. pag. 114. 
                  Baals priests. These examples
are left for our instruction.ibid. pag. 115. Where this iustice is not executed,
the state is most corrupt.
               When Magistrates do cease to do their duties,Goodman, pag. 185. 
                  (in thus deposing
or killing of Princes) the people are as it were without officers:
& then God giueth the sword into their hands, & he himself
is become immediatly their head:ibid. pag. 180 for to the multitude a portion of
the sword of iustice is committed:ibid. pag. 184 from the which no person,ibid. pag. 185 King
Queene, or Emperour (being an Idolater) is exempt: he must die
the death. The people in the 25. of Numbers, did hang vp certain
of their heads and captains: which ought to be for euer a perpetuall
example of their duetie, in the like defection from God to hang
vp such rulers, as shall draw them from him. If neither the inferior

magistrates,Obedience, pag. 115 nor the greatest part of people will doo their offices:
(in punishing, deposing, or killing of Princes) then the minister
must excommunicate such a King:Obedience, pag. 116. any minister may doo it
against the greatest Prince.ibid. 18. God will send to the rest of the people,
(which are willing to doo their duty,Goodman, 199. 200. 201. but are not able) some Moses
or Othoniell. If they know any Ionathan, they must goe vnto
him to be their Captaine: and he ought not to refuse them. By
the worde of God (in such a defection) a priuate man (hauing
some speciall inward motion) may kill a tyrant:Obedience. pag. 110. as Moses did the
Egyptian: as Phinees did the lecherous: and Ahud did king Eglon:
or otherwise, a priuate man may doo so, if he be commaunded
or permitted by the common-wealth.
               And vnto some obiections that be made to the contrarie,
these answeres are shaped.
               
                  Ob. Be subiect to higher powers:Goodman, pag. 106. the powers be ordained
of God.
               
                  Ans. Wicked Kings are not Gods ordinance.Goodman, pag. 111. Saint Paule
speaketh of lawfull powers.
               
                  Ob. Seruants must be obedient to their Masters, thogh
they be froward.
               
                  Ans. Paul speaketh of bondmen,Obedience, pag 47. not of subiects obedience.
               
                  Ob. Peter was commanded to put vp his sword.
               
                  Ans. He was a minister,Goodman, 12
                        •
                     . and no magistrate.
               
                  Ob. Christ could haue called for twelue legions of Angels
for his defence,Goodman, 119. 120. if it had beene lawfull to haue vsed
force, for the setting vp of the Gospell.
               
                  Ans. Christs kingdome was not of this world: he tooke vpon
him no temporall sword: but that hindreth not those that haue it.
               
                  Ob. Ieremy was commanded to obey the king of Babel.Goodman, 125. 126.
               
               
                  Ans. The secret counsell of God was reuealed to him to that
effect. It is no generall rule.
               
                  
                  Ob. Dauid said,Goodman, 138. 139. God forbid that I should touch the annointed
of the Lord.
               
                  Ans. It was in his owne priuate cause, and so vnlawfull.
               
                  Ob. Sir Thomas Wyat did,Goodman. 202. 205. as you would haue others to
do, &c. but he had no good successe.
               Ans. The goodnesse of his cause is not to be measured by his
successe.
               
               He was no traytour,Page 203. his cause was Gods: and none, but papists
and traytours, can iustly accuse him of treason.
               The Councellors and all others, that would be accounted nobles
(and tooke not his part) are in very deede traytours to God and
his people,Page 206. Page 207. and to their countrie.
               The author of the booke of obedience (he should haue
sayd of rebellion) endeth his treatise, with significatiō, that
the nobilitie of England,
                  Page 137. (hee speaketh of them that were in
Queen Maries daies) are not to be trusted either by their words,
othes, or handwritings, furder then a man doth see, & hear them,
& scarsely so far. And Goodman likewise, for his conclusion,
is most earnest with all english subiectes, that they would
put his doctrine in practise, assuring them that in so doing,
if they be cast in prison with Ioseph,Pag. 218. 219. 220. 221. 
                  to wild beasts with Daniell,
into the sea with Ionas, into the dungeon with Ieremy, into
the fiery furnace with Sidrach, Misach, & Abednago, yet they
shalbe comforted: whereas if they will not: in seeking to saue their
liues, they shall loose them they shall be cast out of the fauor of God,
their consciences shall be wounded with hell like torments, they
shall despaire & seeke to hang themselues with Iudas, to murther
themselues with Frauncis Spira; drowne themselues with Iudge
Hales, or else fall mad with Iustice Morgan, at Geneua.
               This doctrine saith Whittingham (afterward vnworthily
Deane of Durham) was approued by the best learned in these
parts,
                  In his preface to Goodmans booke. 
                  meaning Caluin and the rest of the Geneuians. The

Englishmen of name, there at that time, besides Goodman
and Whittingham, were (as I take it) Anthony Gilby, Miles
Couerdall, Dauid Whitehead, and sundry others. Who liking
the sayde doctrine also exceedingly, were very earnest to
haue the same printed, for the benefite (as they sayde) of their
brethren in England. Whittingham made a preface to Goodmans
booke: wherein hee greatly commendeth this doctrine,
and writeth thus, in the name (as it seemeth) of all
his fellowes there. We desire that you (meaning all in England
and elsewhere, that loue to know the truth and follow
it) should bee perswaded in this trueth. Againe, here thou doest
heare the Eternal speaking by his minister, &c. quickly giue eare
and obay, &c. And again, If thou wish for Christian liberty, come
and see how it may easily be had, &c. From Geneua.
               
               Here it is very material further to be obserued, that the
rest of the learned men, that fled in Queene Maries time,
as Iohn Scory: William Barlow: Richard Cox: Thomas Beacon:
Iohn Bale: Iohn Parkhurst: Edmond Grindall: Edwine Sandes:
Alexander Nowell: Robert Wisdome: Iohn Iewell: & very many
more, hauing no great affection to Geneua, bestowed
themselues in Germany, especially at Zuricke, Basill, and
Franckeford. These men maintained the reformation of
the Church of England in King Edwards time: they vsed in
their holy assemblies, the forme of seruice, and order of ceremonies,
which were then established: and they vtterly
misliked, & condemned the foresayd propositions, as very
seditious & rebellious, according to the iudgement of all
the reformed Churches, (for ought I can learne) both in
Germany and else-where, besides Geneua and her offspring.
               Besides they of Franckeford, (as it appeareth) notwithstanding
their griefe, that they were constrained to leaue
their country for their conscience: yet in the middest of
all their afflictions, they retained such duetifull harts vnto

                  Queene Mary, (imitating therein the Apostles and Disciples
of their Maister) as that they coulde not endure to
heare her so traduced into all hatred and obloquy, as shee
was by the other sort.Knox hist. pag. 185. 
                  Maister Knox, comming vpon occasion
from Geneua to Franckeford, was by these graue men,
accused of Treason, (as he himselfe confesseth) for matters
that he had published in print, against their Soueraigne and
the Emperor: and was faine thereupon, for the sauing of his
life, to flye thence secretly backe againe to Geneua.
               
               Lastly, by meanes of their disliking of the sayd propositions,
and their further course helde in the defence of the
foresayde reformation in England, against the other mens
counterfeit presbyteries: these learned men at Franckeford,
could haue small reputation with them of Geneua. Thus
one of that crew then, hath written since of them. The English
Church,
                  Knox hist. pag. 201. 
                  which was assembled at Geneua, was seperated from
that superstitious and contentious company, that was at Franckford.
And againe,Ibid. pag. 185. 
                  They were more giuen vnto vnprofitable ceremonies,
then to sincere Religion.
               
               These things I thought meete, for your aduertisement,
to set downe, that the propositions precedent might appeare
vnto you, not to haue proceeded from any rash or
light conceit in our English propounders, publishers, and
maintainers of them: but that they doo containe their resolute
iudgement, agreeable to those points of the Geneua
resolution, mentioned before out of Knox and Buchanan.
               
               Whereby it is apparant, that if our sayd English Geneuians,
had found as redy assistance at that time in England, as
Knox and his complices (about, or soone after the same
time) did in Scotland, they would not haue fayled, to haue
put the sayde positions aswell in practise heere with vs, as
some Scottish Ministers did in that Country. Which great
mischiefe, and disloyall outrage, as the state here, did then

prouidently suppresse and withstande: So her Excellent
Maiesty, hath since preuented, by abolishing of the Romish
Religion, and the restoring of the Gospell, which
was the quarrell in those dayes pretended. So as our English
Reformers, hauing hitherto had no cause for this
point to imitate the foresayde proceedinges in Scotland, it
remayneth, that I shew vnto you, how far (as yet it is disclosed)
and how directly they endeuour to follow the said
practises of the Scottish Ministers, for the erecting vp in
England of the Geneua new Papacie.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               Our English Disciplinarians, doo imitate the Scottish, in their
desire of the Consistoriall gouernement, sauing that they are
more bewitched with a kind of dotage after it.
               
                  IN Scotland, notwithstanding that at the last the
Ministers had obtayned, in some sorte, the allowance
of the confession of their faith, contayning
the summe of that doctrine, which
before they had so greatly desired: yet because they wanted
the Geneua discipline, wherein consisted their very
great ioy, together with the hope of their future soueraignety,
they were but a little satisfied with all the rest.
And euen so, it hath fallen out since in England, sauing (for
ought I can read) that the sayd Scottish ministers were not
then come vnto so great a dotage after this Discipline, as
there now is growne amongst vs.
               About some two or three and forty yeares agone, and
after,Harmonia confess. in the beginning of her Maiesties Raigne, the deuisers
themselues of this new platforme,Cal. Epist. &c. were well content
to accept of, and commend such Churches, as had abandoned
Popery, though they had withall imbraced another

kinde of Discipline.
               Then in disputation against the Papists and Anabaptists,Bertram pa. 15 Mornay p. 37. Caluin instit. lib 4. Cap. 1. sect. 9.
there could bee found in all Fraunce and Geneua, but
two essentiall notes of the Church: vz. the true preaching
of the word, and the right administration of the Sacraments.
               
               Then vpon Goodmans,
                  Beza in colloquio Possiaceno. Conuict. de statu. Gall. pasto. fol. 122. 
                  Whittinghams, & Gilbies returne,
(with the rest of their associates) from Geneua into England:
although it grieued them at the hart, that they might
not beare as great a sway here in their seuerall consistories,
as Caluin did at Geneua,
                  This appeareth by their letters, sermons, and by Gilbies most rayling Dialogue betwixt a lame souldier of Barwicke, and an English Captaine. and so not onely repined and grudged
at her Maiesties reformation of this Church, but laboured
(as they might) to sowe abroade in the lande that
seede, which hath brought forth a great part of all the disorders,
troubles, and disobediences, that since haue ensued.
Yet notwithstanding they meddle not much in shewe,
(for any thing I can heare of,) with matters of this Discipline,
but rather busied themselues, about the apparrell of
ministers, ceremonies prescribed, and in picking of quarrels
against the common Booke.
               Marry since that,Confes 5. & 7. Maister Beza deuised a way, howe to
bring in the Geneua Discipline, to be a third essentiall note
of the Church: since, Maister Cartwright hath beene at Geneua,
and vpon his returne did ingage his credit to iustifie
that platforme, to be a necessary forme of Gouernement,
prescribed by Christ for all times and places: since, Maister
Trauerse hath also beene there, and did take vpon him
in his booke de Disciplina Ecclesiastica, to do the like: since,
Maister Cartwright did likewise (at his second beeing beyonde
the seas,
                     T. C. Second replie pa. 53.) sende vs worde in his second booke, that
Master Beza accounted his sayde third note of the Church,(vz.
the Geneua Discipline) to bee as necessarie a note, as either the
word or Sacraments: and since, Maister Cartwright and Trauers,
with the chiefest of their followers in England, haue of

later yeares (vpon consideration of the premisses, and further
deliberation, in their conferences and meetinges to
that purpose) resolued and concluded generally, for the
necessity of the same Discipline, which before had beene
onely deliuered with vs, as their priuate opinions: Since
these times (I say) the friends and fauorers of it, haue from
time to time, by certain degrees, so increased in their fond
affections towards it; as that now they are in a manner ouercome
with the strength and violence of them, and doo
bragge in their bookes, that they will not sticke to dye in
the cause.
               Maister Cartwright (as I take it) had an especiall eye to
this deuise when he sayth, that certaine of the things, which
he and his followers do stand vpon, are such, as if euery haire
of their heads, were a seuerall life, they ought to afford them all in
defence of them. Diuers other besides, doo offer to aduenture
their liues for the iustifiyng of it,
                  Epist. before the demonst. Epist. before the sup. as Vdall & Penry, & nothing
will content them without the Geneua discipline. For say
they, it is found
                  Practise of Prelats D. 2. 
                  to be the onely bond of peace, the bane of heresie,
the punisher of sinne▪ and maintainer of righteousnes.
               
               It is pure,Motion. pa. 46. perfect, and full of all goodnes for the peace, wealth
and honour of Gods people, and is ordained for the ioy and happines
of all Nations.
               The want
                     T. C lib. 2. in the Epist. of the Eldership is the cause of all euill. It is not
                     T. C. lib. 1. page 3. to
bee hoped for, that any common-wealth will flourish without it.
This DisciplineT. C. lib. 1▪ pa. 6. and 48. is no small part of the Gospell: it is of the substance
of it. It is theMotion 84. right stuffe & gold for building the Church
of God. This would make theIbid. 84. Church a chast spouse, hauing a
wonderfull brightnes as the morning, faire as the Moone, pure
as the Sunne, and terrible like an army with banners. Without
Register. p. 68. this Discipline, there can be no true Religion. This gouernement
Epi before sup. A. 2. is the scepter, whereby alone Christ Iesus ruleth among men. The
Churches of God inMartin Iunior: Thes, 14. Denmarke, Saxony, Tigurin, &c. wanting

this gouernement, are to bee accounted maymed, and vnperfect.
The establishingT. C. lib. 1, pag. 3. of the Presbyteries, is the full placing of Christ
in his kingdome. They that
                     T. C. lib. 1. pag. 220. reiect this Discipline, refuse to haue
Christ raigne ouer them: and deny
                     T. C. Table preface to the demonst. him in effect, to be their king
or theirMotion to the Lordes. page 22. Lord. It is the bladeIbid. pa. 49. of a shaken sword, in the hande of
the Cherubins, to keepe the way of the tree of life.
               Ridiculous men and bewitched. As though Christs
soueraignety, kingdome, and lordship were no where acknowledged,
or to be found, but where halfe a dosen artizans,
Shoomakers, Tinkers, and Tailors, with their Preacher
and Reader, (eight or nine Cherubins forsooth) do
rule the whole parish. But I haue noted vnto you, out of
these few places, (omitting many other) this their wonderfull
dotage, to this end▪ that it may be considered, whether
it be likely, that our English Consistorians hauing ouerrunne
the Scottish ministers, or at the least ouertaken them,
in their opinions of the necessity of this Discipline, will be
left behind them, in their practises according to the Geneua
resolution, for the attayning of it, or no?
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               Our pretended English reformers doo imitate or rather exceede
the Scottish Ministers in rebelling and rayling against all that
doo encounter them.
               
                  WHen in Scotland they first had in minde to
reforme religion, and after to erect their
Discipline, (according to the Geneua resolution)
they spent their wittes and all
their deuises, by railing and slandering,
to bring the Bishoppes and the rest of the
Clergy, with the whole course of their gouernements into
detestation and hatred with the people. They write their

owne pleasures of them,
                  Knox hist. pag 234. 
                  and to them: and that in the name of the
people. They stirred the Nobility by their writings against them:
they had their supplications to their Parliaments:
                  ibid. pag. 213, 214, 216. 
                  and to the
Queene Regent;
                  ibid. pag. 256. 
                  they had their appellations from their Bishops,
their exhortations to the Nobility,
                  ibid. pag. 304. 
                  to the Estates and comminalty,
and many such practises they had to that purpose, yea,
after their Bishops and Clergy had receiued the Gospell.
               But in this course, our reformers in England, haue not
onely imitated them, but (as ready Schollers, and apt for
such mischiefe) haue very farre exceeded both them, and
as I thinke) all others, that hitherto haue dealt that way.
They haue renued ouer againe, & applied to our Church
gouernours,Sathan prince of hell, to the Pope, Cardinals, Bishopes, &c. two or three of the most bitter Treatises, that
euer were made against the Popes, Cardinals, Popish Bishops,
Monkes and Friers, &c. in King Henry the eight his dayes.
They haue foure or fiue very diuellish and infamous Dialogues:
                  Practise of Prelates. 1. Gilbies. 2 lB. 3. Vdals. 4. That which came from Throgmor.
likewise their complaints and petitions to her Maiesty
and Parliament, in the name of the comminalty, their appellation,
their exhortation, and diuers other most lewd &
scurrilous Epistles and Letters.
               When they are called before any Magistrate, and dealt
withall for their factious proceedings, they vsually afterward
doo take vpon them to write and publish, vnder the
name of a conference, what wordes and arguments haue
passed: which they perfourme with all reproch, disdaine,
vntruth, and vanity: and so do pester the Realme and their
fauourers closets, with infinite such shamelesse and slaunderous
discourses, as is most intollerable.
               They haue had fiue or sixe supplications to seuerall Parliaments,
penned altogether according to Knox his stile and
violent spirit, in many places word for word: besides Martin,
and his two sonnes, their holy imitations of Beza his
Passauantius, (that all things might proceede Geneua like)

in their sixe bookes of Consistorian grauity.Martins Epi. His Epitome. Hay any wor. Martin Iuni. Martin Senior Martin Prote. And now, vpon
better care taken by her Maiesty, that no such libels should
be hereafter printed in England, (at the least without some
daunger to the parties, if it may bee knowne) they haue
founde such fauour, as to procure their chiefe instrument
and old seruant Waldgraue, to be the King of Scots Printer,
from whence their wants in that behalfe shall be fully supplyed.
               For hauing obtained that place,Refor. no enemie. (as hee pretendeth in
Print) they haue published by hundreths, certaine spitefull
and malicious bookes against her Maiesties most honorable
priuy Councell. Also their humble motion to their
LLs. with three or foure other very slanderous Treatises.
And now it seemeth, for feare that any of all their sayd Libels
& rayling Pamphlets, (that haue bin written in her
highnesse time) should perish, (being many of them but
triobolar chartals:) they haue taken vpon them to make a
Register: and to Print them altogether in Scotland, in two
or three volumes: as it appeareth by a part of the sayde Register,
all ready come from thence, and finished: which
containeth in it three or foure and forty of the sayd Libels.
               In all which courses taken, more then heathnish, this is
their drift and especiall end, that hauing by their forged
lies, their poysoned tongues, and their hypocriticall outcries,
procured a generall mislike of her Maiesties reformation,
the present gouernment of the Church, the chiefest
defender thereof, the Lords that fauour it, the Archbishops
and Bishops that haue authoritie in it, & the rest of the
Clergy that doe submit themselues vnto it: they might
come at the last to attaine their purpose, and by fishing in
our troubled waters, (according to the Geneua resolution)
set vp and establish their glorious scepter and kingdome.
               Out of these bookes, because some might otherwise

charge the premises herein with slander of the godly brethren,
I haue thought it very conuenient to lay downe before
you, particularly, some most lewd and wicked speeches,
in maner and order, as in tenne of the next Chapters
following, is specified.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               The speaches of the said pretended reformers, concerning England:
the state, the present reformation, and gouernment of
the Church.
               
                  ENglandPenries Epistle before the humble motion. with an impudent forehead, hath sayd:
I will not come neare the holy one. And as for
the building of his house, I will not so much as
lift vp a finger towardes that worke, nay I will
continue the desolations thereof.Gilby, p. 77 England hateth
them to this day, that faithfullie doe their office. OfEpistle before the demonst. B. 3. all the
nations that haue renounced that whore of Rome, there is none
in the world so farre out of square, as England, in retaining the
Popish Hierarchy.
               We in1. Adm. p. 4 England are so farre off, from hauing a Church rightly
reformed, that as yet we are scarse come to the outward face of
the same. WeSupplica. to the Parliament, pag. 67 are neuer the better for her Maiesties reformation,
seeing the walles of Syon lie euen with the ground (that is,
seeing their discipline, is not established.)
               
               YourSupplica. 62 reformation (as it standeth) will be little better, then
that of the Samaritanes, who feared Iehouah: but worshipped
their owne Gods. MenSupplica. 6
                        •
                     
                   belike doe thinke no more to be required
at their handes, then the rasing of Babell: the diuell as yet contenting
him selfe with Bethel. YourPreface to the demonst. A. 4. gouernment is that, which
giueth leaue to a man to be anie thing, sauing a sound Christian.
Omnia cum liceant, non licet esse bonum.
               
               
                  
We1. Adm. pa. 2. lacke a right gouernement of the Church. InEpist. before the supplica. stead of the
ordinance of God in the gouernment of his Church, the marchandize
of shamelesse Babylon is maintayned. The1. Adm. p. 25. gouernment now
vsed by Archbishops, Bishops, &c. is both Antichristian and diuelish.
Rome isGilbyes dial. 151. come home to our gates. Antichrist1 Adm. p. 33. raigneth amongst
vs. TheSuppl. to the Parlia, 56. established gouernement of the Church, is trayterous
against the maiestie of Iesus Christ: it confirmeth the Popes
supremacie, it is accursed. It isHay any. pa, 5, 6, 8, 12. an vnlawfull, a false, a bastardly
gouernement. In the state of the Church there is nothingMartins Epistle. 33. but
sores and blisters, yea the griefe is euen deadly at the heart: They
Hay any, pa. 13. must needes be not onely traytors to God and his word, but also enemies
vnto her Maiestie, and the land, that defend the established
gouernement of the Church to be lawfull.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               Some of their vndutifull and consistorian speeches concerning her
Maiesty, &c.
               
                  THeMartins Epistle 10, 53. Bishoppes haue long deceaued, and seduced
her Maiestie and her people. DooHay any. page 5. you thinke
our Church gouernement to bee good and lawfull,
because her Maiesty and the state, who
maintaine the reformed religion, alloweth the
same? why? the Lord doth not allow it. In effect: thatIbid pag. 13 15, 23. her Maiesty
and state, (in maintaining the established gouernement, and
reiecting theirs) doo mayme and deforme the body of Christ, and
so doo bid God to battell against them. MinistersRegister, pa. 48. ought not to obey
the Prince, when he prescribeth ceremonies, and a fashion of
apparell. ByGilbyes preface to his dialogue of the souldier of Birwicke. the same authority, that the Queene commandeth
the apparell, now appointed to the Ministers, she may commaund
any piece of Popery, so she name it pollicie. Achaz, of pollicie,
brought such an altar into Ierusalem, as he did see at Damascus,
where he had ouercome the Idolaters and their Idols. But cursed

was his policie, and so are all they that retaine any thing of their
old Idolatrie, (he addeth for example, the candlestickes vppon
the Queenes altar, kneeling at the communion, &c.)Martin Iunior. Thes. 22 Of
necessitie, all Christian magistrates are bound to receiue this gouernement
by Pastors, Doctors, Elders and Deacons, and to abolish
all other Church gouernement.Motion our of Scotland to the Lords. pag. 41. Either her Maiestie
knoweth not what they desire, being abused by the Bishops; or
else shee is negligent of her dutie, and vnthankefull to God.
               
                  Her
                  Gilbie, 66. 68. 142. Motion. p. 31. 32. 33. 
                  Maiestie, is cunninglie resembled, to Ieroboam, Ahab,
Iehoram, Ahaz, Gedeon, Nadab, Saule, Iehu, Asa, and Iehosaphat
in those points, whereby they offended God, and
she is threatned by their examples, in that hauing begon
so well, she doth not proceede to set vp Christes gouernment
throughly.
               
               
                  A question being asked (as the register reporteth) by
the Bishop of London,
                  Regist. p 33. 
                  Anno. 1567. vz. haue we not a godly
Prince? speake:Wil. Why. Tho. Rowlād Ro. Hawkins is shee euill? There are three answers made,
by three seuerall men. The first: what a question is that? the
fruites do shew. The second: No. But the seruants of God are
persecuted vnder her. The thirde: Why? this question the Prophet
answereth in the Psalmes: how can they haue vnder standing
that worke iniquitie, spoiling my people, and that extoll vanitie?
To this obiection: that it isDemonst. of Discipline. pag 75. Dotanisme to challenge
such authoritie ouer Princes, (meaning the authority which
the Eldership challengeth) answere is made: vz It is flatterie
to suffer Princes to do what they list.
               
                  To this
                  T. C. 2 part of his 2 replic. pag. 65. 
                  position: That princes should bee excepted from
Ecclesiasticall Discipline, and namely from excommunication,
they answere thus. That excommunication should not be exercised
against Princes, I vtterlie mislike: To affirme that, It
is but a meere mockerie of the Lord,ibid. pag, 92, and to offer himselfe (meaning
the now L. Archbishop of Canterbury) as a bawd to al maner
of sinnes in Princes. To insinuate, that others being subiect

to this correction, onelie Princes should be exempted, (I feare,)
commeth from a worse cause, then from simple error.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               Some of their rayling speaches against the high court of Parliament;
and all others generally that do maintaine the present
gouernment of the Church of England.
               
                  
                     FOr not admitting the platforme set
downe in the first admonition, &c.
Anno. 14. of her Maiestie: and suffering
the parties, that offered, it
to be punished: Thus they write.
The2. Admonition pag, 3 state sheweth it selfe not vpright,
alledge the Parliament what it will: al
honest men shall finde lacke of equitie; all good consciences shall
condemne that Court. It shalbe easier for Sodom and Gomorrha,
in the day of iudgement, then for such a Court. There is no
other thing to be looked for, then some speedie vengeance to light
vpon the whole land, prouide aswell as the politicke Machiauels
of England thinke they can though God do his worst.
               
                  Likewise of the Parliament, the 29. of her Maiestie (for
their tollerating the Bishops, &c. in stead of their newe
gouernment) it is said. That they shalbe in danger ofSupl. pa, 18, the
terrible masse of Gods wrath, both in this life and in the life to
come: and that if they did not then abrogate (the gouernment
by Bishops,) wellSup pa, 25 they might hope for the fauor and
intertainement of Moses (that is the curse of the law,) but the
fauour and louing countenance of Iesus Christ, they should not see
nor euer enioy.
               
                  Againe of the same Parliament, it is likewise af firmed:
that (if the reformation desired, were not graunted,) they

should betray God, betray the truth, and betray the whole kingdome.
TheyIbid, pag, 7 should declare themselues to be an assembly, wherein
the Lordes cause could not be heard; an assembly, wherein the
felicity of miserable men could not be respected; an assembly, that
wittingly called for the iudgements of God vpon the whole land;
an assembly, wherein trueth, religion, and pietie could beare no
sway: ThereIbid, pag, 43 shalbe not be a man of their seede that shall prosper
be a Parliament-man, or beare rule in England any more.
               
                  Furthermore, a prophesie is passed (but from that spirit,
I trust that tooke vpon him to be,
                  1 Of the kings. 22. spiritus mendax in ore prophetarum) that if they preuailed not in the said Parliament
according to their supplication: thenSup, pag, 75 76. the Nauie of the Spaniards
should come againe, and fight against this land, and waste
it with fire and sworde: that God shal send a terror into the harts
of our valiantest and stoutest men: that one enemie shall chase a
thousand of vs: & that although we had smit the whole hoast, so
as there remayned none but wounded men amongst them, yet shal
euerie man rise vp in his tent, and ouerrunne this land.
               
                  Lastly, this they write generally, of al that do withstād
their desires: ThoseMartin iunior: Thes. 28 kingdomes and states who defend anie
Church gouernement, saue this of Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and
Deacons, are in danger of vtter destruction. Noneibid▪ Th. 46 euer defended
this Hierarchy of Bishops to be lawfull, but Papistes, and such
as were infected with Popish errors. NoMotion out of Scotland. pag, 20 man can open
his mouth (against Presbiteries) but with a shamelesse face, and
seared conscience. TheEpistle to the suppl, A, 3 enemies hereof after the manner of the
wicked, mentioned in Iob, do say vnto the almighty, depart from
vs: because we desire not the knowledge of thy waies: yea and in
their practise they say, who is the almighty, that we should serue
him?
               ThisEpist, to the Sup. A 4, shallbe the portion, of as many, as (to the end) oppose
themselues against the cause of reformation now laboured for:
the heauen shall declare his wickednesse, and the earth shall rise

vp against him: the encrease of his house shall goe away: it shall
flow away in the day of his wrath: his eyes shal see his destruction,
and he shall drinke of the wrath of the Almighty. TheyRegister out of Scotland. are no
better to bee thought of, then enemies to the Gospell of Christ,
to her Maiestie,pa. 71. and people: that seeke to keepe Christes holy
Discipline from amongst vs. ThisEpi before the supl. is that cause, against which
neuer man yet striued and prospered. All the Newgates and Oldgates,Exhort to the BB. B, 1,
yea and all the Tiburns in England, are too little for such
rash, and presumptuous he ades, that will not giue God leaue to
rule: but will take the scepter out of his handes. I doPenry in his Epi. from Scotl. before reformat. no ennemie feare
that many of the forwardest ennemies of reformation, are not
the backwardest frendes, that the king of Spain hath in England
at this day.
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               Some of their Disciplinarian speeches concerning the Lordes of
her Maiesties most honorable priuie Councell.
               
                  OVrEpist. from Scotl. before reformat. no ennemie. A. 3. Councell may truelie be saide, to delight
in the iniury & violent oppression of Gods
saincts & Ministers: therefore the Lord wil
surely visite our Councel, with an heauie
plague.
               Our CouncelIbid. A. 3. & 4 cannot possibly deale truely
in matters of iustice, betweene man and man; insomuch as they
bend all their forces, to bereaue Iesus Christ of his gouernment.
The which vngodly and wicked course as they haue held on, euer
since the beginning of her Maiesties raigne: so at this day they
haue taken great boldnesse, and growne more rebellious, against
the Lord and his cause, then euer they were. In so much as their
honors, in token of thankefulnesse to him that exalted them: dare
now charge the cause of reformation, to be an ennemie vnto our
state and such as fauor the same, to be vnquiet and factious men,

disturbers of the common peace and quietnes, and sowers of sedition
among the subiects.
               They doIbid A, 4▪
                   not ablie detect their impiety against God, and their
enmitie to the kingdome of his Sonne Christ: they offer iniury to
her Maiestie. If her Maiesty giue eare to such Councellors, shee
may haue cause one day to lament. Assuredly, those that are our
ennemies for the profession of the truth, (meaning the pretended
Discipline (cannot bee her Maiesties sure frendes, whatsoeuer
they pretend.
               SathanIbid, A, 4 worketh the defacing of the way of truth: & supporteth
his owne kingdome, by instruments of no meane countenance.
               Be they noble orIbid, B, 1 vnnoble, Councellors or inferior men: I am
so farre from fearing their power, that the more I see them rage,
the greater strength I haue, to stand to the truth, which they raue
against.
               I do warneIbid, B 1. and admonish those Councellors, with whome and
against whome especially, I deale in this Treatise, to repent them
of their great insolencie, whereby they haue beene puffed vp with
Senacharib, to magnifie and oppose themselues; against the cause
and people of the Lord of Hosts: as against the Religion and people,
of some of the Gods of the earth. Otherwise they are to feare
least the Lord, hauing raised vp many of them, out of mean places
into the throne of iustice, meaneth to shew his power and great
name, by making them examples of his fearefull wrath; as he did
Pharaoh, who wrought his owne ouerthrow.
               If men will wonder, thatIbid, B▪ 1, we being so contemptible in the
sight of the world, dare yet be so bold, as to controll great states
and mightie men; and to chalenge them of iniustice, against the
Sonne of God and his members; who will not sticke to brag with
Pilate, that they haue power to crucifie Christ, & to absolue him;
they are to vnderstand, that wee know of no power, but from aboue:
and therefore of no power, that is able to beare out iniustice
and wrong. The hils of the Robbers wee grant to bee high,

and vnassayleable in the sight of an eye of flesh: but we haue learned
of the holy man, to account the habitation of the wicked to be
accursed, euen when hee seemeth to be best rooted: for we know
that the steppes of his strength, shall bee restrayned, and that his
Counsaile shall cast him downe.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               Some of their rayling speeches against the Magistracy in England,
the Iudges, Lawyers, and lawes both ciuill and ecclesiasticall.
               
                  THeEpist. from Scotl. before reformat. no ennemie. A. 3. Magistracy and ministery haue walked hand
in hand, in the contempt of true Religion: and vnto
both, the worde of the Lorde is made a reproch.
               AmongstIbid. A. 3. those who deale in the cause of iustice, there are
found wicked persons: euen wicked lawyers and iudges, (who
seeme to know of no other God, but their owne gaine, (that lay
waite for the blood of Gods saints, as hee that setteth snares; and
marke whether they can heare of any, that go further in the cause
of God, then the corruption of our state doth permit. And if they
finde any such, they know how to wrest against them, a clause of
some statute, contrary not onely to the meaning thereof, but euen
contrary vnto all iustice and equity, yea common reason it selfe,
and the verie groundes of all good lawes and statutes. So that it is
now growen, and hath bene of a long time, a common practice of
these Godlesse men; to make of the statutes, ordained for the maintenance
of Religion and common quietnesse, a pit, wherein to
catch the peaceable of the land.
               The commonibid. A. 3 inditements of the Lords true and faithfull
Ministers, for matters of trifles, as the omission of the surplisse,
churching of women, crosse in Baptisme, &c. doth manifestly
witnesse the iniquitie of these Atheists.
               
                  
TheMaitin Iunior. Thes. 34. lawes, that maintaine the Archbishops and Bishops are
no more to bee accounted of, then the lawes maintaining the
Stewes.
               Theibid. Thes. 38. humaine lawes, that maintaine them, are wicked and
vngodly.
               The lawesFenner against Bridges. p, 5. are made their common sanctuarie, to defend all
our wickednesse.
               Impiety isSup. pa. 59 suffered to beare sway against the maiestie of God:
and that by law and authority.
               Such lawesSup, pa, 24, are retayned in force, as iustle and ouerthrow
the royall prerogatiue of the sonne of God.
               AsEpistle before the demonst. B. 4 great indignity is offered vnto Iesus Christ, in committing
his Church vnto the gouernement of the common law, as
can be, by meane hyrelings unto a king: in committing his
beloued spouse vnto the direction of the mistresse of the Stewes,
and enforcing her to liue after the lawes of a brothel-house.
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               Some of their consistoriall sayings, as touching our Religion,
Communion booke, Sacraments and Ceremonies.
               
                  WE1. Adm. 32, striue for true religion. Asibid, pag, 2. our lackes are,
there can be no right religion.Gilby, p▪ 29. Many religions
are mixed together, of Christ and Antichrist,
of God and the deuill.ibid. pag. 90 Christes Religion
is fondly patched with the Popes; ioyning
fire and water, heauen and hel together.
               The2, Adm, p. 6 truth (in a manner) doth but peepe out from behinde the
screene.
               Their1. Adm, p. 17 prescript forme of seruice, is full of corruption. In
ibid, pag. 24 all the order of their seruice, there is no edification, but confusion.
Theibid. pag, 16 Communion booke is an vnperfect booke, culled and
picked out of that popish dung hill, the portuise and masse-booke:

and many of the contents therein be such, as are against the word
of God. And
                  Martin senior. C. 2. Martin senior calleth it our sterue-vs Booke.
               The2 Admon. pag. 42. Sacraments are wickedlie mangled and prophaned.
TheyGilby. pag. 2 eate not the Lords supper but play a pageant of their own,
to blinde the people: and keepe them still in superstition: to make
the seely soules beleeue that they haue an English masse: and so
put no difference betwixt trueth and falsehoode, betwixt Christ
and An
                     •
                  ichrist, betwixt God and the deuill.1 Admon. pag. 21. The publike baptisme
is full of childish and superstitious toyes.
               
                  And of our orders, garments, and ceremonies. They
areGilby. p, 40. carnall, beggerly: Antichristian pompes, rites, lawes, and
traditions: popish fooleries, Romish reliques, & rags of Antichrist
dregs and remnants of transformed Poperie:pag. 41. Pharisaicall outward
faces and vizardes: remnants of Romish Antichrist: of superstition,Pag. 1. pag. 5. pag. 12. pag. 14. pag. 91. pag. 96. pag 95 pag. 150 and Idolatrie: Knowne liueries of Antichrist: accursed
leauen of the blasphemous Popish Priesthoode: cursed patches
of Poperie and Idolatrie, they are worse then Lowsie: for they are
sib be to the sarke of Hercules, that made him teare his owne
bowels asunder.
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               How they charge the present gouernment with persecution.
               
                  THere2. Admon. pag. 59 is a persecution of poore Christians, &
the professors of the Gospell suffred, not far vnlike
to the six articles. Godsibid. cause is troden
vnder foote, and the benefite of his Church is
little regarded.
               
                  1 Adm. p. 2 Poore men haue been miserably handled, with reuilings, depriuations,
imprisonments, bannishments, and such like extremities.
GodlyPractise of Prelates. D. 8 Ministers haue beene brought before the barres
of iustice: they haue beene arraigned amongst fellons and theeues:
they haue been imprisoned to the vttermost and defaced: they are

reproched, shaken vp, threatened; many are depriued: they are
examined by an inquisition, much like tha: of Spaine. O lamentable
case, O heynous impietie.
               
                  ibid B. 2 Shal they be thus marked with the blacke cole of reproach &
villanie? O inhumaine and more then barbarous impietie.
               BesidesMart protest. 13. whorish impudencie, halter, axe, bandes, scourging,
and racking, our Bishops haue nothing to defend themselues withall.
               TheVdal. dialogue. F, 1 Clinke, Gatehouse, White-Lion, and the Fleete, are their
onelie arguments.
               IfExhorta, to BB. A. 1 I say, Ieremie, Ezechiel, Osee, Micheas, and Zacharie, were
aliue: they would be carried to the Marshall-sea; the White-lyon,
the Kings-bench, the Gate-house, and other Prisons, yea to New-gate.
               In2, Admon. pag. 1. & 2. effect, as Caine persecuted Abell: Esau, Iacob: the Patriarches,
their brother Ioseph, the Iewes, Moses: the Priests Ieremie,
Osea, Amazia and Christ: euen so in these dayes, the Preachers
are slandred and persecuted by such, as would seeme pillars
of true religion. If this persecutionpag. 59. be not prouided for, it is the
case of many a thousand in England, greate trobles will come of
it.
               TheDialog that came from Throg, D. 2 land is sore troubled: there is no place nor being,Martin. protest. pag. 5 for a
faithfull Minister of the word. Our bloud crieth for vengeance
against the Bishops.
               ISnape to his father, 1590. am made like to our Sauiour Christ who hath troden this
path, in that (as he sayth) hee is troubled not for euiil, but for
good, It faresWight before he was imprisoned to a frend. with vs as with prisoners in Poperie: God sende
vs their comfort, MnistersLord in his papers. are in worse sort suppressed now,
then they were by the Papists in Queene Maries time. This
crosseFen of Lords imprisonmēt. is common, not onelie with him, but with all that will liue
godly in Christ. The cause is holy: and his sufferinges acceptable.
Ik perceiue the Lyon roareth, but cannot bite, further then the
Lord shall permit.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XI.
               Some of their Consistorian speeches of the Clergie of England, assembled,
as occasion hath required, in the Conuocation house.
               
                  THeySup. pa. 47, are wolues. It is a Synagogue. Their
onely endeuour is,Pag. 48, how to preuent Christ,
from bearing rule in the Church,pag 49. by his
own lawes.pag. 53 They are knowne to bee ennemies
vnto all sinceritie. The whole conuocation
house, are (in iudgement) contrarie
to our Sauiour Christ, they are intollerable
oppugners of Gods glory: and vtter ennemies vnto the
liberties of his Church. As long as that house standeth, (as at
this day it doth) there can be no hope at al, that either Gods heauenlie
trueth; should haue free passage, or the Church her libertie,
in this kingdom.pag, 55. They haue seduced and deceiued the ciuil state,
& people, in bearing them in hand, that al is wel in the Church.
               
                  They are termed, (by one of the
                  Mart, Epist 
                  Captaines of this
crue) right puissant, poisoned, persecuting, and terrible Priests:
Clergie maisters of the confocation house: the holie league of subscription:
the crue of monstrous and vngodlie wretches: that
mingle heauen and earth together: horned maisters of the conspiration
house: an Antichristian swinish rabble: ennemies of
the Gospell: most couetous, wretched and Popish Priests, the Conuocation
house of Diuels BelzabubDialogue that came from Throgmort. D. 4 of Canterbury, the chiefe of
the Diuels.
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               Some of their presbiterial speeches of the Bishops of England professing
the Gospell.
               
                  THeHay any. p, 15, 34, &c. Bishops are the greatest and most pestilent ennemies
that now our state hath, & are like to be the ruine of her

Maiestie,pag. 20. and the whole state: Archbishops and Bishops are vnlawfull,
vnnaturall, false, and bastardlie gouernours of the
Church,pag. 21 and the ordinances of the Diuel: pettie Popes: pettie Antichristes:Idid, 28.
like incarnat Diuels: they are Bishops of the Diuell:
BishopsMartins Epist. 37. are cogging and coosening knaues. They will
lie like dogs. OurEpist, pag, 6 Bishops are proud, popish, presumptuous,
prophane, paltrie, pestilent, pernicious prelates, & vsurpers: Impudent,
shamelesse,pag. 33. and waynescot faced Bishops, like beastes. They
are in a premunire. They ought not to bee maintayned, by the
authority of the ciuill Magistrate,pag. 21 pag. 4 in any common wealth.
TheyVdals dialogue. c. 1 are, in respect of their places, ennemies of God. The
Martins protest. 27. worst Puritane is an honester man, then the best Lord Bishop
in Christendome.
               TheirMartins. protest, pag. 4. pag, 8. pag. 12 pag, 21 pag, 21 crueltie is without measure. They are butchers and
horseleeches: it is the portion of their inheritance. Their bloudthirstie
attempts. These dragons. Their tirannie and bloudthirstie
proceedings are inexcusable. In effect, that they conspire to
pull the Crowne from her Maiesties head.
               BishopsVdals dialogue. D, 2 callings are meere Antichristian. TheMartin sen. B. 4. c. 1 Bishops are
robbers, Wolues, simoniacks, persecutors, sowers of sedition and
discontentednes betweene her Maiesties subiectes. They haue incurred
the statute of premunire: they are (ipso facto) depriuable.
Though they bee in the Church; yet are they none of the
Church. The true Church of God ought to haue no more to doe
with them, and the Synagogue, (namely their Antichristian
Courts) them with the Synagogue of Sathan. BeEpist to the epitom. packing Bishops:
you striue in vaine, you are laid open already. Friers and Monkes
were not so bad.
               OfThe Dialog that came from Throg. mort, D. 3 all the Bishops that euer were in the See of the Archbishop
of Canterburie, there was neuer any did so much hurt to the
Church of God as hee hath done. No Bishop that euer had such
an aspiring and ambitious minde as hee, no not Cardinall Wolsey.
None so proud as he: No not Stephen Gardiner of Winchester.

None so tirannicall as he: no not Bonner. He sitsIbid, c. 4. vpon
his cogging stoole, which may truelie be called, the chaire of pestilence.
His mouth is full of cursing against God and his Saintes.
His feete are swift to shed bloud▪ there is none of Gods children,Mart, sen. C. 1
but had as leeue see a Serpent, as meete him. It grieueth them
to see so wicked an ennemie of God and his Church. BelsebubMart sen. of
Canterbury. The Canterburie Caiphas: Esau. a monstrous
Antichristian Pope: a most bloudie oppressor of Gods Saintes:
a very Antichristian beast: a most vile and cursed tyrant. InEpistle out of Scotl. before reforma. no ennemie.
respect of his Antichristian prelacie ouer Gods Church, and for
the notable hatred, which he hath euer bewrayed towardes the
Lord and his truth, I thinke him one of the dishonorablest creatures
vnder heauen.
               
                  And againe of the Bishops, but especially of the Lord
Archbishop. InPractise of Prelates. C. 6. his behauiour, wrath, anger, reproch, and
disdaine (as in a wood, so manie Lions, Beares, Tigers, and cruell
beastes) were seene to range, and in this more sauage, that
whereas they by time and vsage may be tamed and appeased, this
man neuer. ItSupp. 37. would be knowen, whether they haue some secret
meaning, if oportunitie would serue to aspire vnto the
Crowne.
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               Some of their vncharitable wordes against all the Clergie in
England, generally that mislike their designements.
               
                  WE1, Adm. p. 2 lacke in England a right ministery of
God. TheIbid, pag. 4. Ministers are neither prooued, elected,
called, nor ordeyned according to
Gods word. I. B. is to beMar Iu, C, 2 inuested into the
place of a naturall foole, after a solemne
manner, according to the booke of ordayning
Bishops and Priests.
               
                  
TheExhort. to BB
                        •
                     . B. 2. Clergie is indicted, as the followers of Antichrist, and
that their Ministerie is from the Pope. LittleGilby. p 50 Ibid. pag, 3, or nothing is
required of our English Priests; but to say the Catechisme, and to
weare a cap, coap, and tippet: Antichrists rags shall make him a
Priest, be he neuer such a dolt or a villaine.
               TheGil, p. 11
                        •
                     . most part of our Ministers, are either Popish Priests,
or Monkes, or Fryers, or ale-house haunters, or boyes and lads,
dronkardes and dolts: that wil weare a fooles hood, for liuing sake:
They are Hogges, Dogges, Wolues, Foxes, Simoniakes, Vsurers:
procters of Antichrists inuentions: Popish chapmen, halting
Newtrals.pag. 53. pag. 32, pag. 89, pag. 112, They seeke nothing, but like greedy dogges, how to fill
their paunches.
               Our supposed Ministers are a multitude of desperate and forelorne
Atheists,Epist. from Scotl. before reformat. no ennemie. A. 3. Hier. lib. 2. con Rufin. a cursed, vncircumcised, and murthering generation,
you shall finde amongst this crue nothing else, but a troope
of bloudy soule-murtherers, and sacrilegious Church robbers. Bene
quod malitia non habet tantas vires, quantos conatus.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               Their especiall drift in their saide railing speeches, as outragiously
published, as if they were meere Iesuites, and peraduenture
to as dangerous a purpose.
               
                  BY the former so wicked and slaunderous
speeches, contayned in the tē
last Chapters, you see how the brotherhood
endeuoreth with the
multitude, (as I saide) not onely
the disgrace of our Church and
Clergiemen, but likewise how bold
they are with her most excellent Maiesty: the high Court
of Parliament, the Lords of her priuy Councel: the Iudges
lawyers, lawes, and all thinges besides, that do giue any

impediment vnto their deuises and complots.
               
                  Harding, Dorman, Stapleton, Sanders, Allen, Gregorie
Martin, and diuers other fugitiues and Traytors, to make
a more easie way, for the bringing in againe of popery:
haue taken the like course in her Highnesse time: meaning
principally, by such vile slaunders, to withdraw her
Highnesse subiects, from their dutifull approbation of the
present estate and reformation of Religion.
               
                  Goodman, Wittingham, Gilby, the author of the booke
of obedience, with the rest of the Geneua complices in
Queene Maries dayes, practised the very same pollicie:
when (as you haue heard) according to the Allobrogicall
resolution, they vrged all states, by degrees, rather to take
armes, and to reforme Religion themselues by force, then
to suffer such Idolatrie and superstition to remaine in the
land.
               But in these more political then Christian practises, as
I said, that our English Disciplinarians of these dayes, haue
farre exceeded the Scottish Ministers: so may it bee truely
affirmed of them, that al the popish Traitors, that hitherto
haue written, and all the said Geneuians that then liued,
for malitious and spitefull tauntes, for rayling and bitter
tearmes, for disdaineful and contemptuous speeches, did
not come neere them.
               Besides, it is especially to be obserued, that in their own
opinions, they haue by these vngodly meanes so preuayled
with the multitude, as that now they begin to vaunt
and bragge of their good successe▪ already therein attayned.
One of them sendeth vs word from Scotland, that
such as haue withstood their pretended Church gouernment,The Motion. pag. 40. 42,
                  are made already in England to bee despised and vile before
all the people: that a poore simple Minister of their &c. is
hearde with more reuerence, and resorted vnto with more diligence,

then one of ours; though he haue the great bell rong, and
men to helpe him vp into the pulpit: that this was wrought by a
contemptible, and very base and straunge meanes, (meaning
Martin and his sonnes libels, &c.) not once dreamed off by a
thousand of Gods saintes: and that when their creastes, (meaning
the Bishops) were set vp, and they began to say all is
ours; then their presumption was dashed, daunted, and taken
downe.
               
               They might as well haue signified vnto vs, in what
tearmes and reputation, her Maiestie, her Parliaments, her
Lords, her Iudges, and her lawes, do stand and hold with
the people. In dealing as they haue done, by their particular
supplications and motions vnto her Highnes, and vnto
their LLs. their intents to that purpose, when the time
shall serue (if in the meane while they be not preuented)
are not ablie disclosed. For otherwise, it might haue sufficed
them, to haue deliuered their discontentments, in priuate
manner, by writing, both to her Maiestie, their LLs
                  ▪
and other in authority: thereby to haue discharged their
consciences without their publishing of them in Printe
to the world, except their purpose had likewise beene, by
that lewd meanes, to haue brought them all into contēpt,
as well as the Bishops. What priuate man, if his friend
should write a letter vnto him, and lay open in the same,
(eyther truely or falsely) many great crimes to his charge:
& afterward should by Printing or any other waies publish
it: could otherwise account of his dealing therein,
but that he meant to make him thereby odious to the
world, or at the least to be of no great account, or estimation.
               Queene Marie was of nature & disposition, very mild
and pitifull; and yet, because shee suffered such crueltie &
superstition to be practised & maintained in her days, you

haue heard by the consistorian propositions (before mentioned)
what was resolued by Goodman, Whittingham, Gilby,
& the rest of the Geneuians against her, concerning her
deposition, &c. Which is a matter that would be wel considered-of,
and in time prouided-for accordingly: considering
that these our home-bred Sicophantes, men of the
Geneua mould, as proud and presumptuous as any that euerliued,
do charge the present state, vnder her Maiestie,
(as before it is noted) with such great impietie, corruption,
idolatrie, superstition, and barbarous persecution:
Which may touch her highnesse, as neerely (by their
doctrine) for maintayning the present state, as Queene
Marie was, for defending of Poperie.
               Well the conclusion of this Booke is this, vz: that seeing
our English consistorians do labour more vehemently, or at
the least as egerly, per fas & nefas, by slaunder, reproch, and
malitious practises, to discredit all those, that withstand
them, in their desires, for the Geneua-like discipline: as any
other Scottish Ministers, Papistes, or old Geneuians, haue laboured
to discredit those, that maintayned al kind of Popery,
Idolatry, and superstition, it is to be feared, least they
proceede in the Geneua Resolution, as their fellowes (whō
they do imitate in Scotland, or rather whom they do excell)
haue done before them.
               The end of the second Booke.
            
         
         
            
            THE THIRD BOOKE OF
DISCIPLINARY GROVNDES
and Practises.
            
               CHAP I.
               The practises of certaine English Reformers for Discipline, from
the yeare, 1560. vntill the yeare, 1572.
               
                  AS in Scotland, when they could not obtaine
their desires, for the full establishing
of their booke of Discipline,
by lawfull authority; they procured
such priuate subscription therunto,
as they were able, and so fell
themselues to the practise of it (as it
hath beene said in the sixt chapter of the first Booke: euen
so haue our men in England, of the same consort and faction,
proceeded in effect, vpon the like occasion, for their
new platforme: but yet in a different manner.
               For the first ten or eleuen yeares of her Maiesties raign,
through the peeuish frowardnes, the out-cries and exclamations
of those that came home from Geneua, against the
garments prescribed to Ministers, and other such like matters;
no man (of any experience) is ignorant, what great
contention and strife was raysed: insomuch as their sectaries
deuided themselues from their ordinary congregations,

and meeting together in priuate houses, in woods, &
fields, had and kept there, their disorderly and vnlawfull
conuenticles.
               These kinds of assemblies (notwithstanding the inconuenience
and absurdnes of them in a Church reformed,)
M. Cartwright (within a while after) tooke vppon him (in
sort) to defend,
                     T. C. 
                        •
                     . reply. page 38. saying: that the name of conuenticles, was too
light and contemptuous for them.
               
               About the twelfth yeare of her highnesse said gouernment,
these malecontents, growing weary of the foresaide
dissentions, and being of restlesse dispositions, began to stir
vp new quarrels, concerning the Geneua Discipline: being
the matter indeede which they still aymed at, in all their
former proceedings. Herevpon, (the 14. of her Maiesty)
two admonitions were framed, and exhibited to the high
Court of Parliament. The first contayned their pretended
griefes, with a declaration (forsooth) of the onely way to
reforme them: vz. by admitting of that platforme, which
was there described.
               This admonition, finding small entertainement, (the
authors or chief preferrers thereof being imprisoned) out
commeth the second admonition, towardes the end of the
same Parliament: with great lightning and thunder, as
though heauen and earth shoulde haue met together, because
of the little regard which was had before, to the former
admonition. In this second admonition, the first is wholly
iustified: the Parliament (as it hath beene shewed) is
mightily challenged: great wordes are vsed, and in plaine
tearmes, it is there affirmed: That if they of that assembly
woulde not then followe the aduise of the first admonition,
they would surely themselues be their owne caruers. The
Church (say they) may and must keepe God his orders:
                  2. Admonition. pa. 60. 61. 
                  and surely
this is only God his order, (vz. the sayd platforme) & ought

to bee vsed in his Church, so that in conscience wee are forced to
speake for it, and to vse it.
               
               Whereupon, presently after the sayd Parliament, (vz.
the twentieth of Nouember, 1572.) there was a Presbytery
erected at Wandesworth in Surrey (as it appeareth by a
bill endorsed with Master Fields hande, thus: the order of
Wandesworth.) In which order the Elders names, eleuen of
them, are set downe: the manner of their election is declared:
the approuers of them, (one Smith of Micham, and
Crane of Roughampton) are mentioned: their offices and
certaine generall rules, (then giuen vnto them to bee obserued)
were likewise agreed vpon, and described.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               The secrete meetinges for Discipline, and the matters handled in
them here in England from 1572 till 1583.
               
                  HOwe they grew to be so farre gone at
Wandesworth, that I find not: they of
London, at that time, were nothing so
forward. And yet, as it appeareth by
the lawfull deposition and othe of
one,Tho. Ed. both before the Commiss, and in the Starre Chamber. (then of that faction, but now
a very honest man, a Batcheller of
Diuinity, and an auncient Preacher) they had then their
meetings of Ministers, tearmed brethren, in priuate houses
in London: as namely of Field, Wilcox, Standen, Iackson,
Bonham, Seinctloe, Crane, and Edmondes, which meetinges
were called conferences, according to the plot in the first
and second admonitions mentioned.
               In these London-meetings, at the first, little was debated,
but against subscription, the attyre, and booke of common prayer.
Marry after (saith he) that Charke, Trauers, Barber, Gardiner,

Cheston, and lastly Crooke and Egerton, ioyned themselues into
that brotherhood, then the handling of the Discipline began to be
rise: then many motions were made, and conclusions were set
downe. As for example.
               
               That forasmuch, as diuers bookes had beene written, and sundry
petitions exhibited to her Maiesty, the Parliament, their LLs,
and yet to little purpose: therefore euery man, should labour, by all
the meanes he could, to bring into the Church, the said reformation
themselues.
               That the present gouernement of the Church, by Archbishops
& Bishops, was Antichristian: & that the only Discipline & gouernment
of Christ, (as they termed it,) vz. by Pastors, Doctors,
Elders, and Deacons, should be established in place of the other.
               That for the better bringing in of the said forme of Discipline,
they should not onely, (aswell publikely as priuately) teach it, but
by little and little, as much as possibly they might, draw the same
into practise, though they concealed the names, either of Presbytery,
Elder, or Deacon, making little account of the name for the
time, so that their offices might be secretly established.
               
                  There was an assembly of three-score Ministers, appointed
out of Essex, Cambridge-shiere, and Norfolke, to meete the eighth
of May,Pig. to Field. 16. of May, 158
                        •
                     . 1582. at Cockefield, (Maister Knewstubs towne) there to
conferre of the common booke, what might be tollerated, & what
necessarily to be refused in euery point of it: apparel, matter, forme,
dayes, fastings, iniunctions, &c.
               
                  Of this meeting it is thus reported. Our meeting was appointed
to be kept very secretely, and to be made knowne to none,
&c. That this assembly was also kept accordingly, it appeareth
by these words. Concerning the meeting, I hope all things
were so proceeded in, as your self would like of: aswell for reuerence
to other brethren, as for other matters. I suppose before this time,
some of the company, haue told you by word: for that was permitted
vnto you.
               
                  
                  Another meeting was also appointed to be helde, that
yeare,
                  Pig. to Field. ibid. 
                  at the Commencement in Cambridge, as is plaine by
these wordes. Concerning the Commencement, I like well your
motion: desiring it might so come to passe: and that it be procured,
to be as generall as might be: which may easily be brought to passe,
if you at London, shall so thinke well of it, and we here may vnderstand
your minde: we will (I trust) as we can, further it. M. Allen
liketh well of the matter.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               A forme or booke of Discipline is drawen, and a resolution is agreed
vpon, how far they might proceede for the practise of it,
without breaking the peace of our Church.
               
                  WHilest the brethren in the Countrey,
were comming thus fast on forward (as
you haue heard in the ende of the former
Chapter:) you must not thinke
that the Rabbies in London were in the
mean time idle. Hitherto it should
seeme, that in all their former proceedings, they had relied
chiefly, vpon the first admonition and Cartwrights booke: as
hauing had no particular and seuerall platforme, that was
generally allowed of amongst them, for the Church of
England. But now at the length, (about the yeare, 1583.)
the forme of Discipline (which is lately come to light) was
compiled: and thereupon an assembly or Councell being
helde (as I thinke at London, or at Cambridge) certaine decrees
were made, concerning the establishing and the practise
thereof. In which decrees, mention is made of a collection;
concluded vpon for the Scottish Ministers, fugitiues
here in England, 1583. (which sheweth the time
when they were made:) & order is likewise taken for the

putting in vse of the Synodicall Discipline; which also prooueth
the age of that booke.
               The decrees themselues are extant to bee seene, vnder
Maister Wights hande; a man of that brotherhood. But it
may not be omitted, that you must thinke; how the godly
brethren in all these and such other their zealous courses,
had neuer any meaning to disturbe the present state established.
And thereupon (forsooth) in this conspiracy or
councell mentioned, (like good and quiet spirited men)
they had an especiall care, that the peace of the Church
might not be broken, by any order or decree of theirs. So
as then the question amongst them was, (seeing the Discipline
must needs vp) how farre they might proceede in
the establishing and practise of it, keeping notwithstanding
the peace of the Church, established already by her Maiesty.
And it was ouerruled accordingly, as it followeth in
the decrees themselues, faithfully translated, worde for
word, out of their owne Latin coppy.
               The title thereof, vz.
               These be the thinges, that (doo seeme) may well stande with the
peace of the Church.
               
               
                  The Decrees.
                  Let no man (though he be an Vniuersity man) offer himself
to the Ministery, nor let any man take vpon him an vncertaine
and vague Ministery, though it be offered vnto him. But such
as bee called to the Ministery by some certaine Church, let them
impart it vnto that Classis or conference, (wherof themselues
are,) or else vnto some greater Church assembly: and if such
shall be found fit by them, then let them bee commended, by their
letters vnto the Bishop, that they may bee ordayned Ministers
by him.
                  Those ceremonies in the Booke of common prayer, which
being taken from Popery, are in controuersie, doo seeme, that they

ought to bee omitted and giuen ouer, if it may bee done without
danger, of being put from the Ministery. But if there be any imminent
danger to be depriued, then this matter must bee communicated
with the Classis, in which that Church is: that by the
iudgement thereof, it may be determined, what ought to be done.
                  If subscription to the articles of Religion, and to the booke
of common Prayer, shall be againe vrged: it is thought, that
the booke of articles, may be subscribed vnto, according to the
statute 13. Eliz. that is, vnto such of them onely, as containe the
summe of Christian faith, and doctrine of the Sacraments. But for
many waighty causes, neither the rest of the articles in that booke,
nor the booke of common prayer, may be allowed: no, though
a man should be depriued of his Ministery for it.
                  It seemeth, that Churchwardens and Collectors for the
poore, might thus be turned into Elders and into Deacons.
                  
                  When they are to be chosen, let the Church haue warning fifteene
dayes before, of the time of election, and of the ordinance of
the Realme: but especially of Christs ordinance, touching appointing
of watchmen and ouerseers in his Church: who are to foresee,
that none offence or scandall doo arise in the Church: and if any
shall happen, that by them it may be duely abolished.
                  And touching Deacons of both sorts (vz. men and women)
the Church shall be monished, what is required by the Apostle:
and that they are not to choose men, of custome and of course, or
for their riches, but for their faith, zeale, and integrity: and that
the Church is to pray, (in the meane time) to be so directed, that
they make choise, of men that be meete.
                  Let the names of such as are so chosen, be published, the next
Lords day: and after that, their dueties to the Church, and the
Churches towards them, shall be declared: then let them be receiued
vnto the Ministery, to which they are chosen, with the generall
prayers of the whole Church.
                  The Brethren are to be requested, to ordaine a distribution of

all Churches, according to these rules, (in that behalfe) that are
set downe in the Sinodicall Discipline, touching Classicall,
Prouinciall, Comitiall or of Commencements, and assemblies
for the whole kingdome.
                  
                  The Classes are to be required, to kepe acts of memorable matters:
which they shall see deliuered to the Comitiall assembly
that frō thence they may be broght by the prouincial assembly.
                  
                  Also, they are to deale earnestly with patrones, to present fit
men: whensoeuer any Church is fallen voide in that Classis.
                  
                  The Comitiall assemblies are to bee monished, to make collections
for reliefe of the poore and of schollers: but especially for
reliefe of such Ministers here, as are put out, for not subscribing to
the Articles, tendred by the Bishoppes: also for reliefe of Scottish
Ministers and others, and for other profitable and necessary vses.
                  All the prouinciall Synodes, must continually, afore hand,
foresee in due time, to appoint the keeping of their next prouinciall
Synodes: and for the sending of chosen persons, with certaine
instructions, vnto the Nationall Synode to be holden:
whensoeuer the Parliament for the kingdome shall be called, and
at some certaine set time euere yeare.
                  Hitherto the Decrees of this graue Councell, whereby it
seemeth to me, that when they resolued, they might proceede
thus farre, and keepe (notwithstanding) the peace
of the Church of England established: they opposed (in
that resolution) the worde peace, to warre: as though they
should haue agreed, how far they might runne on in this
race, without vrging of their followers, to force & armes.
For otherwise, how could any sober men, so much as once
haue imagined, that they might, in this sort, ouerthrow (in
effect) the present gouernement, and establish their owne
deuises, and yet neuer breake the peace of the Church?
But I will not presse this point. It is more agreeable to my
purpose to pursue the chase.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. IIII.
               About the yeare, 1583. they fell againe to the practise of their
Discipline, and of a Consistorian question.
               
                  
                     TO make good lawes, and not see them executed,
is but labour lost. And therefore
it should seeme, that these wise Law-makers,
were presently after, as carefull to
put the sayde orders in practise, as they
were before to resolue vpon them: as it may appeare by a
letter, written to Master Field from Antwerpe, the 25. of
Iune, 1583. by one Cholmeley, in answere of a former Letter,
sent vnto him from the said Field. For thus Cholmeley writeth:
Laetor intùs & in corde, de meliori successu rerum vestrarum,
quòd cum de conuentibus vestris audiam, tum de Disciplinae
Ecclesiasticae formali 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   multò lubentissimè. Dicam quòd
verum est, serò nimis incepistis: quisquis iam tandem vel incipere
recusauerit, vel a tam praeclaro incepto desistat, peccatum suum
feret: paenitendumest de priori lentitudine. I am glad with all my
heart, for the better successe of your affaires, not onely in that I
heare of your assemblies, but most willingly of all, in respect of your
effectuall practising of the Ecclesiasticall Discipline. I will tell you
that which is true, you haue begun this course too too late. Whosoeuer
shall now, either refuse to begin, or shall desist from so notable
an enterprise, he shall beare his owne sin. You ought to repent you
for your former slownes. And afterward, thus out of the same
Letter,
                  Philip. 1. 
                  to incourage Maister Field and the brethren. In
nulla re terreamini ab ijs quise opponunt, quod illis quidem est exitij
indicium, vobis autem salutis, idque a Deo. In nothing feare
your aduersaries, which is to them a token of perdition, but to you
of saluation, and that from God.
               In Iuly the next yeare,Gelibrand to Field. vz. 1584. some of the Scottish Ministers

afore spoken of, went to the Act in Oxford: where
Maister Gelibrand with his brethren, gaue them great entertainement.
At that time, there was a notable question
propounded amongst their fauourers there, by the sayde
Ministers, as is manifest by these wordes. Here haue beene a
good company of godly brethren this Act. Maister Fen, Wilcox,
Axton: the Scottish ministers, and wee haue had some meeting
and conference, to our great comfort that are here. One point
(which then was moued) I would wish to be throughly debated
among you and them, concerning the proceeding of the Minister
in his duety, without the assistance or tarrying for the Magistrate,
&c.
               
               What was resolued amongst the brethren of London,
about this matter at that time, I know not. Marry this I
finde, that presently thereupon, they grewe more violent,
and prepared themselues to proceede more resolutely, in
the challenging of their Discipline, as it is plaine by the
dealing both of them, and of their fauourers, that yeare in
Nouember and December after, at the Parliament, 27. of her
Maiesty.
               And besides, let the sayd Maister Gelibrands words, in a
Letter to Field, dated the 12. of Ianuary after, vz. 1584. bee
considered. For (as it seemeth to me) they either tend to
sedition, or to the admitting, in Oxford, of the foresayd Decrees
or Discipline. Sure I am, that they can hardly (for
ought I see) receiue any good construction. Thus he writeth
               I haue already entred into the matters, whereof you write, and
dealt with three or foure of seuerall Colleges, concerning those
among whom they liue. I finde, that men are very dangerous in
this point generally fauoring reformation: but when it commeth
to the particular point, some haue not yet considered of these
things, for which others in the Church are so much troubled: others

are afraid to testifie any thing with their hands, least it breed
danger before the time. And after: many fauour the cause of reformation,
but they are not Ministers, but young students, of whome
there is good hope, if it be not cut off by violent dealing before the
time. As I heare by you▪ so I meane to goe forward, where there is
any hope, and to learne the number, and to certifie you thereof.
               Furthermore, at the time of the Parliament last mentioned,
I finde, that there was a nationall Synode helde likewise
in London by these brethren: according to their former decisions
and Synodicall Discipline. This appeareth by three
letters. The first was, from eleuen ministers of Essex, to Field:
wherin they desire to be certified,
                  26. Ia. 1584. 
                  whether the brethren meant
to be exercised, in prayer and fasting, and vpon what day. The
seconde was, from nine of the saide Ministers, to Fielde and
Charke:2. Febru. 1584. wherein they writ thus: We haue elected two Godly
and faithfull brethren, Maister Wright and Maister Gifford,
to ioyne with you in that businesse.
                  29. Nouemb. 1584. The third was, from Gelibrand,
to Field: Wherein he excuseth himselfe of a great ouersight,
in these words. Touching my departure from that holy
assembly without leaue, &c. I craue pardon, both of you & them,
&c. And thus (sayth he) commending this holy cause to the Lord
himselfe, and your godly counsaile to the President thereof, I take
my leaue.
               
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               Their Booke of Discipline is reuiewed: it was after sent abroad about,
1587. it was put in practise, in Northamptonshire and
many other places.
               
                  NOtwithstanding that the booke of Discipline
was abroad, as it hath beene noted, (in the third
chapter,) and that the brethren had framed
themselues (as they might) vnto the rules thereof: yet

there were found, some imperfections in it: which in the
Synode, mentioned in the former chapter, (as I take it) were
referred to Maister Trauers, to bee corrected and ordered
by him, as his leysure will permitte. Which appeareth by
a letter of Maister Fields to Maister Trauers, in these words.
               Concerning our other busines: I would wish, that the Discipline
were read ouer with as much speed as could be,Field to Trauers. 3. Iulie. 1585. and that some good
directions were giuen, for the brethren abroad, who are earnest to
enter some good course, for the furtherance of the L: cause. And
after in the same place: I finde many abroade, very willing to
ioyne with the best: to put in practise that which shall bee agreed
vpon, by the brethren. If it might please the brethren therefore,
that those or the like instructions (which wee had) with a perfect
coppie of the Discipline, might be sent, I would wholly imploy my
selfe in that seruice. Another also vpon the longer stay thereof.
I pray you hasten the forme of Discipline and send it. And the
same man againe:
                  Gelibrand to Field. 9. of Nouem. 1585 I pray you remember the forme of Discipline,
which Master Trauers promised to make perfect, and send it me
when it is finished.Gelibrand to Field, 30. Ianuarie. We will put it in practise, and trie mens minds
therein, as we may.
               
                  According to these requests, the draught of Discipline
was at the last finished: and then sent abroade, to be approued
generally by all the brotherhood, as may thus appear:
The discipline we haue receiued, and we giue you and the brethren
hartie thanks for it.Gelibrand to Field. As yet we are not resolued in all points of it:
hauing had but small time to peruse it, nor the commoditie of often
meeting about it. But we haue taken order for our monthly assembly,
and after our owne consents yeelded vnto it, for associating
other into our companie,Sandes to Field 20. Iune 1587. whom we shall thinke approued. And an
other. We hartilie giue God thanks (sayth one) for the godly &
most Christian paines of the brethren, in the trauaile of the Discipline:
which is come to our hands to be considered-of Gelibrands
letter of his receit of the booke of Discipline, was written

in the name of the brethren in Oxford. At which time
there was another Synode held in London: whither (sayth
the letter) Maister West and Maister Browne were sent from
Oxford: to whom they referred the estate of their Church, to be related:
and by whom they desired to vnderstand, directions from
the Synode, how they might deale afterwardes in those matters.
               Within a while after,This appeareth vnder M. Wights hand. vz. 1587. (as I suppose,) there was
in like sort an assemblie or Synode helde of the Cambridgeshire
brotherhood: accompanied peraduenture with some of other
shires. About which time also, vpon the new edition
of the foresayd booke, the further practise of the Discipline
mentioned by Cholmeley, 1583. (as is before shewed) began
to spread it selfe more freely, into the most parts of the
Realme: but especially (for ought I doo yet vnderstand) it
was most friendly intertained, amongst the ministers of
Northamptonshire, as it appeareth in recorde by some of
their owne depositions, 16. of May, 1590. in these wordes
following. About two yeares and a halfe, since the whole shire
was diuided into three Classes.
                  
                     M. Iohnson. So in effect M. Litleton M. Sharpe. 1. The Classis of Northamptonshire,
consisting of these Ministers: Maister Snape, Maister Penrie,
Maister Sibthorpe, Maister Edwards, Maister Littleton,
Maister Bradshaw, Maister Larke, Maister Fleshware, Maister
Spicer, &c. 2. The Classis of Dauentrie side, consisting of these:
Maister Barebon, Maister Rogers, Maister King, Maister Smart,
Maister Sharpe, Maister Prowdloe, Maister Elliston, &c.
3. The Classis of Kettring side: consisting of these: Master Stone,
Maister Williamson, Maister Fawsbrooke, Maister Patinson,
Maister Massey▪ &c.
               
               
                  This deuise (saith Maister Iohnson) is commonly receiued in
most
                  
                     M. Snape reported as much, as Edward Smith. Ri. Hawgar & Ri. Holme haue deposed 
                  parts of England, (as I haue heard in sundrie of our meetings:)
but especially, in Warwickshire, Suffolke, Norfolke,
Essex, &c.
               
                  
The maner of euery perticular Classis is this. AtM. Sharpe and M. Litleton doe likewise herein agree with M. Iohnson. their meeting
(which is alwaies in some priuate house, but yet in their Mother
Cities) first a moderator is chosen▪ in this sort: one of them
conceiueth a praier, for Gods direction in that choyse.
               Then he, that conceiued the praier, sitteth alone in scrutonie:
and euery one giueth his voice secretlie vnto him. He that hath
most voyces is chosen.
               The moderator, thus chosen, conceiueth another praier: that
God would blesse him in the course of his office. Then being set at
the tables end, with his brethren by him: the names of all the brethren
are called. If any were absent at their first sitting downe, he
sitteth after in order, as he commeth, for auoiding of superioritie.
               The authoritie of the moderator endureth vntill the next meeting
of that Classis. At the breaking vp of euery Classis, there is
euer some certaine time appointed, when they shall meete againe:
which is sometime within a fortnight, but commonly three weeks
at the furthest: If any thing do fall out in the meane time, fit to be
consulted vpon: the moderator may call the Classis together sooner,
according to an order made amongst themselues.
               It isMast. Litleton deposeth as much. a generall order, that when any is admitted into a Classis:
he doth promise vnder his hand, that he will submit himselfe,
and be obedient to all such orders and decrees, as shall be set down
by the same Classis to be obserued.
               
                  As for example: these were part of the particular articles,
whereunto euerie one of Northampton Classis did subscribe, at
his entring or admittance into it: we doo promise to submit our
selues, vnto such orders and decrees, as shall be set downe by our
Classis: We do promise to submit our selues, to be censured by our
brethren of this Classis, in all matters concerning doctrine and
Discipline, &c.
               
                  In this Classis it was furthermore concluded and agreed vpon,
that when any controuersie did arise, touching any matters of
doctrine, or about the interpretation of any place of Scriptures: euerie

one of that Classis, should alwaies yeeld therein, vnto that
interpretation and resolution, which the brethren of that Classis
should determine of. And so also when any questions did rise amongest
them of greater difficultie. As for example, Maister
Stone mooued this question to the Northampton Classis in
the behalfe of one: vz. two are contracted: one of them marrieth
with a third: hee or shee so married are free againe. The question
is: whether the former contract, doo nowe againe binde.
And the resolution was: it did not: which was a false Resolution.
               
               The determinations and acts concluded vpon in this Classis,
                  Mast. Sharpe to the same purpose of Dauentry Classis.
were registred in a booke by Snape: chosen Register by the companie,
and who alwaies kept the same.
               Besides these perticular Classes, there is another kind of meeting,
which is termed the Assembly. And it consisteth (for example)
in Northamptonshire, of the number of six: that is two of
euery Classis, which are sent thither by election. The ordinarie
place of this assembly in Northāptonshire, was at Northampton:
where Snape commonly was one, and a chiefe man, Barbon
& King, were the men that vsually came from Dauentry side:
and Stone and Williamson from Kettring side.
               At the meeting of the sixe, there is alwaies a moderator first
chosen, in manner and forme, as in the Classis: and so likewise
for their further order of proceeding. The moderator continueth
his authoritie, ouer all the three Classes, vntill the like meeting
happen again: which is neuer certain. But yet commonly within six
or eight weeks, vpon occasion signified from the Classes vnto this
moderator. For vnto him belongeth the calling of this assembly.
               
               The matters, which here are handled, are those of great moment;
such as concerne the state of the Church generally. As for
example: the writing of letters to the brethren at Oxford,
Cambridge, & London:
                  The like Ma. Sharpe of Dauentry Classis to certifie them of their proceedings,
& to know what course is held amongst them, in those places, for

the Discipline and gouernement, which they tearme Reformation:)
to the intent, that the particular Classes, vpon their aduertisements,
may direct themselues, and their Churches accordingly.
               It is likewise alwaies concluded, at such times, which of the sixe
assembled, shall penne the letters. And in this choise, Snape was
commonly the man.
               The men, to whom they vsuallie did write: were one in Cambridge;
Trauers in London, and Gelibrand in Oxford:
When any answeres were returned from those places: they were
commonly directed to Snape, or to him that had written to them,
in the name of the brethren.
               Two especiall points (I remember) were concluded in this assemblie:
the one was, for a suruay of all the Churches in Northhamptonshire:
                  M. Sharpe to to the same purpose of Dauentrie Classis.
th'other, for an order to bee obserued at the last
Parliament, which then drew neere.
               The suruay was, to know what euerie benefice in the shire was
worth, how many soules by a generall coniecture, were in euerie
parish: who were the incumbents, and of what life, paines and qualities
they were. To this purpose, the fittest men, and such as were
best acquainted in the shire were nominated: as Litleton for
Haddon Deanerie, &c. Which duetie he performed for his part
to the vttermost: and brought a most rayling Discourse, against
euery Minister, which was not of our companie.
               The end propounded of this suruey, was: vz. that if vpon signification
to the brethren abroad, what was done there: they would
likewise make the like suruey in other countries: the Parliament
(if neede required, and to the better furthering of their purposes)
might haue a generall viewe, of all the Ministers in England,
that impugned their desires.
               The second point before mentioned was this: vz. a conclusion
to send vp to London, one or two of euerie Classis in Northhamptonshire,
with letters of credite, to attend at the Parliament:
                  
to ioine themselues with the brethren of other countries:
and to offer disputation, (if it should be so thought meete) and to
vndertake any other such matter, as should then and there be determined
of amongst them: and that there should be letters written,
of this resolution, to know how the brethren abroad liked it:
or what other course they would hold, at that time, for the bringing
in of Discipline and Church gouernement.
               These two points, were penned by Snape: and sent to the brethren
abroad, as it was ordered.
               What answere was returned to Snape, from the brethren in
Oxford & Cambridge, I know not: but well I remember, that
Trauerse did write to Snape, a very cunning Letter: wherein
he shewed himselfe not to mislike the foresaid suruay to be generallie
made, but signified, that the Parliament drawing on so fast, it
could not be done so soone. But for the second point: that (he writ)
was liked, and meete to be followed.
               Whereupon the Classes of Northamptonshire, did send vp
some three or fower, as Settle for Northampton, Rogers for
Dauentry, &c. with a further conclusion, that if any of them
(vpon occasion) should be committed, others should be sent vp in
their places.
               Although the time was short,This suruey hath beene made in the most shires of England: as by the surueies themselues to be shewed it appeareth. They are in maner of heathnish libels. for the generall accomplishing
of these forenamed pointes: yet this examinate thinketh, some
thing was done in the first: vz. as hee hath heard, a suruay was
made to the purpose before touched, of the Ministers in Northfolke,
Suffolke and Essex. And for the second, true it was, that
many were sent to attend at the Parliament, from the most parts
of England. And one resolution was, that some twenty or thirty of
them, should haue come in their gownes, with all grauitie, to the
Parliament-house-dore; and there haue desired by petition a disputation.
               Furthermore, concerning some censures vsed, there was a generall
consent and purpose, amongest the brethren, touching a secret

kinde of excommunication: for examples sake. A lay man
committeth some sinne. One of the Elders was to admonish him.
The partie is obstinate. The Elder must take two or three with
him the second time. And if this serue not, then he is to be debarred
from the communion. In this case, if the said party shuld (notwithstanding)
intrude himselfe to communicate, then it was agreed
to repell him, vppon pretence of certaine words in the communion
booke. So as thereby, they might keepe their owne course,
for their Discipline, and yet haue a cloake to couer them withall,
out of the booke.
               Againe, an other thing is notable to this effect. About a
yeare and a halfe a goe, Iohn Nelson of Northampton, an Elder
or a Deacon of Saint Peters, (as I thinke) hauing eyther his
daughter, or his sister gotten with childe, in his house, by one of
his seruants, Master Snape dealt with the said seruant, to vrge
him to publicke repentaunce: and at the last, so farre preuailed
with him, (as it was thought,) that he promised the next sunday
so to doe: but came not. Whereupon Snape made a verie bitter
Sermon against him. The next Sonday he came indeede. And
then Snape made a long praier, that God would giue him grace,
to make a faithfull acknowledgement of his sinne &c. That done,
the penitentiary, made publique confession &c. Which being perfourmed,
Snape absolued him; and then entred into a great discourse
how cleare the partie was, and free from that sinne committed,
euen as though he had bin newlie born: charging the congregation,
that no man should presume, at any time after, to obiect
the same vnto him. But that, which was most wondred at:
whereas this poore man was thus dealt withall, Snape caused
lame Prettie, a Souldier of Barwicke (who without any calling
in the Church at all, sauing that he had a tolleration to read, did
such seruice in that place, as was appointed by Snape to bee read,
till he came to Church) the next morning to marrie the saide penitentiarie
to the woman with childe before named, without anie

bringing of her, vnto anie such publicke repentance. Hereof, grew
amongst the people great speech, that the pore man was so vsed, &
the cicher mans sister or daughter was so freed. The saide lame
Souldier, hath married manie in that place, vpon Snapes commaundement:
for that Snape holdeth, that dutie to appertaine
no more to the Ministers office, then to anie other man.
               
                  And as touching that point mentioned, of the bretherens
submitting of themselues, by subscription, to be censured
in their Classis: it was thus vsed in the Northampton
Classis. The brethren being together in a chamber, the partie to
be first censured, (as they were all to be in course) goeth forth
out of the chamber. Then the moderator asketh euery mans opinion
of him: how he behaueth himselfe aswell in his life, as in
his Ministerie: and euerie man, hauing spoken his opinion, the
partie is called in: and then, if he were not any way touched, he is
greatly commended: if otherwise, then reprooued, as the causes
require. For example, Edwards of Cortnall comming vnder
this censure, was blamed for vsing the Crosse in Baptisme: and at
his comming-in againe, was wonderfull sharpely dealt withall for
the same.
               
                  Thus farre Maister Iohnson of the Northampton Classis.
With whom doe also agree in the principall points: Maister
Littleton, as touching the same Classis, Maister Sharpe, &
Maister Walker, Preachers and persons deposed, concerning the
Classis of Dauentry side: and Maister Stone (a Preacher likewise)
vpon his oth, for that of Kettring side. One or two
points I may not omitte,
                  Stone in the Starchamber. 
                  which Maister Stone hath deliuered.
He confesseth that at diuers times, Maister Snape, Master
Barbon; Maister Sharpe, Maister Prowdloe, Maister
King, Maister Iohnson, Maister Sibthorp, Maister Spicer,
Maister Baxter, Maister Littleton, Maister Williamson,
Maister Bradshaw, Maister Fleshware, Maister Harrison,
and hee, haue mette in Northampton: and likewise at

                  Kettring: and at his house, the most of them, with some others as
Maister Rishbrooke, Maister Atkinson, Maister Dauyes,
Maister Massye, Maister Okes &c. about matters of discipline.
And he saith further, that in an assembly had, either at his house
or at Kettring, it was propounded, treated, and concluded, that
the Apocrypha writings were not to be read in the Church. And
in an other assembly, which of them he doth not remember,
he affirmeth likewise, that it was debated and concluded
vpon, that the superiority of the Bishops of this land, ouer the rest
of the Ministers, is not warranted by the word of God.
               
                  To these depositions, concerning the Northamptonshire
Classes, I might adde the depositions of one maister Parker,
Vicar of Dedham in Essex, for the proofe of the Classes in
that shire: as of one about Brayntree side, consisting of these
Ministers, maister Culuerwell, maister Rogers, maister Gifford
&c. another about Colchester, consisting of these Ministers,
Doctor Chapman, Doctor Chricke, maister Dowe, maister
Farrar, maister Newman, master Tey &c. and so likewise the
depositions of others.
               
               Ego singulis sabbatis, si non alius adueniens locum suppleat,
cum prescripta leiturgias formula nihil habens cōmertij;Hen. Asker to Field. Apr. 14. 1585. in coetu
concionem habeo: idque reuerendorum fratrum consilio, qui suos
habent singulis ferè hebdomadis conuentus, qui etiam me in eorum
numerum, (sic est mihi propitius Deus,) benigne ascripserunt.
I preach euery Sabbaoth day, (if no other that commeth by
chance, doth supply the place) hauing nothing to do at all with the
forme or booke of Common Prayer: and that by the counsell of the
reuerend brethren: who haue their meetings almost euery weeke,
who haue also, (God being so mercifull vnto me) admitted me very
kindly into their number.
               
                  But in following of that course, I should be too tedious.
I will onely set downe, one mans witnesse more, agreeing
with Master Iohnson; for the proofe, that the like Classes, are

or haue beene held in most Shires in England: and so referring
you to iudge of them all, by that of Northampton, I
will goe forward.
               
               
                  About two yeares since, Maister Snape did say and affirme,
in the presence of Edward Smith, Robert Vicars, Edward
Birde, Richard Holmes, & himselfe, that there were three
or foure small Classes of Ministers in euery shire, where there
were any learned Preachers, who did vse (in their meetinges) to
debate of the Discipline, by Pastors, Doctors, Elders, & Deacons,
and that the said seuerall small Classes, did send their resolutions
and opinions, to the greater assemblies at Cambridge at Sturbridge
Fayre time, and at London at Bartholomew Fayre
time, which did meete together also for the same purpose: and that
if the said great assembly did like of that, which was done by the
smaller Classes, then was the same (so liked of) generally concluded,
to be that, which ought to be, or stand, in the Church. (As for
example.) That it was concluded and agreed vpon, both in the
said Classicall and generall assemblies; that the dumbe ministerie
was no ministerie, or else no lawfull ministerie: and that the
Ministers in their seuerall charges, should all teach one kind of doctrine,
tending to the erecting of the foresaid gouernement, by Pastors,
Doctors, Elders and Deacons: which pointes (sayth
Holmes of himselfe in another examination) were concluded
in the Synode at Sturbridge Fayre last. vz. 1588.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               A Synode is held at Couentrie, 1588. many questions are resolued,
the booke of Discipline is subscribed vnto.
               
                  THere is mention made, in the last chapter, of a Synode
or meeting, 1587. of the Cambridgeshire Classicall
Ministers, and peraduenture of some others
also with them. In which meeting there were certain questions

propounded & dealt in: the which questions were
afterwards sent by their direction, to the Warwickshire Classes,
or brethren assembled in those parts, to bee further intreated
of and resolued.
               The next yeare after, vz. 1588. the saide Warwickeshire
Classes, &c. assembling themselues together, in councel, (as
it seemeth at Couentry,) the questions mentioned, were determined
vpon: and besides, other matters were also concluded,
as by the acts themselues following (to be shewed
vnder Maister Wights hand, and are acknowledged in effect
vppon two mens othes in the Starre-chamber) may sufficiently
appeare. Thus the proceedinges of that meeting are
intituled. Acta conuentus Classium Warwic, die decimo, quarti.
1588. The Acts of the assembly of the Warwickeshire Classes the
tenth day of the fourth moneth. And touching the questions
specified. Questiones a fratribus ex Synodo Cantabrigiensi, anno
superiore delatae, eâ quae sequitur formulâ sunt explicatae. The
questions brought the other yeare, from the brethren of the Cambridge
Synode, are resolued in manner as followeth. I will not
trouble my paper with the fourme which they vsed, but
these were some of their resolutions: vz.
               That priuate Baptisme is vnlawfull.
               That it is not lawfull, to read homilies in the Church.
               That the signe of the Crosse, is not to be vsed in Baptisme.
               That the faithfull ought not to communicate with vnlearned
               ministers, although they may be present at their seruice, if they
come of purpose to heare a sermon. The reason is, because lay men,
aswell as ministers, may read publike seruice.
               That the calling of Bishops &c. is vnlawfull.
               That as they deale in causes ecclesiasticall, there is no duety belonging
vnto them, nor any, publikely to be giuen them.
               That it is not lawful, to be ordained by thē into the ministery; or
to denounce either suspensions or excommunications sent from thē.
               
                  
That it is not lawfull, to rest in the Bishops depriuation of any
from the ministerie, except (vpon consultation with the neighborministers
adioyning, and his flocke) it seeme so good vnto them:
but that he continue in the same, vntill he be compelled to the contrary
by ciuill force.
               That it is not lawfull, to appeare in a Bishops Court: but with
protestation of their vnlawfulnes.
               That Bishops are not to be acknowledged, either for Doctors,
Elders, or Deacons, as hauing no ordinary calling.
               That touching the restauration of their Ecclesiasticall discipline,
it ought to be taught to the people, data occasione, as occasion
should serue.
               That nondum (as yet) the people are not to be solicited, publicè
(publickly) to the practise of the discipline: donec, (till) they
be better instructed in the knowledge of it.
               That men of better vnderstanding, are to be allured priuatly,
to the present imbracing of the Discipline and practise of it, as far
as they shall be well able, with the peace of the Church. And thus
farre the prouinciall Synode of the Warwickeshire Classis.
               Likewise at that time, there was in the same assembly, a
great approbation obtained of the foresaid booke of Discipline,
as to be a draught of Discipline, essentiall & necessarie for
all times: and certaine articles (being deuised in approbation,
and for the maner of the vse of that booke,) were then
brought forth, treated-of, and subscribed vnto, (as Maister
Nutter & Maister Cleuely, two that were then present, haue
deposed,)Nutter and Cleueley in the Starre-chamber 
                  by Maister Cartwright, Maister Fenne, Maister
Wight, &c. who promised to guide themselues by the saide Discipline,
and according to it, as it is set downe in the saide articles,
which herafter shall be likewise declared. It appeareth also
by the said parties depositions, that diuers others did subscribe
at the same time, (or at the least within a short time
after,) but they might not (forsooth) by reason of their

owne consciences, name them. Howbeit the matter is otherwise
plaine inough, who they were: by a note taken
with Maister Litleton: vz. Iohn Oxenbridge, Edward Gellibrand,
Hercules Cleuely, Anthony Nutter, Leonard Fetherstone,
Mathew Hulme, Edward Lord, &c.
               
               This booke, hauing thus at the last receaued this great
allowance, more authentically: was carried farre and nere,
for a generall ratification of all the brethren. It was offered
to the Dauentry side Classis,Sharpe and Walker before the Commissioners. as Master Sharp and Master Walker
haue deposed; and likewise at Northampton by Penry, as
Maister Litleton affirmeth. But that, which Maister Iohnson
hath set downe,Iohnson before the Commissioners. is worthy the remembrance. The effect of
it, is this: that when the booke of Discipline came to Northampton,
to be subscribed vnto: there was a generall censuring vsed amongst
the brethren there, as it were to sanctifie themselues, partly
by sustaining a kinde of penance, and reproofe for their former
conformity, to the orders of the Church, established by her Maiestie,
and other matters of conuersation: and partly to prepare their
mindes for the deuout accepting of the foresaid booke. In which
course of censuring vsed at that time, there was such ripping
vp, one of anothers life, euen from their youth, as that
they came vnto great bitternes, with many reuiling tearms
amongst themselues, one growing thereby odious to another,
and some did thereupon vtterly forsake those kinde of assemblies.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               The booke of the pretended Discipline is made perfect at Cambridge:
certaine Synodes are kept: and of their estimation.
               
                  IT might haue beene deemed, that after so many
viewes, Synodes, and subscriptions, this worthy
draught of discipline, would haue growne to

great perfection: but it falleth out otherwise. For (as it is
confessed vppon othe) at Sturbridge Fayre-time, the next
yeare (after the sayd Classicall counsell of the Warwicke-shire
brethren) vz. in the yeare, 1589. there was another Synode
or generall meeting, helde in Saint Iohns Colledge in Cambridge.
Where (saith M. Barber) they did correct▪ alter, and amend
diuers imperfections conteined in the booke, called Disciplina
ecclesiae sacra, verbo Dei descripta: and (as maister
Stone affirmeth) did not onely perfect the saide forme of Discipline,
but also did then and there, (as he remembreth▪) voluntarily
agree amongst themselues, that so many as would should subscribe
to the saide booke of Discipline after that time. The persons,
that met in this assembly, were as these two last deponents
affirme,) maister Cartwright, maister Snape, maister Allen,
maister Gifford, maister Perkins, maister Stone, maister Barber,
maister Harrison, with others, &c.
               
               I finde mention also of another Synode, 1589. held (as
I take it) at Ipswich. Thus one Iohn Warde did write, that
yeare, to certaine at Ipswich: I thinke not to come ouer, till the
Synode, which is (as I take it) a moneth after Michaelmas.
               
               It hath beene obserued before, out of maister Edmonds
deposition: cap. 2. who were the Classicall brethren of London.
It is also fit to be vnderstood, who they are, that most
commonly met there also, at their more generall, prouinciall
or nationall assemblies or Synodes. And this both maister
Barber, and maister Stone, doo sufficiently declare. For the
space of about foure yeares last past, (saith maister Barber,) and
since the last Parliament, (saith maister Stone,) there haue bin
seuerall meetings in London at the houses of maister Gardiner,
maister Egerton, maister Trauers, and maister Barber. The persons,
that vsually mette in these assemblies, (saith maister Barber,)
were maister Cartwright, maister Charke, maister Trauers,
maister Egerton, maister Gardiner, maister Oxenbridge,

maister Gelibrand, maister Culuerwell, maister Browne of Oxford,
maister Allen, maister Gifford, maister Sommerscales, and
himselfe.
               
               Maister Cartwright, maister Trauers, and maister Egerton,
were at sundry times chosen Moderators or Presidents in the
said assemblies. And afterwardes generally of the office of
the Moderators. The resolutions, conclusions, and determinations
of such matters, as were disputed-of, and agreed-vpon, by the
more number of them, that so disputed in the said assemblies: were
by the saide Moderators or Presidents, before named, at the
times and places of the saide seuerall assemblies, summarily and
briefly, either written in a booke, or otherwise set-downe in loose
papers, as to the saide Moderators, or Presidentes should bee
thought meet or conuenient.
               As the Classicall assemblies of London were of greater estimation,
then those in the Country: so these more generall
meetings or Synodes last mentioned, were of highest
authoritie: and indeed the grand test of all the rest. It may
be said truely of them both, that they haue been the kindling
sparkes of all those flames, which are in the Church.
What was there ordered, went, as perfectly currant. From
thence, the brethren, of other places, did fetch their light.
As doubts did arise, thither they were sent to be resolued.
The Classicall and Synodicall decrees in other places, were
neuer authenticall indeede, (as it seemeth,) till there they
were ratified. The chiefest directions, for all the brethren
else-where, were sent from thence. It is wonderfull to
consider, how men so obstinate and wilfull in their owne
waies against the Church of England, established by her
Maiestie; should be brought to submit themselues in such
sort, as they did, to be led by these assemblies, as elswhere
it doth appeare.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VIII.
               Vpon some detecting of the premisses some were called into question:
they refuse to be examined: all they were charged, which
is in effect confessed.
               
                  IN the yeare, 1590. vpon the detecting (before
some of her Maiesties Commissioners in causes
Ecclesiasticall) of the most of these things, wherof
I haue hitherto spoken: Interrogatories were
drawen, containing in them the effect of all the premisses;
and diuers such Ministers were sent for, as were sayde to
haue beene the chiefe ringleaders in all those actions, Accordingly
they appeared: but in the place when they
shuld be examined,In the Preface they refused to answere vpon their othes.
Diuers pretences therof were made, as one; that first
they would see the Interrogatories, whereof they should
be examined. The generall summe of them, was imparted
vnto them: and it was likewise told them, that they should
bee charged to answere no further, then by the lawes of
the Realme they were bound to doo. But all this would
not serue. Whervpon the Interrogatories themselues were
shewed vnto some, as namely to Maister Snape, who stood
most at the first vppon that point, and did pretend, that if
first hee might see them, hee would then aunswere vnto
them. But the issue was accordingly, as it was expected:
For hauing perused them, he was further-of, then he was
before: and writ to his friends, what was the summe of
them: to the intent they might be forewarned, and so (as
he sayd) become better armed. Which course taken by him:
was not without the great prouidence of God. For thereby
their whole plot, and all in effect, that was laid to their
charges, was discouered. His Letters were intercepted,

wherein he writeth after this sort.
               Reuerend and beloued, this day Aprill the 7. I haue beene againe
before the Commissioners:Snape to N. N. 1590. After much adoo, I obtained to
see and peruse the Articles against mee, (but briefly and in their
presence onely,) they are many, (36. 37. besides those vnder
mine owne hand,) and very large, some twelue, some twenty lines
long, consisting of many branches. As far as I could (for the time)
conceaue and remember, they may be referred to these two heads:
some concerning may selfe, together with others, and some touching
my selfe alone. The former sort are touching Classes and Synodes:
wherein there are mentioned particular places: (London,
Oxford, Cambridge:) times (Act, Commencement,
Sturbridge fayre, Tearme:) persons, (Cartwright, Perkins,
Trauers, Charke, Egerton, Barbon, Stone, Snape,
Knewstub, Allin, Dike, & diuers others, &c.) and some things
dealt▪ in and agreed vpon, &c. By all which, besides many
other thinges specified, it is most euident, that they haue
manifest and certaine knowledge, not onely of generals,
but also of specials and particulars.
               
               Beloued,Snape to Barbon Aprill 11. 1590. and so also to Stone. I haue twise appeared before the high Commissioners:
the first time, the issue was prison: the second, close prison. This is
my state now: the causes of both, and the proceedings in both, you
stall receaue of Maister Knightlye, the former more large in a
Dialogue, the latter more briefly in a Letter: both vnperfect, both
vnperused: reade them, and returne them with what speede you
may: for I haue now no coppy of them: let them be wisely kept, lest
they breede more anger. I haue procured another coppy to be sent
to Master Stone, that in both places you might be forewarned, &
forearmed. Touching the conferences, those of our Countrey, are
yet more particularly discouered: persons (besides those there named)
Kinge, of Coleworth: Prowdloe, of Weeden, &c.
Spicer, of Cogenho: Edwardes, of Cortenhall, &c. places:
Sharpes house at Fawseley: Snapes chamber at Northampton,
                  
&c. Si quis coniecturae sit locus: I would iudge Iohn Iohnson
to haue beene the man: because (to my remembrance) persons
and thinges of his time beeing mentioned, hee onely is not
named. Whosoeuer and howsoeuer, wee see the Lord calleth vs to
be more resolute. They will not, they cannot be any longer concealed:
now whether it were better and more safe, that one man with
the consent of the rest, should boldly, freely, and wisely, confesse
and lay open, &c. or that some weake (or wicked) man shoulde
without consent, and in euill sort acknowledge, &c. Iudge you: the
thing they ayme-at, is: A conuenticle. It must come to tryall. In
the cause of murther, &c. it is wont to be enquired, whether the
party fled vpon it: consider and apply to this matter, and the Lord
giue vs wisedome in all things. It were good you sent to T. C. with
speede.
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               Cartwright is called for, by authority: a Synode is held in London:
it is there resolued that he shall refuse to be examined vppon
his othe.
               
                  AFterwarde the same yeare before mentioned,
1590. (in September, as I take it,) Maister Cartwright
vpon occasion was sent for, by the sayd
Commissioners. Now, about a weeke or a fortnight
before, Cartwright was committed, (sayth Maister
Stone) whereas,Depos. in the Star-chamber. the question mentioned by Snape to Barbon
& the brethren: (which, as it seemeth, troubled them
all:) vz. whether it were not fit, that one man with the consent of
the rest, should boldly, freely, and wisely, confesse and lay open &c.
came to be disputed in London. There was a Synode or
meeting, held at Maister Gardiners, by these brethren, Maister
Cartwright, Maister Charke, Maister Trauerse, Maister Egerton,
Maister Cardiner, Maister Barbon, Maister Barber,

                  maister Oxenbridge, maister Gelibrand, master Culuerwel,
my selfe, and certaine other Ministers: and they did then and
there debate and consider amongst themselues, whether it were fit
or conuenient, that the said maister Cartwright, (after his commitment
to prison) should discouer or reueale, all or any the matters,
which passed in conference and disputation, in any of their
former assemblies, or not. What the resolution hereof was,
whether through the examiners ouersight, or Maister
Stones peruersenesse, (I know not) but it is not set downe.
Howbeit the effects which followed, do make it manifest.
               For maister Cartwright, about the time before limited,
being conuented: and moued in the Consistory at Paules,
by the Bishop of London, the then two Lordes chiefe Iustices,
maister Iustice Gawdy, maister Sergeant Puckering, now Lord
Keeper of the great Scale of England, maister Attorney Generall,
now Lorde Chiefe Iustice of England: and diuers others
her Maiesties Commissioners then present to take his oth
to answere to certaine Interrogatories: yet notwithstanding
that the chiefe points of them were then deliuered in generall
tearmes vnto him, & that the said both honourable
and graue persons, did (euery man) seuerally assure him
vpon their credits, that by the lawes of the Realme he was
bound to take his oath, & therevpon to answere, as he was
required: he desired to be borne withall, and said that hee
thought he was not bound by the lawes of God so to do.
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               Further proofe for their practise of their Discipline: collected out
of the rules of their subscribed booke.
               
                  IF hitherto, as yet the point (I haue in hand) be not
sufficiently prooued: vz. that our English reformers
haue attempted after the Scottish Ministers fashion,
to bring into the Church of England, their pretended

                  Disciplinarian gouernement, of themselues, and by their
owne authority, without any further staying (as they had
done) for the ciuill Magistrate, albeit they pretende now
the contrary: then it is fit that I produce some further
matter to this purpose.
               Amongst sundry things in the said booke of Discipline,
let these few be well considered of, & weighed. It is there
sayd: Presbyterium in singulis ecclesiis constituendum est, there
ought to be erected in euery Church a Presbyterie. Now if they
had meant, (as it is pretended) not to haue put their book,
or at the least some chiefe parts thereof in practise, vntill it
should haue beene established by Act of Parliament, they
would haue sayde for constituendum est, there ought to bee
erected, constituatur, let there bee erected in euery parish a
Presbyterie.
               Againe,Cap. de conuent. ecclesiae. in all their assemblies prescribed in the booke,
this was one point to be still inquired of: vtrum disciplina
vigeat, whether the Discipline had any life in it, or were esteemed,
or continued: which question had beene friuolous, and
very vnmeete to haue beene continued, as prescribed by
Law, if the Discipline it selfe had beene allowed by Act of
Parliament, before that question should haue beene moued.
               
                  Furthermore saith the booke:
                  Cap. de concionibus ad ecclesiam habendis. in funeribus desuescendum
est commodè, ab habendis concionibus, quod periculum sit, ne superstitionem
quorundam foueant, aut vanitati inseruiant: The
Preachers must leaue-of by little and little, as they may conueniently,
to preach at burials, least thereby they nourish the superstition
of some men, or giue ouer themselues to the preseruation of
vanity.
               Likewise, festi dies sunt commodè abolendi: holy daies (as
we tearme them) must be abolished, commode, as they may,
handsomely. Nowe, if this booke had not beene meant, to

haue beene put in practise in these two pointes, before it
had come forth, authorised by law: they would haue said
for the reasons alledged: from henceforth let there be, or it is
ordered, that there shall be no more preaching at burials, nor holy
dayes obserued, or let them henceforth be abolished.
               
               
                  Moreouer: reliquae liturgiae tota ratio in sacramentorum
administratione,Cap. de reliqui. Liturg. officiis. & ex vsu ecclesiae in nuptiarum benedictione
consist it. Cuius forma commodissima est, quae ab ecclesiis vsurpatur,
quae disciplinam ex Dei verbo instaurârunt. The rest of the
liturgy doth consist in the administration of the Sacra
                     •
                  ents, and
(as the vse of the Church is,) in blessing of mariages. The forme
whereof, is most fit and commodious, that is vsed by those Churches,
which haue erected the discipline, according to the worde
of God.
               In the Parliament (27. of her Maiestie: as I remember)
the brethren hauing made another booke, tearmed at that
time: A booke of the forme of common prayers, &c. and contayning
in it the effect of their whole pretended discipline:
the same booke was penned, altogether statute and lawlike,
and their petition in the behalfe of it was: vz. May it
therefore please your maiesty, &c. that it may be enacted, &c. that
the booke hereunto annexed, &c. intituled: a booke of the forme
of common prayers, administration of Sacraments, &c. and euery
thing therein contained, may be from henceforth authorized,
put in vre, & practised throughout all your maiesties dominions.
See here, when they hoped to haue attained their purposes
by law, and to haue had the same accordingly established:
they offered to the Parliament a booke of their own,
for the forme of common praiers, &c. and thought it (as it
seemeth) altogether inconuenient, to leaue euery minister
to his owne choyse, to vse what forme hee list, other then
such as were allowed in some Church, which had receiued
the Discipline: for any such they liked-of indefinitly.
               
                  
Whereby it to me it seemeth manifest, that they neuer
meant, to haue required the enacting of that Chapter, de
reliquis liturgiae officijs, but onely to set downe, what course
their bretheren should follow for the interim, vntill they
might take further order for a booke of their owne.
               Lastly, in all this whole booke of Discipline, there is not
once mention made of any authority, or office, in or ouer
the Church; belonging to the Christian ciuill Magistrate.
Hee hath not so much, as either voyce or place, in any of
their Synodes, as a member thereof: except he be chosen to
be an Elder. He hath not any power assigned vnto him to
call a Synode: no, though it bee a Nationall Synode: nor so
much as to appoint the particular times or places of their
meetinges, nor (which is most strange,) so much as that
his assent, is to be required to any of their Canons. But all
these thinges are set downe in this booke, as of right to appertaine
vnto their Ministers and Elders. For the tryall
whereof: I must needes referre you to the booke it selfe,
which is in many mens handes: where you shall finde the
brethren ascribe that to themselues, which in the greatest
darkenes of Popery, all the BBs. in the Land (for ought I
doo remember) durst neuer challenge. Which is a proofe
sufficient, that either they meant by cunning to haue depriued
her Maiesty, by her owne consent, of all her regall
authority, in these and such like causes of the Church, as
not of right belonging vnto her (which they will not acknowledge:)
or otherwise, that they had agreed without
her consent, to take this authority vnto themselues: which
(if they had any conscience) they would not stick to confesse:
that being assuredly their currant doctrine, as in
some other place it shall hereafter more fully appeare.
               But it may be said that these are onely collections. Well
let them be, as they are. Indeede there is no cause, why I

should stand vpon collections, hauing yet in store most euident
demonstrations.
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               Further proofe for their practise of their Discipline out of the
articles they subscribed.
               
                  THere hath beene often mention made, of
the articles, whereunto the brethren subscribed,
for their allowance and practise of
the sayd booke of Discipline: and they are
worde for worde, as here I doo set them
downe, according to the deposition of those, that subscribed
vnto them, and as they are to bee shewed vnder Maister
Wights hand.
               We the brethren assembled together, in the name of God, hauing
heard and examined, by the word of God, according to our
best abilitie and iudgement in it, a draught of discipline essential,
and necessary for all times, and Synodicall, gathered out of
the Synodes, and vse of the Churches; haue thought good to testifie,
concerning it, as followeth.
               We acknowledge and confesse the same, agreeable to Gods most
holy word, so farre as we are able to iudge or discerne of it, excepting
some fewe pointes, which wee haue sent to our Reuerend brethren
of this assembly, for their further resolution.
               We affirme it to be the same, which wee desire to be established
in this Church, by daily praier to God: which we promise (as God
shall offer oportunity, and giue vs to discerne it so expedient) by
humble suit vnto her Maiesties honour able Councell, and the Parliament,
and by all other lawfull and conuenient meanes, to further
and aduance, so farre as the lawes, and peace, and the present
estate of our Church, will suffer it, and not enforce to the contrary.
               
                  
We promise to guide our selues, and to be guided by it, and according
to it.
               For more especiall declaration of some points more important
and necessarie, we promise vniformely, to follow such order, when
we preach the word of God, as in the booke by vs is set downe, in
the Chapters of the office of Ministers of the word, of preaching
or sermons, of Sacraments, of Baptisme, and of the Lords supper.
               Further also, wee promise to followe the order set downe in the
Chapters of the meetings, as farre as it concerneth the Ministers
of the worde. For which purpose, we promise to meete euery sixe
weekes together, in Classicall conferences, with such of the brethren
here assembled, as for their neighbourhood may fit vs best:
and such other, as by their aduise we shall be desired to ioyne with
vs.
               The like wee promise, for Prouinciall meetinges euery halfe
yeare from our conferences, to sende vnto them, as is set downe in
the Chapter, concerning the Prouinces, and the conferences
belonging vnto them, beeing deuided according to the order following.
               Likewise also, that we will attend the generall assembly euerie,
yeare, and at all Parliaments, and as often as by order it shall
be thought good, to be assembled. Hitherto the Articles.
               
               Now by these articles, and by their subscription vnto
them, it is most euident, that the pretences made by some,
are but meerly shiftes: as that their purpose onely was, to
haue the booke in readines against a Parliament, and that
they subscribed the articles to no other ende, but onely to
testifie their agreement in iudgement, for that they were
charged to disagree amongst themselues. For if that had
beene their intent, it had beene sufficiently performed, by
subscribing to the first article onely. But they proceede-on
further: and entred into a certaine league, or association, binding
themselues by promise; vnder their hands, what they

(for their owne partes) will attempt, and as they might
perfourme.
               In the second article, (as it is apparant,) there are other
lawfull meanes promised to bee vndertaken, (for the aduancing
of the Discipline,) then prayers to God, and supplications
to her Maiesty and the Parliament.Litleton. Whereupon
Maister Litleton (a subscriber) being examined, what hee
vnderstoode those meanes to bee:
                  Before the Commissioners. answereth vpon his oath,
that he thinketh their priuate conferences, were meant, to be those
lawfull meanes mentioned in the article. Which is according
to the resolution of the brethren in of London, set downe
before, out of Maister Edmondes examination: vz. that seeing
they could not preuaile,
                  Before the Commissioners. 
                  by sute to the State: the Ministers
themselues should set vp the Discipline, as they should bee able.
And Maister Iohnson, is also as direct vppon his oath, to the
same effect, saying.
               It was a generall conclusion amongst all the Classes, and brethren,
that forasmuch, as the Discipline required by petitions,
could not bee publikely established by lawe, it was thought in conscience
necessary, to establish it and practise it priuately: to which
purpose also, euery man was to vse his endeuour, to encrease the
number of such, as would conforme themselues that way.
               Againe it is promised in the same Article, that they
would proceede with their sayd meanes, for the aduancement
of their Discipline, so far as the peace of the present state
of our Church would suffer.
               
               Now how farre that is, it hath beene before touched in
the decrees of one of their Synodes, 1583. for as men most
strangely bewitched) they imagined, that they could so
cunningly play their feates, as that they (might in effect)
set vp their owne Discipline, secretely, vnder hand, and yet
neuer disturbe the present gouernement of the Church.
               For as peace is heere taken in their sense, one King or

gouernement may inuade another, with all kinde of hostility,
and say (as they doo) that they meane but peace.
The truth is, they may haue peace in their mouths, but in
their actions, there is nothing lesse. So as this their restraint
(being but a vaine pretence) doth no way indeed
impaeach my assertion.
               Furthermore, whereas also it followeth in the same article,
(and not enforce to the contrarie,) Maister Littleton being
examined vpon his oath what that should meane:
                  In the Starre Chamber. answereth
that he himselfe, Maister Snape, Maister Proudloe, and others
did agree, to put the said articles and Discipline in execution
and practise, so far as the peace and the present estate of the
Church will suffer, and not enforce to the contrarie. That is to say:
till the Magistrate did enioyne them or enforce them, to leaue the
practise of the said Discipline: and in another place, till the
Magistrate did inhibite them to the contrarie, and force them to
leaue it. And further, hee also sayth: that they did agree to
guide themselues by the said booke of Discipline, and according to
it, with the same limitation. Now what if by their secret practises,
(to drawe away the peoples harts from the present
gouernement of the Church) they could haue procured
such strength and number, to haue followed them, as that
no reasonable restraint, or force of the Magistrate had bin
able to haue encountred and suppressed them? I doo but
aske the question.
               In the rest of the Articles, there are but two generall
points: the one contained in the third Article, concerning
the vniformitie, which they promise to vse in their Ministery:
and the other is, as touching their agreement, to follow
the orders set downe for their meetinges: Classicall,
contained in the fourth: Prouinciall in the fift: Nationall
in the sixt article.
               So as where before in the second Article, they had mentioned

                  other meanes, whereby they had promised to aduance
their Discipline, besides praiers to God, and supplications
to her Maiestie: they doo nowe in part explane themselues,
in the other Article following, and doo set downe,
what meanes they that were Ministers would vse and put
in practise, for the aduauncement of it, vz. the two points
mentioned, that is, their vniformity in preachings, and their
meetinges: according to Master Littletons deposition: in
these words: they meant by those meanes, in the second Article,
their conferences, as he thinketh. But to carry this matter past
thinking:In the Starre Chamber. let Master Fen be heard: who saith: that he agreed
to put some things of the booke in execution, according to the subscription:
let Master Lord be heard: who sayth, that he agreed
to put some things of the said booke in practise, as in the Articles is
contained. But let their Coryphaeus Maister Cartwright himselfe
be heard: who sayth, that he agreed to put two points of
the Articles in execution: vz. touching the order of preaching,
and touching the assemblies.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               It is confessed that they agreed to put one point of their booke in
practise without her Maiesties assent: what it is: & of strange
names giuen to children.
               
                  NOw because it appeareth, in the thirde, fourth,
fift and sixt of the sayd Articles, that concerning
both these points, they referre themselues
to certain Chapters of their booke of Discipline:
I haue thought it very conuenient, to set downe, out of
the said Chapters, some of those particulars, which by their
said subscription they bound themselues to practise, without
any further staying for the ciuil Magistrate: and withall
to adioyne some part of their constancie, (if so I may

abuse a good worde▪) in the perfourming of their promises
touching the said particulars▪ Maister Littleton beeing
sworne,Exami. before the Commi. dealeth (as it seemeth) very directly to this purpose:
for (as he saith) concerning the contents of the foure
last Articles, hee for his part, whilest hee was of that company,
perfourmed his promise, and (he thinketh) that the rest that subscribed
did the like. But to the particulars: and first of the
first point.
               The Minister, that is to preach, shall appoint the Psalme that
is to be song,De officio. Minist. &c &c. After the Psalme, let there be made a short admonition
to the congregation: howe they shall prepare themselues
rightly, to pray. Let a Prayer followe, containing the confession of
sinnes, &c. and concluded with the Lords Prayer. After the Sermon,
let Prayers be made for grace, that the auditors may profite
by the doctrine deliuered: also for the whole Church, and all particular
callinges: and let them end likewise with the Lords Prayer.
Then a Psalme, &c. and lastly let the conclusion bee made, with
some short forme of blessing the congregation, taken out of the
Scriptures.
               For the practise of this order: I referre the proofe of it
to all those, who haue obserued the manner of any of the
brethrens behauiour, in their seuerall Churches. The most
of them, that are but Doctors, (as they terme themselues)
and readers of Lectures in other mens charges, do seldom
or neuer come to the seruice, which is read in the Church
according to her Maiesties Lawes: but vnder pretence of
studying for their sermons, doo absent themselues, vntill
seruice bee done, or at the least almost finished, and then
they come in, (grauely I warrant you,) and doo goe to
this their owne forme of seruice.
               The rest of the fraternity, that haue cures of their own,
some of them will haue a Parliament Minister, (as they
terme him) vnder them, to say seruice: and then he himselfe

dealeth, as it hath beene noted of the Doctor: but others,
that are not able to haue such a one, they for their safer
standing (as their tearme is) doo vse some piece of our
seruice-booke, and peraduenture reade a lesson, (which
things they affirme, as it hath beene touched, may be performed
as wel by those, that are not ministers, as by them.)
And then they in like sort, doo begin their owne ministeriall
function, and proceede according to the foresaide fashion,
subscribed-vnto, and promised.
               But to proceede vnto their practise of other pointes of
that booke.
               The Preachers must leaue off,Deioncionibus habendis, &c. by little and little, as they may
conueniently, to preach at burials, least thereby they nourish the
superstition of some men, or giue ouer themselues to the preseruation
of vanity.
               Let not women onely offer infants to Baptisme, but the father,
if it may be conueniently,De Baptismo. or els some others in his name.
               Let perswasions be vsed, that such names, as doo sauour either
of Paganisme or Popery, bee not giuen to children at their Baptisme,
but principally those, whereof there are examples in the
Scriptures.
               Whether these pointes, (especially for two of them)
haue beene practised by the brethren or not, the newe
Churchyard in London, and many brables in the country, about
vrging of the natural fathers to become Godfathers
to their owne children, &c, can more then sufficiently
witnesse. And for the third, it is also sundry waies apparant.Fenner. Barbon. Aire. Wigginton. &c. Before the Commissioners.
For whence else doo these new names and fancies
proceede? The Lord is nere. More-tryall. Reformation. Discipline.
Ioy-againe. Sufficient. From-aboue. Free-gifts. More-fruite.
Dust. and many other such like. But Richard Hawgar
of Northampton, did first vnder his hande, and after vppon
his oath, deliuer an especiall history (to this purpose)

of giuing names.
               
                  Snape would not Baptise one Christopher Hodgkinsons
childe, because hee would haue the childe called Richard. The
order was this. Hodgkinson obtained promise of Snape: that
he would christen his childe. But (saith Snape) you must then
giue it a Christian name, allowed in the Scriptures. The partie
told him, that his wiues father, whose name was Richard, desired
the name. Well (saith Snape) you must doe as I bidde you:
that, when you come, the congregation be not troubled. But notwithstanding,
the said Hodgkinson not thinking it would haue
beene made a matter of such importance, the child was brought.
Snape proceeded in the action, till hee came to the naming of the
child. And when he heard, that they called the child Richard, &
that they would giue him no other name; hee staied there▪ and
would not in any wise Baptize the child. And so the child was carried
away thence, & was Baptized the weeke following, at Alhallowes
being named Richard.
               
               Of likelyhoode, the brethren haue founde this thing to
be a matter of great importance: that they wil rather leaue
an infant vnbaptized, then giue him such a name.
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               A second point of their Booke confessed to be agreed vpon, for the
practise of it, without her Maiesties assent.
               
                  NOw I wil come to Master Cartwrights
second point, that is, of the meetings:
and set downe the Chapters, wherevnto
in the Articles subscribed, they
referred themselues: that thereby
herafter no man, that wil read them,
may doubt of their purpose, of not
staying for the Magistrate: which are as follow, so neere as

I could by translation of them out of Latin, expresse their
meaning.
               Mutuall conference is to bee practised in the Church by common
assemblies:Of the assemlie of the Church. but in these, matters Ecclesiasticall are to bee
handled, and such chieflie as concerne those Churches, whereof the
assemblie doth consist.
               They shall not determine, (except they be requested,) of anie
thing touching other Churches: but shall only decree, that such
matter is to be referred to the next greater assemblie: Let the
matters and order of thinges to be handled in them be thus.
               Next after the view or calling of those that be present, (wherin
withall, the names of such as bee absent must be noted, that in
the next Assembly, they may eyther yeeld sufficient reason of their
absence, or els bee censured, by the iudgement of the assemblie,)
first let the Acts of the next assemblie afore, (that was of the same
sort) bee read: to the intent, that if any thing of them were left
then vndone, it may be dispatched. Then, let those matters be
done, that are peculiar to the Assembly in hand. And first, let euerie
of them deliuer the instructions from their Churches, in the
same order that they sit, together with the Fiduciary or Letters
of credence of the Churches: next, let there be * censures had of
the Churches of that assembly:vz. inquisition (as I take it) is meant. whereby may bee vnderstood how
they are framed and vsed: whether the doctrine and the Discipline
haue their course in them, and whether the officers of them
doe that which appertaineth, and such like.
               Besides let them decree those things, that shall concerne eyther
the common behoofe of all the Churches of that assemblie, or of any
one of them: and this course will be sufficient enough, for the
view and ouersight of the Churches.
               Lastly, (if it so seeme good) let there bee inquirie & Censures
had, euen of those, which be delegated to meete in that Assemblie.
               Such as are to meete in the Assemblies, let them bee chosen, by
the Suffrages of those Churches or Assemblies, that haue interest

or to doe in it: and out of these, let such only be chosen, as hath exercised
some publike office in that Church, eyther of a Minister, or
of an Elder, and which hath subscribed both to the doctrine and
Discipline, and which haue vndertaken to behaue themselues in
all things according to the word of God.
               It shall be lawful for other Elders & Ministers, yea & for Deacons
and Students in Diuinitie, by the appointment of the assemblie,
(especially if they be such, as doe exercise themselues, in interpreting
the Scriptures in the Assemblie,) to be both present, &
to bee asked their iudgements: these of the latter sort are therefore
to be admitted, that their iudgements to handle the affaires
of the Church, may hereby both be tried and sharpned. Yet let
none be counted to haue a voice, but those onely, that were chosen
by the Church, & which bring their commissions consigned vnto
them.
               If any matter be to bee consulted of, that is of speciall importance,
let the President of the last superior Assembly, or the Minister
of that Church, in which the next Assembly is to be made,
send it ouer in due time vnto the Ministers of all the churches of
that assemblie: to the intent they may afore treate thereof, with
those of their charge, and so may know and report their iudgements.
In making choise of a place for the Assemblies, respect is to
be had of neerenes, and other oportunities: in case any party may
instly finde himselfe grieued aboue the rest.
               It is expedient, that in euerie Ecclesiasticall Assembly, there
be a President, which may gouerne the assembly, and that he bee
from time to time chaunged, if it may be conueniently: & he must
be thus chosen, viz.
               He that was President of the last Assemblie of that kinde afore,
or the Minister of that congregation, where the Assemblie
is made, (conceiuing first a praier directed to that purpose) shall
preferre vnto the Assemblie, the motion for choise of a President.
               
               
                  
The President beeing thus chosen, conceiuing first a Prayer
fitting vnto the whole action and Assembly,) shall call ouer the
names of those, which be present and which bee absent, and note
them: that the absents may be called-vpon at the next assembly, to
yeeld a reason of their absence.
               Which if it be not sufficient, let them be censured, by the authoritie
of the Assemblie. Then let him read the Actes of the last Assembly,
that if any thing thereof remaine, it may then bee dispatched.
Then shall be aske of euerie one, in order as they sit, their letters
fiduciarie or of credence, and their instructions signed.
Which being propounded in the same order, and sufficiently debated
by all their opinions, hee shall aske their iudgements, and gather
the suffrages, and pronounce what the greater part adiudgeth,
Which be shall procure to be put into Actes, that the Delegates
of the seuerall Churches, may procure copies and transcripts to bee
made, which they may impart vnto those Churches, to whome it
appertaineth.
               The President also, by the iudgement and authority of the
Assembly, is to giue answere, either by word of mouth, or by letters,
to such as require it. If any censures be to be inflicted, hee is to performe
them. He shall also take care, that all things be godly and
quietly carried, by exhorting them vnto quietnes, and moderation
of minde, one bearing with another, as neede shall bee, and by
preferring vp, such as be wilfull and contentious, vnto the Assembly:
lastly, he shall propound vnto them, touching the time of their
next meeting: and then with exhortation vnto them, chearefully
to goe forward in their duety, and with thanksgiuing, he shall curteously
dismisse them.
               Before the dismission of the Assembly, let no man depart, but
with leaue.
               The assemblies according to their seuerall kindes, if they bee
greater, are of more; if they be lesse, they are of lesse authoritie.
Therefore it is lawfull to appeale from a lesse assemblie to a greater,

if any man thinke he haue iniurie, except the fact be most euident
and plaine vnto euery man: but yet none otherwise, but that
the iudgement of the assemblie shall hold, vntill it shall be otherwise
adiudged, in an assemblie of greater authoritie.
               Assemblies are eyther Classes, or Synods.
               
               
                  Classes are conherences of the fewest Ministers of Churches,
standing neare together, as for example of twelue.
               The chosen men of all the seuerall Churches of that assembly,
are to meete in conference; that is to say, for euery Church a minister
and an Elder: and they shall meete euerie fortnight. They
shall chiefly endeuour the ouersight and censure of that Classis:
searching particularly, whether in them euery thing be done, according
to the holy doctrine and discipline of the Gospell: vz.
Whether any question bee arisen, touching any point of doctrine.
               Whether the Ecclesiasticall discipline haue his course.
               Whether any Minister be wanting in any of the Churches, that
they may speedily prouide a fit person.
               Whether the rest of the Elders and Officers of the Church, bee
appointed in euery Church.
               Whether care be had, ouer schollers, and the poore.
               In what pointes the Classes doo want aduise, for the further
aduancing of the Gospell among them.
               Before they make an ende, let some of the Ministers present,
make a sermon, either in course, or being chosen thereto by voyces.
Of whome the rest of the Ministers (secluding the Elders) shall
iudge among themselues: and if in any point, it shall be requisite,
they shall monish him brotherly: weighing euery thing, according
to the course, afore laid-downe in the Chapter, touching those

things, which are to be performed by him that preacheth
to the congregation.
               
               
                  Synodes.
                  A Synode is an assembly of chosen men, from 
                        •
                     oe Churches,
then those that be in one Classis, or conference.
                  In these, the Articles of the holy Discipline and Synodicall,
must alwaies be read: also in them, (after all other thinges be finished,)
censures or inquisition made, vpon all that be present: and
the supper of the Lorde shall bee celebrated by them, in and with
that congregation, where the Assembly is made, if conueniently it
may be.
                  Of Synodes there be two sortes: the first is particular, and this
conteineth vnder it both
Prouinciall and Nationall Synodes.
                  
                  A Prouinciall Synode, is an assembly of those, which bee
delegated from all the Classes or conferences of that Prouince.
Let euery Prouince conteine in it 24. Classes.
                  This may be fitte order, for the assembling together of a Synode
Prouinciall, vz. Let this care be laid vpon some certaine
Church, by consent of the Synode: let that Church, with aduise of
the Classis whereof it is, prefixe the place and time for the Assembly:
let other Churches, sende vnto such Church, those matters
which seeme vnto them of some difficultie to determine: and likewise
those matters, that doo appertaine to the whole Prouince,
and that diligently in conuenient season: to th'intent, that that
Church may in due time giue aduertisement vnto all the Classes
of the Prouince, both of the time and place, and of the matters to
be handled: so that such as are sent, may come better prepared, &
and that they may iudge thereof, according to the resolution of

their owne seuerall Classes or conferences.
                  Let euery Classis sende vnto the Prouinciall Synode two
Ministers, and as many Elders.
                  It shall bee called euery halfe yeare, or more often, vntill the
Discipline be confirmed.
                  But before a Nationall Synode be celebrated, let it be called
three months afore, that they may prepare, and furnish vp those
things, that belong vnto it.
                  Let the Acts of all the Prouinciall Synodes be sent vnto the
Nationall, by that Church, in which the Prouinciall assembly
was had: and let euery Minister be furnished, with the copies of
the Acts, and with the reasons vsed.
                  The Nationall, is a Synode consisting of the Delegats from
all the Synods Prouincail, that are within the dominion of one
common-wealth. Let the manner of calling it, be the same, that
is appointed for calling the Prouinciall, except the Synode it
selfe shall take other order herein: vz: by some certaine Church:
yet so, as the said Church doe appoint for place and time (to holde
it in) such as the Prouinciall Synode of that Church, which
shall next ensue, shall determine, and thinke good.
                  For the Nationall Synode, three Ministers and three Elders
must be chosen, out of euery Synode Prouinciall.
                  
                  In it, the common affaires of all the Churches of the whole nation
and kingdome, are to be handled: as of Doctrine, Discipline,
and ceremonies: causes not decided in inferiour Assemblies, Appellations,
and such like.
                  By the decree of the Nationall Synode, one is to be chosen,
which shall reduce the commentaries or Actes of all the seuerall
Churches, into one body.
               
               
                  Hitherto concerning particular assemblies. Now followes
the vniuersall or oecumenicall Synode of
the whole world.
                  
                     
And this is the Synode, that consisteth and is gathered together,
of the chosen men out of euery particular Nationall Synode.
                  
                  The Acts of all Synodes, are to be reduced into one body.
                  And thus farre these Chapters of the meetings: the particular
points whereof, maister Cartwright, and his companions,
haue bound themselues, by their subscriptions,
to put in practise, without any further expectation for her
Maiesties assent. And according to these pointes, (as
their numbers and oportunities haue serued their turnes)
they haue accomplished their bonds and promises; as by
that which hath beene saide, and by depositions vppon
othes, concerning their meetinges and dealinges in them,
is most apparant, to any that is not blinded with wilfull
obstinacie.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               Moe points of their booke put in practise: fasts: calling of Ministers:
presbyteries: censures, &c.
               
                  FVrthermore also, they haue not contented
themselues with the execution
of these thinges onely, but they
haue besides proceeded, in like manner,
with the ful practising almost of
all the rest of the booke.
               It is most notorious, that according
to the doctrine thereof, they haue taken vppon them,
to appoint publicke fasts: and then especially they haue
done it, when their fellowes haue beene most busie, to
trouble the present estate of the Church. Besides that,
these fasts with their seueral sermons and other prophecyings,

haue had another principal vse: vz. (as Lord did write
to Fen of maister Cartwrights pleasure) that the day following,
the brethren might talke of other matters.
               
               Likewise (saith maister Iohnson) touching the election
and making of ministers,
                  Iohnson before the Cōmissioners. I thinke they obserue, asmuch as they
can, the order prescribed in the said booke of Discipline. As about
Proudloe, of Weedenbeck his admission, (
                     〈◊〉
                   I haue heard)
and Snapes and Larkes. The manner whereof is, that they renounce
the calling, they haue had of the Bishops, and doe take it
againe, from the approbation of the Classis. And againe: they
will be content to accept orders from the Bishop, as a ciuill matter,
but doe not thereby account themselues Ministers, vntill the godly
brethren of some Classes haue allowed them. But more fully
Richard Hawgar.Rich. Hawgar his depositiō. The first degree they haue entered into, is this:
that teaching all Ministers, which are called according to the order
of the Church of England, to bee vnlawfull: they doe vrge,
such as they dare trust, and who are Ministers alreadie) to seeke
at their Classis a new approbation, which they terme the Lords
ordinance.
               
               In this action, the Minister before allowed of, must renounce
his former calling, and take that calling▪ (wherby he must stand)
of them.
               The manner whereof, is this: when any doe yeeld hereunto,
they appoint a day of their Classis, &c. As the example following
wil shew. One master Hocknel, being to haue a benefice, was
willed (by his Patrone) to bring some testimoniall, of the Ministers
of the shyre for his good conuersation. Wherevpon hee came
to Maister Snape. Who dealt with him (as is afore mentioned,)
and Hocknell hauing beene a Minister before, (some sixe or
seauen yeares) yeelding: Snape, with his companions gaue him
a text, and appointed him a day.
               
                  
At which time the Classis met in Saint Peters: and hee
preached. After, they assembled themselues, willing Hocknell
to stand aloofe. Then Maister Penry beganne to make a speech,
exhorting them to be carefull, to call vpon God: to deale without
affectiō in this their action &c. After which, they fel to the matter.
Some liked, that the man shuld be admitted, & some otherwise.
Those that were against him made these two reasons. First,
that hee had not iumped meete, in deliuering the Metaphore,
which was in his text: secondly because he was neyther Grecian
nor Hebrician. So as they ouerruling the rest, Hocknell was
called for, and in some sort commended: but yet the speaker
of the Classis told him, he must take more paines at his book, before
they could allow of him, as a fit Minister. Hereupon Master
Hocknell and they fell out: and he (contemning their censure)
did proceede, and tooke possession of his benefice.
               When they call a man, that is not alreadie a Minister: then
hauing vsed the order before mentioned, they command him to
goe to the Bishops, as to a ciuile Magistrate, for his writinges,
(which they tearme by a prettie name that this ex. hath
forgotten: and this they say, is onely for his safe standing in his
former calling, receiued of them: not that thereby hee receaueth
any power to be a Minister. On this sort was Master Lark (dwelling
a little from Wellingborow) called.
               After this calling by them, the parties so called, may preache
here and there, as he thinketh good, vntill hee bee called to a
charge: & then he must go to the Bishop, for his better standing,
and so the people calling him, he is a full Minister.
               Maister Snape being a Minister already, renounced that his
first calling: was called by the Classis: by that calling hee preached,
but would not administer the Lords Supper. After the parrish
of Saint Peters knowing, that he must not account himselfe

a full Minister, vntill some particular congregation, had chosen
him, they chose him for their Minister, and so he standeth at this
present. Thus farre Hawger.
               It is likewise deposed by two,Rich. Holmes. Rich. Hawgar before the Cōmissioners. that Maister Snape for the
answering of a question propounded vnto him, said, that
rather then he would haue stood, by vertue of any Letters of orders,
he would haue bin hanged vpon the gallowes.
               
               
                  But let Maister Snape speake himselfe.
                  Snape in a writing of his owne hand. Touching the substance
of my calling to the ministerie: I affirme, that I had it of
the church of God, being approued by the learned & godly neighbour
Ministers, and chosen by the people of my charge, to that
function. Touching that allowance, that I had of the Bishop, I
take it to be a thing meerely ciuile, belonging to a ciuile Magistrate:
which authoritie he hath by Act of Parliament, & which
therefore I might lawfully receaue at his hands, for the peaceable
execution of my Ministery.
               Againe, concerning the Presbyteries, (which the booke
affirmeth should be in euery parish:) they (want in effect)
nothing of all their whole platforme: if they could but
once attaine vnto the publike erecting vp of those thrones.
And how far it is likely they haue already preuailed therin,
without staying any longer for her Maiestie; let these
thinges following, whereof some haue beene touched alreadie,
make it knowne vnto you. Mention hath beene
made of a Presbytery set vp at Wandesworth.
                  Ma. Edmonds It was a decree
of the London brethren, that the Ministers should by little &
little, as much as possibly they might, draw the Discipline into
practise, though they concealed the names, eyther of Presbytery,
Elder or Deacō, making little account of the names for the time,
so their offices might secretly be established. There was an order
sette downe, in an assembly (1583. as I take it) for
the conuerting of Churchwardens and Collectors into Elders

and Deacons: as before in the Actes themselues it appeareth.
According to this order the brethren afterward
sent their directions abroad, to their fellowes, for their execution
of it.Barbon to Field. I receiued (saith Master Barbon) from our faithfull
brother Maister Gelibrande, a direction of the brethren,
concerning the Conuerting of Churchwardens into Elders, and
Collectors into Deacons.Holmes. 
                  Richard Holmes affirmeth that by
such speeches as he hath heard, hee doth verily thinke, that the
Ministers in their Classes haue resolued, to erect vp their seuerall
Presbyteryes, in their owne parishes. With him agreeth
Master Iohnson:Iohnson, according to the rules of that booke, I thinke
that sercetly in most places, where the brethren of the Classes
are, there are Elders chosen, and that they put the Discipline in
practise, so farre as they may, amongst themselues, without any
apparant shew thereof, to the ouerthrow of their safe-standing.
Further also he deposeth, that he himselfe hath beene blamed
diuers times, priuatelie, in that he would make no such choise of
Elders, (where he preached,) to practise the Discipline. And
what els should Gellibrand meane, by these words in a Letter
to Field? I haue written to Maister Cartwright seuerally,
and ioyntly to him and the Elders, signifying my readines, and
what aduersaries there are.
               
                  Lastly there was a nomination of Elders, at Kilsby in
Northampton-shiere, made by Maister Lee the Pastor, in the
yeare 1588. Their names as it was deposed before Sir
George Farmer and Sir Iohn Spencer, were, William Greene,
Roger Cowley,Ioh. Browne. Thomas Hall, Richard Wolfe, Iohn Browne, and
William Mariat: which sixe (saith the deponent,) Maister Lee
thought sufficient to determine and end all matters of controuersie
in the said towne. Henry Pinson also affirmeth, that he being
enformed of this election of Elders, by the said Browne and
others would not yeelde his consent thereunto, but said hee would
stand to the lawes of this realme, appointed by her Maiestie.
               
                  
One especiall reason, (as it was enformed) why Pinson
refused in this sort to ioyne with his neighbours, was: for
that there should haue beene some punishment, inflicted
by the said Elders vppon his sonne, for flinging a stone at
Elder-Mariats window, which he would none of, but was
faine to flie to her Maiesties lawes.
               So here then it appeareth (in some sort,) whether the
brethrē meant, to stay any more for the ciuile Magistrate,
in erecting of their Presbyteries: then they confesse they
did, concerning their vniformitie in Sermons and tripartite
meetings.
               
               Besides, it doth also appertaine to the further proofe of
the said Presbyteries, that (as it seemeth) some of those censures
haue beene vsed: for example, excommunication:
Which (by the rules of the Discipline booke) are of right
to be exercised by them. One Bluet a Minister (as I suppose)
being excōmunicated (as it seemeth) did write a
Letter to Field and Egerton: wherein hee is most earnest,
that vpon his repentaunce hee might bee restored againe
to the Church. Woe is me (saith he) that I am cast out of your
presence this day: but shame and sorrow is vnto the cause. And
if this woe and shame did but touch the bodie, it were tollerable:
for then at the day of death I should end my miserie, and no more
heare the words of reproach. For now euery one that seeth mee,
reprooueth me: and I am become a rebuke vnto all men. But this
is not all. Woe is me, that there is a partition-wall, betweene heaven
and my conscience, &c. If my offence may not bee passed by,
without further confession: euen before God and his Church in
London, will I lie downe and licke the dust at your feet, and confesse
more against my selfe then any of you know. Seuere Catoes,
I warrant you. But is this the matter they contend for,
that men may fall downe, and kisse their feete?
               There is also another example to this effect, worthie of

your remembrance: one La. Thomson writeth in this sort
of it. I thinke of him as an vnsound member, vnfit to bee continued
in the bodie, vnles he would be subiect to the gouernment
of a bodie, especially the bodie of our sauing God. The partie
meant by Thomson, was (as I take it) maister Wilcox, the
author of that admonition, which caused the first breakingout,
of all those troubles, that since haue ensued. This appeareth
by foure letters, written about the yeare 1583.
three of them from Field to Wilcox, and one from Wilcox
to Field. What the cause was, though it bee expressed in
one of the said Letters, I omit to rehearse it, no waies minding
to touch any mans priuate behauiour or infirmities.
But this I must tel you, that the brethren, (that is in Thomsons
sense, the body of our sauing God,) were so displeased and
angrie with him, that they suspended him from his Ministerie,
and did vse their censure of excommunication against
him.
               If you aske mee how Wilcox tooke this course at their
handes, I answere, euen as Pinson before named did, when
his sonne should haue beene punished: hee disliked it so
much, as that hee began to call their authoritie (for such
kind of their proceedings,) in question, he refused to submit
himselfe to their censures, and told Field plainely, that
he had bin dealt disorderly withall, both for matter and manner:
adding that hee had perhaps concealed as great infirmities of
Fields, and of some others, as his were.
               
               
                  With these and many such like words Field was greatly
prouoked, and for his owne part defied him. Whereas
(saith hee) for the hiding of your owne shame, you beginne to
score vp my faults, which you say are sixe in number, as great as
yours, if you should vtter them: I say it is no help to you, but testifieth
that old pride, hipocrisie and malice, which long time hath
lurked in that cankered heart of yours, &c. But I doe defie you,

&c. And for his refusing of their proceedinges: you ought
not (saith Field) so lightly to esteeme, that holy censure of the
brethren, but in true repentance to haue hidden your face, &c.
Againe: if God hath made you an instrument, to seeke for the
aduancement of Christs Scepter: kisse it your selfe and bee subiect
vnto it &c. Againe, if you loue Christ and his Church, before
your owne glorie, and your owne sinnes haue shut vp your mouth:
then be silent for euer. And notwithstanding that Wilcox
tooke exception to their authoritie, yet in the Letter
wherein Field answereth that point, and many others, he
beginneth thus. The Lord Iesus open your eyes, and giue you
such a true sence, and feeling of your sins, that howsoeuer you for)
a time) be throwne to Sathan; in the end your soule may be saued,
and you may feele assurance of eternall life, &c.
               What the issue of this matter was amongst them, I find
it not. It seemeth that in the end, Wilcoxe for lacke of his
former maintenance, (which was withheld from him by
the brethrens procurement, & vpon perswasion that after
a time he should be restored to his ministerie againe, and
in the meane space be relieued) he was faine to yeeld and
to submit himselfe vnto their censure, (by them tearmed
the Scepter of Christ.) Marrie still he thought himselfe to be
hardly vsed, and after some time of expectation, desired (as
it seemeth) to know, how long hee should vndergoe their
heauie indignation. Whereunto Field answered thus.
The brethren thought meet to admonish you, vtterly to surcease.
For how long or how short, mee thinkes you should not enquire,
considering the circumstances: who know very well your selfe,
that if an otherwere in your case, that no time can bee limited.
Neuerthelesse, if you doubt the iudgement to bee too hard, that already
is giuen, you may aske the priuate opinions of others your
best friends, as of Master Cartwright, and M. Thomson, who
are of mind that you are for euer disabled to that function, &c.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XV.
               They haue ioyned themselues into an association or brotherhood,
and doe appropriate to their meetings the name of the
Church.
               
                  THere is often mention made, in the premises
of the brethren, but yet in none other
sense, thē they approriate to themselues,
in sundrie of their writinges and
Letters, as
                  Barbon to Field. Pig to Field. Snape to Stone. Salute the brethren. Salute the
Barbon to Field. reuerend brethren, Master Trauers, Chark
Barber, Gardner, Egerton. SaluteD. chapman to Field. our most reuerend brother
Maister Cartwright. SalutePig to Field 1586. our reuerend brother Maister
Cartwright, and the rest of the brethren. TheGellibrand from Oxford to Field. brethren salute
you. CommendWake to Field. me to all our brethren. Commend meeKnew stub to Field. to all
the brethren with you: the brethren with vs here are in health.
CommendWade to Field. me to Maister Charke and Maister Trauers, with all
the rest of the brethren. RememberBarbon to Field. me to the brethren. Let him
L. Thomson to Field. be accounted among the brethren, as hee deserueth. I writ to
my Mother, to speake to you and our good brethren, to prouide me
of some honest brother, to Catechise my family. ToLord to Field. Maister
Field, with the rest of the Godly Ministers, his brethren, in London.
To his belouedWigginton to Field. brother, Maister Field, and to all other his
faithfull brethren, namely of the Ministery, at or about London.
OurD. Chapmā to Field. brethren haue determined. I'trustGellibrand to Field. you are so linked together,
by the bond of brotherly loue, and the desire of the pure Discipline
of the church, that nothing may sunder you. The brethren
assembled: the Godly brethren: our pore brethren here, (at
Oxford) do long to heare from you: and, in the Articles whervnto
they subscribed: we the brethren, &c.
               
                  Vppon the occasion of these termes, and many other

such like: it is found out by examination, that this Classicall
and reforming consort, with their followers; haue diuided
themselues from all the rest of the ministerie, and
Christians in England:Cricke to Field. 
                  and linked themselues into a newe
brotherhood, with this lincke, vz. (as Doctor Cricke tearmeth
it) the desire of the pure Discipline: thereby shewing
themselues to be most notorious Schismatickes.
               When Salutations are written,Iohnson. (saith maister Iohnson) by the
brethren that seeke reformation, as vnto the godly brethren: the
meaning is, (as I euer tooke it) to such as haue submitted themselues
vnto the holy Discipline. Againe, when the name brother,
is giuen to ministers, it signifieth them to be of some Classis, for
their consulting and setting vp of Christes kingdome: and when
to the laitie, those that generally do ioyne with the ministers for
the discipline, and doe euery of them submit themselues to a minister
of some of the Classis, &c. And these, both ministers and
people, are the godly brotherhood, denying the name properly of
a godly brother or sister to any other. The same also (in effect)
hath he deposed in the Starre-chamber: where he further
addeth, that thus he thought himselfe, when hee was of that brotherhood,
and that it was so commonly maintayned, both by him,
and by the rest of the Northampton Classis.
               
               
                  And maister Edmondes,Edmondes. 
                  in like maner, hath deposed as
much to the same purpose, both in the Starre-chamber, &



before her Maiesties Commissioners for causes ecclesiasticall.
This (saith he) I do know, that when salutations were sent, or letters
written to London from some Ministers abroad, as from
Fen or Cartwright, &c. to maister Field & the rest, &c. therby
was alwaies meant, properly, the ministers or the brotherhood of
the Ministery in London: and when they vse the name or phrase
of godly brethren, or sisters, or godly brotherhood or sisterhood,
they meane generally both all the said Ministers, and likewise
as many, as do depend vpon them for the cause of reformation. So

as the rest of the Ministers and people, who and wheresoeuer, that
doe not ioyne with them, (as is before said) are altogether excluded
out of their brotherhood: insomuch, as they will auoide the
company of all other, as much as they can possibly, refusing eyther
to buy or sell, or to eat or drinke with them.
               
                  Againe, it may not in any wise be omitted, that in their
seuerall said letters & other writings, they vse oftentimes
the name of the Church, and of the Churches: in as lewd a
sence, as they do the name of brethren. Thus they write. I
knowSnape to Field. the state of this Church: Make knowen to vs the state of
the Church with you: Our ChurchesKnewstub to Field. are in danger of such, as
hauing beene of vs, do renounce all fellowship with vs.
               TheKnewstub to Field. hand of God is like to be heauy vpon our Churches here,
if the malice of Sathan and his instruments be not preuented. A
woman with vs, &c. sometimes thought to be a friend to Religion,
&c: giueth it forth, that Maister Walsh had laid witchcraft
vpon her. She would haue had him conuented, by some of the
Iustices: but when he was once named she was repelled. Now she
is come to London &c: She deuiseth newe matter against him,
and against vs all,Good Iustice. as that wee should haue had meetinges at her
house &c. and that wee haue a priuate iurisdiction among our
selues, thinking that this will make her entrance vnto the Archbishop,
or high Commissioners &c. I pray you first conferre
with maister Walsh: and then deale, (as secretly as you may) to
medicine these mischiefes.
               It is longBlake to Field. since I heard from you, (saith one Blake) of the
state of the Church of London. Another, By M. West
                  Gelibrand to Field. & M.
Browne, you shall vnderstand the state of the Churches, wherein
we are. A third: If my offenceRob. Bluet to Field and Egerton. may not be passed by, without a
further confession, euen before God and his Church, in London
will I lie downe, and licke the dust at your feete, and confesse &c.
A fourth: I receiued a letterFenne to Field. from you in the name of the rest
of the brethren: whereby I vnderstand your ioyning together, in

choosing of my selfe, vnto the seruice of the Church, vnder the
Earle of Leicester, &c. I am ready to runne, if the Church command
me, according to the holy decrees and orders of the discipline.
By these their speeches it appeareth, that as they
haue cut off themselues from the fellowship of the rest of
the Christians in England, by ioyning themselues into a seuerall
brotherhood: so haue they already seduced her
Maiesties subiects, by gathering them together into a new
societie, whereunto they doe appropriat the name of the
Church: as though all other Churches in the realme, were
but as Iewish Sinagogues or heathenish assemblies. This is
not, (you shall see) my bare collection: heare the witnesses,
what they hereof haue deposed.
               
               In these brethrens speaches of the Church or Churches:Iohnson. it is to
be vnderstood, that by the Church of England, they meane the
Church according to humaine lawes and the Popes: which is ruled,
(as they terme it) by an Antichristian gouernement. And
by the Godly Churches, or the Churches of God in England,
they meane such places, congregations, or assemblies, as doe
embrace the reformation, and haue such a minister, as is of some
Classis.
               Sometime also by the Church, (as the Church of God in London)
is meant the Classis of the brethren, or their Synods. And
so maister Edmondes:Edmondes. when they vse these, or the like speaches,
in their writing or otherwise: vz. the Church or Churches of
God heere, with this or that, or the Church in London hath done
this or that: they by they especially meane the Ministers thēselues.
               
                  But for the further clearing of this matter: because the
chiefe Rabbies of this conspiracie, do themselues preach in
our material Churches, it is to be obserued, that the parish
where they preach, being assembled, is not the Church
properly in their sence: but as many thereof onely, as are
ioyned vnto them with that inuiolable bond mentioned:

vz. the desire of the godly discipline: and those furthermore,
who leauing their owne parish Churches, doe come
vnto them. As for example: The Church of God (forsooth)
in the Black Fryers, doth consist, besides that parish,
of a number of men and Marchauntes wiues, dispersed
here and there throughout the whole Citie. Be content to
hear the depositions, that are taken to like purpose. Maister
SnapeSnape. affirmed (as Richard HolmesHolmes. 
                  and Richard HawgarHawgar. haue
deposed): that here one, & there one, picked out of the Prophane
and common multitude, and put a-part to serue the Lord: maketh
the Church of God, and not the generall multitude. Maister
Iohnson saith, that the brethren of the laitie doe seldome come to
their owne parish Churches, nor receiue the communion there, otherwise
then they are compelled for feare of trouble. For they account
those their pastors onely, whom they do so choose. And maister
Edmonds,Edmondes. 
                  vpon his experience in London. The people of
this brotherhood, do seldome come to their owne parish Churches,
otherwise then for feare, to incurre some daunger of lawes: neyther
do they accompt the minister of their parishes, to bee any of
their pastors properly: except he be some one of the brethren Ministers,
before specified, or very effectually inclining that way.
               It is likewise to bee obserued, that if any of this faction, brotherhood,
or sisterhood, do lie dangerously sicke: they do seldome or
neuer, send for their owne pastors to visite them: nor moue them
to pray for them, publikely▪ in their owne parish as neglecting
their praiers: but do send to the Readers abroad, whom they haue
chosen for their pastors, both to come vnto them, & to pray with
them, and for them, in their assemblies.
               This also is to bee obserued, that the stricter sort of this crue,
when they lie at the point of death, will haue no bell tolled for
them: and many of them do take order, before their death: that
afterwardes, they be not buried in any Church: that there bee no
sermon: nor any wanner of buriall vsed, which is prescribed.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XVI.
               A ridiculous pretence of laws: with a recapitulation of the summe
of this third booke.
               
                  
                     AS they countenance these their conuenticles, & vnlawful assemblies before specified,
with the name of the Church: so
with the like boldenesse, (to the same
purpose) some of them are not ashamed
to affirme: that by the doctrine of the
Church of Englād, and by the lawes and statutes of this
Realm, the present gouernment of the Church of England,
vnder her Maiestie, by Archbishops and Bishops, is to bee accounted
wicked and vnlawfull, and withall (in effect) that
by the saide doctrine, lawes, and statutes, all the former
proceedings,
                  Martin Iun▪
                   
                  decrees, &c. of the brethren, are to be maintayned
and iustified. As by the particular proofes following,
it will appeare.
               
               The officesMartin Iun, of Lord Archbishops and Bishops, &c. (saith
Martin Iunior) are condemned, by the doctrine of the Church of
England. The doctrine that condemneth the places of Lorde
Bishops isThes. 49 approoued by the statutes of this Realme, and her
Maiesties prerogatiue royall. To beThes. 50 a Lord Bishop is directly
against the Statute: 13. Elizab. AccordingThes. 78. to the doctrine
of the Church of England, our Prelates haue no authoritie
to make Ministers, or to proceede to any ecclesiasticall censure:
theirThes. 82 citations, processes, excommunications, &c. are neither
to bee obeyed nor regarded. Men oughtThes. 83 not to appeare in their
Courtes: aThes. 84▪
                   man being excommunicated by them, ought not to
seeke any absolution at their hands. And in the behalfe of the
brethren, he doth also further affirme: that by theThes. 72▪
                   said doctrine
of the Church of England &c. all Ministers bee of equall

authoritie: that theThes. 80. godly ministers ought to ordaine those, that
would enter into that function, without any leaue of the prelates,
and not so much as once to suffer them to take any approbation of
the prelates: thatThes. 85. euery minister is bound to preach the Gospell,
notwithstanding the inhibition of the Bishops: thatThes. 86. a man being
once made a minister, is not to be kept backe from preaching,
by the inhibition of any creature: andThes. 106. that by the saide doctrine,
&c. all ministers are bound by subscription, &c. to disauow
the Hierarchie of Bishops.
               
               When you shall reade these strange assertions, so farre
passing any ordinary bounds of common modestie: think
with your selues, that it is no maruaile, to see their writinges
so full of authorities. For I do assure you, that euen
in the like sort, and with the same sinceritie & faithfulnes,
doe they alledge for their platformes, both Scriptures,
Councels, Fathers and Histories.
               Moreouer, what with the pretence of Gods law, of mans
law, and (I know not) of what law, they haue been suffered
to go so farre against all lawes: that now they haue taken
such heart, as that some of them are not affraid to affirme
(and that in print because the people might take notice of
it):
that there is no authoritie, which may lawfully suppresse
their foresaid proceedinges.Martin Iun. Thes. 17. 18. 22. 
                  No Magistrate (saith one
of the brotherhood) may lawfully mayme or deforme the body of
Christ, which is the Church: no lawfull Church gouernment is
changeable, at the pleasure of the Magistrate: of necessitie all
christian Magistrates are bound, to receiue this gouernment, &c.
               
               And thus hither to you haue seen the proceedings of our
English reformers according to their ringleaders actions in
Scotland: they haue had their draughts of discipline: they
haue subscribed a particular book for England: they haue
put their former platformes, & their said particular booke,
(for the most part of it) in practise, as neare as they could:

they haue had their meetinges and Synodes, generally
throughout all the lande: they haue made decrees & conclusions,
not only to further their own conspiracy, but also
to ouerthrow the present gouernment of the Church:
they haue had in some places their Elders: they haue exempted
themselues from the ecclesiastical gouernment in
this Realme, accounting the same, (in some respects,) to
be Antichristian, and so not to be obeyed, (& in some other)
to be a meere ciuile, and a parliament church-gouernment:
and in that regard, onely after a sort, to bee yeelded
vnto, for their better & safer standing, in their owne seditious
and consistorian waies. They haue, by their false gloses,
seduced many of her Maiesties subiectes: they haue
combined themselues together, into a strange brotherhood.
They challenge to their vnlawfull and seditious
assemblies, the true and most proper name of the Church.
               
               They say their doings are according to law.
               
                  They affirme (in effect) that no Magistrate may lawfully
ouerthrow that, which they haue builded: in asmuch,
                  The humble motion pa. 84.
                  as now it is saide, that the Bishops, in seeking by the
authority which her Maiestie hath giuen and confirmed
vnto them, to maintaine (as they are bound) the present
church-gouernment and state, established by her highnes
lawes within this Realme, and to suppresse and reforme
their schismaticall & seditious disorders, and such like, are
the disturbers of the peace of the church: that the Bishops
beginne the
                  The humble motion pa. 84. quarrel in disquieting of them, who in towne
and country, were very greatly at vnity, & tooke sweete councell
together, for the profiting of the Church. ThatEpistle to the discouerie of R B. &c. the Bishops are
the schismatickes, and not they: that the crime of schisme, which
the prelates woulde fasten vppon them, doth iustly cleaue to the
Bishops: and thatRegister pa. 69 Bishops may be discharged by the Church.
               And they haue entred alreadie into this consideration,

                  how Archbishops, Bishops, Chauncellors, Deanes, Cannons,
Archdeacons,
                  Lord to Fe
                        •
                     . 158. 9. 
                  Commissaries, Registers, Apparitors &c. (All
which, by their said pretended reformation, must be thrust from
their liuings.) should be prouided for, that the common wealth be
not thereby pestred with beggars.
               
               Whereby it appeareth, that (in their owne conceites)
they haue already attained their soueraintie. They and
their conuenticles (forsooth) are the true Church: and all
England besides is in a schisme.
               
                  So as now it may be dayly expected, when these godly
brethren, for a full conclusion of their attempts, will take
vpon them, (as their maisters did in Scotland) to discharge
the estate of Bishops,Declaration B 2. 
                  and to direct their commissioners; to
her most excellent Maiestie, commanding both her and
her highnesse most honourable priuie Councell, vnder the
pain of excommunication, to appoint no Bishops hereafter,
because they haue concluded that state to bee vnlawfull:
and that furthermore her Highnes, vnder the same
penaltie, shall not presume from thenceforth, either any
longer to maintaine the present Antichristian Church-gouernment,
or once to attempt the ouerthrowing of theirs.
And thus much of this matter, vz. concerning our English
reformers, and their imitation of the Ministers of Scotland,
in that seeing they could not preuaile, with their suites &
supplications to her Maiestie and the Parliament,
for the setting vp of their discipline: they
haue taken vpon them to doe it
themselues.
               
               The end of the third Booke.
            
         
         
            
            THE FOVRTH BOOKE OF
DISCIPLINARY GROVNDES
and Practises.
            
               CHAP. 1.
               Some of them seeme to growe desperate, and propound to themselues
a strange example to follow, for the adauncing of their
Discipline.
               
                  As the Ministers of Scotland with their
adherentes, finding sondry impedimentes
in theyr foresaide proceedings,
and in the setting-vp of their
discipline, did grow to be very angry,
& ther-vpon often-times before
they came to armes or violence, did
cast out many greate speaches and
threatnings (as it hath beene before declared): euen so also
it fareth now rightly, with our Disciplinarians in England.
They threaten and bragge aboue measure, what
shall come to passe: and I pray God they be suffered to go
no further.
               
                  One of the brethren, (in the name of the rest,) complaining,
that they are oppugned, and (as he saith) persecuted,
desireth, that the same may be prouided for: and addeth therwithall

these words.
                  2. admonit. pa, 59. It is the case already of many a thousand in
this land: yea it is the case of as many, as seeke the Lorde aright,
&c. Greate troubles will come of it, if it be not prouided
for.
               
                  None seeke the Lord aright but this brotherhood. Great
ioy of them. But what troubles meane they? That,
an other seemeth to cleare: where he sayeth, that they
can endure no such hard dealing, as is vsed against them
any longer.
                  Suppl. pa. 61, Alas (saith hee) wee are neuer able to stand
against the pouerty, losses, imprisonment, discountenance, by our
superiors, that our bretheren haue sustayned &c. Neuer able to
swallow vp the slaunders, and bitter names of puritanes, precisians,
traitors, seditious libellers &c. Why? what will you
doe?
               
               
                  The best that can bee gathered of his wordes, is this.
Come, (saith hee) let vs make a Captaine, and returne againe
into Egipt. If they haue not their mindes, the danger may
bee, which in deede will bring some troubles that they
are not vnlike to become either Atheists or Papistes.
               Shortlie after the straunge attempt before mentioned
that was made against the king of Scotland, Anno 1585,
by ten thousand of his owne people at Sterling: (whereby
the consistorian Ministers preuailed, aswell against their
Soueraigne, as against their Bishops, for the aduancing
of their presbiteries): there came out a rayling Dialogue,
here in England published abroade in print and scattered
by the brotherhoode, throughout the whole Realme.
               
                  This Dialogue is intituled: the state of the church of England
laid open in a conference, betweene Diotrephes (representing
the person of a Bishop,) Tertullus a Papist, (brought
in to pleade for the orders of our church,) Demetrius, a
Vsurer (signifying such as liue by vnlawful trades:) Pandocheus,
an Inkeeper, (a receyuer of al, and a soother of euery

man for his gaine:) and Paule a preacher of the worde of
God: (sustayning the place and persons of the Consistoriall
brethren.)
               
                  Where, (by the way,) see againe the account they make
of all that do maintaine the present state of the Church:
they are but ambitious worldlings: Papistes: liuers
by vnlawfull trades: and men pleasers. But themselues
are Apostles.
               
                  In this Dialogue, Paule is set forth as a man desirous, (vppon
the Innekeepers motion,) to heare some good newes
from Scotland: who meeting with the Bishop, hee vseth
him according to the Consistorian humor: that is, most
proudly, most spitefully, and most slaunderously. He condemneth
both the calling of Bishops as Antichristian, and
censureth al their proceedings, as wicked, Popish, vnlawfull,
and cruell. He affirmeth that all the good, that hath
beene done for the present flourishing estate of the Gospell
in England: hathE. 1. beene brought to passe, by those men,
whom the Bishops despise, and by that course, which they were euer
ennemies vnto. He saith, thatF. 1. very many of all degrees,
are fully perswaded in the matters of reformation, and that he is
perswaded, this will come of it, vz. that he shall see the gouernement
of the Church,, (by the rules of their discipline) set vp before
it be long.
               
                  The Bishop is supposed to haue beene sent out of England
into Scotland, for the suppressing of the Presbiteries
there: and so is made, vpon his returne homewarde, to be
the reporter of the Scottish affaires, and withall to signifie
his great feare, least he and the rest of the Bishops in England,
should bee serued shortly, as the Bishops had lately
beene in Scotland, namely at Edenburgh and Sainct Andrewes
&c.
               
               Ah (saith the pretended Bishop) my hoste. The Puritanes

in Scotland haue got-vp their discipline,
                     
                        •
                     . B and vtterly ouerthrown
all the soueraignty of Bishops: by which they preuailed so mightily,
that we feared, our fal in England shortlie to ensue. Whereupon
I was sent, together with this my frend (Tertullus,) who
came out of Fraunce into England: to goe and seeke the subuersion
of their great assemblies, and the rest of their iurisdiction:
wherein I preuailed a while, but now it is worse then euer it was.
And it came so to passe: because the whole land cried for Discipline
againe; and the Noble men so stifly did stand to it: and lastly
the Ministers that came home from England, dealt so boldly
with the king; that I was vtterly cast out, without all hope euer to
doe any good there againe, and now I make homeward in hast,
least I loose all there also.
               Here you haue the brethrens approbation of the aforsaide
attempt in Scotland: whereby it is apparaunt, that if
they shal be able to bring the people to such a kind of clamor,
and the nobility to such a manner of stifnes: they can
be wel content for their partes, to haue her maiestie vsed,
as the Scottish king was: for it is according to their Geneua
Diuinity.
               
                  Tertullus the Papist,
                  F. 2, & 3, &c. he is made the Bishops only Councellour,
in the whole course of the gouernment of our
Church: by whose aduise, (the author of the Dialogue
saith) that the Bishops do beare with the Popish recusants,
and that so many waies are sought to suppresse the Puritanes.
This Tertullus, together with the Host and the Vsurer,
do relate to the Bishop those occurrents in Englande,
which had fallen out and hapned in his absence. And
vppon the occasion of this question, asked by the Bishop:
vz. haue not the Bishops yet suppressed the Puritans, neither
with countenance, nor by authority? Tertullus maketh this
aunswere. Suppressed? no, my Lord: a friend of mine writte
vnto me, that one of their preachers saide in the Pulpit; he was

perswaded that there were a 100000. of them in England, and
that the number of them increased dayly in euery place, of all estates
& degrees.
               
               Is it not time for the Magistrates to looke about
them? They do take it in scorne to bee thought so
weake, as that they could bee suppressed. Bee it, they
flatter themselues therein: yet their desire is apparant,
that (if they be suffered, and shall euer be able) they will
bring it to that passe. And if this be not a necessary consequent
of the premisses: my iudgement faileth me. But
to proceede.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               Of their doctrine for making a reformation themselues, and how
the people must be thrust into that action.
               
                  
                     ABout foure yeares since, it should
seeme that some of the brethren,
were of opinion, that they had
dealt long inough in the practise
of their Discipline, after such a secret
manner: and that then they
were bound in dutie to proceede
to the publike exercise of it, notwithstanding
any daunger, that might therby ensue. For
thus one of them writeth.
                  Payne to F. Our zeale to Gods glorie, our loue to
his Church, & the due planting of the same, in this horheaded age
should be so warme & and stirring in vs, as not to care what aduenture
we giue, and what censures we abide &c. The Iesuites &
Seminaries, their diabolicall boldnes, will couer our faces with
shame &c. And after also in the same letter. We cānot be discharged,
of great disloyalty to our cōming Christ, except we proceed

with practise, and so to further the Lords cause by suffering: forasmuch
as that dutifull suffering, for so honorable a matter, is as
sure a signe of subiection, as obeying, the time so vrging that
bounden duetie. It is verily more then time, to Register the names
of the fittest and hottest brethren round about our seuerall dwellings,
whereby to put Maister Snecanus godly counsell in execution:
vz. Si quis obijciat &c. If any man obiect, that the setting
vp, and the lawfull practise of the discipline in the Church,
is hindred by the ciuill magistrate: let the magistrate bee freely
and modestlie admonished of his duety. If he esteeme to be accounted,
either a godly or a Christian magistrate, without doubt hee
will admitte wholesome counsailes. But if he do not, yet let him
bee more exactlie instructed, that he may serue God in feare, and
bend his authority to the defence of the church and of Gods glory.
Marry, if by this way there happen no good successe, then let the
ministers of the Church, execute their office, according to the appointment
of Christ. For they must rather obay God then men.
In this last point, we haue dolefully failed, which now or neuer
standeth vs in hand to prosecute with all celerity, without lingring
and staying so long for Parliaments.
               This aduise of Paines, was thought by the brethren, (as
I gesse) to be somewhat too rash. For of likelihoode they
could not finde at that time, so sufficient a number of such
hotte brethren as might serue their turne. Whereupon (as
I suppose) out commeth the decrees of the Warwick-shire
Classes, that for the increasing of the said number, euery minister,
(as occasion serued,) should teach the Discipline vnto the
people, as wel as the other partes of the Gospel. And for the moderating
of Paines too hastie aduise, it was thus determined.
Non dum solicitandum esse publicé vniuersum caetum ad
praxim Disciplinae, donec meliùs instituantur homines in eius
cognitione: that is: As yet the whole multitude are not to be allured
(publikely) to the practise of the Discipline, vntil men bee

better instructed, in the knowledge of it. As though for the answering
of Payne, they had said; that when by that means
they had gotten, a sufficient number to assiste them, then
his counsaile should be followed.
               For you must vnderstand, that their chiefest trust is reposed
in the people, as it may be further made more plain
vnto you by the deposition of maister Edmonds, whose
wordes I will set downe, as they remaine in record. I doe
well remember (saith he) that after I had left that company,
meaning the London assemblies, meeting with Master Field,
I talked with him, what harme was already done, by inueighing
against the present state of the Church, and by their proceedings,
in beating this their new reformation into the heades of the common
people, because they were alreadie growen thereby amongest
themselues, into great diuisions: very contemptuous, insolent, &
intractable, &c, Whereunto hee answered, tush, holde your
peace: seeing we cannot compasse these things, by suite nor dispute:
it is the multitude and people, that must bring them to passe.
But I will leaue their endeuours a while, how they may
seduce the people, and enter into a discourse to their further proceedings.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               They would haue the nobility and the inferior Magistrates to set
vp their discipline: & of their supplication with a 100000 hāds.
               
                  IT is here to be considered, what course
they take, to bring the Nobility and inferior
magistrates of England, to the before
said stifnes,Suppl. to the gouern. of Wales. pa. 15. 16. 36. 37. 38. 39. (mentioned in the first
Chapter) that was in them of Scotlād:
Maister Penry exhorteth the Lord President
of Wales, by the examples of Moses,

Iehosuah, Dauid, Salomon, Iehosophat, Hezechiah, Iosue,
Nehemiah, &c. & to take in hād their pretended reformation,
in that countrie: prouing that he hath authority therunto,
because hee is a gouernour vnder God, and that if hee
refused so to doe; he could haue no commission to rule there,
in that therby Christ being reiected, he was become but the Lieutenant
of Sathan. Here you haue Allobrogical, and Consistoriall
stuffe, able of it selfe, (if it were receiued) to fill all
Christian kingdomes, with all kinde of mutinies, sedition,Goodman with the conent of the Geneuians &c p. 214. 215
and rebellion. They would make the inferior
Magistrates, vnder their Soueraigne to beleeue: that they
had, (for their times, and within their limittes,) as absolute
authority, as if they themselues were fully Princes
there: and were not manie waies restrayned, by the
supreme Magistrate. Surely if they shall bee able, by
these and such like perswasions, to draw vnto them the
Iustices of Peace, the Shirifes or Lieutenants of euery Shire,
(and so make them the executioners of their good pleasures
and platformes, without any further Commission
or warrant from her Maiestie:) they shall not neede to
expect eyther Prince, or Parliament, but may throwe
downe and set vp, as greate builders doe, whatsoeuer
shall be most agreeable, to the mutabilitie of their owne
affections.
               And whereas an obiection might haue beene made,
that if either the Noblemen, Gentlemen, or people shold
take vpon them to cast downe the Bishops, and to reforme
the church, according to their raigning frēzy, without
her maiesties commandement, that in so doing they shold
greatly disturbe the state of the Realme, and highly offēd
her most excellent maiestie: these points are both of them
passed ouer with a snuffe, & with great disdaine, as being
no such impediments, as ought to hinder the valiant corages

of Consistorian subiects.Martin Iun. Epilog. 
                  I tell you true, (saith one of
their Captaines) I thinke it a greate blessing of God, that hath
raised vp Martin to hold tackling with the Bishops, that you
may haue some time of breathing, or rather a time to gather courage
and zeale, &c. to set vppon these ennemies, &c. For if, as
hitherto you haue, you bee so loth, for disturbing of our state, forsooth
and the offending of her Maiestie, not onelie to speak against
but euen vtterlie to reiect this Hierarchy of our Bishops, euen to
haue no more to doe with it, then with the seate of the beast: you
shall declare vnto our children, that God can set vp, but a company
of whiteliuered souldiers &c. Forsooth if this exhortation
be according to their Discipline: it ought no longer
to be tearmed Christs, (as they tearme it) but the Diuels
Discipline.Martin sea And yet, because they would not haue her
Maiestie altogether neglected, an other of their Lieutennants
can be content, that (before their souldiers mentioned,
shoulde beginne the skirmish) there might bee
first, (as it were) for a parlee, some little ouuerture
of duetie signified: that, if (as yet) her Highnesse
woulde bee ruled by them, they would desist. To
this purpose hee moueth all the Puritanes, (as hee tearmeth
them,) in England both Lordes, Knightes, Gentlemen,
Ministers and people, to offer a supplication to
her Maiestie: in effect, for the full obtayning of all their
desires.
               To this (saith he) an hundred thousand hands would
be gotten &c. and then thou (speaking to his reader) may
well thinke, what a stroke so many would strike together, &c. It
should appeare, that they are not few, and of small reputation, but
in a manner the strength of our land, and the sinow of her Maiesties
royal gouernment, which our Bishops do falsely note with
the names of Puritanes, The consideration whereof, I tell thee, euen
in policie, would make, that this their suite should not bee hastily

reiected, especially in such a time, as wherein we now liue, in
daunger of our enemies abroad, and therefore had need of no causes
of discouragement at home. I like it well when men will
deale plainelie, You see indeede their hearts. And is it
not then euident, whereat they ayme? In such a time no pollicy?
Indeede the returne of the Spaniard was then expected.
No neede then of discouragement at home? Why?
wanting your desires, wold you haue taken no part, if the
Spaniard had come? or purposed you, to haue made a
more readie passage for him, by rebelling at home, before
he should haue come? or would you haue ioyned with
him, if he had come? or meant you thereby, (through
terror) to haue enforced her Maiestie, to your purposes,
least you should haue taken some of these courses? Chose
which of them you list: the best is seditious.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               Presuming vpon some vnlawful asistance, they vse very violent
wordes.
               
                  HOw true it is, that they haue a hundreth
thousand, ready at their direction,
I know not: but they haue surely
too many: if the companion of the
brotherhood, that sent his humble
motion abroade, may be herein beleeued.
Thousands (he saith) do sigh for this
discipline,
                  pag. 39 
                  and ten thousand haue sought it: and approued and
worthy men of euery shire, haue consented vnto it.
               
               But certaine it is such is their hope, to thrust the people,
with the rest of their confederates, into some vnlawfull
execution, of their distempered designementes: that they

are come to a wonderfull resolution and assurance, as hauing
almost (in their own conceipts,) obteined alreadie,
the verie scepter of their kingdome. The Eldershippe is
at hande, (saith the humble motioner.) And againe: vsing
reasons, why the state here in England shoulde presentlie
embrace their gouernement, hee falleth vpon these
two pointes, (iumping iustlie, with the Scottish ministers
logique, mentioned before by Diotrephes, the pretended
Bishop,) vz. the people are inflamed with zeale, and (as it seemeth)
the second reason dependeth vpon the first: that
is, because it is harde, daungerous, and impossible to stand against
it. In effect, the people crie for the Discipline,
and therefore it must needes preuaile. Indeede they
haue slaunderously set out supplications and complaints
in the name of the comminaltie: thereby to terrifie
their withstanders. But I trust the people generally are
not so madde, although there bee some that are straungely
bewitched: vnto this conceipt of the peoples readines
it seemeth to mee, that M. Snape had relation, when
hee vsed these wordes following, as they are set down by
the othes of some of them, to whom he spake them. How
say you (quoth hee) if we meaning himselfe and his fellow
ministers,Holmes, Hawgar. &c. with their adherentes deuise a way, whereby to
shake off all the Antichristian yoake, and gouernment of the Bishops:
& will iontly together erect the discipline and gouernment
all in one day: but peraduenture it wil not be yet, this yeare & a
halfe. An other, (of his more then superabundant charitie)
foreseeing the mischiefes that are ready to fal by his
brethrens procurement, vpon the Bishops of this realme:
giueth them warning to begone in time.Epistle to mart▪ epitome. 
                  Bee packing Bishops,
(saith he you striue in vaine: you are laid open alreadie.
               
               
                  Friers and Monkes were not so bad. Looke to your selues:
for my sonnes will not see their father thus persecuted at your

handes.
                  W. F. 
                  We protest (say the authors of a certaine supplication,
drawen to her Maiesty: and found in one of the brethrens
studies: but he wil not confesse, by whose aduise it
was penned:) We protest (say they) vnto your Maiestie: that
we will be no longer subiect vnto the Bishops vnlawfull and vsurped
authority &c. Wherefore let them not looke for it at our
handes.
                  Epistle to the Demonst. And an other. The trueth will preuaile (speaking
of the discipline) in spight of your teeth (meaning the Bishops,)
and all other aduersaries of it. Likewise an other dealeth
as charitably with the common wealth, as his fellow
did with the Bishops:
                  Martin iun. Thes. 98. 103. 100. 105. that is: he warneth to take heede:
saying, that it will be very dangerous to our state, to mayntaine
two contrary factions: that the Magistrates are then bound, euen
for the quieting of our state, to put downe the one: that those, that
stande for the discipline, neither can nor will giue it ouer, (so as
they will not bee put downe): and that the saide Magistrates
cannot maintayne the corruption of our Church, namely Archbishops
and Bishops, without the discontentment of their subiectes.
               
               
                  And an other: we haue sought to aduance this cause of God,
by humble suite to the Parliament, by supplication to your Conuocation
house, by wrighting in defence of it, and by challenging
to dispute for it: seeing none of these meanes vsed by vs haue preuayled:
if it come in by that meanes, which will make all your
harts to ake, blame your selues.
               And to conclude.Martins protestation. 
                  In this one point (saith another) the Bishops
are of my minde: vz. that reformation cannot well come
to our Church, without bloud. Let the place be througly considered.
The wordes are ambiguously set downe: of purpose
to couer (in some sort) the crueltie, which lurketh in
their own heartes. For in my simple iudgement, his speaches
can haue no other good & coherent sence, then this,
vz. that as the Bishops do think (as he slaunderously deemeth)

that there can be no reformation of the Puritanes
disordered proceedings, without the bloud of some of
their brotherhoode, so he is of minde, that the reformatiō
which he and his companions do seeke for, cannot be attained
vnto, without the bloud of some of those, that doe
withstand their platformes. It is true that hee there onely
prosecuteth the cruel opinion, which hee ascribeth to the
Bishops: saying that no bloud can handsomly be spilt, vnlesse they
be the butchers. But he passeth cunningly by his own mind,
as very wel knowing his companions capacities. Indeed, if
they do take vpon them to spil bloud, they cannot (thanks
be to God) as yet, do it handsomely. The Lord of his infinite
mercy graunt that their opportunities, to such a mischief,
do neuer serue them better, then hitherto they haue
done.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               Vpon Cartwrights committing to prison: some strange attempts
were looked.
               
                  BEsides, prayers to preuent such outrages (as are
mentioned in former chapters) there must be other
meanes diligently looked into. For out of
question, it is high time. Euery one is acquainted with the
execution of Hack. but few do vnderstand, the secretes of
those attempts. They stretch much further then they are
supposed.
               You may remember,Buch, de iu
                        •
                     e regn. 57. the Disciplinarie mens doctrine
(before mentioned) vz.Goodman. pag. 185. Iunius Brutu s. 170. that when Princes grow to be tyrants,
(whereof seditious spirites will be the iudges, (and
that the inferiour Magistrates will not do their duties:Beza de authorit. magist. insubd. p. 97 the
people then, (if any Ionathan will step foorth, to be their
captaine) are bound to ioyne themselues vnto him, and

may vse the sword in their own right:I. P Of obedience. Whittinghams preface Goodman pag. 196, I. P. 121. or otherwise some
priuate man, that is moued with zeale extra ordinem, may
execute vengeance, vppon prince or Potentate, Idolater,
wicked persons, &c. euen as the spirit shal moue him. The
which doctrine (as I said) they take vpon them to cōfirm,
out of the scriptures: by these examples vz. of Phineas, who
in zeale killed the adulterers: of Ahud, who in zeale killed
king Eglon, in his priuate chamber: of Iaell, who in zeale
killed Sisara: of Matathias, who in zeale killed a Iew, for
committing Idolatrie: and of the same Matathias, who
in the same zeal killed likewise, at the same time, the kings
commissioners, that commanded the people to conform
themselues to the kings proceedings. &c.
               To those that know these principles, how can it be eyther
obscure or difficult, what they are both to thinke &
iudge, when they shall heare of any extraordinary callings,
and secret motions, in priuate men? whereby they shall
take vpon them, (through the assistance of giddy & seduced
malecontentes,) to correct and amend, to set vp and
throw downe, to deliuer and restraine, to punish and execute,
how, what, where, when and whom, &c. according
to their own pleasures: and all vnder pretence of such directions,
as they shall affirme that the holy Ghost doth
minister vnto them.
               Vpon the proceedings, held by course of law, against
Vdall and some others: and likewise by reason, that certaine
Preachers, but especiallie maister Cartwright, being
called before her Maiesties commissioners in causes ecclesiastical,
for their aforesaide vndutyfull proceedings, were
(vpon iust occasions) committed to prison: the matter
was greatly grudged at, & so taken to heart; amongst the
reforming and zealous brotherhoode, as that many deuises
and complots, were (as it seemeth) in deliberation not

onely how the saide prisoners, might (for the present) bee
defended and deliuered: but also how thereupon they
might proceede, for the setting vp of their Discipline. To
this purpose,Wigginton, to Porter at Lancaster, 6. Nouemb. 1590. in mine opinion these words of Wiggintons
are verie pertinent. Maister Cartwright is in the Flee
                        •
                     e, for refusall
of the othe (as I heare) and Maister Knewstubs is sent for,
and sondry worthy ministers are disquieted, who haue been spared
long. So that wee looke for some bickering ere long, and then a
battel: which cannot long endure. How far these wordes may
bee drawne, I leaue it to be considered of, by those that
can discerne of such like kind of phrases. This I can assure
you of, that (vppon what grounds I know not) through
the course which was held by the magistrats here, against
the said prisoners: there was great expectation, and as it
were a hope conceiued by their fauorers, in another cuntrey,
of some bickering amongst vs, (about that time,) as
Wigginton writeth of.P. A. 7. De. cemb. 1590. Thus a man that hath been of especiall
account in Scotland, did write vnto a friend of his in
England. I attend your next answere, aswell of the estate of your
Church, as of all other affaires. For there is here great worde of
sondry vprores, which I trust be false, or repressedin due season
by her Maiestie.
               
               But that passeth all (to this purpose,) which falleth out
most apparantlie, by the view taken of such letters and papers,
as were found vpon the apprehension of Hacket and
his Prophets.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               One Edmond Copinger tooke vpon him to worke Cartwrightes
&c. deliuerance: he pretendeth an extraordinary calling and
acquainteth diuers with it: one Gibson a Scot: P. Wentwotrh,
Cartwright, Wigginton, Charke, Trauers, Egerton, &c.
               
                  
                  WHilest some were deuising of one way,
and some of an other, for the good of
the saide prisoners, &c. One Edmond
Coppinger, with his familiars, could find
no meanes to bee looked for, except it
might please God, according to the
foresaide positions, to stir vp some zealous
brethren, by some extraordinary calling, to effect
their desires. This cogitation (as it seemeth) no soner grew
vpon thē, but that by and by they fealt, (as they thought)
in themselues: some certaine slender instigations, to such
a heauenly purpose. It appeareth that towards the latter
end of December, 1590▪ Copinger, Arthington, and Iohn
Bentley,
                  Coppinger examined, 19 of Iuly. Arthing. discourse. maister Knightlies man, did hold a fast, at one Thomas
Lancasters house, a scholemaister in Shoe-lane. It began
vpon the Saturday at night, and held till Sonday at night.
In the time of this fast, vz. the Saterday
                  Coppinger to T. C. at night, Coppinger
(as he said) found himself very extraordinarily exercised &c.
with a wonderfull zeale, to set forth Gods glory any waies, which
lawfully he might enter into. At that time also, (I mean at that
last fast: Arthington had likewise his extraordinary calling.
Thus Copinger did write of his matter to Lancaster: the letter
was also subscribed vnto, by Arthington, In
                  Coppinger and Arthing to Lancaster, the 15. of Iuly 1591. 
                  your house,
in your presence, and partly by your meanes; I had my first extraordinarie
calling, and of the same minde is my brother Arthington.
Copinger the next day after the saide fast, did ride into
Kent: and vpon his returne, (which was with some speed)
he signified vnto his fellow-fasters, how he had been extraordinarily
called, both before his going, the said Satterday
at night: & also in his iourney, since he departed from
them: vz. how God had reuealed
                  Arthing, discourse. vnto him, such a secret
mystery, as was wonderful. By the way (saith he) as I rid, I
fansied to my selfe,
                  Cop. to T. C. 
                  that there was leaue giuen mee, to speake to

God, in a more familiar manner, then at any time before: also I
perswaded my self, that his spirite did giue me many straunge directions,
wherein the Lord would vse me to doe seruice to his most
glorious Maiestie, and to his Church. Concerning the substance
of his said reuelation, hee also tolde, Arthington &
Lancaster thus much: vz.Arthingtons discourse. 
                  that he knew a way, how to bring the
Queene to repentance, and to cause all her Counsell and Nobles,
to do the like, out of hand, or els detect them, to bee traytors that
refused.
               
               After the relation of these things, within a day or two,
this Copinger and Arthington,
                  Cop. to T. C. held another fast by themselues.
Whereupon (saith Copinger) I was againe stirred vp, to
such businesse of such importance, as in the eyes of flesh and bloud,
was likelie to bring much danger to my selfe, and vnlikely to bring
any good successe to the Church of God.
               
               Of these his instigations, or reuelations, hee writ to
some preachers in the Realme:
                  Cop to T. C. 
                  and to some without: as namelie
a letter the last day of December, 1590. to one
Gibson, a kinde of preacher in Scotland.
                  Copping to Gibson. Wherein hee
greatly complayneth of the present state of our Church:
and desireth of him, to bee instructed from the brethren
there, in diuers points, concerning an extraordinarie
calling. Thee state of our Church (saith hee) groweth worse
and worse: our zealous Ministerie and Magistracie are daylye
disgraced and displaced: the meanes of helpe is taken away, except,
that God woulde eyther moue her Maiestie inwardly, shee
being bereaued of those holy helpes▪ which Gods seruantes enioy
in the publike exercise of religion: or else stirre vp, some faithfull
Zorobabell or Nehemiah, to let her see how the Lordes
house lyeth waste, and how vsurpers of Antichristian tiranny,
doe keepe Christ Iesus from gouerning in his kingdome. And
then hee addeth. My selfe am acquainted with some, who, to
do seruice herein, would aduenture the losse of their liues, so that

they might haue warrant from the worde, for their so doing, and
haue approbation by the Church. And to this end they fancy to
themselues to haue receiued an extraordinary calling, wherein
they feare to be abused by Sathan. Then followeth his petitiō.
And therefore I, thogh most vnworthy, haue aduentured to write
vnto you, to beseech you in the bowels of Christ Iesus, to haue conference
with such, as are most able to aduise you on our behalfe,
and to returne answere, how a man may examine himselfe in this
matter, and what be the extraordinarie thinges, which must bee
in him, that is so called: what course he is to take, to haue his extraordinarie
calling knowne: first to himselfe, and then to the
Church.
               
               After hee had sent away this letter into Scotland hee
began to draw his doubts into some Methode: and did
propound them all in eight questions. The chiefe
summe whereof, it this, whether in these dayes, and in
this countrey, where there is but preaching heere and there,
where the Discipline is not established, but oppugned, by the
publike Magistrates, whether there bee place for any extraordinarie
calling, immediately from God, of workers and helpers
to his Church &c. These questions thus contriued
hee sent them to his olde acquaintance Wigginton: who
iustly according to Copingers humor, aunswered them all
affirmatiuely: as his aunswers are to be shewed, vnder his
owne hand, and as Copinger did also write vnto maister
Cartwright; the effect of which Letter will follow in
course.
               Vpon Copingers receite of this aunswere, that there
was high time, for such extraordinary callings: presently after,
ther was an other fast procured by Copinger, for a better cō
                  formation
of such his manner of calling,Cop. to T. C. and to see, if any
mo might be drawn thereby into the same conceipt. This
fast was held vppon the Wednesday, in a Marchauntes house,

where Wigginton then lay,
                  Cop. exam. 19. Iulie. 
                  and Wigginton himselfe with three
or fower others was present at it. But before this fast was held,
meanes was vsed (saith Copinger) to haue some notice giuen to
some of the Preachers in Prison, of the day of their humiliation,
and of their desire to haue them commend vnto God in their praiers
the holy purposes,
                  Cop. to T. C. 
                  which any fearing God, should in time attempt
to take in hand, by seeking the glorie of God, and the good
of the Church.
               
               
                  The effect of their prayers in this fast,
                  Copin exam. 19. Iulie. 
                  was this, vz.
They humbly beseech Almighty God, that if hee had appointed
to vse any of them, to doe any special seruice to him and his: and
that to that end would extraordinarily call them,Cop to T. C. that he would
seale vp his or their so calling by some special manner, and by his
holy spirite, and giue such extraordinarie graces and giftes, as
were fitte for so waightie an action.
               
                  How the rest of this company sped hereby, I finde it
not: but Copinger (as hee sayth) was called againe the same
night in a dreame.Copin. exam. 
                  The manner whereof, he thus describeth.
About the midde part of the night, I thought my selfe in
my sleepe, to be carried into Heauen, and there being wonderfullie
astonished with the Maiestie of God, and brightnes of his glorie,
I made a lowde and most strong noice &c. since which time, I
find euery day more & more comfort: and suppose, there is somwhat
in me &c. to worke (he meaneth some strange reformation.)
               
               As before it hath bene partly touched, Copinger did not
only craue the aduise of some ministers in these his great
actions, (as oft he tearmed them): but also of such of the
Laity, as he thought were most fitte to ioine with him, or
to aduise him: and I doubt not, but that he dealt as plainly
with them, as he had done before with Dauison a Scotte
and others. This doth appeare in some sort, by a Letter
written vnto Copinger by Peter Went worth, the fiue and

twentith of Ianuarie 1590. in answere of one sent vnto
him before, from Copinger.
                  P. W. to Cop. 25. lan, 1590. It seemeth that Copinger hauing
desired maister Wentworth to come vnto him to London,
that they might conferre together, &c. for answere
he excuseth himselfe in respect of his lamenes. &c. and
of his debillitie and weakenes, to giue aduise in matters of importance,
wherein I perceiue (saith hee) you are labouring.
And further (saith hee,) I do assure my selfe, that the purpose
tendeth vnto the true seruice of God, and of her Maiestie. I beseech
you resort to the Lorde, to direct your labours both in matter
and manner. For an ill manner may marre a good matter.
You are in a plentiful soile, where you may vse the aduise
of many godly wise. Vse the benefite thereof, and then as Iosuah
saide, bee bolde, and of good courage: feare not to bee discouraged.
               
               Besides it appeareth by a Letter of Copingers to Thomas
Lancaster,
                  Cop. to L. 29, Iau. 15. 19 the Icholemaister, dated the nine and twentith
of Ianuarie: that he had disclosed, (as it should seeme, all
the premises, vnto diuerse of the Ministers of London, desiring
to haue had some conference with them: and offering
himselfe to be directed either to proceede, or draw backe, as the
Church should aduise. But they supposing the matter to bee
too harde to bee effected: and him an vnfitte man to manage it,
refused to admitte of any such conference. In the same letter,
it is also euident, that Copinger had made the night before
a rude discourse (as he tearmeth it) to Lancaster of these matters,
which Lancaster disliked. And touching some speeches
had with maister Egerton, thus he there writeth. Most
true it is, that he refused to take triall of mee, and of my giftes: alledging,
that he was a meane ordinarie man &c. and one that
could not iudge of extraordinary giftes: and withall, most Christianly,
wisely, and louinglie perswaded me, to be carefull & circumspect
ouer my selfe: to take heede least I was deceiued by the

subtiltie of Sathan, and so misse-led: whereby I might endanger
my selfe, both for my liberty, estate, and credit, and also bee an
hinderance to the great cause, which I would seeme to be most desirous
to further. But withall he concluded, that he would bee
loath, to quench the spirite of God in mee, or to hinder my
zeale.
               
               In another letter also, to the said Lancaster from Copinger:
concerning other his proceedings with Egerton, he saith:
it cannot bee denied, but that the cause is good, which I desire to
be an actor in: but it is saide by some, that it is impossible that I
should be fit to meddle therein. He also desireth Lancaster, to
deal with Egerton, that he might haue a sight of al the letters,
which he (the said Copinger) had written vnto him about
these matters.
               
               About this time it also appeareth, that Copinger fell in
to some dealings with M. Cartwright, concerning the
premises: and that he had sent vnto him, the questions before
mentioned, for to know his resolution, whether it
would be agreeable to Wigintons. He writ a letter vnto
him, dated the 4. of February 1590. beginning thus.
               Right reuerend Sir, your most wise and christian councell, together
with offer to take knowledge by writing frō me, of such matters,
as might induce me to suppose my selfe, to haue receiued some
hope of speciall fauor from god, to some special vse: doth moue me
more and more to admire his mercies towardes mee &c. In this
letter, he signifieth to M. Cartwright (as before I haue noted,)
the number of their fastes, his seuerall callings, his
writinge to some preachers within the Realme, and to
some without: and his confirmation by Wigintons said answeres,
and maketh these petitions vnto him: vz. that the
church (I meane, saith he, your selfe & such as you shal name vnto
me:) would look narrowly into him, for the trial of his extraordinary
calling. If (saith he) I bethought to be any wayes miss-led,

I craue sharpe censuring▪ If I be guided by Gods spirit to any good
end, (as heareafter shall be adiudged,) I shal be ready to acquaint
you and them, with generalities and particularities, so far-foorth
as you and they be desirous to looke into them. And his second
petition was, vz. to haue (saith hee) your further answere to
some questions, wherein I desire to be resolued▪ with your direction
also, what hereafter I am to signifie to your selfe, concerning the
matter it selfe.
               
                  After M. Cartwright had receaued this letter from Coppinger,
he sent vnto him a message, that he should attempt nothing
but by aduise, and that he should be wise and circumspect.
Besides it seemeth,
                  Copinger to T. C. 13. of febr. 1590 
                  that vpō
                   Copingers so earnest sute made
as hath bene specified, there was a time appointed, that he
might be conferred withall. These things do appeare to
be true, by a second letter of Coppingers to Cartwright, the
13. of February. Wherin he greatly complaned that he had
beene put backe from that seruice of god and his church, which he
had in hand, (and that hy his frends:) he desired M. Cartwright
that the day appointed for conference might holde, and hee addeth
this reason. The daunger which some stand in: for
their liues, is not vnknowne: and if I had not beene letted, I
durst haue ventured my life, to haue procured their release ere
now.
               
                  And againe to the same effect. As I may, I command you
in the name of God, that you aduise the preachers, to deale speedely
and circumspectlie, least some bloode of the Saintes be shed. In
the ende hee signifieth, that the next day, hee with some
others, did meane to humble themselues in fasting, and that the
prisoners did know of it.
               Whilest Copinger was in expectation of the said conference:
how it fel out I know not, but (as it seemeth) councel
was taken, & the matter ouer-ruled, that the ministers
appointed, should vtterly refuse to haue any conference

with him. Wherupon M. Cartwright, Trauers, Charke,
and Egerton, sent him worde by M. Hockenhull, that they
would leaue him, to himselfe: or rather to Sathan: and that they
thought him vnworthy, to bee conferred withall.
                  Coppinger. to Charke, Trauers and Egerton. And this
appeareth by Coppingers letter to Charke, Trauers & Egerton
beginning thus: Right reuerend fathers &c. About the deliuery
of this message, Copinger did after, (in some sort) chalenge
M. Hockenhull: and told him also,Cop to Hockenh. 24. Feb
                        •
                      1590. 
                  that seeing he had
beene refused to bee conferred with-all, by those godly, wise, and
zealous preachers, who hadde promised to haue had conference
with him &c. occasion therby was offered vnto him, to approue
himselfe.
               
               About this time or a little before, Coppinger receiued a
letter in answere of his, from Gibson (the Scottish Minister
aboue mentioned:) dated from Pententland in
Scotland the sixt of Februarie 1590. concerning the
pointes of Coppingers saide letter vnto him. Wherein
hee writeth very cunningly, touching Coppingers question,
and shifteth it ouer (like his craftes-maister) with
an indirect and vncertaine aunswere. But in these
pointes hee is very plaine: vz. that hee had shewed Coppingers
letter to sundrie: that hee had conferred of it with
the best of their Ministerie: that their Church was not forgetful
to do al good offices, for the weale of the brethren here: that
there was a writing ready to send to Germany to Iunius, that
he would trauaile with some of the good & wel affected professors
there: that (of his knowledge) trauaile was to be made with some
others, as namely the King of France, and that their ministery
would themselues trauaile with her Maiestie. No doubt if Iunius
or any other, at their request shall take vpon them, to
deale with her highnesse, for men of Coppingers humor or
for any of those, whom he would haue deliuered, the suggestions
(which either are, or must be made vnto them,)

are like to containe many slaunders and vntruthes. But
to goe forward.
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               How Coppinger and Arthington came acquainted with Hacket:
of their conference with Io. Throg. Coppingers letter to Io.
Throg. and his answere.
               
                  SHortly after this time,Hacket to Wigginton 3. march. 1590. vz. the 3. of March
1590. William Hacket, an olde companion
of Wigintōs did write vnto him,
and doth comfort him then in prison,
with the exāples of Gideons empty pitchars,
of the deliuerance by Moses through
the red sea, and of Haman that was hanged vpon the same gibbet,
he had prepared for an other. Hee vseth also these words.
Master Wigginton: I desire to communicate my spirite at large
with you: but I know not your keeper &c. Good M. Wigginton,
make my sound heart, knowen to M. Cartwright, M. Snape,
M. Vdall, M. Lord.
               In the Easter terme, this Hacket came vp to London, of
likelyhood to communicate his spirite with Wigginton, &
to grow into acquaintnance with the parties named: but
his pretence was, partly to see what would become of Iob,
Throgmorton,
                  Hackets discourse. 
                  and partlie to reckon with Wigginton, about the
making of malt betweene them together. He had not beene
long in London, but hee came to Wigginton, who (amongst
other discourses) tolde Hacket that there was a Gentlman
(meaning M. Coppinger) in the Cittie, a very good man &c.
He describeth him vnto Hacket, and the matter also hee was
entring into: signifiyng further, how Coppinger had beene
wonderfully discouraged (in his purposes) by the Preachers in

London: but that hee (for his part) had not so done. &c. Hee
also commended Arthington to Hacket,
                  Arthing. ex 19. Iulie 1591. to be an honest
man. Then Wigginton sent for Copinger, and by Gods prouidence
he came foorthwith vnto him: and M. Wigginton willed
Copinger and Hacket, to take acquaintance one of the other:
assuring Coppinger, that he knew Hacket to be a man truelie fearing
God, and such a person,
                  Arthingt. ex 30. of Iuly 1591. 
                  as God might minister some comfort
to Copinger by his conference: that Hacket had beene tormented,
and that for the 
                  a 
                  credite of Hackets suffrings, a hundreth could
witnes. About this time also,Arthingt. ex 19. of Iuly 1591. 
                  Arthington by Wiggintons and
Coppingers meanes (as hee sayth) fell into acquaintance with
Hacket, meeting first with him at Mistris Lawsons house, M.
Iob Throgmorton also being thē at London, grew into some
conference (as it should seeme) with these three companions,
Coppinger, Arthington, and Hacket. And this is gathered
by Coppingers letter to Iob Throgmorton, after his departure
from London, that tearme: and by the answere, returned
from him vnder his owne hand, and sealed with his
seale of armes. Both the letters are fit to be considered.
Thus Coppinger writ vnto him, as it appeareth vnder his
owne hand.
               
                  
                     My owne deare brother: my selfe and my two brethren,Where Hacket then lay by Coppingers appointment. who
lately were together with you in Knight-rider street, do much desire
conference with you, which will aske some time. The busines
is the Lords own, and he doth deale in it himselfe, in a strange
and extraordinarie manner, in poore and simple creatures. Much
is done since you see vs, which you wil reioyce to heare of, when we
shal meete: and therefore I beseech you, as soone as you receiue this
letter, hasten an answere in writing, to my syster Randolphes
house, at S. Peters hill foote, by Poules wharfe. Therin aduertise
(I beseech you) when I may come to speake with you: for delayes
are daungerous, and some of the great enemies begin to be so pursued

by God, as they are at their wits end. The Lorde make vs
thankefull for it, who keepe vs euer to himselfe, to do his will and
not ours.
                     
                        Your very louing brother in the
L. most assured to command.
                     
                  
               
               This coppie remaineth thus endorsed. The coppie of a
letter to M. Iob Throgmorton, from E. C. And now followeth
Throgmortons letter, beeing an answere (as I take it)
vnto Coppingers.
               
               
                  
                     My good brother, &c. (I reioyce that you will vouchsafe so
to account of mee.) Your godlie conference at anie time, when oportunitie
shall serue, I will not refuse. And albeit our busines
may hinder vs now to meet, yet there is no time ouerpast, but that
it may be performed, when it please God. The next terme, (you
heare) I must appeare here againe vppon my band: at which time
you shall find, that I will be glad of your christian conference, or of
any other brothers, by whom I may be enlightened. Lord deliuer
mee, from that pride of heart, to reiect or refuse that while I
liue. That course you speake of, intended by you, I was neuer (you
know) in particular acquainted with. And therefore, for mee
to like or dislike a matter, that I had no knowledge of, had beene
(I take it) without ground or warrant. Onlie I confesse, I heard
some buzzes abroad, of a sole and singular course, that either you,
or some other had plotted in his head, which was greatly feared,
and condemned of the brethren. What that was, as I know not,
so had I small reason to speake of it with preiudice. Onelie I would
wish you, and all that beare good will to the holie cause, in this perilous
age of ours, to take both your eyes in your handes, (as they
saie) and to be sure of your ground and warrant, before you striue
to put in exeecution. For as I like not of coldnes of zeale, vnder
colour of discretion: so on the other side, I think that this sentence

of our sauiour (be ye wise as serpents) was not written in vain
neither, and had great neede to be practised of some in this age.
A sanctified cause, (you know) would alwayes haue a sanctified
course. Our rule and square, must be the word of truth, which
so long as we lay before vs, as our leuel, we shall not lightly swarue
much from the marke. The Lord therefore direct vs, in these
feareful and miserable daies, and let not our infirmities be a barre
to his mercies. I know, (my good Brother,) that the greatest
workes of the Lord: are wrought by the weakest instrumeuts, least
men should boast in the arme of flesh. And therefore, (were it
not for my sinnes and vnworthynes,) I could easilie perswade my
selfe, in regarde of my weaknes, that the Lord might effect something
by me, who am priuy to mine owne wants, and farre short of
those good giftes, it pleaseth you (of your loue) to loade mee with.
But this worke, that you speake of, (howsoeuer the instrument bee
compassed with weaknes,) must sure be wrought by a more sanctified
heart, then my selfe can yet without hypocrisie boast of. And
therefore, though in affection and good will I ioyne, yet I resigne
the honor of the worke, to those, that the Lord hath more enabled.
The man you speake of, (if he be at Oundhell,) dwelleth hard by a
Sister of mine, and thereupon I shall haue the better occasion to
see him, when it please God. Forget me not in your holy praiers
and meditations, and salute good Giles with many thankes, whose
debtor I am in the Lord. Blessing vpon Syon: confusion vpon Babell:
hast this 18. of the 5. Moneth.
                     Euer yours in the Lord.
                  
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. VIII.
               Copinger to Hacket of an appearance in the Starre-chamber: his
letter to Vdall: why Cartwright, &c: refused to conferre
with him: Cartwright resolued some questions of Coppingers:
of eight preachers that did fast and pray for Coppingers successe.
               
                  AFter some few dayes, that Hacket had
taried in London, the said Easter terme,
he returned home againe to Oundle:
hauing first promised Coppinger, that
he would come vp againe vnto him,
whensoeuer he sent for him. Nowe
Coppinger, by his said conferences and
acquaintance with Hacket, was grown (as he said) very bold
and couragious.
                  Copinger to Hacket. But yet shortly after, vz, (as I thinke) the seuenteenth
of May, he liked so well of Hackets company,
that he sent for him againe, to come vp vnto him: saying, If
Gods spirit direct you to come, come: if not, stay. But write with all
speed,
                  Copinger to Hacket. 17. of May. 1591. 
                  and conuey your letter, and inclose it in a letter to him, who
brought you and me acquainted: (that was Wigginton): put not
too your name, for discouery, &c. And in the same letter, hee
sendeth Hacket this newes. The zealous Preachers (as it is
thought) are to be in the Star-chamber to morrow. (I thinke, he
meaneth the last day of Easter tearme last.) The L. by his
holy spirit be with them, and stay all euill that is intended against
them. My selfe, if I can get in, am moued to be there: and I
feare, if sentence with seueritie shall be giuen, I shall be forced in
the name of the great and fearefull God of heauen and earth, to
protest against it. About this time also, he writ a verie couragious
letter to Vdall in prison: (for he confesseth it was

written about tenne weekes,
                  Copinger to Vdall. May 1591. 
                  before his examination:
which was the nineteenth of Iuly). In this letter he telleth
him, that (notwithstanding some brethrens hard opinions of
him, and other discouragementes) yet now the Lord hath not
onelie enabled him to fight, but at the length (in some sort, to vanquish
and ouercome. He signifieth also vnto him, that the
next day, there were some few, that purposed to ioyne together, in
a holy fast, in regard of the afflicted Saintes in generall, &c. He
greatly commendeth the Ministers cause and suffringes, that are
in prison, assuring himselfe that God will blesse all the actions in
it. He saith, there were diuerse out of prison, lying hid, that
in this great worke were hammering their heads, bestowing their
braines,Hacket and his fellowes. and spending their spirites: who doe hope (in short tyme)
to be brought forth into the sight of their and your enemies, to
defend the cause you stand for: whose presence (God assisting
them,) will daunt the enemies more then yours: for that they be
men voyde of learning, wisedome, and gifts, such as can challenge
nothing to themselues, but must giue all to God: who in all the
greatest workes, that euer haue beene wrought, hath vsed the
weakest meanes, least men should boast in the arme of flesh. And
therefore (I beseeche you) cheare vp your selues in the Lord: for
the day of our redemption is at hand: and pray, that the hand of
the Lord, may be strengthened in them, whom he hath appointed
to take part with you in this cause.
               Here (you see) he was growne to a wonderfull resolution.
But yet there is another letter of his, that wil make the
same more euident, and likewise lay open more plainelie,
some of the premises, then hitherto they haue beene. Hee
sheweth therein, that hee could be still well contented,The Copy of Cop. letter to a friend 21 May. 1591. 
                  to
haue some conference with Maister Charke, Maister Trauers,
Maister Egerton, Maister Gardiner, Maister Philips, and
Maister Cooper. But (sayth he) I make not this suite, for that
I would seeke to haue approbation from them, or any other liuing

creature, but from God himselfe.
               
               You haue heard before, how these Ministers haue refused
to confer with Coppinger. And what shoulde a man
thinke, the cause might be? Surelie a feare they had: least
he shoulde (by entring into some particulars) bring them,
within the compasse of his dangerous complots. This may
be necessarily there also gathered, in that as shewing hee
could be content, to conferre with the said parties, not because
(he protesteth) that he would seeke any approbation
from them: so doth he likewise remou that doubt, saying,
that he purposed not to acquaint them with the courses, which he
purposed, by Gods assistance, to take in hand, whereby great daunger
might growe to them, and little good to him: but that they
might be witnesses of his humilitie, &c.
               
               You haue heard also, of one of Copingers petitions to
Maister Cartwright, for his aunswere to those questions
mentioned, that he had before propounded to Wigginton.
Whereunto it should seeme, that (although at the first he
misliked that motion) yet in the end he yeelded. My humble
desire to you is (sayth Coppinger) that you (in my name) giue
great thankes to good Maister Cartwright,
                  Ibidem. 
                  for satisfying mee in
some questions, which, at the first, he thought little vse to be made
of. Likewise it also appeareth, that Maister Hockenhull did
his aforesaid message vnto Copinger, from the preachers, in
harder manner then he had Commission. For (sayth he)
his counsaile,
                  Ibidem. (that is Cartwrights) and cariage of himselfe, the
Lord did direct and blesse it vnto mee: though the Messenger
&c. in his cariage of himselfe, failed somewhat, both in that hee
deliuered from him, and the rest of the Brethren. And whereas
further more in like sort, notice being giuen to the Ministers
in prison, of one of Copingers fasts, it appeared not,
what regard they had thereof: that point also is now cleared
in the same Letter. I beseech you also giue thankes, on my

behalfe, to the other eight preachers: for vpon notice giuen vnto
them, by some of Gods children, that somewhat was intended
to be don,
                  Ibidem. 
                  wherein Gods Glory might appeare, and request made
that the religious desires, and godly purposes of the faithful, might
be strengthned by their holy praiers: they thereupon, (as it is
credibly signified vnto me) humbled themselues in fasting and
prayer: and such an extraordinary blessing came to me thereuppon,
as it is not fitte to be repeated.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               Of Hackets first comming to Wigginton: of his gadding vp and
downe: and of the designement to haue beene executed in the
Star chamber.
               
                  
                     EDmond Copinger, hauing thus proceeded
in the course you haue heard
of: at the length he did send againe
for Hacket: the spirite (as it seemeth)
mouing Hacket: before, to stay
at home.Cop. to Hack. Marry now, he straitghtly
vrgeth him to be at London, thre or
foure daies, before the beginning of Trinity Terme: which hee
could not be: but came vp the first day of the Terme which was
the fourth of Iune 1591 and lodged at Islington.
                  Hackets discourse writen by Copinger. The day
following, he went to the Counter, and there dined with
Wigginton:
                  4. Iune. 1591. and after dinner, he beganne his Pageant, vz.
to crie out against certaine of her Maiesties most honorable
priuy Councell, and to vtter against them most villanous
speches. The next day being Sonday, he wēt to haue
heard maister Phillippes preach: but hee preached not that
day there: as the Sexton informed him. Then hee went

to haue heard Maister Cooper: but seeing a Surples lie there, he
departed thence, and went to Maister Egertons Sermon. At
night, not knowing where to lie, hee went to Wigginton: where
he mette with Coppinger, and by Wiggintons appointment, hee
lodged at Maister Lawsons. The next morning, viz. the seuenth
of Iune, he proceeded with his slanderous outcries
against the said honorable Councellors: and so continued
two dayes after. In the one of which two dayes, hee
was commaunded, (as is sette downe) to goe out of Paules by
London gate, and say: by your leaue London: because hee
knew, he was shortlie to remoue his dwelling. The same day also,
in the forenoone, he went to the Fleete, to haue spoken
with Maister Cartwright: but missing of his purpose, hee
left his message with the porter, vz. that maister Cartwright
should deale faithfullie in the Lords busines &c. Of his afternoones
worke, thus it is also in the same place recorded.
He was commaunded to sit that afternoone at maister Lawsons
shoppe: but the purpose of the Lord in that, and what some of the
Citizens themselues know, (he saith) I forbeare to speake. These
courses held by Hacket,
                  Ibidem. in the streets, of exclaiming against
such persons &c. did proceede (as it seemeth) by the aduise,
or at least by the allowance of Wigginton. For it
appeareth vnder his owne hand, that he approued (after
his fashion) such outcries in the streetes to be lawfull, by
two examples: one out of Iosephus, and an other of a Yorkeshire
man, that heretofore had vsed the like in London, as Wigginton
recordeth.
               
               About this tyme▪ vz. in Iune, (as I gesse,) one Iohn Boman,
a seruant,Boman to Wigginton. Iune. 1591. in Oundell, did write thus to maister Wigginton:
I desire you to send me a Coppie of a writing, which you
had from Maister Cartwright, vppon the Court matters, when
Goodman Hacket was with you the first time.
               
               Also, shortlie after the aforesaid outcries were finished,

and many other things thought vppon amongst them,
(you may be sure to such seditious purposes:) the end of
Trinity Tearme drew neare: when it was commonly expected,
that Cartwright and the other ministers in prison,
should haue come to their answere openly in the Starre-chamber.
Whereupon a Letter was written, by Copinger
to his most deare friend Thomas Lancaster, the Schoole-maister,
from whom he could keepe nothing, that Lancaster
in pollicy would suffer to be tould him. Which Letter
Lancaster saith: he did teare in peeces, but confesseth vnder
his hād, that in the same these words were contained:
vz. If our Preachers in prison do appeare to morrow in the Star-chamber,
and our great men deale with them so,
                  24. Iune. 1591 
                  as it is thought
they will: if God doe not throw some fearfull iudgement amongest
them, so as some of the chiefe of them goe not aliue out of
the place then neuer giue credite to me, in any thing, whilest you
liue. But maister Cartwright and the rest appeared not this
day: and so the parties threatned, escaped this iudgement.
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               A preparation towardes the intended disloialtie: two of Copingers
Letters to Maister Charke: and to another: Cartwright and
Wiggintons commendation of Penries being then in London.
               
                  NOt lōg after this time, (if not before)
maister Wiginton and Copinger,
                  Wigg. ex. were
very busy, for the better preparing
of the peoples mindes, to the readidier
acceptation of their further
purposes, to publishe in print
two pamphlettes of Wiggintons
                  
penning, as he himselfe confesseth. The one was of Predestination,
as though (by the abuse of that doctrine) they
meant to haue had the blame of all the wicked and intended
mischiefes, both of themselues and of their partakers,
remoued from themselues, and layde vppon the Lordes
shoulders: as though he should haue moued them to such
lewd attemptes. The other was a kinde of Ballade, directed
for aduice, to a yong courtier, wherein they make waye
(as it seemeth) for their frend Hacket, and that with wonderfull
quotation of Scriptures. I will trouble you onely
with fowre of the verses.

                     A Christian true, although he be a clowne
                     May teach a King to weare Scepter and Crowne.
                  
And after.

                     For God will sure confound such, as deuise
                     His ordinance or church to tirannise.
                  
To these rimes, both for manner and matter, I may well
resemble those, made (I doubt not) by the same spirit.
               
                  Either from countrey or Court,Epist. to Mart. Epitome.
                  
                  Martin Mar-Prelate will do you hurt.
               
               Now that Copinger was a dealer in these thinges, with
Wigginton before they were printed,Hack. decla. it appeareth by these
wordes of Hackets in his last declaration to maister Young:
Wiggintons boy can declare all his Maisters writinges: for the
boy and Maister Copinger, sate writing halfe a night, by this examinates
bedde side, but what they writte, he cannot tell: but one
word he heard: that the Countrey Clowne, can teach the
king to weare the Crowne.
               
                  
                  Afterwardes (as I take it) vz. the 9. of Iuly, being fryday
M. Charke preached at the blacke Fryers,
                  Cop. to Chark 9. Iuly. 1591. 
                  at which Sermō
                  
Copinger was present: who misliking (as it seemeth) some
wordes then vttered, did write a letter presently to M.
Charke: wherein amongst other pointes, he sayth. Right reuerend
Sir &c. I do not denie (good Sir) but I haue now a long
time taken a strange and extraordinary course, but such as hath
offered occasion of suspition, of my not onely doing hurt to my
selfe, but also to the best sort of men now in question, and to the
cause it selfe. But by what warrant I haue done this, that is all.
For if the holy Ghost hath beene my warrant, and carieth mee
into such actions, as are differing from other mens &c. What
flesh and blood dare speake against it, &c. Forbeare to censure me
and such other, as should deale extraordinarily with mee, in the
Lordes busines, committed to our charge, and iudge of vs, by the
effectes which follow: which if you heareafter see to bee wonderderfull
great, then let all ordinary men call themselues to an examination &c.
And after. The waste of the Church cannot be denied
to be greate, so that there is a place for extraordinary men,
&c. Againe, my desire heretofore hath beene to haue hadde
counsaile and direction: but now by comfortable experience, I
finde, that the action which the Lorde hath drawn me into is his
owne: and he will direct it himselfe by the holy Ghost &c, To
conclude, I beseech you (saith he) to shew this letter to M. Trauers
and M▪ Egerton.
               
                  M. Charke, vpon the receipt of this letter, preaching
againe the Sonday after, in the same place, vttered in his sermon,
these wordes, which (Copinger saith) were ment of
him, in respect of his foresaide letter: there are some persons
so desperate, that they would willingly thrust themselues vpon the
rockes of the land. This also appeareth by an other letter,
cōcerning this second sermon,Copin. to a preacher the 13. or 14. of Iuly. written about the 13. or 14▪
of Iulie, to an other preacher in London, but hee is not named:

it had beene to good purpose, if hee had beene named.
For it seemeth hee was as throughly acquainted
with Coppinger, and his fellowes designements, as it may
be well supposed, that Wigginton was.
               In my letter (vnto Charke) I manifested my selfe to haue an
extraordinarie calling, and signifyed, that the Lord had so called
others besides my selfe, who would approue our selues, to bee the
seruantes of the Lorde, in a high calling. Againe the ship (that
is the Church) had perished, if the Lord had not immediately
called three of vs, to helpe to recouer it &c. My calling is especially
to deale with Magistrates: another hath to doe with
Ministers, who hath written a letter to you of the Citie &c. The
thirde is the chiefe, who can neither write nor reade, so that hee is
the executioner of the Lords most holy wil. He further offereth
to acquaint this Minister, with their whole course, and willeth
him to shew this letter to his brethren, and to publish it, where euer
hee should goe.
               
                  Hacket confessed,Hack. last ext. that being about this time, (as I take it)
with Wigginton, the saide Wigginton affirmed, in the presence
of two gentlemen and others, that if the Magistrates
did not gouerne well, the people might draw themselues together
and to see a reformation.
               
               Vpon the 15. day of Iuly, Copinger and Arthington did
write a iointe letter of purpose to haue drawne Lancaster
vnto them, for the making vp of a quaternion. And
this was one perswasion. If I Ed. Coppinger, do not prefer
you, before any one man in the land, whosoeuer, for your wise,
holy, louing, and religious course, both in the generall calling of
a Christian, and in your particular calling, the Lord confound
me.
               
               After Lancaster had receiued this letter, notwithstanding
he writ vnto him, of some mislike he had of their proceedings,
yet (as Hacket saith,) he came vnto them all three,

the same night,
                  Hack. ex. 21 of Iuly. 
                  to one Walkers house at Broken wharfe, where
they conferred together about an hower after supper. Of what
great account this Lancaster and some others were, with
these companions, it doth further appeare by that which
followeth.16. of Iuly The same day in the morning that Copinger
and Arthington made their seditious Proclamation in
Cheapside: they two together first, and afterwarde Hacket,
came vnto Wigginton, & amongst many things, (as Wiginton
himselfe cōfesseth) they told him; that M. Cartwright
had done more against Antichrist then any in the worlde before
him, since the Apostles times; and that Wigginton, was comparable
vnto him, and that M. Lancaster was aboue them both,
in the estate of heauenlie glorie, because he had kept himselfe vndefiled
from the common corruptions of these times, and had a
most simple hart to God. Likewise also they saide to Wigginton,
at the same time, that Reformation and the Lordes discipline
should now forthwith bee established: and therefore charged
Wigginton in the Lordes name to put all Christians in comfort,
that they should see a ioyfull alteration, in the state of Church
gouernment, shortly.
               
               
                  Arthington, after being examined said, that Penry had
sent him word by a letter out of Scotland, that reformation
must shortlie be erected in England: and that he tooke him (in
so writing) to bee a true Prophet. It is not also vnlikely, but
that Penry was a Prouoker of these men to such their outrages:
hoping, that vpon their outcries & proclamations
the people would haue risen. For he was then in London to
haue played his part if their attempts had found the good
successe,Ienk. Ioh. ex they looked for. Marry when he saw Hacket executed:
he presentlie (the same day) posted backe againe
towards Scotland.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XI.
               Of the trayterous intendments which were towardes the Court.
               
                  BEfore this their intended insurrection,
it is to be further remembrd vnto you
what was disclosed amongst themselues
in their owne discourses and
prophesies, (as since it appeareth,) cō
                  cerning
the meanes, whereby they
thought to haue preuailed, for their
discipline,Arthingtons prophesie. &c. by those their most lewde, seditious, and
trayterous attempts. Her Maiesties course helde, for the
maintenance of the present gouernement of the Church:
was their chiefe grief, (which course they tearmed the defence
of abhomination:
                  Vdall. &c. 
                  the bearing of the beasts marke, the thrusting
of Iesus Christ out of his own rule & gouernment) and the
arraignement of some, with the imprisonment of Cartwright &
others.
               
               If the Starre-chamber day (before mentioned) had held
some of her Maiesties most honourable priuy Counsaile,
(whom they supposed to stand most in their light) should
neuer haue departed thence aliue. After that plot fayling
they deuised how by their imprecations and cursing of
themselues they might perswade the people, that certaine
of the Lordes of the saide most honourable Counsaile, were
traytors. Wherein how they preuailed I know not: but
this I find, that they had not onely determined to haue remoued
them all from her Maiestie:
                  Coppinger in a letter. & to haue placed others in their
roomes, (whom they had already named particularly,) but
likwise to haue proceeded against their LLs. with very hard
censures. The Lord pardon their soules, (saith Copinger) for in

their outward man, they must be punished, though they repent.
Nay in their own conceits: they had likewise already depriued
some of the chiefe of their LLs from their greate
places of honor: so as when they tooke occasion, to speake
seditiously of them, they vsed their bare names, without
any of the honourable titles, belonging vnto them: as such
a man lately such an officer, Chancellor or Treasurer, &c.
               
               Besides (when the time of their said intended insurrection
grew nigh,) they sent to haue her Maiestie moued
for the committing of her saide Councellors: least in the
vprores, which they meant to stir, their LLs. might haue
beene violently surprised &c. they hauing peraduenture
some purpose, to bring them afterwardes to some of their
own more publike courtes of iustice.Ibid. 
                  I do aduise (saith Coppinger,)
that euery one of her Councell, be commanded, to keepe
their house or chamber for feare of stir & danger: and that such
and such, &c. be appointed to waite vpon her: and that maister
Wigginton, (in more fauour with God then any man of his calling,
whosoeuer,) be commanded to be neare her highnesse, to
pray to God, and to preach priuately, &c.
               
               But that which is especially most horrible, (although
they might seem, by this last prouision, for her Maiesty, to
haue indeede some good regard of her safety) yet is it cō
                  fessed
to haue bin affirmed amongst them: that her highnes
was worthy to be depriued,
                  Arthin. exam. 19. of Iuly 
                  for giuing credite and countenance to
the Bishops and such other wicked persons: and for misusing her
good subiectes, I think they ment the imprisonment of Cartwright
and the rest.
               It is also further confessed by Arthington, that his fellowes
refused to pray for her Maiestie: and in his second examination,
he acknowledgeth, that hee verily thinketh, that
Hacket meant her Maiestie should haue beene depriued: and in
his long Apologie vnto the LLs. thus: In my conscience Hacket

meant to murther those noble men, that hindered his purpose,
one way or other, &c. and after, &c, to haue done that, which
my heart and hand for trembling cannot expresse.
               
               
                  Agreeable hereunto, are Hackets wordes, both before
he was condemned, and after. If (saith he) Copinger, one
Catiline late of Oundell,
                  Hack. on the torture. & Wigginton were straitly examined:Hacket examined. 24. Iuly
they could vtter and declare matters of treason. And at an
other time: If these fellowes (meaning Copinger and Wigginton, &c) were wel sifted, they could declare al the treasons. And
the morning before his death. It was a gratious and an happie
turne,Hacket to M. Yong in presence of diuerse. that these treasons were in time reuealed: for otherwise
it would haue cost a number of innocent men their bloud: hut now
(I trust in God,) that they will reueale their treasons. And thus
you see the end and drift of the foresaid extraordinary callings,
for the setting vp and establishing of the pretended
holy discipline.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               That of long time, some such attemptes as Hacket made for Discipline:
were of greate likelyhood purposed.
               
                  
                     MY purpose was not, from the beginninge,
eyther to set downe, or to prosecute, the
full hystorie of these desperate reformers,
(which is most effectually performed already
by another),
                  Conspiracy for Discipline 
                  otherwise then they
doe concerne some other persons, and especially
those, not of the meanest of our Disciplinarian
Ministers, and are therby verie pertinent (in my opinion)
to shew the point, I haue in hand, of the brethrens imitation
of the Scottish ministers reformation. For I trust (as I
said, in the entrance to this part,) it wil not now be denied
but that great & many threatning speaches are published:

One telleth vs, that great troubles will come of it, if that brethren
may not be suffered to do what they list: another, that
they can no longer endure to bee vsed as they are: another in effect:
that our Bishops shalbe vsed, as they were in Scotland: and
that there are moe of this confederacy, then can be suppressed:
another, that it is more then time, for the hottest brethren to set
vp the Discipline themselues, without any further staying for
Parliaments: a Synode, that the people, being first instructed,
are then to bee thrust into the publike practise of the Discipline:
another man, that seeing the brethren cannot obtain their wils,
by sute nor dispute, the multitude and people must worke the feat:
another, that inferior Magistrates of their owne authority,
within their limits, are to make this new reformation: another,
that it is a shame for all the fauorers of this faction, in that for
feare of disturbing of our state, (for sooth,) and offending of her
Maiestie, they had not before this time cast out our Bishops: another,
that there are a hundred thousand of this brotherhoode in
England, who if they come with a petition for the discipline to her
Maiestie, cannot in pollicie be reiected, without danger: another
that approoued and worthy men of euerie shire haue already consented
to this Discipline: that the Eldership is at hande: that the
people are inflamed with zeale, & that it is impossible to stand
against it: another, that there is a deuise amongst them, how to
obteine their desires all in one day: another, that Bishops are
to be packing after the Fryers and Monkes: another, that they
will haue their Discipline in spight of all the aduersaries of it:
another, that it is dangerous to the state, if they haue not their
willes, in regard of the discontentment, which wil ensue thereby,
in the heartes of her Maiesties subiectes: another in effect, that
the Discipline is like to come into our Church, by such a meanes,
as will make all the Bishoppes heartes to ake: and another,
that he is of this minde, that reformation wil not be had without
bloud.
               
                  
Now if any man, to extenuate these things, shal say:
let euery man beare his own burthen, & be charged with
his own particular actions: what some in the heate of their
zeale haue published it ought to haue a charitable construction,
& cannot wel be further extended, to touch any
other: as if al the factioners had entred into such a seditious
conspiracie, as the said threatning speeches do import, I
answere, that some indeede there be, that do cast these &
such like colours ouer this matter, to bleare mens eyes
withall. Some commends their zeale, but not their discretion:
some allow their matter, but not their manner:
and some will take vpon them to excuse both: but as yet
I neuer heard any of that crue, but hee would eyther in
one respect or other, find some occasion to commend the
worst of them.
               Besides where so many of any one sect do concurre in
their writings, about any new point: it is commonly taken
to be the iudgement of them all. And who knoweth
not, that if Cartwright and the rest, had not secretly clapped
such fellowes on the backs for their zeale, and laughed
in their sleeues to see them go so forward, but had disliked
them: his earnest reproofe of the first (being their
Apostle and worthy) would haue preuented all the others
that followed, being his Disciples. But if it be true, (that
I haue heard reported) that vpon the comming forth of
Martins Epistle: Maister Cartwright should say: seeing the
Bishops would take no warning: it is no matter that they are
thus handled: Surely those words, from him were enough
to set these men agogge. So as, that which is commonly
reported of great robberies: may fitly serue to satisfie the
bowlsterers of such lewdnesse.
               There are (say they) in such attemptes not onely executioners,
but also setters, receiuers, and fauourers: and in

matters of treason concealers: who are all of them
within the daunger & compasse of law. How this may be
applied, I leaue it, to any reasonable mans consideration,
that shall be pleased to weigh the premisses, aswell
concerning the said threatning speaches & great bragges:
as also the course which was helde, by the ministers in
prison, and those of the London-fraternitie, together
with some others, touching the attemptes, which
Coppinger and his fellowes tooke vpon them to effect.
            
            
               CHA. XIII.
               Briefe collections: whereby it may summarily appeare: that certaine
Ministers in London did know, what Coppinger intended.
               
                  
                     WIgginton (as you haue heard) vpon Cartwrightes
commitment, &c. writeth of a
bickering, and then a battell to be looked for.
Coppinger with his companiōs fasteth, &
so dreameth of a way, howe to worke
wonders. He sendeth into Scotland concerning
an extraordinary calling, signifying that some did fancy
to themselues such a manner of calling, who would hazard their
liues, that Christ himselfe, by the abolishing of the Antichristian
tyranny, (which he affirmed did raigne in our Church,)
might gouerne in his owne kingdome. Wigginton afterwarde
approueth the lawfulnesse of such a calling, in these dayes, our
Churches lying wast &c. Copinger and Wigginton with some
others, do thereupon fast againe, to know which of them should
be so called. The lot (forsooth) falling vpon Copinger chiefly
he is not silent: but maister Wentworth (amongst others)

                  must be of his priuy Councel. He also disclosed himselfe,
(after a sort) as you haue heard, to certaine of the Ministers
in London before mentioned: and namely to Maister Cartwright,
imparting vnto him his seuerall callings to an extraordinary
course for the discipline, &c. His said writings into Scotland,
and Wiggintons said approbation of an extraordinary calling.
He sent Maister Cartwright the same propositions, that
Wigginton had allowed: whereof maister Cartwright, afterwardes
thought, there might bee good vse: hee signified vnto
him, that by his calling, he was to take in hand such busines, as
in the eyes of flesh and bloud, was likely to bring great danger to
himselfe, and vnlikely to bring any good successe to the Church:
he told him, that if he had not beene discouraged, he had before
that day procured the release of some, that stoode then in daunger
of their liues, meaning (as I suppose) Vdall, and Newman,
&c.
               As he dealt with Cartwright, so did he with the other
Ministers, and with some of them more plainely, desiring
still of them all, both Cartwright and the rest, and that most
instantlie, that he might be conferred withall, offering himselfe
to be altogether ruled by them, either to proceede (if they thought
meete) in his saide so dangerous businesse, or otherwise wholy to
desist and leaue it off. He also offered to imparte vnto them
all his designements, as to M. Cartwright, not onely in generality
what he intended, but also the particular meanes, whereby
he purposed to bring the same to passe. Afterwardes when
through his acquaintance with Hacket, by Wiggintons
meanes, & other incouragements giuen him by an other
of his lay friendes: and by Wigginton &c, that he grew to be
more resolute: hee signifyed the same to M. Charke, (not
past six days before their furie brake forth,) stil yet desiring
conference with him, Trauers, Egerton, Gardiner, Cooper and
Philips.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XIIII.
               The cunning dealing of certaine ministers in London, how notwithstanding
they wished Coppingers plot to goe forward: yet
they might be (if it were possible) without the compasse of law.
               
                  COnsider I pray you the policy, which
the saide ministers (mentioned in the
end of the former Chap.) vsed. They
at the beginning, no sooner heard of
Copingers conceit of an extraordinary
calling, to worke such great matters:
but by & by, (as mē acquainted with
the fore-saide Geneua positions,) they very well knewe,
wherunto that matter tended. And therefore wher-as the
poore misse-led gentleman, would haue imparted vnto
them, al his secretes: they started from that point, and refused
wholy to take from him any knowledge of them.
               They sent him some cold messages, of their dislike of
his proceedings, (which they after qualified, as it hath
been shewed,) not so much to with-draw him from his
lewdenesse, as that therby if thinges fell out amisse, they
might haue some meanes to cleare themselues, by the testimonies
of such their messengers, as Hockenhull and others.
And touching conference that was also by them
denied, and surely vpon good and prouident reasons. For
if therby, they should haue yelded in opinion vnto him,
they knewe it might haue broughr them into apparant
danger. Besides, they were not vnlike by sufficient arguments
to haue disswaded him, from such a fantasie:
which (as it seemeth) was very farre from their meaning.
And lastly, it was almost impossible, but that in their debating

with him of his pretended calling, he must needes
haue made some mention of such particulars, as with their
own safety they durst not haue concealed▪ & so that way
also his platforme would haue beene dashed. The safest
way therefore, for them was, not to haue any conference
at all with him: and that course (for ought I finde)
they tooke: to the hardning of Coppingers hart, and his fellowes:
and to the greate aduenturing of all the mischiefes,
that were intended.
               It was not denied amongst them, (as Coppinger sayth,)
but that the cause was good, which he desired to be an actor in: but
the thing that stucke in their teeth, was this: vz. they thought
it impossible that he should be fit to intermeddle in it, without the
endaungering both of himselfe (as Egerton saide,) and of
the greate cause which hee would seeme to bee most desirous to
further. Howbeit though Egerton would not take vpon
him, to approue his extraordinarie calling, (for
feare of him-selfe:) yet (for all the saide daunger) hee
thought it no pollicy greatly to discourage him, when
he qualified his speeches after this sort: vz. hee would bee
loth to quench the spirite of God in Coppinger, or to hinder his
zeale.
               
               
                  Iosuah was called extraordinarily by God him-selfe,Numb. 27. Deut. 31 to
cast the enemies of the Israelites out of the land of Canaan,
that they might possesse it.Iosuah. 1. 9. Which example M. Wentworth
applying to Coppinger, and encouraging him, vpon
aduice taken, as the Lord did Iosuah: vz: be bold & of a good
courage, feare not to bee discouraged &c. he shewed no greate
mislike of Copingers purposes. Likewise, though M.
Throgmorton, notwithstāding his cōference, (as it seemeth)
with Coppinger, Arthington and Hacket, was not acquainted
(as he saide,) with Copingers particular platformes: yet
in that he confesseth, he had heard some buzzes abroade of a

sole and singular course intended, & doth not only aduise him
to imitate the serpentes wisedome, but saith also, that in affection
and good will he ioyned with him: it could not otherwise
be, but that Coppinger was thereby greatly animated.
               
                  When Copinger tolde Vdall that certaine vnlearned
men, then lyinge hid, would shortlie take vpon them the defence
of the cause, which hee and his brethren in prison stood-for, and
woulde thereby daunt all their ennemies, more then they coulde,
willinge both him and the rest, ther-vpon to cheare vp themselues,
(for the day of their redemption was at hand: I doe
greately maruaile, what Vdall thought to bee Copingers
meaning.
               
               It might well haue stoode with M. Charkes duety, (seeing
Coppingers full resolution to enter into some desperate attempt,
by vertue of his extraordinarie calling,) to haue
disclosed the same to the state. When he preached in the
Blacke Friers, to the brotherhood there, about two days after
his said intelligence of Copingers resolution, and but
fiue or six daies before their proclamation that there were
some persons, so desperate that they would willinglie thrust themselues
vpon the rockes of the Land, thereby to haue disswaded
Copinger, (who then was present,) or for what other purpose,
I know not: hee should forth with haue acquainted
the saide rockes also, what boisterous tempestes and violēt
stormes had beene ready to assault them.
               In this briefe summary, I omitte the rest of Wiggintons
actions, referring you to his fellow Hackets iudgement,
both of him and them. They are so apparant, by that
which hath been sayd, as they seeme to me, to be past coniectures.
And I would withal my hart, that all which hath
bene hetherto saide of the other ministers, touching this
pointe, did onely depende vpon probabilities. For then
charity would binde vs to iudge the best. But men may

not cal good euill, nor darkenesse light, nor treasonable conspiracies,
ecclesiasticall pollicies. Marke them (if it please
you) for disciplinarian practises: and then bearing that
brande, owne them, who liste, and tearme them as you
fancy.
            
            
               CHAP. XV.
               If Hackets treasons had preuailed for the pretended discipline,
how they might haue beene defended by the disciplinarie doctrine.
               
                  I Am not ignorant, that now, if any of the
saide ministers or their fauorers were
asked, how they like of Coppingers and
his companions proceedings: no men
will more eagerlie exclaime against
them. When Hacket with his adherents,
found themselues preuented, and
that they were cut of in the beginning of their race, then
(to saue their liues) they could confes, their extraordinary
purposes, pretended before with teares, with fasting,
(with grones and imprecations, to haue proceeded from
the spirit of God,) to be nothing else, but illusions of Sathā,
cruel, bloody, & trayterous designements. But if they
had preuailed, what would haue been said of them then?
Surely it is no hard matter to gesse. If Coppinger, Hacket,
and Arthington, had murthered two or three of the Lords
in the Star-chamber, the last day of the said Trinity Terme,
the Consistorian doctrine would easily haue defended it:
especially if their further intents for the discipline, had
thereby succeeded. I will tell you a notable historie to
this purpose.
               About the yeare 1545. (M. Caluin then raigning in the

Consistorie at Geneua,)The hist. of the church of Scotland. pa. 143. 144. 145. one Norman Lesly son to the Earle
of Rothsey, fell at some iarre with the Archbishop of S. Andrewes,
then a Cardinall: for a priuate cause (saith our Chronicle
& Buchanans) betwixt them two, for his dealing, concerning
the burning of one George Wisehart, (saith the history
of the Church of Scotland.) Whereupon the said Normā,
                  F. Thyn. and Buchanan.
with some of his partakers conspired the Cardinals death,
they being the rather animated therunto, throgh the Councell
of some greate men of the Realme, that had conceiued some
deadly hatred against him. The effecting of which conspiracie,Hist. of the church of Scotland.
proceeded after this sort, as is set downe in the
saide Ecclesiasticall history. The 29. of Maie 1546, the saide
Norman, with 16, or 17. moe, entred by a wile into the
Castle of S. Andrewes, (where the Cardinal dwelt) early in
the morning: and after some course taken for possessing
themselues of the castle, Norman Lesly, Iames Meluin, and
Peter Carmichaell, got into the Cardinals chamber, where
finding him set in his chayre, and crying vnto them: I am
a Priest, yee will not slay mee? the saide Leesly stroke him first,
once or twise, and so did the saide Peter. But Iames Meluin (a
man, you may be sure, of nature most gentle and most modest,)
perceiuing them both in choller, withdrew them, and saide: This
worke and iudgement of God, (although it be secrete,) ought to
be done with greater grauitie. And presenting vnto him the
point of the sworde, saide. Repent thee of thy former wicked life,
but especially of the shedding of the blood, of that notable instrument
of God, M. George Wisehart, which albeit the flame of
fire consumed before men, yet cries it a vengeance vpon thee, and
we from God are sent to reuenge it.
                  The godly fact and wordes of Iam. Meluin. 
                  For here before my God, I
protest that neither the hatred of thy person, the loue of thy riches,
nor the feare of any trouble, thou couldest haue done to mee
in particular, moued, or moueth me to strike thee: but onely because
thou hast beene and remainest an obstinate enemie against

Christ Iesus and his holy Gospell. And so hee stroke him, twise
or thrise through, with a stog-sworde: and so he fell. The
Cardinall being thus murthered,F. Thin. and Buchanan. 
                  they seized vpon the Artilllerie
and munition, wherewith that fortresse was plentifully furnished,
and likewise vpon the rich hangings, householde stuffe, of
all sortes, apparell, Copes, iewels, ornamentes of Churches, greate
store of gold and siluer plate, besides no small quantitie of treasure
in ready coine.
               
               Some amongst vs in Englande, haue laboured very earnestlie
to qualifie Copingers words, where he said, that God
would throw some fearefull iudgement amongst the Lordes, so as
some the chiefe of them should not goe aliue out of the place: as
though there had beene no violent course intended by
him & his associates, but that (in his fond conceit (he had
imagined, that God himselfe from heauen, should haue
shewed that iudgement, for the deliuerance of Cartwright
and the rest. And in my conscience, one gentelman of
good credit, not acquainted at all with the Consistorian doctrine,
in these & such like matters thought so in his hart.
But here this maske is pluckt from such faces as could not
be ignorant, what was ment, in that the same spirit which
Was in Copinger, speaking before in Iames Meluin, or rather
(as I thinke) in Knox, and his fellow-ministers, (according
to whose humor he penned that history,) doe tearme the
saide cruell murther of the Cardinall, to bee the worke and
iudgement of God, & that for the manner of the executiō of
it. Besides in the margent of the Booke: ouer against the
Stabbers blasphemous wordes, this note is set downe, vz.
the godly fact and wordes of Iames Meluin. But that, which
mooueth me most, and for the which I haue troubled you
with this historie, is this: that men are animated to commit
the like murthers, and the doctrine thereof is stoutely
iustified according to the heathenish conceit, of a certaine

tyrant, whom Cicero also (a heathen man, but yet of better
iudgement) doth confute.
               
                  Dionisius, hauing spoiled the temple of Proserpina, at Locris,
of Iupiter in Peloponesus, of Aesculapius at Epidaurus, because
Proserpina drowned him not,Cicer. de natura deorum lib. 3. as he sayled to Syracuse
nor Iupiter stroke him in peeces with his thunderboltes,
nor Aesculapius made an ende of him by some long & miserable
consumption, both he himselfe, and many others,
accounted such his sacrilege, to be both iust and lawfull.
And euen so it falleth out, for the murther I speake of. He
that hath eyes to see let him see.
               After the foresaid Castel was surprised, and the Cardinall
was murthered, Lesly with his company, Knox and the
rest kept the same Castel by force against the Gouernor.The hist. of the church Scotland.
But at the last they were compelled to yeeld it vp: and being
thereupon sent (as prisonners) into Fraunce, they were
(by directions there) committed some of thē to the Gallies,
and some to other prisons. Howbeit in the ende
they all escaped with their liues, by one meanes or other,
sauing the saide Iames Meluin, who dyed in prison, wherevpon
commeth in this notable Consistorian doctrine, borrowed
of the said heathenish conclusions.
               This we write, vz. (how all but Meluin escaped) to let the
posterities to come vnderstand, (saith Knox and his fellowes)
how potently God wrought, in preseruing and deliuering of these
that had but a smal knowledge of his truth, & for the loue of the
same hazarded all. That if that, eyther we (now in our dayes,)
hauing greater light, or our posterities, (that shall follow vs) shal
see a fearefull dispersion of such as oppone themselues to impiety,
or take vpon them to punish the same, otherwise then lawes of
men will permit: if (wee say) we or they shall see such left of men
yea as it were despised and punished of God, yet let vs not damne
the persons that punish vice, (and that for iust cause:) nor yet despaire,

but that the same God, that deiects (for causes vnknowen
to vs) will raise vp againe the persons deiected to his glorie, and
their comfort.
               
                  Againe if our said seditious persons had preuailed with
the multitude, (in their other plot) concerning their purposes
of remouing some of her maiesties most honorable
Priuy Councell, from her seruice in that place: and in appointing
others to succeede them, (whom they fancied to
be fauourers of their Discipline): you should haue heard
(I warrant you) no cries of the brotherhood, nor complaints
in your streets, of any of that faction. It would haue
beene saide, as Goodman taught at Geneua, that seeing the
saide Councellors were enemies to Christes kingdome, and did
seduce her Maiestie now, that God had raised them vp, an Othoniel
or a Ionathan to assist them, why should they not haue
ioyned themselues vnto him? Oh (would some haue said)
the holy discipline, the holy discipline, the holy discipline: what
Prince or Potentate may resist the holy discipline and prosper? Others.
See the hand of the Lorde: when men do faile what God
can doe. Others, the greatest workes, that euer were done in the
behalfe of the Church, haue beene brought to passe by the basest
meanes. Others, this is the worke of God, and it is admirable in
our eyes. Others, thus Iosuah being extraordinarily strengthned
by God, threw thirty kings out of the land of Canaan. Others,
sufficient warning was giuen, & what would they haue had men
to haue done? Then should you haue had such a declaration,
or proclamation, as you haue before heard of: penned
(no doubt) by some of the Consistorian ministers in Scotlād:
vz. of the iust and necessary causes, mouing them and their assistantes
her Maiesties faithfull subiects,Declara
                        •
                     ion 1582. before mentioned. to repaire to her Maiesty:
for resisting of the present daungers, appearing to Gods true religion
and professors thereof, &c. and to seeke redres and reformation
of abuses, remouing from her Maiesty, the chiefe authors therof

&c. that with common consent, redresse and remedy might bee
prouided: Or termed. The repairing towards Greenwitch to the
Q. Maiesty,Proclamation at Sterling. 1585. F. Thin. 
                  as else where such attempts haue been colored.
               
               Likewise, if yet thinges had not squared to their likings,
and that they had gone further with good successe in any
violent course against her maiesty, (as it is confessed they
purposed to haue done,) then also the Geneua-diuinity must
haue borne the brunt, for the iustification of such extraordinary
iudgementes of God. And thus you should haue
had these matters smoothed ouer, as partly it may appeare
by the assault mentioned at Sterling, wherein the king was
present in person: and partly by the Consistorian propositions,
(before set down) touching this point, with many other
things, both to be noted in the premises, and also in
those bookes, out of the which the saide propositions are
drawen.
               I will not trouble you any further with Ifs, although I
could adde, that if the said traitors had proceeded on forward,
with their confessed purposes, to haue touched her
maisties estate: there wanteth no lesse defence, by Disciplinarian
learning, for such a matter, then for the premises.
You may remember the seditious & intollerable propositions
before mentioned, as they are truely collected out
of our own countrey mens books, infected at Geneua with
that pestilent doctrine. Many examples also would haue
beene brought, for that purpose, out of Buchanan, Beza,
Knox and the rest of that humor: especiallie the graue resolution
giuen by Knox and Wollocke,
                  Histo. of the Church of Scotland. pa. 372. 373. generally against all
Princes, but particularly then vrged and effected, by the
deposing of the king of Scots grandmother, from her ciuil
gouernment of that land. And peraduenture a part of the
said Knox his exhortation to England written from Geneua
the twelfth of Ianuary 1559.Exhort pag. 91. 92. (as soone as he hearde of her

maiesties possession of the royall Crown of this Realme,)
would haue beene iustified: where he saith, that no power,
nor liberty, ought to be permitted to any state, degree, or authority,
(whatsoeuer they bee:) to liue without the yoke of Discipline,
&c: and that if Prince, King or Emperour, would enterprise to
change or disanull the same, he ought to be reputed an ennemie to
God, and therefore vnworthy to raigne aboue his people.
               
               And thus you see how al these treasons, if they had happened,
with what Consistorian zeale they might haue been
defended afterward, by the Disciplinarian doctrine, which
hath beene sent abroade into this Iland from Geneua: and
meetely well practised already, in some partes thereof, by
men of that stampe. Whereupon I do collect, (the premises
considered) by Cartwrights & other the ministers intelligence,
with Copingers desperate purposes, that they cared
not what mischiefs had ensued, so they themselues might
haue beene safe. For (as it is most euident, by the threatning
speeches before mentioned,) there is nothing more
laboured for, amongst that sect, then to thrust their many
thousandes, or some of them into some mutiny or bloudy
attempt. Their hope was, that vpon any such occasion,
their chiefe fauourers would not cease to solicit her
maiesty, (for feare of further trouble) to graunt their desires,
or (at the least) to take some other course, for theyr
contentment, then hitherto (in their opinions) there hath
beene taken. They knew, that whatsoeuer either could
or should fal out, vnder the pretēce of seeking for Christs
kingdome, and for the extirpation of the present gouernment
of our Church (tearmed by them to bee so abhominable
& Antichristian,) if it had good successe for their deuised
platformes, yet the said Consistorian examples, with
their Allobrogicall new learning, would haue borne it out
sufficiently, and maintained it. I pray God deliuer Englād
                  
from these and such like points of Discipline.
               
               For mine own part, I would not haue, vrged matters in
this sort, were it not, that I thinke (in my conscience) it is
more then high time, that her maiesties faithfull subiectes
should learne to know these practises, and withall to beware
of such sectaries, as (vnder their many, both godly
and goodly pretences) do thus seditiously endeuour to
disturbe the land. And the rather also, I did it, because I
see there are diuerse, that will needes hood-winke themselues,
and stop their eares, with the Serpent in the Psalme
of purpose, because they would gladly haue these things
smoothered vp. For hereby it will be apparant to our posterity,
that if any such mischiefes, (which God forbid)
shal happen hereafter, they were sufficiently warned, that
both should and might (in good time) haue preuented
them, and withall it would then be found true which Liuie
saith: vrgentibus rempublicam fatis, Dei & hominum salutares
admonitiones spernuntur.
                  Lib. 5 dec. l When the Lorde for the
sinnes of the people, is purposed to punish any Countrey:
he blindeth the eyes of the wise, so as they shall either neglect,
or not perceiue those ordinary meanes, for the safety
thereof, which very simple men, (or babes in a manner)
did easily foresee. Which iudgement I pray God turne
far away, and long from this and all other true Christian
lands and kingdomes. Amen.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   