
      
         
            
               
               
            
         
         
            
            
            
               ¶ The Gardeners Labyrinth: Containing a discourse of the Gardeners life, in the yearly trauels to be bestovved on his plot of earth, for the vse of a Garden: with instructions for the choise of Séedes, apte times for sowing, setting, planting, & watering, and the vessels and instruments seruing to that vse and purpose: Wherein are set forth diuers Herbers, Knottes and Mazes, cunningly handled for the beautifying of Gardens. Also the Physike benefit of eche Herbe, Plant, and Floure, with the vertues of the distilled Waters of euery of them, as by the sequele may further appeare. GATHERED OVT OF THE BEST APPROVED WRITERS of Gardening, Husbandrie, and Physicke: by Dydymus Mountaine.
            
            PRINTED AT LONDON by Henry Bynneman. ANNO. 1577.
         
         
            
               
               Henrici Dethicki ad lectorem 
               Carmen.
               COelum, aequor, tellus, nunc, lumina, flumina, fructus,
               Praestat, fundit, habet, sole, vapore, fimo.
               Hortus praestat olus, praestant Pomaria poma:
               Cuncta vigent, magno parta labore viri.
               Vrbis honos hortus, florum speculatio grata,
               Et sunt herbarum pharmaca graeta viris.
               Falce, ligone, filo, qui, dissecat, effodit, ornat,
               Plantam, terram, hortos, haec documenta tenet.
               Sano, aegro, caeco, vis? victum, pharmaca, visum,
               Lingua, mente, manu, haec, perlege, disce, tene.
            
            
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ To the righte honourable and his singular good Lorde, Sir William Cecill, knighte of the moste noble Order of the Garter, Baron of Burghlev, Lord high Tresurer of England &c. Henry Dethicke wysheth long health, with encrease of honour.
            
               COnsyderyng (right honorable) my promise plighted (vnto my friende, lately enterred) I was enforced to performe the perfecting of this Englishe Treatise: otherwise I had not so willingly attempted to sollicite your honour wyth this vulgare stile. And sithens that reason requyreth, and duty demaūdeth, the satisfying of the trust in me reposed, I doubte not but that myne enterprise will be allowed. Vnreasonable were I, and destitute

of all humanitie, if that I shoulde obstinately neglect, the earnest desire of the deseased: likewise, worthy were I to be deemed vndutyfull, and altogether vngratefull, if that I shoulde omit any oportunitie, whereby I myght encrease so rare a commoditye to my country. I therefore respecting the requeste of my friend, and tēdering the profit of my coū
               try, haue craued herein (as heretofore in all other mine affaires) your honours protection, and the rather, for that I finde none (your honour excepted) neyther in auntient aucthoritye, neyther by common consente, neyther by present proofe, that hath more warely, and wisely, warded the weale of this countrey. In fine, to auoide tediousnesse, I haue omitted all circumstaunces, whereby I might display the sundry cōmodities & rare rudiments, contained in this painful, and gainful discourse: but surceasing to trauise farther in this terrestriall Gardeners Labyrinth, I wish vnto your

honour by dayly Prayer, the fruition of the Heauenly Paradise, crauyng of the Omnipotent and prouident God, the guider of that gorgeous Garden, that hee woulde vouchsafe to graunte vnto you, the sweete sauour of his chiefe fragrante floures, that is, his comfort to cleaue faste vnto you, his mercy to keepe you, and his grace to guyde you, nowe and euermore.
            
               Your honours most humble HENRY DETHICKE.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ A Table expressing the Contentes of euery Chapiter conteyned in this Labyrinth.
            
               THe firste deuising of Garden plottes vvith their commodities in tyme past. Chap. 1.
               
               The dilligence requyred of a Gardener, and vvhat encrease a vvell laboured earth yeeldeth. Chap. 2.
               
               The choosing of a Garden plotte, vvith the goodnesse of the earth. Chap. 3.
               
               Of playner instructions for the choosing of a battell ground, vvith other matter necessarie. Chap. 4.
               
               Of the placing of a Garden plotte, vvith the Commodyties therevnto belongyng. Chap. 5.
               
               VVhat aire is noyous to mē, & to plants, and vvhy a Garden shoulde bee placed nigh to the ovvners house. Chap. 6.
               
               The forme of Inclosures inuented by the Romaines. Chap. 7.
               
               The inuentions of erecting a strong hedge for the defence of a Garden. Chap. 8.
               
               The cause vvhy dunging of Gardens vvas misliked in auntient time neare to houses, and vvhat dung is best allovved for pothearbes. Chap. 9.
               
               Of the kindes of dung, and vvhich is commended for a Garden. Chap. 10.
               
               VVhat is to be considered before the Ieuelling of Beddes. Chap. 11.
               
               Of the framing of Herbers, VValkes, and Alleys, in a Garden. Chap. 12.
               
               The forme of disposing quarters, beds, & Borders, vvith the sovving, choise and defence of the Seedes, vvyth the vveding of the beddes. Chap. 13.
               
               The artely disposing of Beddes for the encrease of Kitchen Hearbes, vvyth the vvittye defences to bee vsed after the Seedes are bestovved. Chap. 14.
               
               The vvorkmanly deuidyng of Beds, for rootes and hearbes. Chap. 15.
               
               The rare inuentiōs for the defence of Seedes committed to the earth, that they may not be endamaged by byrdes, nor creepyng things. Chap. 16.
               
               The vvittie helpes for the Garden Seeds to bee employed before and after the sovving of them, least that they should be harmed by outvvarde or invvard iniuries. Chap. 17.
               
               Of the nature and election of sundry Seedes, vvith the apt times commended for the sovving of moste Kitchen hearbes. Chapter. 18.
               
               Certaine preceptes for the sovving of delectable floures and tender herbs, vvith the obseruations of the Moone. Cha. 19.
               
               The commended times to bee obserued in the bestovving of Seedes and plantes in the earth vvith the discommodities. Chap. 
                        •
                     .
               
               Of certain curious instructions, for the bestovving of Seedes and daintye Hearbes. Chap. 21.
               
               In vvhat space of tyme Seedes committed to the earth in the encrese of the Moon, commonly shoote vp. Chap. 22.
               
               VVhat diligence is to be had in vveeding of a Garden. Chap 23.
               
               Of the tymes of vvate
                     •
                  yng beddes, and vvhat manner of vvater oughte to be vsed for Plants, vvith the inuentions of Vesselles. Chap. 24.
               
               Of the remouing of plants, vvith the breaking and s
                     •
                  ipping of sundry sets. Ch. 25.
               
               Certayne instructions for the gatheryng and preseruing of kitchen Herbes and rootes, vvyth floures, daintie Hearbes and rootes to the vse of phisik. Cha. 26.
               
               The remedies vvhiche preuayle agaynste Snailes, Cankervvormes, Garden fleas, and Barthvvormes. Chap. 27.
               
               The helpes agaynst Garden Moles, Ants, Gnats, Fleas, & Frogs, vvasting herbs, trees and fruites. Chap. 28.
               
               Of rare practises against serpentes of the Gardeyn, and other venemous thinges, hurting as vvel men, as kitchen hearbes, trees, and fruites. Chap. 29.
               
               Of the helpes againste Scorpions, Todes, Garden myce, VVeasels, and all other beasts, vvasting herbs and fruits. Cha. 30
               
               Of remedies against haile, lightnings, tempests and beatings dovvne of Kitchen herbes, trees, and fruites. Chap. 31.
               
               Of the healpes against frostes, blasting of trees, mistes, and rust. Chap. 32.
               
               Certayne proper knots deuised for Gardeyns, to be placed at the ovvners discretion.
            
            
               
               ¶ The Chapiters conteyned in the seconde parte.
               THe secrets in sovving and remouing the garden Colevvort, vvith the physicke healpes of the Colevvorte, and distilled vvater thereof. Chap▪ 1.
               
               The order of sovving the Beete, vvith the phisicke healpe of the Beete, and vvater distilled thereof. Chap. 2.
               
               The order in sovvyng or settyng of the Blete, vvith the cōmodities therof. Ch. 3.
               
               The order in sovving or setting of Arage vvith the phisike helps therof. Chap. 4.
               
               The sovvyng and remouing of Sperage, vvith the phisike helps therof. Chap. 5.
               
               The ordring & sovving of Spinage, vvith the phisicke helpes thereof. Chap. 6.
               
               The ordering and sovving of the Garden Sorrell, vvith the phisike helpes of the Sorrell and Pympernell, and the v
                     •
                  ater distilled therof. Chap 7.
               
               The ordering and sovving of Louage, & Buglosse, vvith the phisik helps of them both, and the vvater therof. Chap. 8.
               
               The figure of the Fornace named 
                     
                        •
                     alneum Mariae. 
                  fo. 26.
               
               The order of sovving remouing & setting the Marigold, vvith the phisike helps of Marigolds, and vvater therof. Chap. 9.
               
               The ordering and sovving Parsely, vvith the phisicke healpes of Parseley, and the vvater distilled thereof. Chap. 10.
               
               The ordering and sovving of Garden and vvilde running Time, vvith the phisicke healpes of Time, and vvater therof. Chap. 11.
               
               The ordering and sovving of Mintes and Holihoke, vvith the phisicke healpes of the Mintes, and Mallovves, and vvater thereof. Chap. 12.
               
               The ordering and sovving of the Artochoke, vvith the phisicke healpes thereof. Chap 13.
               
               The ordering and sovving of Endiue and Succory, vvith the phisicke helpes both of them and the vvater thereof. Chap. 14.
               
               The ordering & sovving of Lettuce vvith the phisicke healpes of Lettuce and the vvater therof distilled. Chap. 15.
               
               The ordering and sovving of Purselane, and Rocket, vvith the phisicke healpes of them both, and of the vvater of Purslaine. Chap. 16
               
               The ordering and sovving of Cheruill, Smallage, Taragon, and Cresses, vvyth the phisicke helpes of Cheruill and Garden Cresses, and the distilled vvaters thereof. Chap. 17.
               
               The ordring and sovving of Bucks horn, Stravvbery, and Mustard seede, vvith the phisicke helpes of them all and vvater distilled from them. Chap. 18.
               
               The ordering and sovving of Leekes and C
                     •
                  ues, vvith the phisicke healpes of the Garden Leeke, and vvater thereof. Chap. 19.
               
               The ordering and sovving of the Onion, vvith the phisicke commodities of the Onion and vvater therof. Chap. 20.
               
               The ordering and sovving of Garlike, vvith the phisicke healpes of Garlike, and the vvater thereof. Chap: 21
               
               The inconueniences of Garlike oute of Plinie. fo. 103
               
               The ordering and sovving of the Scalion and Squill Onion, vvith the phisicke healpes thereof. Chap. 22.
               
               The ordering of Garden Saffron, vvith the phisicke healpes thereof. Chap. 23.
               
               The ordering and sovving of Nauevves, vvith the phisicke benefites thereof. Chap. 24.
               
               The ordering and sovving of the Rape and Turnupe, vvith the phisicke helps of the Rape, and vvater thereof. Ch. 25.
               
               The ordering and sovvyng of Radyshe, vvith the phisicke benefits of Radishe, and the vvater thereof. Chap. 26.
               
               The ordering and sovving of Parsneps and Carots, vvith the phisicke he
                     •
                  lpes of them & the vvater of Parsnep. Ch. 27
               
               The ordering and sovving of the Garden Poppy, vvith the phisicke helps of Poppye, and the vvater thereof. Chap. 28.
               
               The ordering and sovving of Cucumber, vvith the phisicke commodities thereof. Chap. 29.
               
               The ordering and sovving of the Gourde, vvith the phisicke helpes of the same, & the vvater thereof. Chap. 30.
               
               The healpes and secretes of the Pompons, Mellons, and muske Mellons, vvith the phisicke commodities of the Pompones and Mellons, and the distilled vvater of Mellons. Chap. 31.
               
               VVorthy instructions aboute the setting

and sovving of sundry phisicke hearbes, fragrant hearbes and floures, and of the Blessed Thistle, vvith the phisicke helps of the Thistle and the vvater thereof. Chap. 32.
               
               The setting and sovving of the herbe Angelica, vvith the phisicke healpes therof. Chap. 33.
               
               The sovving of the herbe Valerian, vvith the phisicke helps of the same, and the vvater of the herbe and roote thereof. Chap. 34.
               
               The bestovving of Bitto
                     •••
                  , vvith th
                     •
                   phisicke commodities of the same, an
                     •
                   the vertues of the VVater thereof. Chaptrer 35.
               
               The bestovving of Lo
                     •
                  age, vvith the phisicke helpes, and vertues of the vvater thereof. Chap. 36.
               
               The bestovving of Elecampane, vvith the Physicke healpes of the same, and the vvater distilled of the hearbe and root thereof. Chap. 37.
               
            
            Finis Tabulae,
         
         
            ¶ Authours from whome this vvorke is selected.
            
               PLinie
               Cicero
               Columella
               M. Cato
               Varronianus Tremelius
               Varro
               Florentinus
               Palladius Rutilius
               Vergile
               Didymus
               Auicen
               Democritus
               Dyophanes
               Hesiodus
               Affricanus
               Apuleius
               D. Niger
               Theophrastus
               Anatolius
               Pamphilus
               Ruellius
               Paxanius
               Beritius
               Marcus Gatinaria
               Albertus
               Philostratus
               Archibius
               Galene.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Gardeners Labyrinth. Contayning the manifolde trauayles, great cares, and diligence, to be yearly bestowed in euery earth, for the vse of a Garden: with the later inuentions, and rare secretes therevnto added (as the like) not heretofore published.
            
               
            
            
               The inuention of G
                     •
                  rden plottes, by whom first deuised, and what commoditie founde by them, in time past. Chap. 1.
               
                  THe worthie Plinie (in his xix. booke) reporteth, that a Garden plotte in the Auncient time at Rome, was none other, than a smal & simple inclosure of ground, whiche through the labour and diligence of the husbandmā, yeelded a commoditie and yearely reuenew vnto him. But after yeares (that man more esteemed

of himselfe, & sought an easier life) deuised and framed this ground plotte, for the minde, as for pleasure and delight: as may well appeare by that Epicure, of whome Cicero maketh mention, in his booke intituled De natura Deorum, who liuing at ease, and conceyuing a felicitie in the Garden, indeuoured first to place and frame the same within the walles of Athens, whiche before (as it should seeme) lay open, and vndefended in the wyde fielde, and the culture of it not had in so much estimation, as to place them nighe to theyr townes or houses: For whiche cause, doth Plinie (by good reason) rightly attribute, the inuention of the delectable Garden to him. The Garden plottes, whiche the Auncient Romaynes possessed (as Plinie reporteth) were onely set aboute with trees, hauing a dead inclosure, made onely of busshes
                     •
                  , that needed repayring euery yeare: in whiche especially were sowen the red Onyons, Colewortes, great Leekes, Cresses, great Mallowes or holy Okes, Endiue, Rocket, and sundry sallate Herbes: In these they found such a commoditie, as maruelously pleased them▪ seyng they by enioying the hearbes, needed no fire about the dressing & preparing of them, and spared a charge of fleshe, besides a dayly profite that they gotte, by the herbes and woodde brought to the Citie to be solde. The meaner sorte of that tyme so litle cared and esteemed the eating of fleshe, (who in generall accompted it a kinde of reproche, to be knowen to haue eaten fleshe) that they refusing this taunt, did (as to a shambles or fleshe market) haunt dayly to the Garden.
               
                  Columella reporteth lib. 10. that the Auncient husbandmē so slenderly looked vnto (or rather forced of) Gardens, that they in furthering the groweth and yeelde of theyr fruytes and hearbes, bestowed a small trauayle and diligence. And as they appeared negligent in their labours of the Garden, so were they well pleased with a meane liuing, in somuch that the common sorte fedde and liued willingly on grosse and simple herbes. But after the age and people were refourmed, and brought by the instruction of the Epicure, to a more delight of themselues, in coueting to feede on daintie herbes and Sallates, with meates delectable, and taking an earnester care for the pleasing of their mouthes, they laboured then to become skilfull, and to vse a greater care about the ordering and apt dressing of Garden plottes, by well fensing and comely furnishyng of their grounde, with sundry needefull and delectable trees,

plantes, and herbes: in which trauayles and diligence of the husbandmen, so good successe and commoditie ensuing, procured not onely the willing carriage of herbes, fruytes, and other commodities farre off to be exercised vnto Cities and market Townes, by which these through the sale obtayned a dayly gayne and yearely reuenew, for the ayde of theyr housholde charges, but allured them also to place and frame gardens, aswell within Citties and Townes as faste by, that a coste bestowed, might after possesse the recreation and delight of mindes, besides the proper gayne made by the fruytes, floures, and herbes, gathered in them. The Garden plottes at length, grew so common among the meaner sorte, that the charge and the chiefest care of the same, was committed vnto the wyfe, in somuch that these accompted not the wife of the house, to be a husewife in deede, if shee bestowed not a payne and diligence as Cato reporteth in the weeding, trimming, and dressing of the Garden. But to be briefe, and leauing further to reporte of antiquitie, I thinke it high tyme to declare the effects and commoditie of this worke taken in hande, and first to intreate of the care, helpes, and secretes, to be learned and folowed in the Garden grounde: All whiche in a pleasant maner, shall after be vttered in destinct Chapiters, to the furtherance and commoditie of many Gardeners, and all suche hauing pleasure therein.
            
            
               What care and diligence is requyred of euery Gardener: to these, what increase & commoditie a well laboured earth yeeldeth. Chap. 2.
               THe husbandman or Gardener, shal enioy a most cōmodiouse and delectable garden, whiche bothe knoweth, can, and will orderly dresse the same: yet not sufficient is it to a Gardener, that he knoweth, or would the furtherance of the garden, without a cost bestowed, which the workes and labours of the same require: nor the will again
                     •
                   of the workeman, in doing and bestowing of charges, shall smally auayle, without he haue both arte and skill in the same. For that cause, it is the chiefest poynt in euery facultie and busines, to vnderstand and know what to begin and follow: as the learned Columella out of Varronianus Tremellius aptly vttereth. The person whiche shall enioy or haue in a readinesse these three, and will purposedly or with diligence frame to him a well dressed Garden, shall after obtayne these two commodities,

as vtilitie and delight: the vtilitie, yeeldeth the plentie of Herbes, floures, and fruytes right delectable: but the pleasure of the same procureth a delight, and (as Varro writeth) a iucunditie of minde. For that cause a Garden, shal workemanly be handled and dressed vnto the necessarie vse and commoditie of mans life, next for health, and the recouerie of strength by sicknesse feebled: as the singular Palladius
                        •
                      Rutilius hath learnedly vttered, and the skilful Florentinus, that wrote cunningly, of husbandry in the Greeke tunge, certayne yeeres before him: Lastly by sight vnto delectation, and iucunditie through the fragrancie of smell: but most of all, that the same may furnishe the owners, and husbande mans table, with sundry seemely and dayntie dishes, to him of small coste. The Garden grounde (if the same may be) ought rather to be placed neere hande, whereby the owner or Gardener may with more ease be partaker of such commodities growing in the garden, and both oftner resorte, and vse his diligence in the same: So that this is the whole care and duetie requyred of euery owner and Gardener, in their plot of ground. Yet may I not be vnmindefull, that the garden doth also require a dunging, at the apt times: of whiche in the proper place we shall after intreate.
            
            
               What consideration and chosing to be vsed, in any Garden plot: with the goodnesse and worthinesse of euery earth. Chap. 3.
               AS to the nature and goodnesse of a garden grounde, the especialler that ought to be eschewed, are a bitter, and salte earth of taste, if so be we meane to make a fertill, commodiouse, & well yeeldyng ground: for these two natures of earth, were very much mislyked in Auncient tyme, as may appeare by the skilfull Poete Virgill, who sayth that euery earth is not allowed or commended, for the yeelde of garden herbes. For which cause, the mynde of the auncient husebande men is, that the Gardener by taking vp a clodde of Earth, should artly trie the goodnesse of it after this maner: in considering whether the earth be nether whote and bare, nor leane by sande, lacking a mixture of perfite earth: nor the same founde to be wholly Chalke, nor naughtie sande: nor barrayne grauell, nor of the glittering pouder or duste of a leane stonie grounde, nor the earth continuall moyst, for all these be the speciall defaults of a good and perfite earth. The best grounde for a Garden,

is the same iudged to be, whiche in the Sommer time, is neyther very drie, nor cleyie, nor sandie and roughe, nor endamaged with gapings, procured by heate of the Sommer, as the woorthie Didymus, in his Greeke instructions of husbandry writeth. Wherefore the earth whiche in the Sommer tyme is wonte to be dry, eyther perisheth or loseth al the seedes sowen, and plantes set in it, or yeeldeth those thinne, and weake prouing on the ground. For the Cl
                     •
                  yie ground of it selfe, ouerfast holdeth: but the sandie and rough, in a contrarie maner: so that neyther is wonte to nourish plantes, nor retayne water. Therefore an apt earth for a Garden, shall you readily trie and finde out, if the same through wet and dissolued with water, you shall see to haue a muche clamminesse and fastnesse. In whiche grounde, if a waterinesse shall exceede, then shall you iudge the same disagreable and vnfruitefull: if dissoluing the earth with water, you shall finde the same very clammie or much cleauing to the hande and fingers, as it were waxe, this earth shall you accompte, as wholly vnprofitable. Plinie willeth, that a garden plotte before all other matters done to it, be very well clensed of stones, and to these, that the earth proue not full of chappes, or but few to be seene, least the Sunne beames entering betweene, may so scortch and burne the rootes of the plantes. For whiche cause, the best and gentle or worthiest earth shalbe chosen, in whiche you minde to committe your seedes: or for the same, that the Nource as a mother, may often agree to the fruyte, or yeelde to be an ayder and furtherer to it.
            
            
               Certayne playner instructions, much furthering the Gardener, in the knowledge and choyse of a good and battell ground, with other matter necessarie. Chap. 4.
               THe Gardener minding to trie and know a fatte earth, for the vse of a garden, shall worke after this maner: in taking a litle clodde of earth, and the same to sprinckle with fayre water, kneading it well in the hande: which after appearing clammie, and cleauing or sticking to the fingers, doth vndoubtedly witnesse that earth to haue a fatnesse in it. An other triall of a battell earth, may thus be purchased, if you digge vp a rotten clodde in a maner blacke, and the same able inough to couer it selfe with the groweth of the owne grasse, and appearing also of a mixte colour, whiche earth, if it be found thinne and loose, may

well be fastned and made clammie, through the adioyning and mixing of a fat earth to it. The garden grounde doth also require a sweetnesse to consist in it, whiche the Gardener shall easely finde and knowe, by taste of it: if so be he take vp a clodde of earth in any parte of the ground which most misliketh him, and moystening the clodde with fayre water in an earthen potsharde, doth after the dipping of the finger in this moyst earth and water, let a droppe softely fall on the tunge, he shall incontinent feele and perceyue (by reason of the taste) of what condition the same is. Further, euery fatte earth beyng reasonably loose, is euermore commended and chosen, whiche of it selfe requireth smal labour, and yeeldeth the most increase. But worste of all others is that grounde, whiche shalbe bothe dry and grosse, leane and colde. In the kindes of grounde, the chalkie is to be refused: whiche properly the auncients name, the cleyishe, and reddish earth. The worthy Varro commendeth the same grounde, whiche of it selfe beyng gentle and pliable, yeeldeth properly walwurtes. The same earth doth Columella greatly allowe, which of the owne accorde yeeldeth or bringeth foorth wilding or Crabbe trees, yong Springs, the Slowe or Bullesse trees, Elme trees, and such like. So that a battell ground, is on suche wise founde and knowen: the rather of the crescent things, seene in it of the owne accorde: yet of necessitie may euery grounde well agree, to be mixed and turned in with dunge. Florentinus vttereth an other triall of a fruitefull grounde: if so be the Gardener diggeth vp a furrow, of a foote and a halfe deepe, and filleth the same againe with the owne earth, which in short time after gapeth or choppeth, this no doubt, is a weake and leane earth: But if the earth thus ordred, swelleth or retcheth out, then is it a sure note, that the same is a battell and fatte grounde. And this is noted to be a meane earth, whiche after the digging and raking euen, gapeth but a little. This I thought not good to be couered, nor willingly ouer passed: that a garden plotte situated or standing neare to a mote, or compassed by a mote, is not alwayes lawdable, in that the seedes bestowed in the same, and diuerse plantes set in it, do lightly and soone through the water vaporating foorth waxe olde: yea the fruytes (whether those shalbe of the hearbes or trees) are for the more parte caused vnpleasant, and ouermoyst. Further conceyue, that a garden grounde, ought to be of a moderate increase, and easie dressing:

whiche neyther is very moyst, nor ouer dry of it selfe. To these suche a earth is greatly commended as beyng new digged, byrdes couet to it: and that Crowes especially folow the new casting of the digger. If the earth shalbe founde naughtie or vnfruitfull, as the Cleyie, Sandie, and Chalkie, then ought the same to be amended, after the minde of the skilfull, with mearle and dunge layed three foote deepe, and well turned in with the earth, if this be perceyued ouer thinne and leane, then to be mixed and holpen by a fat earth: or to a barreyne and ouer dry groūd, may be mixed a moyst and very fatte earth. A waterie ground is made the better, if the same be mixed with a sandie or small grauelie earth, and deepe Alleys made, for the conueighyng and shifting of the water falling in the night. But to vse such a tediouse paynes in these, Plinie accompteth it a madnesse: for what fruyte or gayne may be hoped after, in bestowyng suche a trauayle and diligence in the like grounde plotte? To conclude, euery reasonable earth, may very much be holpen thorough the well dunging, and laboring of the Gardener, of whiche matter (in the proper place) we meane fully to intreate.
            
            
               Of the placing and standing of a Garden plotte, with the necessarie benefite of water to a Garden, and other matters profitable. Chap. 5.
               IT is right necessary (sayth Varro) to place gardens neare to the Citie, aswell for the benefite of pothearbes and rootes, as all maner of sweete smelling floures, that the Citie greatly needeth. Where these placed in a soyle farre off that they can not so conueniently and in due time be brought to the market to be solde, in such places are altogither disalowed, and thought friuolous for the turne. Cato doth very much commende the garden plot placed neare to the Citie, in which both young trees to beare vp Uines, and Willow or Osier trees be planted nigh to water sides and in places waterie: and that through the garden grounde, water or springs be seene running. To these, the seedes of most hearbes committed into a very well dunged, dressed, and fayre or large open plot, in whiche besides all kindes of fruytes, for the vse of man, workemanly planted and set in apte times of the yeare. This skilfull Cato also willeth, that all kindes of garden groundes be placed and framed neare to the Citie, aswell for the Garlande or Posie

floures, as all maner rounde and delectable rootes, with the sweete and pleasant smelling trees: as all the kindes of the Roses, the sweete Jacemine, the Eglantine bryar, the Myrtill tree, and all others of lyke sorte, sowed and planted in due seasons of the yeare. But a Garden plot, onely seruing for the vse of potherbes and the kitchin, ought especially to be a battell ground, sufficient moyst of it selfe, and well turned in or workemanly laboured with dung. Garden plottes ought to be placed, farre from Barnes, Hay loftes, and Stables, if the same possibly may be refused, or otherwise chosen for the turne: in that the chaffe or duste of strawes (as enimie to them) the plantes hardly brooke and suffer: in somuch that the very strawes blowē abroade with the winde, and falling on hearbes, do greatly annoy and harme them: as the singular Florentinus in his Greeke instructions of Husbandry skilfully vttereth. For these, sayth he, by cleauing to the plantes, in the fallyng, pearse the leaues, which once pearced, are incontinent burned by them. All Gardens aswell prosper by the dunging with rootes, as with the proper dunge allowable: yet dungyng the Garden earth, with the branches and leaues of trees, is of the skilfull Gardeners very much disalowed, as vnprofitable and noyouse to hearbes.
               As to the well standing of a Garden behoueth: the aptest and moste laudable placing of a Garden plot shalbe, if the playne grounde lying somewhat a slope, shal haue a course of spring water running through by seueral partes. But this course of water, running through the Garden plot, may in no wise be bigge. And the smalnesse of the labouring and dressing of a Garden grounde, is more of yeelde, than the largenesse of it, not labored in a maner at all.
               It behoueth to haue a well in a Garden, onlesse some running water as eyther ditche or small ryuer be neere adioyning: for that a sweete water sprinckled on yong Plantes, and Hearbes, giueth a speciall nourishment. If a well bee lacking in the Garden, then digge a deepe pitte, in some conuenient place of the Garden: although it may be a painefull labour for the Gardener, to drawe water out of the same. For a Garden grounde needeth often to be watered, through whiche all Seedes committed to the earth, as Plinie reporteth, both sooner breake foorth, and speedier spread abroade. That a pit with water of long continuance, may be purchased, the same at that time Columella
                  
willeth to be digged, whē as the Sunne shall obtayne or occupie the last degrees of virgo: which is in the moneth of September, before the Equinoctiall haruest. For the vertue then of Well springes, are throughly tried and founde out: at whiche time through the long drought of Summer, the earth lacketh the due moysture of rayne. If a well or pitte to purpose cannot be made in the Garden: then frame vp a squarepitte or Cesterne leaueled in the bottome with brycke and 
                     •
                  ime to receyue the rayne water falling: with whiche in the hottest Summer dayes, you may water the beddes of the Garden. But if all these maner of healpes and wayes, shall fayle the Gardener, or can not wel be compassed in the Garden ground, then shal he digge the ground after the minde of Palladius Rutilius, three or foure foote the deeper or lower. For the beddes on such wise ordered, being workemāly laboured and sowen, may the better endure, through the lowe standing, the whole drought of the Summer dayes. In the Garden ground besides, this shall you obserue, that when the Alleys or pathes of the beddes be ouer cloyed with water, to digge deepe gutters here & there after your discretion, in suche order, that the water falling and runnyng along, may be guyded into a conuenient pitte, made at the lower side or ende of the Garden, for that onely purpose. Here further learne, that what Garden plot the nature of the moysture helpeth not, the same may you aptly deuide into partes, in conuerting the spaces, digged and dressed for the winter time to lie open to the South, and those prepared for the Summer time like, vnto the North quarter.
            
            
               What ayre commended for the benefite of a Garden, and whiche be no
                     •
                  ous as well to Man as the Plantes: and the reason why Garden plottes ought to be placed nigh to the owners house. Chap. 6.
               EUery ground pl
                     •••
                  ying neare to the Cittie, aswell the Garden as Orcharde, ought to be placed neere to the house, for the oftner recourse and diligence to be bestowed of the owner: and the Garden especially to be laboured and well turned in with dung: through whose iuyce and fatning, the earth may yeelde hearbes of the owne accorde. As touchyng the ayre commended for a Garden, the same being cleare and temperate is beste alowed, in that this not onely cherisheth and

prospereth the hearbes growing in it, but procureth a delight and comfort to the walkers therein. An euill ay
                     ••
                   in the contrarie m
                     •••
                  et, troubled with the vapours of standing pitt
                     •
                  s, ditches, and suche like mixed to it, dothe not onely annoy and corrupte the Plantes and Hearbes growing in that Garden faste by, but 
                     •
                  ist choke and dull the S
                     •
                  yrites of men by walkyng in the 
                     〈◊〉
                  . Besides▪ the windes byting, and frostes mortifying, doe both harme and destroy Plantes. Auicen wryting of the ayre, doth in skilfull maner 
                     •
                  tter, that the same ayre, whiche after the Sunne setting is soone colde, and after the Sunne rising speedily hote, is both subtill and healthfull to man. So that a contrarie ayre to this, worketh the contrary to man and Plantes. Yet that ayre is accompted worser, which seemeth as it were to wring or binde h
                     •
                  rde togither the Heart: yea making straight or letting the attraction of ayre. The learned Neapolitane Rutilius besides these reporteth, that ye subtilnesse or healthfulnes of ayre, do declare those places free frō low valleys, and stincking mistes or fogges in the night, that might annoy both men and the Plantes. Here is doth not much disagree from the matter, to write in generall, general of the qualities of the windes: and of these, in the briefest maner. First, the Easterly and Westerly windes, be in a maner temperate of qualitie, as betwene a hotenesse and coldnesse: yet of the two, the Easterly windes be knowen dryer. Further the Easterly windes, are for the more parte hoter, than the Westerly, & the Westerly by reporte of the Auncient somewhat more moyst, than the Easterly. Of all the windes, for the benefite of the Garden, is the Southwest winde especially commended: as the worthy Florentinus in his Greeke rules, and others of experience affirme.
               Besides these, as vnto the clemencie or temperatenesse of ayre, and healthfulnesse of the place belongeth, a Garden plot in colde countries, ought in a contrary maner to be placed, as either to the East or South quarter: if the same be such a plot of ground, whiche bothe contayneth trees, & Plants or Herbes comming vp in it, least the Garden plot excluded from these two partes, by the obiect or standing against of some most great and high hill, be so nipped, frosen, and withered, with the extreame colde long continuyng, or the Garden plotte otherwise farre distant form the comforte of the Sunne on the North parte, or els the Sunne only shining low and weake, at the West quarter of the same.

The singular Cato willeth, that the Garden, if a man can, be placed at the foote of an Hill: and the same beholding or lying open to the South, especially in a healthfull place. For a Garden plotte thus defended by an highe hill, on the North parte, and all the day comforted, by the open face of the South quarter: is procured to yeelde the sweeter and tymelier Fruytes, in the seasons of the yeare. But in hote Regions or Countries, let the open place of a Garden grounde, be rather situated towardes the North quarter: whiche may through the like standing auayle, aswell to health of bodie and quicknyng of the Spyrites, as to profite and pleasure.
               This besides conceyue, that the placing of a Garden grounde neare to a Fenne or Marrishe, is euery where to be misliked and refused: if the same lie open towardes the South or Weste, and yearely in the Summer time is accustomed to be drie: for on such wise hapning, the ayre thereabout gathered vp, doth in the falling againe, ingender eyther the Pestilence, or wicked vermine, much harming the Garden plot lying nigh to it. There is also a great regarde to be had to the water, mote or ditche, standing nighe or rounde aboute the Garden grounde: whether this for the more parte be wonte to vaporate or breath foorth any noysome ayre, that may both to men and the Plantes be harmefull. For peculiar or proper is the same (or rather such is the propertie) of very many still waters and Motes. So that it is the counsell of the skilfull (if any lyke be knowen) to refrayne from placing any Garden plotte or Orcharde, if the owner may choose, neare to the same.
            
            
               The forme of the inclosures, whiche the Husbandmen, and Romaynes in time past inuc
                     •
                  ted. Chap. 7.
               FOr asmuche as the same may be thought a meere madnesse, to haue chosen out a fitte plotte of grounde, and to cast, digge, and dresse it seemely in all poyntes: yet lying open day and night, aswell to the incursious and cōmon haunte, as to the iniuries to be wrought & done by robbers or theeues, foules and beastes: for that cause, I here minde to intreate of the sundry maners of fensing, & cōpassing in of the Garden groundes in auncient time. First, the skilfull and warie husbande men in tyme paste, being those of good abilitie, buylte them

walles about of F
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  stone artly layed and mortered togither, & some did, with baked bricke like handled. Others of lesser abilitie, and of the meaner sorte, framed them inclosures, with stones handsomely layed one vpon an other without morter or Cley: and some of them couched the broade Slate stones, with other bigge and large stones (in like order aboute) where such dwelt by quarries of stone. But very many of the baser and poorer sorte, made them fen
                     •
                  es and walles aboute, with mudde of the ditche, dung, chaffe, and strawes cut short, and wel mixed togither. Others there were, whiche with bigge Canes set vpright, by small poles bound togither, so fensed theyr Garden plot, in handsome maner round about. Some also with yong Willow trees, set by certayne distances, and the drie blacke thorne (purchased from the woodde) beyng bound in (betweene the spaces) so framed theyr inclosure: but this maner of inclosing wrought or buylte by Arte (the skilfuller named) a dead and rough inclosure, made especially for the keepyng and defending of Cattell out of the Garden ground. Yet the hedge or inclosure erected after this maner, required euery yeare to be newe repayred and bounde vp in the places needefull, to the tediousnesse and great paynes of the husbande man.
               The learned Columella in his husbandry reporteth, that the Romaynes in time paste, fenced and inclosed their Garden groundes, with bigge quarters set vpright, and Poles with lathes, very thicke fastned to them, by small roddes of the Osier tree walling them in. Some boared large holes through bigge bodies or stockes of trees, that quarters or great poles made for the purpose might passe thorough them, eyther by twoo or three togither, in reasonable distaunce, with payle borde raysed and fastned along to them. Some also through the tymber of trees (set into the earth) fastned bigge poles or long quarters round about, much like to the vsuall Cattell poundes in our age. But some attayning a more skill, erected as Varro reporteth, a natural inclosure, set about with the blacke or White thorne trees, and yong willowes: whiche had besides the rootes of a quicke set hedge, that in tyme growing vp, withstoode tempestes, windes, landfloudes, yea fire the consumer of all things put to it. The Auncient husband men did besides these inuent the ca
                     •
                  ting vp of banckes & counterm
                     •
                  res of earth, round aboute the Garden plotte, much lyke to the trenches in tyme of warre

aboute Bulwarkes and Tentes: and these they especially made neere to high wayes, or by Riuers, and in Marrishes or Fennes lying open, or other Fieldes, that the Garden plot might on such wise be defended, from the damages and harmes, both of Theeues, Cattell, and Landfloudes.
               For a playner conceyuing of the abouesayde, learne these folowing: that the Auncient husbandmen did caste vp and made a deepe ditche, about theyr Garden ground (standing in the open fielde) whiche might receyue al the rayne water falling: and this they so digged with a slope passage, whereby the water might runne the easier and freelier from the bottome. The earth and Clay cast vp on the inside (faste by the brincke) they so wrought vp togither, that hardly any person (after the drying of the coūtermure) could clyme ouer the same. Some also made high banckes or countermures, without a ditche digged about, and the same so serued in the open fieldes in steade of a wall.
               To be brief, the inclosure whiche longest indured, surest, and of the least cost, was the same that the Romaynes in auncient time made with Brambles, and the white Thorne layed orderly in bankes, for the better growing vp. For this inclosure or hedge (after yeeres sprung vp) endured by reporte of the learned Cato an infinite time: yea experience in our age, doth likewise confirme the same. For whiche cause, this inclosure was very much commended of the Auncient Romaynes, who well conceyued and knew, that the Bramble decayed or died not at any season, except it were digged and plucked quite vp by the rootes. Yea they learned by practise, that the Bramble swinged or scorched with straw flaming, recouered & grew euery yeare after, both stiffer, rougher and thicker togither.
            
            
               The later inuentions of erecting a naturall and strong Hedge▪ whiche in time growing, may proue a most sure defence and sauegarde of the Garden. Chap. 8.
               THe most commendable inclosure for euery Garden plot, is a quick set Hedge, made with the Brambles and white Thorne: but the stronger and more defensiue Hedge is the same, whiche the singular Democritus in his Greeke instructions of husbandry (that wrote long before Columella, and Palladius Rutilius) cunningly vttereth, and the

same with ease and small coste, after this maner. Gather, sayth he, in a due season of the yeare, the 
                     •
                  eedes founde in the redde berries of the biggest and highest Bryars (whiche by a more common name with vs, are called the wilde Eglantine Bryars) the through rype seedes of the Brambles (runnyng low by the grounde) the rype seedes of the white Thorne, and to these bothe the rype Berries, of the Gooseberrie and Barberrie trees: this done, mixe and sti
                     •
                  pe for a tyme, all the Berries and Seedes, in the blended meale of Tarts, vnto the the thickenesse of Honie: the same mixture lay diligently into olde and vntwisted Shippe or Well roapes, or other long worne roapes, and fittered or broken into shorte peeces, beyng in a manner starke rotten, in such order, that the Seedes bestowed or couched within the softe heares of them, may be preserued and defended from the colde, vnto the beginnyng of Spring. At whiche tyme, where you be minded, that the inclosure or Hedge shall runne and spring vp: there digge in handsome maner, twoo small furrowes, and these eyther two or three foote asunder, and a mans foote and a halfe deepe: into whiche lay your roapes with the Seedes, couering them workemanly with light carth: and (if neede shall requyre) water by sprinckling, or moysten the Seedes, in the same wise agayne.
               The worthie Columella (in his husbandry) & the Neapolitane Palladius Rutilius, wryting the like instruction, in a maner, will that the ground plotte, in which a Hedge shalbe erected, be compassed with two narrow furrowes, digged three foote distant one from the other, and a mans foote and a halfe deepe: but these to be made in the Equinoctial Haruest, at what time the ground shalbe well moystned with shoures. The Furrowes thus prepared, they appoynted to lie open all the winter thorough: after in the moneth of Februarie, the roapes with the seedes, layed into eache furrowes, to be couered not thicke ouer with light earth, for hindering the growth of the seedes, especially of the white Thorne: and that this action be rather wrought, when as the winde bloweth from the South or Southwest: the seedes thus couered with diligence, shall appeare within a moneth eyther more or lesse, and the tender young Thornes sprung vp to some height, must be holpen and stayed with Willow twigges, or other small proppes, set betweene the emptie spaces, vntil the Thornes, by their further growth,

ioyned togither, may stay one the other: whiche within few yeares, wil grow to be a most strong defence of the Garden or fielde, & a sure safeguide against outwarde iniuries. Columella▪
                   besides willeth, that a Willow or Osier hedge, be set on eyther side, and in the middle roome or space, betweene the two furrowes, couered and euen raked: that these might so stay the tender Thornes, springing vp in eyther furrowe, vnto the tyme they ioyned, & were growen aboue this Willow hedge, or at the least vnto such strength, that they wel stayed one of the other. Others there are, as the famouse Diophanes (among the Greeke wryters of Husbandry) and with him many the like, whiche will a quicke set Hedge to be erected, and made after this maner. The bigger armes or roddes of the Bramble, they willed to be cut into shorte portions or partes, and these layed aslope, into open Furrowes of a span deepe, to be diligently couered with earth: after to vse aboute the Plantes, a dayly digging or rearyng vp of the earth, and watering of them if neede so requyreth vntill the Plantes budde foorth, and the leaues of the stemmes open, whiche by this maner of comforting and cherishing, shall grow in fewe yeares to a strong, sure, and continuall hedge.
               The Neapolitane Palladius Rutilius instructeth, the way and maner of erecting an other quicke set Hedge, on this wyse: Plante, sayeth he, young Elder trees, neare three foote asunder, then the seedes of the Brambles, lapped diligently in long lumpes of softned & moyst Cley or tough earth, lay the same orderly in a shallow furrow, betweene the Elder trees, whiche artly couered with light Earth, and watering the places if neede so requireth, will within three yeares following, growe to suche a strength and surenesse, that the same will be able inough, to defende the iniuries bothe of the theefe, and beast. Palladius Rutilius reporteth, that this hedge of the Brambles after three yeares growth, ought to be swinged with flaming strawe: for on suche wise handled, it prospereth afterwardes the better. In that the Bramble, as he sayth, through the euery yeres swinging or burning with straw, ioyeth and increaseth the better: yea through the yearely burning, as the skilfull Husband men affirme, they shoote out harder and rougher of prickles.
               And this maner, to be briefe, is a generall way of enclosing Garden groundes, with small coste, and easily performed. Although the

comlier inclosure or Hedge for a Garden be the same, whiche is made of the white Thorne artly layed: that in fewe yeares with diligence cut, waxeth so thicke and strong, that hardly any person can enter into the ground, sauing by the Garden dore. Yet in sundry Garden groūds be hedges framed with the Pryuet tree, although farre weaker in resistance: which at this day are made ye strōger, through the yearely cutting, bothe aboue, and by the sides: yea the same also caused through the like doyng to grow the euener and thicker, to the beautifiyng of the Garden grounde, and for other necessarie purposes. To conclude, I haue here vttered the making of certaine naturall inclosures for a Garden, whiche may with the meanest coste be erected in any ground.
            
            
               The cause why certayne skilfull husbandmen in Auncient time, misliked the dunging of Gardens neere to the house: and what dung best allowed for kitchin or pothearbes. Chap. 9.
               THere were in Auncient tyme, as Plinie reporteth, certayne witti
                     •
                   husband men, that wholly refused and forbadde the dunging of Gardens placed nighe to the dwelling houses: in that this dungyng might not onely infect the ayre thereabout, but cause also the crescente things to proue both vnsauerier and more corrupt. And in this matter the worthy writers of Husbandrie commended highly the Greeke Poete Hesiodus, which writing very cunningly of husbandry, omitted the dunging of the fieldes, & Garden plottes: contented rather to councell vnto healthfulnesse, thā willed ye same to fertilitie. In somuch as it was supposed inough at that time, to haue fatned the fieldes and Garden plottes, with the leaues and emptie coddes of the Beanes, Peason, Tares, and such like, turned workemanly in with the earth, in due season of the yeare, and not to haue imployed or dunged the ground, with a rotten and pestilent matter, incommodiouse to Man & the Plantes. Whiche wise men haue well founde out, in that the sowen Plantes sprung vp in such an earth, yeelde for the more parte a harmefull qualitie to the dayly feeders on them, hardly to be amended.
               Yet for that neyther the Auncient, nor later husband men seeme to follow the instruction of this precept, nor approue or allow any proper dunging, in prescribing and commending the same in generall: for that cause, I here purpose to intreate in a briefe maner, of the nature

and vse of the same. But first of all to warne you, that a good and battle grounde needeth small dunging, where a drie and thinne or leane earth, in contrarie maner requyreth plentie of dung. A earth onely drie (as Maro reporteth) well ioyeth to be often fed, and diligently laboured with fat dung: But the grounde that hath a meane substance in it, requireth in like maner a meane dunging to be vsed. Further conceyue, that good dung doth (for the more part) procure, a good and battle earth the better, yea this helpeth and amendeth the euill and naughtie earth: But the euil dung in a contrarie maner, doth euermore cause al earthes the worser: And this behoueth the Gardiner and husbande man 
                     •
                  o knowe, that as the earth not dunged, is both colde and stiffe, euen so the groūd by the ouermuch dunging, may be burned altogither. For which cause (Columella reporteth) that more auaylable and better it is, often to dung the earth, than ouermuch at one time, to bestow in the ground. The earth digged vp to serue for the spring, ought to be dunged in the waine or decrease of the Moone about S. Martyns day: that the same lying all the Winter through, may so be desolued, agaynst the time of committing seedes to the earth: and in the Moneth of Marche to bee dunged againe, that the earth well moystned with showres (in the moneth of Aprill) may be procured the apter, for the bestowing of your finer and daintier seedes in the same. Herein consider the leanenesse or fatnesse of your earth, in the often dunging of it, and the worthinesse of your seedes, which may require a lyke paynes to be bestowed on the ground. The plot of earth prepared for the Winter seedes, ought to be wel turned in with dung about the end of September, and the seedes committed to the earth, after the grounde bee well moystned with showers. The dung in a Garden plot, for the planting of yong settes ought not to be cowched or layde next to the rootes of the plantes: but in such order the dung vsed, that a thinne bed of earth be first made, for the setting of the yong hearbes: next layed to this, a handsome bed of dung, as neyther to thicke nor thinne spred on that earth, aboue that let an other course of earth bee raked ouer, of a reasonable thicknesse: which workemanly handled and done, see that your plantes bee sette (in handsome maner) into the ground, and in a chosen tyme. For the earth and beddes (on such wise prepared) helpe that the plants bestowed shall not at all be burned: neyther the heate of the dung, hastily breath

forth to them.
            
            
               Of the kindes of dung, and which well commended for the dunging of Gardens. Chap. 10.
               AS touching the worthinesse & excellencie of dung, the Greeke writers of husbandrie (to whom many of the latin Authours consent) affyrme that the Doues dung is the best, bycause the same possesseth a mightie hotenesse, for which they willed this dung to bee strawed the thinner, and in a maner (as thinne to be scattered abroade) as seedes on the earth, wherby the same may so season the earth measurably, and not on a heape or thicke bestowed (as M. Varro reporteth) much like to the dung of cattel throwne abroad on the ground. The dung also of the hen and other foules greatly commended for the fournesse, except the dung of geese, ducks, and other waterfoules, for their much and thin dunging. And although this dung last, bee weaker than the others, yet may the same be profitable, as the selfesame Varro witnesseth out of the Gre
                     •
                  ke instructions of husbandrie. A commendation next is attributed to the Asses dung, in that the same beast for his leysurely eating, digesteth easier, and causeth the bitter dung, which bestowed in the earth, for that the same is most fertill by nature, bringeth or yeeldeth forth least store of weedes, and profiteth verie much all plantes and hearbes: yea this causeth the most sweete and pleasantest herbes and rootes. The third in place is the Goates dung, bing most sowre, which ensueth the sheepes dung yet fatter. After this, both the Oxe and Cow dung: next the swines dung, worthier than the Oxen or Kien, but greatly disallowed of Columella, for the mightie hotenesse, in that the same burneth the seedes immediately, bestowed in the earth. The vilest and worst of all dungs after the opinion of the Greeke writers of husbandrie, is the horses and moiles: if either of these be bestowed alone in ye earth, yet with the sower dungs mixed, either wil profitably be abated or qualified. But the same especially is to be lerned and obserued of euery Gardener and husbandman, that they fatten not the earth, if it be possible, with dung of one yeares, for the same, besides y• it is of no vtilitie, it ingendreth also many noisome wormes, and kindes of vermin. But of the contrarie minde is Columella, who willeth the earth to be fatned wt dung which hath lyen a
                     •
                  yere, & not aboue, in that the same, as he reporteth, bringeth forth least

weedes, and possesseth as yet a sufficient strength for the turne. But how elder the same be, so much the lesse profitable, in that it lesser auayleth: yet the newest dung (sayth he) will well agree for Medowes or the fields, in that the same procureth the more yeelde of grasse, being bestowed in the Moneth of Februarie, or Marche, in colder countreys, and the Moone increasing of light. The mud also of a running water, as the ditch or riuer, may be employed in the stead of dung. The dung besides of three yeares is esteemed very good, for that in the longer time lying, whatsoeuer this shall haue of the euill qualitie, and stinking sauor, the same by that time vapored forth: & if any hard matter consisted in the same, the age throughly resolued it. Howsoeuer it shall happen, that the earth be, the worthiest dung of all, for floures & Kitchin herbes is the verie thinne Ashes reported to be, which in nature is hote. For this kinde of dung eyther killeth or driueth away the Garden Fleas, the wormes, the canker wormes, founde commonly on Colewortes, Snailes and all other creeping things wasting the stemmes of plants, and herbes. The dung which men make (if the same be not mixed with the rubbish or dust swept out of the house) is greatly mislyked, for that by nature it is hoter, and burneth the seedes sowne in that earth: so that this is not to bee vsed, vnlesse the ground be a barren, grauelly or verie louse sand, lacking strength in it, which being on suche wise, requyreth the more helpe of nourishment and fatning, through this kinde of dung: yet for lacke of the foresayde dungs, the others may bee put in vse: so that these with the Spade be often chaunged and dispersed in the ground. Here you may not forget, that a watrie Garden plot requyreth the more plentie of dung, but a drie earth needeth the lesser dunging: the one for the dayly moysture running in it, being ouercolde and stiffe, is through the often applying of the hote dung, resolued and made temperate: And the other drie of it selfe through the heate consisting in it, by much applying of this hote dung, is of the same burned: for that cause the moysture grounde ought to haue store of dung, but the dryer small dunging. That if no kind of dung can be purchased, t
                     •
                  en in grauelly groundes, it shall be best to dung the same with Chalke: 
                     •
                  ut in Chalkie places, & ouer thicke, those dung with grauelly earth: for on such wise Garden plottes, shal not only be caused to be battle and fruitfull, but shall also become fayre and delectable, as Columella the moste

diligent and skilfull instructer (of the Romaine Gardens) witnesseth: let this last instruction of Plinie be remembred, that at what time soeuer you minde to dung a Garden for yeelding of fewe weedes, see that the winde blowe then from the west quarter, and the Moone decreasing of light, and the earth also drie: But for the dunging of a Medow (as before vttered) let the same be done in the increase of the Moone. &c. For by such an obseruation followed, the plentifulnesse of yeeld is maruellous much increased: as after the worthie Greekes, the Latin wryters of husbandrie, haue noted.
            
            
               What to be considered of euerie gardiner, before the casting forth and leue
                     •
                  ling of the beddes, with the disposing of the earth. Chap. 11.
               BEfore I intreate of the sowing of Gardens, it behoueth to admonish you, that it much auayleth in a Garden, to frame seemelye walkes and Alleis, for the delight of the owner, by which hee maye the freelier walke hither and thither in them, and consider throughly all the matters wrought and done in the Garden, if the disquietnesse of minde hinder not the benefite of the same. The walkes and Alleys shall to that ende be disposed, that they may serue in the steade of a dunging in those places, as the worthie interpreter M. Cato (that cunningly wrote of the auncient husbandrie) witnesseth. These before considered, let vs come vnto the matter: Certaine skilfull practicioners admonish, that a Garden plot or field, bee not sowne ouer all, vntill the earth before shall be well moystned with showers. That if these fall in due season and tyme (then the skilfull Gardiners agree) to be well liked. If any be otherwise occasioned to sow, as often it so happeneth, then the seedes slowly breake forth, how workmanly soeuer the seedes may bee bestowed in a drie Garden ground, or plow lande, as that worthie Columella witnesseth: which like matter in certaine countreys is woont to be exercised, where the cōdition of the ayre is on such wise. For what the same is which shall be bestowed in a drie earth, is euen the like, as If the same were layde in a house, whiche corrupteth not. But when showers fall on the seedes (committed to the earth certaine dayes before) they after shoote vp in one daye: yet are these seedes in daunger (sowne in the meane time) of Byrdes, and Antes or Pismires, except the seedes be (before the sowing) preserued and defended wyth those

helpes which shall after be vttered, in the proper place following. How soeuer the occasion and weather serue, the Gardiner shall employ his diligence, that the Garden ground or field, which ought to be leuelled, and sowne in the spring time (that the same may yeeld the proper fruits in the Sommer time) bee digged and dunged (if need so requyre to the earth) about the ende of Haruest, when as yet the cold season and frosts bee not approched, nor bitter weather begun. And the same gardē plot or quarters of the Garden, which the Gardiner woulde in the Haruest time, haue couered with the Sallet, Pot hearbes, and rootes, ought to be turned vp in the beginning of Sommer, or in the Moneth of May, that the Cloddes of earth may (through all the colde Winter, and hote Sommer weather) speaking or rather (here meaning of the greater Gardens) bee so dissolued, as the worthie Maro skilfullye instructeth.
               And to these that the rootes of the vnprofitable Herbes or Weedes may likewise be killed: After the Winter or Sommer time ended, dung then must bee orderly turned in with the earth: as in the Moneth of Marche (the Moone decreasing) for the Spring time, and in the end of Haruest, for the Winter tyme. And when the sowing time approcheth or draweth neare, then shall the Garden grounde (as the proper order and maner of euerie Countrie is) bee diligently raked, weeded and purged, both of the stones and vnprofitable rootes, after the same, let the earth bee dunged, and orderlye digged, as in the maner afore taught, which through the diligent digging so often repeated, that the dung with the earth by the twise labouring ouer bee well dissolued and mixed togither. After this digging and dunging againe the seconde time (if the ground needeth such fatning) and the earth leuelled, may the Garden (about the middes of Februarie, but I rather suppose in the Moneth of March to be more agreeable, and the Moone especially in hir first quarter) be beautified in apt places of the same, with seemly Herbers, before the quarters and beddes be workmanly troden out by the Gardiner: the instruction of which Herbers, shal fully be vttered in this next Chapter.
            
            
               
               The framing of sundry Herbers delectable in a Garden, with the walkes and alleys artely deuised in the same. Chap. 12.
               
               THe Herber in a Garden may bee framed with Juniper poles, or the Willowe, eyther to stretch, or be bound togither with Osyers, after a square forme, or in arche manner winded, that the braunches of the Uine, Melone, or Cucumbre, rūning and spreading all ouer, might so shadowe and keepe both the heate and Sunne from the walkers and sitters there vnder. The Herbers erected and framed in most Gardens, are to their much refreshing, comfort, and delight. These two, as the vpright, directed by quarters set in the Earthe, and leaning to the wall, neere to which faire Rosemarie, or the redde Rose set, to runne straight vp, and the winding in arch manner, framed (as I vttered afore) with the Juniper, or Withie poles, to shadowe the walkers there vnder. To this fastning the Uine, and sundry hearbes, whiche in the growing vp, runne and spredde ouer the same, as the Bryonne, Cucumbre, Gourd, & diuers others, of which heere vnder we shall more fully intreate. But first I meane to speake of those Herbes, whiche the Gardener planteth and ordereth to runne for beauties sake in an vprighte Herber: after to intreate of those, whyche he eyther soweth or planteth, to runne ouer the winding or arch Herber. The plantes to runne vp, and serue comeliest for the straight Herber, ought to be those of a fragrant sauoure, and that

growe or shoote vppe highe, and are spredde abrode, whyche especially framed in the Garden for delight and pleasure, and these properly named wall Herbers, in that they are set in a manner leaning to the wall, with the quarters sette vprighte, and poles fastned ouerthwart, along the whiche, the Rosemarie, the Jasmine, and redde Rose in manye Gardens, sette for growe vpright, whiche in tyme growing, beautifye an vprighte Herber, although these couer not the same, through theyr shorter and lower growing than the Herber: yet this commoditie ensueth by the Herber, that the owners friendes sitting in the same, maye the fre
                     •
                  lier see and beholde the beautie of the Garden, to theyr greate delyght. The erection and garnishing of the winding Herber, maye best bee wroughte with Juniper poles, in that these may well endure withoute repairing for tenne yeares: but those framed with the Willowe poles, require euery three yeares to be repayred.
               The owner or Gardener that woulde sette Rosetrees to runne vp by the poles of thys Herber, ought workemanlike to beginne and doe the same aboute the myddes of February, and in the fyrste quarter of the Moone, the beddes before well reared wyth a stonie and drye Earth, and not wyth Dung. The Rosetrees with theyr rootes, are also to be planted in short and narrowe beddes, diligentlye raysed with a drye Earthe, but if the Gardener or owner will, slyppes may be broken off from the rootes, cutte in a slope manner at the heads, about a mans foote and a halfe long, writhed at the endes, and so sette in a slope manner, a foote deepe into beddes, well reared with a drie Earthe, and in the encrease of the Moone. The olde trees newe sette euerye fifth yeare in the wayne of the Moone, take roote the sooner, and yeelde the more Roses, beyng proyned and refreshed euery yeare with new and drie Earth aboute the rootes, for neyther the slippes nor olde rootes ioy in a fatte Cley, or moyst grounde, but in the drye and stonye Earthe, and to bee sette in ranckes well a foote distaunte one from an other, in drye beddes, well reared vppe: for bestowed in ranckes of suche distance betweene, they prosper the better, and yeelde more Roses. The Seedes of the Rose commytted to the Earthe, doe slowlye come vppe, yet so often as you mynde to sowe the Seedes, bestowe them a foote deepe in lyghte and drie Earthe, aboute the myddes of Marche wyth vs, and in February, in hotter places, the Moone then increasing.

Here may any truly learne by the instruction o
                     •
                   the worthie Neapolitane Palladius Rutilius, whiche are the seedes of the Rose: For a man (sayth he) may not thinke the yellow graynes within the Rose flower (being of a golden colour) to be them, but the knobbes which grow after the maner of a most short and small peare, the seedes of which are then full ripe, when they be perceyued brownish and soft, which will be in the Moneth of September. The owner also may set the Jasmine tree bearing a flagrant flower, the muske Rose, Damaske Rose, and Priuet tree, in beddes of drie earth, to shoote vp and spreade ouer this Herber, which in time growing not onely defendeth the heate of the Sunne, but yeeldeth a delectable smell, much refreshing the fitters vnder it. But this Arche Herber for any kinde of the Roses, may not bee built much aboue a mans heigth, for the short growth of them. And as this Herber is delectable to the eie, euen so laborsome, & with diligence to be tended: for which cause the more nūber in England, plant Uines (for the lesser trauaile) to runne and spread ouer the vpright and square Herbers, framed with quarters and Polles reaching a breadth. After the Herbers seemly perfourmed, in conuenient places and walkes of the Garden ground (here meaning and speaking of the large plottes) the Alleis euen troden out, and leauelled by a line, as eyther three or foure foote broade, may cleanly be sifted ouer with ryuer or sea sande, to the ende that showers of raine falling, may not offend the walkers (at that instant) in them, by the earth cleauing or clagging to their feet. The commodities of these Alleis and walkes, serue to good purposes, the one is, that the owner may diligently view the prosperitie of his herbes and flowers, the other for the delight and comfort of his wearied mind, which he may by himselfe, or fellowship of his friendes conceyue, in the delectable sightes, and fragrant smelles of the flowers, by walking vp and downe, and about the Garden in them, which for the pleasant sightes and refreshing of the dull spirites, with the sharpning of memorie, many shadowed ouer with vawting or Archherbers, hauing windowes properly made towardes the Garden, whereby they might the more fully view, and haue delight of the whole beautie of the Garden. But the strait walkes, the wealthie made like Galleries, being all open towards the Garden, and couered with the vine spreading all ouer, or some other trees which more pleased thē. Thus briefly haue I touched

the benefites of walkes and Alleyes in any Garden ground: whiche the Gardiner of his owne experience may artly tread out by a line, and sift ouer with sand, if the owner will, for the causes afore vttered.
            
            
               The forme of the disposing the quarters into beddes and apt borders about, with the sowing, choi
                     •
                  e and defence of the seedes, and weeding of the beds. Chap. 13.
               
               THe quarters well turned in, and fatned with good dung a time b
                     •
                  
                  fore, and the earth raysed through the dunging, shall in handsome maner by a line set downe in the earth, be troden out into beddes and seemely borders, which beddes (as Columella witnesseth) raysed newly afore with dung, and finely raked ouer, with the cloddes dissolued, and

stones purged forth, shall bee artely troden out, into three foote of breadth, and into what length the owner or Gardener will: but to such a breadth especially troden forth, that the weeders handes may well reach vnto the middest of the same, least they thus going by the beddes, and weeding forth the vnprofitable hearbes and grasse, maye in the meane time treade downe both the seedes shooting vp, and plants aboue the earth. To the helpe of which, let the pathes betwene the beddes be of such a reasonable breadth (as a mans foote) that they passing along by, may freely weede the one halfe first, and nexte the other halfe left to weede.
               The beddes also ought (after the minde of the worthie Neapolitane Palladius Rutilius) to be troden out narrow, and of a length, as twelue foote long, if the plot be large, and sixe foote broade, and the pathes to these of a seemely breadth, for the easier retching into the middle of the beddes, or at the least freelier, to the furtherance and speede of the weeders. In a moyst and watrie Garden plot, this skilfull Neapolitane willeth, that the beddes in the same grounde bee reared two foote high, for the better prospering of the seedes committed to that earth, and the plantes come vp. But in a drie grounde, the edges of the beddes raysed a foote highe, shall well suffice. The pathes troden out betweene the beddes, ought to be of a good depth and euen, whereby the water sprinckled gently forth by a water pot, on the vpper face of the beddes, and falling into the pathes, may the easier enter into the beddes, to the better moystning and feeding of the rootes of the plantes, and the rest superfluous to runne the easier into other Alleys or pathes needing this moysture, whiche by this easie running along in the pathes, shall proceede a speedier moystning, and farre better watring of all the beddes, yea the superfluous water in the ende, lying still in the pathes, may through a slope gutter made in the middes of them, be directed forth into a conuenient place made for the purpose, of some distance from the beddes. And this instruction much auayleth to beddes in the night time, when as mightie showers happen to fall, whiche might ouercloy the beddes, were it not for the Gutters speedily conueying the water away.
               All these instructions conceyued, the Gardener or Owner maye then prepare himselfe to the committing of Seedes to the

earth: in which he ought to be carefull, that after the bestowing of the seedes in the earth, a clearnesse or mildnesse of the ayre may for certaine dayes succeed: for through the ayre and weather fauouring, and the seedes sowne in warme places, where the sunne long shineth, doe they most speedily break, and shoote aboue the earth, so that the seedes be new and good, the age of which in this doing, much auayleth to be examined and knowne. Therefore euery Gardener and owner ought to be careful and diligently to foresee, that the seedes committed to the earth (as M. Cato willeth) be neither too olde, drie, thin, withered, nor counterfeyted, but rather full, new, and hauing iuice. These notes of the seedes remebred, and the Gardener minded to cōmit them to the earth, ought afore to regard, that the wind at that instant bloweth not frō the north but rather frō the south, or southwest, nor the day verie cold: for in such seasons and dayes (as all the skilfull report) the earth as then timorous and fast shut, hardly receyueth and nourisheth the seedes committed to it, where the ground in a contrary maner, doth willingly apply and retaine the seedes, bestowed or sowne in fayre dayes, and temperate hote.
            
            
               The artely disposing of sundrie beddes, for the sowing and increase of diuerse fruites and kitchin herbes, with the wittie defences to be vsed after the seedes are bestowed. Chap. 24.
               THe Gardener minding to commit chosen seedes into sundrie beds, ought to lerne, that the beddes lying open to the south, be high raised, through the well mixing of horse dung with the earth, and after the euen raking and leuelling, to remain a certaine time vnsowed: then one or two of the beddes in the moneth of March, and in the increase of the Moone, may he sow with Lettuce and Purselane seedes, for these sooner spring vppe in the moneth of March, than Februarie, to bee remooued in the beddes, after the plantes be shotte vp halfe a finger heigth. In those beddes may he also sowe the Parsely, Rocket, Sorrell, Endiue, and diuerse other Sallat hearbes: which after they be somwhat come vp, may bee thinner sette in other beddes. Haue beside a speciall regarde to your Seedes, that they bee neyther to olde, wythered, thinne, and emptye, and the borders of those Beddes maye you bestowe with the Seedes of the Artichoke, well two hande breadth asunder.

In an other bed may you sow fine seedes to haue pleasant hearbes that may be kept drie, for the pot or kitchin in the Winter time, and those which yeeld delectable flowers, to beautifie and refresh the house, as the Maiorani, French balme, Time, Hysope, Ba
                     •
                  il, Sauerie, Sage, Marigolde, Buglas, Borage, and sundrie others. The Gardener may trie these seedes in beddes, lying all open to the warme Sunne, as the Orenge, Lemmon, Pomecitrone, Pomegranate, the Myrtle and Date, but these ought so to be fensed by a succour on the North side, that the colde Ayre hinder or let not the comming vp of them. When the Cytrone or any of these be well sprung vp, the Gardiner ought to remoue and set them into proper chestes filled with light earth, which at will and pleasure, may be rolled hither and thither, for the better auoyding of the Sunnes great heat, and bitter colde ayre, by standing vnder a couer or Penthouse, made for the onely purpose. In an other bed being of good length, and placed toward the quickset hedge, and to runne ouer the Arche Herber, may the Gardener bestow seedes of the Cucumber, Cytrone, round Gourd, and long: In an other bed also, bring long and narrow, and deepe furrowes at eche side made, to set vessels lower than the beddes, may the Gardiner sow seedes, of the sundrie kindes of Melons. That the Byrdes and other foules may be defended from comming to the seedes committed to the earth, the skilfull will, that the white thorne be layde on the beddes: but to bestow your seedes in beds rather in the Moneth of March, than Februarie, and the moone increasing do spedier appeare aboue the earth. But if the Gardener feareth least the seedes committed to the earth should be in daunger through the 
                     •
                  itter cold ayre and Sunnes heate following (as yearly the like so happeneth) the beddes may then be couered with thick Mattresses of straw, in such maner, that they hinder not through their weight, the crescent things comming vp, which may thus bee ordred, in setting fyrst vp sundrie forked stickes at eche corner, and in the sides of the beddes, on which long roddes layde, reaching to eche corner, and at the endes, as Columella willeth: these done, let him wittily lay on the Mattresses, in couering and defending the yong plants from the cold or heate, at that time. But at such times as the ayre being cleare in the colde season, the Mattresses (when the Sunne shineth warme) may be taken of, for the speedier increasing of the plantes spinging vp. All herbes and rootes

for the Kitchin, prosper farre better by their remouing, and thinner setting, through which (by report of the skilfull) they yeelde a pleasanter sauour▪ There are of the Greeke writers of husbandrie, which will the sowing of seedes to be done in the increase of the moone, as from the first quarter, vnto the full light of the Moone, and 
                     •
                  he knowing at that time to be vnder the earth in the day time▪ Others hauing deuised a perfiter way, do not allow a timely or early sowing of seedes, for whiche cause they disposed and deuided the same sowing of seedes, into two, yea into three or foure seuerall times of the day, contenting by this meanes to auoyde the vncertaintie of the time to come: herein calling to mind the husbandly prouerb, of the worthie Columella, which sayth, Haue no mistrust in the committing of seedes to the earth.
               
               It therefore behoueth the gardiner, which hath an earnest care for the purchasing of Kitchin or pot hearbes, to regard & see that the seedes comitted to the earth be ful & new, the earth artely prepared, ye dung in the same laudable, & water at hand for the vse of the seedes. For the seedes founde and good, do yeeld after the sowing plantes of the like goodnesse and vertue: the earth laboured and made apte, will verie well keepe and prosper the seedes committed to it: the dung being good, and well myxed with the earth, will cause the earth batteller, and to these the louser, whereby water diligently sprinckled on the same, may the freelier and easier enter in, to feede and cherish the rootes, and the water seruing to the same ende, that it may as by a feeding pappe, nourishe and bring vp all crescent things.
            
            
               The workemanly casting forth, deuiding, and preparing of beddes for the most hearbes and rootes of the Kitchin. Chap. 
                     •
                  5.
               THe owner or Gardener ought to remember (that before he committeth seedes to the earth, the beddes be disposed and troden out, into such a bredth and length, as best answereth to euerie plant & roote, in that the beddes to be sowne for Nauew rootes, ought to be troden out large and long, next to which may the beddes for Colworts and Cabbages be ioyned of a sufficient bredth: to these next may you place beddes of a reasonable breadth, for the Rapes and Tureu rootes: then for a seemely diuision in the Garden, may hee treade out by these an Alley of three foote broade: next to whiche, if the Gardener will,

may he dispose sundrye beddes togither, for diuers kindes of Herbes, as the Arrache, Spinedge, Rocket, Parselie, Sorrell, Beetes, Speradge, Cheruill, Borage, Fenell, Dill, Myntes, white Poppie, and sundrye others. Next ioyning to these, may the owner or Gardener place an other alley of three foote broade, by whiche, frame beddes for the Leekes and Cyues, and to these nexte, may the Gardener ioyne beddes for the Onyons and Chiboules, by these nexte, the Scalions and Garlike in two beddes disposed. Then leuell out by these an Alley of three foote and a halfe brode, to which the Gardener maye adioyne manye beddes about for bordures, seruing as wel for the keeping in of ye sauoures, as for hedges and pot hearbes for the Winter. After these, it shall be right profitable to leuell a bedde only for Sage, another for Isope, the like for Time, another for Maioram, a bedde for Lauender, another for Rosemarie and Southernwood, a bedde for Sauerie and Isope, beddes for Costemarie, Basill, Baulme, and running Tyme: yea a bedde of Camomile, for the vse of Benches to sytte on, and a delectable Labyrinth to be made in the Garden (if roome wil so serue) with Isope and Time, or the Winter Sauerie only. In the Garden besides, to sowe and plant diuers Phisicke herbes, and pleasaunt floures, shall be to great vse and commoditie, in that these, besides their delectable sight, yeel a commoditie to our bodies, in curing sundry griefes as wel in women, as men, for which cause, it shall be necessarie to sowe Beddes of Physick Herbes next to these, as the blessed Thistill, the Romaine Wormewood, the Sperage, Herbe Mercurie, Gentiane, Dittany, Herbe Fluelline, Hartes tung, Buglosse, Selfeheale, Liuerwort, Lungwort, Stecados, Ualeriane, Spykenard, Lyons foote, Mugwort, Herbe Patiēce, Angelica, Byttonie, and many others, of which in the seconde part shall particularly be vttered, and their Phisicke benefites to bee employed manye wayes.
            
            
               The rare inuentions and defences for most seedes to be committed to the Earth that these be neither endamaged of Birds, nor creeping things. Chap. 16.
               AL worthy Writers agree, that in vaine the Husbandly Gardener shall trauel, yea and all others, if the Seedes bestowed in the earth,

happen after to be endamaged eyther of Wormes, and other creepyng things, or otherwise scraped vp and wasted by Byrdes, or else harmed by any other iniurie, whether the same bee wrought within, or without the Earth, for which cause, that the owner or Gardener may auoyd these iniuries, it is high time that he employ a care and diligence in the conceyuing of these remedies and secretes following. If Seedes to be committed to the Earthe, are a little time before the bestowing, stieped in ye iuice of Housele
                     •
                  ke or Syngrene, they shal not only be without harme preserued, from Byrdes, Antes, Field Mice, and other spoylers of the Garden Herbes, but what plants shoote vppe of these, shall after proue the better and worthier, as I obserued the like, founde noted both in the Greeke commentaries (of matters of the fielde) and Latin authours of husbandrie, which to be most true, although experiēce instructeth and approueth the same, yet this many times happeneth in sundry Countries, that small store of the Herbe can be founde to supply the turne, by reason whereof, the Gardener must be forced to exercise a sparer way, after thys manner, in steeping of the Herbe for a nighte in a good quantitie of water, and the same to sprinckle sufficientlye on the seedes, whereby they maye all the nyght drawe and drinke in the substaunce of the Herbe, as the worthy Columella instructeth.
               And for lacke of thys Hearbe altogither, (the sayde Authoure reporteth) that the Gardener maye vse in steade of it, the Soote cleauing on the chymney, whyche gathered a daye before the bestowing of the seedes in the earth, and myxed for a night with them, doeth the like defende the seedes in safety.
               The Greeke writers of husbandrie (and after them, Plinie, and the worthy Neapolitan Palladius Rutilius) reporte, that those seedes maye bee preserued in safetie, from all euill and Garden monsters, if the bare heade, without fleshe, of eyther Mare or shee Asse (hauing bin couered of the Male) bee buried in the Garden, or that the middes of the same fyxed on a stake set into the earth, be erected.
               The worthy Plinie further reporteth, yt there is a Garlike growing in ye falowe fielde (named Alum) which on such wise boyled, yt the same wil not grow again, & strawed on the Beds sowen, doth in such maner auaile, yt Byrdes after wil not scrape vp the earth, nor spoyle the seedes

bestowed in them. And such which haue eaten of this, are taken (as being astonished) with the hande. The well practized Affricanus vnto the same matter instructeth, that if a quantitie of Wheate or Barley bee boyled or infused in wine, and mixed with Neeswort, as either the black or white, and the same sprinckled abroade by the pathes of the beddes round about, doth on such wise defende the seedes sowne from the iniurie of Byrdes. But those being in a maner dead by eating of this, or at the least starke drunke, he willeth then to 
                     •
                  ang vp by the legges, on a long rodde sticked in the earth, to the terrour and fearing away of all other Byrdes comming to the place. Nor this worthie Authour omitteth the rare practise of the decoction of riuer Creauises: with whiche if the Gardener shall sprinckle his seedes before the sowing, Byrdes will neuer after (a matter to bee maruelled at) approche to the Garden Beddes: yea the plantes beside, whiche are sprung or shotte oute of these, shall endure and continue safe and free from all the iniuries of creeping things. There are certain skilfull practisioners, which affyrme to haue auayled mightily in dryuing away Byrdes, by the onely sprinckling of this decoction aboue taught on the plantes come vppe, which matter hath of many beene experienced aboue a hundred tymes, so that the same were wrought at a certaine period and time of the Moone. Sundrie practicioners myxed the bruised leaues of the Cypresse tree, with the seedes for a night, and the same myxture on the morow they bestowed in ye earth, being afore wel wrought, and turned in with dung. For on such wise the plantes sprong out of these were deliuered from all maner of gnawings of creeping things. Others skilfully practised, vsed the drie shauings or filings, eyther of the heartes horne, or Elephants tooth, which they myxed with the seedes for a day, and committed them after to the earth, or they otherwise sprincled the seedes to be sowen with the water of the infusion and mixtion of these for a night.
            
            
               The wittie helpes commended of the auncient, for the Garden seedes, to be employed as well before as after the sowing, that these be not harmed by outward nor inward iniuries. Chap. 17.
               THe singular Port Virgill counsayleth that the seedes to be cōmitted the earth to bee afore sprinckled & moisted with the water of

                  Nytre infused, or the Bryne made of the same.
               The Greeke Apuleius willeth, that Seedes (beefore the sowing) bee sprinkled and moistned with Wine, for on suche wise handled, the plantes springing and shooting vp, weaken the lesse, yea being feeble, they shal mightly be holpen 
                     •
                  with water & Bryne mixed and sprinckled on them.
               There are c
                     •
                  rtaine Greeke instructers of Husbandrie (both of Plinie, Columella, and the Neapolitane Paladius Rutilius) allowed and commended, which will, that the rootes of the wild Cucumbre be infused for one whole day and a night in faire water, and with the same, through the often sprinckling, so to moisten well the Seedes, the next day those Seedes couered ouer with a Blancket, they will the next morrowe to be committed to the earth, affirming the Seedes thereby to prosper the b
                     •
                  tter, and these for a certaintie to bee preserued from all euill annoyances. The selfe same doth the skilful Apuleius will, that a fewe Lentels be also myxed with the seedes 
                     •
                  , in the sowing of them, for as much as the 
                     •
                  ame pulse by propertie, auayleth againste the harmes of wyndes: Thys authour further willeth, that for a safety of the seedes bestowed, a speckled Tode, named of the Greekes Phrynon, bee drawen by a lyne in the nyghte time, rounde about the Garden or fielde, afore the earth be laboured, or diligently digged and dressed of the Gardener: and the same after inclosed in an earthen potte to be buried in ye middes of the Garden or Falowe fielde, which, at the present sowing time approched, shall then bee digged furth, and throwen or carryed from that place, a greate distaunce off, least the plantes (after the seedes sowen) growing vppe in that place, maye proue or become bitter and vnpleasant of smell.
               The Egiptian and Greeke instructors of husbandrie reporte, that the seedes, after the bestowing, will remayne vngnawen or bitten, and free of harme by creeping things in the Garden, if the seedes shall bee committed to the earth when the Moone possesseth hic halfe light, or is quarter olde. It might be thought an obliuiousnesse, to haue ouerpassed ye physicke experiment of ye singular Democritus, both for the seedes and plantes, noted diligently (of the skilfull Neapolitane Palladius Rutilius) after this maner: Bestow and close couer (saith Democritus) of the Sea or riuer Ereuises, no fewer than ten in number, into a glasse body

filled vp with water, the same set abrode in the aire, let so stande to bee sunned for tenne dayes togither, the Seedes that you would after haue to remaine in the earth vnharmed, sprinckle and moisten with the same water for eyght dayes togyther, after these eyght dayes ended (as Rutilius instructeth) doe in like manner with that water, vntill the plantes after your desired minde be well sprung vp, at whiche experiment thus handled, you will greatly maruell: for out of these Seedes, what plants shall be sprung and shot vp, will not only driue Beastes and Cattell from the eating of them, but all other creeping things of what condition they be, from the gnawing and biting of them, of whyche matters shall further be intreated, in the proper Chapiters a little after, and for other defenses and helpes of Seedes as occasion offereth in the places shall be vttered.
            
            
               The laudable instructions of the auntient, in the nature and election of sundry Seedes, with the apt times commended for the sowing of most Kitchin Herbes. Chapter. 18.
               THe singular Columella instructeth, that all Seedes bestowed in the Garden, for the vse and benefite of the Kitchin or potte, ought rather be done in the increase of the Mone, as from the first, vnto the sixte day. For asmuch as all Seedes committed to the Earthe, in the decrease or waine of the Moone, eyther slowly breake and shoote vp, or else so weakely increase, that these after serue to small purpose. It many times also happeneth (as the worthy Varro reporteth) that although the Seedes bestowed in the Earth, be done in the increase of the Mone, the Seedes besides hauing a iuice, waightie, full, white meale in them, and in no maner corrupted or too old, yet these notwithstāding are hindered through some euill constellation, which of the skilful is named an influence of Heauen, were the Gardeners diligence neuer so muche, so that it is not impertinent to the matter heere to recite what the worthy Neapolitane Palladius Rutilius reporteth of the Garden ground, which sayeth, that a garden plot, placed and lying vnder a freshe and sweete aire, and moistned gently by some Spring or sweete water runnyng by, is in a manner battell and readie ynough, whereby the same requireth but a small instructiō and diligence, to be bestowed in the sowing of it. The bestowing of Seedes in a moist earth, the beddes afore short cast, ought to be done in the warme season of the Spring, as in May,

and the Mone increasing, for seedes on suche wise handled, prosper the better, through the warme and drie time following. But if occasion moueth you to commit Seedes into a drie ground, and that water bee farre distant, then digge the alleis of the beddes deepe, and in a slope maner, for the better leading of the water from beddes sufficiently moistned, to others lacking moisture: and to these such a drie Earth better agreeth to be sowen in the Haruest time, the ground before well moystned with shoures, heerein not forgetting the choise of seedes, nearest agreeing to the natures of these two Earthes, with the furtherance of the Moone at time of the sowing. If the Gardener mindeth to commit seedes to the Earth in the Sommer time, lette the same be done in the increase of the Mone, in the monethes of July and August. In the Haruest time about the middle of September, and in October, ye Mone in those monethes in hir first quarter: for the time againe of committing Seedes to the Earth, let the same be done in the Monethes of February and March, the Mone at those times increasing of lighte.
               The Seedes which ought especially to be sowen in the Earth, about the ende of Haruest as about the middle of September, and in October the Mone at those times increasing, that these may all the Winter endure, and be strengthned in the ground, are the Endiue, Onions, Garlike, Scalions, the great Garlike, yong Leekeheads, Colewortes, Mustard seede, and such like.
               The Garden ground naturally colde, or all the day receyueth but a weake comforte of the Sunne, through his shorte presence or tarying there, or else in colde Countries, as at Yorke, and farther Northe. In such places I say, the bestowing of many seedes better agree to be done about the middle of the Spring, or in the moneth of May, in warme and caulme dayes, the Mone then increasing of light.
               But the seedes to be committed to the earth in those Countries and places in the Haruest time, ought rather to be done sooner or before the time with vs, where the Seedes otherwise to bee bestowed in hote Countries and places in the Spring time, require farre timelyer to be done, as in the beginning of the moneth of Marche, and the Seedes to bee sowen in those places in the Haruest time, to bee bestowed muche later.
               The Seedes that at will of the Gardener may be committed to the

Earth, either in Haruest or Spring time, chiefly for the Kitchin or pot, vnder a gentle ayre, and in a Battle ground, are these, the Coleworts, N
                     •
                  uew, A
                     •
                  ti
                     •
                  hocke, Endiue, Lettuce, Dyll, Rocket, Coliander, Parselie, Fennoll, Radishe, Parsnip, Carret, and sundry others. Yet these by report of the skilfull, come better forward, being sowē in the moneth of July, the country there hotte, but in the countrie temperate, the seedes ought rather, in ye month of August: and in the Countrie beeing colde, in the month of September. Those seede committed to the earthe in warme and caulme dayes, prosper far better than those being sowen in hotte and nipping colde dayes: for that the warme, comfortablie drawe vppe the plantes, where as the hotte dayes (in a contrarie manner) do drie, and the bitter colde shut the earth.
               The seedes which the Gardener mindeth to bestowe in the earthe, ought not to be aboue a yeare olde, and that brused haue a white meale wythin, & ful: for otherwise being ouer old, or withered, they wil neither grow, nor profit at all. The fresher and newer that the seedes be, at time of the bestowing in the Earthe, as the Leeke, the Coucumber, and the Gourde, so muche the sooner these breake, and appeare aboue the Earthe: contrariwise, howe muche the older the seedes shall be, as the Parsely, Betes, Organy, Cresses, Peneroyall, and Coliander, so much the speedier do these shoote vp, and appeare aboue the Earth, so that the seedes before the sowing be not corrupt.
            
            
               Certayne preceptes of the skilful in our time, for the sowing of many delectable floures, and tender Herbes, with the obseruations of the Moone in these, and in other matters necessary. Chap. 19.
               THe latter writers of husbandrie reporte, that these tender Hearbes, and pleasaunte floures, as the Maioram, Sauerie, Herbe Fluell
                     •
                  ne, Buglosse, the blessed Thistil, the Herbe Angelica, Ualeriane, Bauline, Ar
                     ••
                  s, Dil, Fennel, Organy, Myntes, Rue or herbe Grace, Sp
                     •
                  rag
                     •
                  , 
                     ••
                  ache, Spynache, Beetes, Endyue, Borage, Rocket, Taragone, Parselie, Sorrell, Endiue, Strawberrye, Lettuce, Artichocke, and sundrye others, the Marrigolde of all kyndes, Rosecampion the redde and white, the flower Amoure, ye
                  
Floure Petilius, the Columbine white and blew, sweete Johns, the Pincke, Heartes ease, the Pionie, red Lillie, herbe Sticas or Lauander gentle, Batchlers button, the Gillifloure of al kindes, the Carnation, and many others, ought rather to be cōmitted to the earth in the spring time and sowne in the Monethes of March and April, for so they speedier come forwarde, than bestowed in the Moneth of Februarie, herein considering the state and diuersitie of the time. The seedes also of the tender hearbes, committed to the earth in an apt time, and the Moone in hir first quarter, doe the speedier shoote vp, being especially sowne after showers of raine, on sunny and warme places, as lying open all the day to the Sunne) which on such wise do the soonest and spediest break, yea and appeare aboue the earth. For which cause, a diligent care must be had in the bestowing of tender Seedes, that the winde then bloweth not from the North, nor done in colde and close dayes: for these both include the seedes in the earth, and hinder their growing and shooting vp.
               Seedes bestowed in hote places, do sooner yeeld their stemmes and leaues, yea these speediest giue their seedes. Such time vse in the sowing of your seedes, as may be both milde and warme, in that warme dayes following speed more forwarde the seedes bestowed.
               As touching the most seedes committed to the earth, they ought rather (as afore vttered) to be newe, not riueled but full, bigge, weightie, fayre of color, fattie or hauing a iuice, which broken giue a white meale and no drie powder, for the seedes that after the breaking yeeld a drie powder, do well declare them to be corrupt, and seruing to no purpose.
               The seedes thus tried afore, and bestowed at that time in the earth, when flowers fell a day or two before, and a temperate day at the sowing of the seedes, doe verie well prosper the growing, and procure these to shoote vp farre speedier. In that a colde ayre at the sowing, and a day or two after, is knowne to bee harmefull to seedes, through the including of them in the earth, and hindring in theyr growth and shooting vp.
               If necessitie forceth the Gardener to bestowe any seedes or plantes, in a salt earth▪ let these be eyther set or sowne about the ende of Haruest, whereby the malice and euill qualitie of the ground may be so purged, through the shoures falling al the Winter.
               
                  If the owner or Gardener mindeth to bestowe yong Trees in th
                     •
                  s grounde, lette sweete Earth or Riuer sande, bee turned in with the same.
               The Greeke writers of husbandrie (after whom Columella and Rutilius) will, that al the kindes of pulses, as Peasone, the Hastings, Uetches, Tares, and such like, to be sowen in a drie Earth, sauing the Beanes, which rather ioy to be bestowed, in a moyst ground.
               What seeds the Gardener mindeth to commit, in a wel dressed earth let these be bestowed from the first day vntill the ful light of the Moone (wel nigh) for that seedes sowen in the Moone, come vp thinne, and the plantes insew weake of groweth. Such trees as the husbandman, mindeth to builde wyth all, let those rather be cut downe after the consent of the skilfull in the laste quarter of the moone, shee being (at that tyme) of small light, yea neare to hyr chaunge, and vnder the Earth.
               In the cutting downe and gathering of corne (as Macrobius wylleth) for the longer preseruing of it and the straw drie (so that the same be done in a drie season) doth better agree, being in the wayne of the Moone.
               Such crescent things as the Gardener (or Husbandman) mindeth otherwise to sel, ought to be cut, and gathered in the full Moone, wherby the greatnesse thereof suche things may yeelde a better sale, and bee delectabler to the eye.
               Such things as the Husbandman myndeth to preserue a long time moyst, as Aples, Peares, Wardens, & such like, let these (after the minde of the skilfull) bee rather gathered neare the full light of the Moone.
               For the cōmitting of seedes to the Earth, although the antient Husbandmen prescribe proper monthes and dayes, yet may euerye person herein kepe the precepte, according to the nature of the place and ayre, so that these diligently bee considered, howe certayne seedes there are, whiche speedier spring vp, and certaine which slower appeare aboue the Earth.
            
            
               
               The commended times to be obserued, with the anoyannce and incommoditie to be eschewed, in the bestowing of seed
                     •
                  s and plants in the Earth. Chap. 20.
               The singular D. Niger learnedly vttereth, that the more of estimation the seedes and plantes are, with the trauailes there aboute bestowed, so much the circumspecter ought euery Gardener and husbādman to be, and the more instructions and helpes the Gardener may attayne, or the greater daunger he may therein auoyde, the more carefull ought he and all others to be.
               The dayly experience is to the Gardener, as a Scholemaister, to instruct him, how much it auayleth and hindereth, that seedes to be sowē, plantes to be set, yea Sions to to bee grafted (in this, or that time) hauing herein regarde, not to the time especially of the yere, as the Sunne altereth the same, but also to the Moones increase and wayne, yea to the signe shee occupyeth, and places both aboue and vnder the Earth.
               To the aspectes also of the other planets, whose beames and influēce both quicken, cōfort preserue, & maintaine, or else nippe, wyther, drye, consume, and destroy by sundry meanes, the tender seedes, plantes, yea & Graftes, and these after their property, and vertue natural or accidentall.
               Herein not to be forgotten, the apt choyse and circumspection of the Earth, with other matters generally required in the same, for whyche cause (after the minde of the skilful Astronomers) and prudent experimenters, in either committing seedes to the Earth, and planting, or other like practise to be vsed about the seeds, plantes and yong trees, these rules folowing are to bee vnderstanded and kept (which they haue lefte to vs for our commoditie) in cases of importance, and where the occasion may be imployed.
               Whē the Moone and Saturne, are either three score degrees of ye 
                  Zodiacke asunder (which distance in heauen) is named of the skilfull, a Sextyle aspect, it is then commended to laboure the Earth, sowe, and plant, marked after this manner.⚹
               But when these are 126. degrees asunder, which properly is named a Trigon, or trine aspect thus noted △ for ye more part, then is that time better cōmended for laboring the Earth, whether it be for tilling Gardening, sowing, planting and setting, or cutting of vynes.
               
                  When the Moone and Saturne, are well a quarter of the Zodia
                     •
                  e distant, which is .90. degrees (named of the skilfull a quadrate aspect) thus comonly marked, □ then is denied vtterly to deale in such matters.
               The Moone being sixe signes distant frō Saturne, so that she occupy
                     •
                  th the like degree in Taurus, as Saturne in Scorpio, or ye 
                  Moone other wise in like degrees of Gemini to Saturne, (right agaynst) in Sagitarie, this aspect togither is disalowed of the expert Astronomers: and noted after this maner.☍
               The Moone possessing hir full light at those times, is like denied of the skilfull: yea the Moone being neare to that section, named of most Astronomers ye Dragons tayle, is in like maner disallowed for sowing of fine seedes, and setting of daintie plants. Here vttering preceptes generall, as we now do.
               But the Moone approched nere to that section named the Dragons hed: the same time for doing the like is verie wel commended: al things before supposed agreeable. But to be briefe, and to knit vp other obseruations, answering to the Moones place especially, lerne these ensuing.
               The Moone increasing, and running betweene the .28. degree of Taurus, and the .xj. degree of the signe Gemini, sow fine seedes, and plant daintie herbes, your earth afore prepared, and ayre answerable.
               But the Moone founde betwene the .28. degree of Gemini, and the sixt of Cancer, (although shee increase) yet bestow no daintie seedes in your earth prepared for the purpose.
               From the sixth degree of Cancer, vnto the .xix. degree of the same signe (so that the Moone increase) both labour the earth, sow fine seedes, and plant daintie hearbes, herein regarding the condition of the ayre.
               From the .28. degree of the signe Leo, vnto the .xj. degree of Virgo, your seedes and plantes of valour, sow and set, the warme ayre and Moone ayding thereto.
               From the .xj. degree of Virgo, vnto the .xxiiij. degree of the same signe, commit seedes to the earth, and set your daintie plantes, so that the winde then bloweth not from the north, nor the ayre colde.
               From the .xxiiij. degree of Virgo, vnto the seuenth degree of the signe Libra, labour the Garden grounde, and sowe your fine seedes, so that the Moone increase.
               
                  From the seuenth degree of Libra, vnto the .xix. degree of the same signe (the Moone answering thereto) sowe and plant.
               From the sixth of Capricornus, vnto the .xix. degree of the same signe (both the Moone and Ayre ayding thereto) sowe your fine seedes and daintie plantes set.
               From the .xxiiij. degree of Pisces, vnto the seuenth degree of Aries, the Moone increasing of light, and ayre calme, bestowe your seedes and plantes in the well dressed earth, prepared for the onely purpose.
               These precepts of the prudent experimenters, well borne away of euery carefull Gardener, the seedes and plantes no doubt, shall prosper and increase the better.
            
            
               Certaine instructions more curious to be learned of euery skilfull Gardener, in the bestowing of seedes and daintie hearbes in a well dressed carth. Chap. 21.
               
               THe learned Plinie worthy of memorie, vttereth a speciall note and rule of the auncient obseruers, to be learned of euery carefull Gardener, in the bestowing of seedes: that if he bee occasioned to commit seedes into a moyst earth, or the seedes to be bestowed are of a greate moysture, then shall the Gardener commodiously choose the ende of the Moones decrease or waine, and neare to hir chaunge.
               
                  In a contrarit maner, the Garden ground of the dryest, or the 
                     •
                  eedes very dry, then in committing such seeds to the Earth, let the Moone beē increasing, and drawing neare to hir full.
               To the better furthering of the Gardeners trauelles, he oughte afore to consider, that the Garden earth be apte and good, wel turned in wyth dung, at a due tyme of the yeare, in the increase of the moone, shee occupying an apte place in the Zodiacke, in agreeable aspect of Saturne, and wel placed in the scite of heauen. All these thus afore hande learned, and wyth dilygence bestowed, procure the plantes the speadier to grow, and wax the bigger, if afore waightie, ful, &c. as before vtt
                     •
                  red in the ninteene Chapter, for otherwise this care and paynes bestowed about the seedes and plantes, nothing auayleth the Gardener.
               The yearely Almanackes doe maruellouslie helpe the Gardners in the election of tymes, or sowing, planting, and graffing, but especially in obseruing the Moone, about the bestowing of plantes, as when the Moone increasing, occupieth Taurus and Aquarius. But if it be for the setting of yong Trees, let the same be done in the laste quarter of the Moone, she then being in Tauro, and in a coniunction with Venus, for so these speedier take roote in the Earth. And the Gardener planting in either Taurus and Aquarius, or Virgo and Pisces, must as carefullye take heede alwayes, that the Moone bee not euill aspected of Saturne and Mars.
               
               In the planting also of yong trees, lette the same bee done from the middle of October, vnto the myddle of Marche. In the sowing of seedes, in a well dressed earth, lette the Moone runne at those tymes in Taurus, Cancer, Virgo, Libra and Capricornus.
               
               But thys dilygently learne, that the seedes and Plantes increase the better, if anye of these signes shall be ascending in the Eastangle, and that Marse neyther beholdeth the Ascendent, nor the Moone by any aspect, but shall be weakly standing in a weake place of the figure at that time.
               Here myghte manye other rules, as touchyng the particular fauoure and hyndraunce of the Starres bee vttered, but that it is not my intente in thys Chapiter to be tedious in words, or darke in sense. For whyche cause, let these few rules contente the Gardener,

who by exercysing of them, and through an instructer, may inuent other rules more particular.
               Yet I feare mee, that the common sorte of menne wyll suppose
these rules to extende somewhat aboue theyr capacitie, whiche for zeale I beare vnto my countrie, moued mee notwythstandyng to vtter and putte suche matter into theyr heades, procuryng them thereby (that where the dayntinesse and valew of the seedes, and plantes so requyre) to request the counsayle of some skilfull, that both maye make playne these preceptes, and instruct them in other rules alike, if neede so requireth.
               To conclude, the Gardener muste here suppose all matters on hys parte to bee fully and dulie firste prepared, and well appointed, and then to attende, or diligently take heede to those tymes, afore vttered, for the workyng of the Planets and Starres, in the bestowing of seedes & tender plants in the earth.
            
            
               In what space of tyme seedes committed to the Earth, in the increase of the Moone, commonly shoote vppe and appeare aboue grounde. Chap. 22.
               
                  FLorentinus (a Greeke wryter of husbandrye) cunninglye vttereth, that the naturalnesse of the grounde, the clemencie of heauen, the fauoure of the weather, and age of the seedes, procureth that the seeds being bestowed in the grounde, doe eyther speedyer, or later shoote vp into plantes. For whyche cause, the dayntie seedes committed to the Earth in a fayre and warme daye, the place hotte or lying open to the Sunne, and the seedes newe, doe farre speedier shoote vppe, than those that beyng sowen in a contrarie season, place, and grounde.
               All Seedes sowen, doe euermore appeare aboue the Earthe, at one certayne tyme in a manner, for whyche cause, the Gardener ought to haue regarde vnto the proper tymes aunswering to the bestowyng of Seedes, and gathering the fruites or yeelde of eache Seedes.
               
                  The Spinage, Rocket, Basi
                     •
                  , and the nauew seedes, breake and appeare aboue the earth, after the thirde day sowing, if a warme ayre succeede.
               The Lettuce seedes bestowed in a wel dressed Earth, do breake and appeare aboue grounde, by the fourth day folowing, if the clemencie of ayre, ayd therto, the Coucūber & Cytrone seedes, bestowed in ye increase of the Moone, and showers of rayn falling the same or ye next day folowing, procure them to appeare the fifte day after.
               The seedes of that slghtly Herbe, named the flower Amoure, being sowen in the increase of the Moone, and the ayre sauouring: doe breake and appeare aboue the Earth by the seuenth or eyghte day folowing.
               The seedes of the Herbe Dyll, bestowed in the Earth, in the increase of the Moone, doe (for the more part) apeare by the fourth daye following.
               The seedes of the Garden Cresses, and Mustarde, committed to the Earth in the increase of the Moone, doe commonly appeare aboue the grounde, by the fyfte day after.
               The Leeke seedes (bestowed in the ground) in the Sommer time, are seene aboue the Earth by the sixt day folowing, but in the winter time, in wel dunged Beds, by the tenth day after.
               The seedes of the herbe Rocket, commytted to the grounde in the increase of the Moone, appeare by the eight day folowing.
               The seedes of all the kindes of Colewortes, bestowed in well dressed Beds, are euermore seene by the tenth day folowing, if the colde ayre hyndereth not.
               The seedes of the great Leekes, bestowed in well dunged Beddes, appeare many tymes by the ninteenth, but oftner by the twentyth day folowing.
               The Colyander seedes, bestowed in well trimmed Beds, and in the increase of the Moone, are commonly seene aboue the earth by the, xxv. daye: but the yong plantes later appeare, if the seedes bestowed are newe.
               The seedes of the Organie and Sauerie, bestowed in lyght Earth, and the Moone increasing, do appeare aboue the grounde by the thirtie day folowing.
               
                  The Parsely seedes, committed to the Earth, and in the increase of the Moone, do commonly breake and appeare aboue grounde, by the xl. day folowing, although they are not many times seene before the fiftie day.
               Thus haue I briefly vttered, a true and pleasant instruction, both for the age of seedes, and skill of the Gardener in the sowing of them. For as I haue aboue sayed, the Lecke, the Coucumber, and Cytrone seedes, doe speedye came vp, being newe seedes: in a contrarie maner, the seeds of the Parsely, Beetes, Spynage, Cresses, Sauerie, Organy, Penneroyal, and Colyander, the elder that these are (before the bestowing in the Earth) the speedier the seedes breake, and appeare aboue grounde.
               The seedes in like maner of the Coucumber, steeped in milke or luke warme water for a night, and committed to the Earth, vnder a warme ayre, do farre speedier breake, and appeare aboue ground. The like may the Gardener conceiue, to be done with the seedes of the Artichock, and many other hearbes, of which, shal particularly be vttered, in the proper places hereafter.
               The third monthes sowing, or rather in May, to such dwelling far North, and where snow lyeth long, there (this bestowing of seedes) better agreeth, especially, where the qualitie of Sommer is knowen to be moyst.
               But in other Countries (this like) by a seldome happe answereth, seedes three monthes old, committed to the earth, in the Haruest time, wyll better agree, being done in hotte Countryes, the Moone herein considered.
               The Gardener in hys well trymmed Earth (the tyme ayding) may commit to the grounde all worthy and excellent kinde of seedes, plantes, flippes, kernels and suche like: but these for a tryal, bestow in the Beds of your Garden.
               So that in any newe kindes of seedes, not assayed or proued before, the Gardener maye not throughly hope, that these will prosper in hys ground.
               The seedes committed to the Earth, in moyst places, doe speedier shoote vp (the Moone helping) thā bestowed in drie ground. For whiche cause, election vsed in the sowing of good & ful seedes (
                     •
                  n either 
                     •
                  round)

much auayleth.
               The Seedes or settes bestowed in shadowie places, although the Earth be well laboured before, doe rarely or very seldome prosper, and yeeld their floure.
               The plantes growen to their floure, maye at that tyme (after the minde of the Neapolitane Palladius Rutilius) be little or nothing handled, for doubt of corrupting their floure, or the sooner sheading of them.
            
            
               What care and diligence is required of euery Gardener, in the plucking vp, and cleere weeding away of all vnprofitable Herbes, growing among the garden plantes. Chap. 23.
               AFter the Seedes beeyng workemanly bestowed in the Beddes, the Gardeners next care must bee, that he diligently pull vppe, and weede away all hurtfull and vnprofitable Herbes, annoying the Garden plantes comming vp.
               But about this exercise in weeding of the beddes, there is a disagreement among the Writers of Husbandrie. For certaine denie that the raking doth profit ye plantes any thing at all, in yt by ye Rake the rootes of the Garden plantes are so vncouered, and the plantes with the same felled, and caused to lye flatte on the ground, which, if cold weather insue, are vtterly killed wyth the nipping ayre, for which cause, they better thought of that weeding and clensing exercise, by pulling vp wyth the hande, so that the same were done in due order and time.
               Yet it pleased manye Husbandmen in tyme past to rake vppe the weedes in beddes, yet not after one maner, nor at al times alike, but accordyng to the vsage of the Countrie, the good skill and condition of the weather: for whych cause, in what manner soeuer this exercise shall bee taken in hand, that weedyng shall neede or be required in these places, the Gardener shall not attempte or beginne the weeding of beddes with the hande, before the plantes well spring vp, shall seeme to couer theyr proper Beddes, and that in this high growth, the plantes shall be mixed and ioyned one to the other, according to the nature and forme in their growth.
               In thys pluckyng vp, and purging of the Garden beddes of weedes and stones, the same about the plants ought rather to be exercised wyth

the hand, than with any Iron instrument, for feare of feebling the yong plantes, yet small and tender of growth.
               And in the weeding with the hande, the Gardener must diligentlye take heede that he doe not too boysterously loose the Earthe, nor handle muche the plantes in the plucking away of the weedes, but the same purge so tenderly, that the rootes of the yong plantes be not loosed and feebled in the soft earth: For occasion will moue the carefull Gardener to weede daintie Herbes, beeing yet yong and tender, least grosse weedes in the growing vp with them, may annoy and hinder their increasing, Therefore the yong plantes in some readinesse to bee taken in hande, ought not to be stayed vntil their strong and biggge growth, but weeded in the meane time, for doubt of the inconueniences aboue vttered. But the common Herbes for the Kitchin the Gardener shall not begin to weede, before they be growen strong in roote, and bigge shot vppe. And this learne, that if the Earth be lose and soft at the time of weeding the dayntie plantes, you may not then lose and pull vppe weedes, but in a soft and tender manner: and yet fine Herbes require at all times to bee weeded, so that shoures of raine haue well softned the earthe a daye before.
               The walking or treding often about the beddes of the little and tender plantes shooting vp, looseth much the soft Earth about them, yea this so settleth downe the ground by the help of shoures of raine falling, that the weedes growing vp in those beddes, are caused the harder to be plucked vp. And sometimes the rootes of the weedes in the plucking vp with the hande are lefte behinde, through thys fastnesse caused of the Earth.
               Heere remember, that you neuer take in hande or beginne the weeding of youre beddes, before the Earthe be made soft, through the store of Rayne falling a day or two before.
               Heere conceiue, that the clipping, plucking away, and pressing downe of sundrye Herbes with Tyles or other waightie things, after they bee growen to some greatnesse, is to greate purpose, for somuch as this causeth them to keepe the longer greene, and to yeelde the thicker, fairer, and bigger Touffes, besides the letting of the Herbes, that they growe not vppe into Seede, and to giue with these a plesanter sauour, than the same that afore they possessed in theyr growth simplye,
               
                  As by a like meanes and ordering, both the Lettuce, Cabbedge and Coleworte, may be caused better, and more pleasant of taste, than the leaues simply growing, wythout any such manner of ordering:
               In the like condition, doe the Radishe and Nauew rootes grow the fayrer, and bigger, if diuerse of the greene leaues (after some growth) be handsomely clipped or broken off.
               But of the apt ordering of these two laste, in causing theyr rootes to be farre bigger than customable, and pleasaunter in tast, shal more fully be vttered in their proper Chapters hereafter, in the seconde perte of this treatise.
            
            
               The commended times for watring of the Garden Beddes, and what manner of water ought necessarilye be vsed to plantes, with the later inuentions of sundrye vessels, aptest for thys purpose. Chap. 24.
               THe Beddes being furnished with seedes in due age of the Moone, requireth diligence (if the ayre sufficiently moysteneth not) in the watring of them, least the ground being very drie of the proper nature, may through the dryeth for the lacke of rayn, cause both the seedes and tender plantes shot vppe, to perishe and drye.
               For which cause, euery Gardener ought carefully to consider the cō
                  dition and property of the earth of his Garden, whether of it selfe, the same be very moyst, or ouer drie, which two extreames learned, he may with the more diligence, bestowe paynes aboute the watering of the Garden beddes, so often as neede shall requyre.
               And for that the seasons in a manner, sufficiently instructe euery owner and Gardener, when to water the plantes come vp, it shall not be (of my part) a newe instruction, to vtter vnto them, the dayes and tymes necessarie to water the plantes, seeing the yongest of any discretion, know▪ that the Beds chiefly require watering after a drought, or when many hotte dayes haue chaunced togither, as the like especially commeth to passe in the Sōmer time, about the Cof
                     •
                  icke rysing of the Canicular or dog Starre (which with vs commonly happeneth about the seuententh day of July. And this watring of the Beddes ought rather be done (as Plinie witnesseth) in the morning, soone after

the Sunne rising) and at the euening when the sunne possesseth a weake force aboue the Earth. The reason this Authoure alledgeth of the same, is that by watering at the hote time of the day as at noone, the water then made hote by heate of the Sunne, woulde so burne the yong and tender rootes of the plantes. And in this watering of the beddes, the Gardener must haue a speciall care and regard, that he moisten not the plantes too muche, least cloying them too much with water, they after wax feeble and pe
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  h. The water best commended for watering of the plantes, is the same drawen or gotten out of the Riuer, or other narrow Streame ebbing and flowing, or else sweetely running one way, through the help of Springs falling into it. But if the Gardener b
                     •
                  e forced to vse Well water, drawen especially out of a deepe Well, or the water out of some deepe pit, he ought then to lette the same drawen vp stand for two or three dayes togither, or at the least for certayne houres in the open aire, to be warmed of the Sunne, least the same beeing new drawen vp, and so watered or sprinckled forth on the beddes both raw and colde, may feeble & kil the tender yong plants cōming vp.
               The age also of the plantes, shall greately direct the Gardener to know how much and how smallye he ought to moysten them at eache time needefull, for the tender yong plantes new come vp, require a lesser watering, and the same gently, where the Herbes more growen, well ioy to be plentifully moystned with the water temperate warme. And this water ought gently to be sprinkled forth on the beddes, with a watering potte, and by other meanes, which after shall bee demonstrated, that the rootes of the yong Herbes may alyke drinke in of the water, and not to be cloyed, through the ouer fast, or too muche moysture sprinckled on them, by whiche doing, these the rather retaine the spirite vanquishing, procured to passe through the exhalation of the Earthe. For whiche cause, the beddes at one instant shall not fully be watered, but as the Earthe and plantes drinke in, so gently sprinckle forthe the water, in feeding the plantes with this moisture, as by a brest or nourishing pappe, whiche like handled, shall greately prosper the tender plantes commyng vp, where they otherwise, by the hastie drownyng with water, are much annoyed, and put in a hazard of perishing.
               To the water standing in the Sunne, if the owner or Gardener mixt a reasonable quantitie of dung, after hys discretion, thys mixture

no doubt will be to great purpose, for as much as the same gently watered or sprinckled abrode, procureth a proper nourishmente to the tender plantes and yong Herbes comming vp.
               The cold as well as the salt water, is knowen to be enimie vnto all kindes of plants, yet Theophrastus reporteth, that the salt water is more proper for the watering of certaine plantes, than any other.
               The common watering potte for the Garden beddes with vs, hath a narrow necke, bigge belly, somewhat large bottome, and full of little holes, with a proper hole formed on the head, to take in the water, whiche filled full, and the thombe layde on the hole to keepe in the aire, may on such wise be carried in handsome manner to those places by a better helpe ayding, in the turning and bearing vprighte of the bottome of this potte, which needefully require watering.
               The watering pot best to bee liked, and handsomest for this turne, both for the finely sprinckling forthe, and easie carriage of water in the same from place to place in the Garden, is that much vsed in the chiefest Gardens aboute London, and in diners partes of Englande nowe knowen, whose forme is after this manner, the body wholly of Copper, hauing a bigge bellie and narow necke, a strong handle of the same mettall workemanly fastned to the bellie and head, to carrie the potte if neede be to places in the Garden: but for a more easinesse and quicknesse in carriage of the potte vprighte and full, is an other strong ring or handle, fastned artelie to the lippes of the potte, much like to the Barbers waterpot carried abrode, that serueth to none other turne, sauing for the easie carriage of the potte full of water to needefull places: but this other handle especially serueth to sprinckle forthe the water by the long pipe full of little holes on the head, that some name a Pumpe, whiche reacheth from the bottome, vnto the head of the potte, for the handsomer deliuering forth of the water, the handle in the meane time guiding this long pipe of the potte, vntill all the water be spent.
               The Gardener possessing a Pump in his grounde, or fast by, maye with long and narrowe troughes well direct the water vnto all beddes of the Garden, by the pathes betweene, in watering sufficientlye the rootes of all such Herbes, which require much moisture. But for a playner vnderstanding of this, I haue heere in the Page following demonstrated the forme to the eye.
               
                  
                  
                     The maner of watering with a Pumpe by troughes in a Garden.
                  
               
               
                  There be some which vse to water their beddes with great Squirtes, made of Tinne, in drawing vp the water, and setting the Squirt to the brest, that by force squirted vpwarde, the water in the breaking maye fall as droppes of raine on the plantes, which sundrye times like squirted on the beddes, doth sufficiently feede the plantes with moisture.
               An other way better commended, and the same with more ease, in watering of plantes and Herbes, is done by a greate vessell of Tynne, formed somewhat like to a Squirte, yet in the deuided partes the same differeth, for that this hathe a pipe of the same mettall raised from the bottome, and reaching in a manner so high, as the greate pipe, hauing many little holes at the imbossed toppe or ende, this bigger Pipe formed after the manner of a small Pumpe, at whose nether ende, a thicke square plate of Tinne stricken ful of little holes, workemanlie fastned, into which a Pumpe staffe put, for the drawing vppe, and forcible sending forth of the water, by thrusting downe with both hands a good distance off.
               The vessell thus prepared in a readinesse, must bee sette into a deepe vessell or tubbe of water, in what place of the Garden the owner or Gardener mindeth to beginne in drawing firste the Pumpe vppe, and with mightier strength thrusting it downe againe, whiche so handled, causeth the water to ascende and flee forthe of the pipe holes on suche heigth, that in the falling, the droppes come downe through the aire, breaking it in forme of raine, that one place being sufficiently watered, the Gardener may then remoue the tubbe and vessel into another place, which needeth the like watering, and on such wise doing in thre or four places, he shall sufficiently moisten all the beddes and bordures of the Garden. That the forme of this vessell with the tubbe may the readier be conceyued, beholde this figure following heere faythfully demonstrated.
               
                  
                  
                     The maner of watring with a pumpe in a tubbe.
                  
               
               
                  The owner or Gardener, enioying a Ponde with water, in his Garden grounde, or a ditch of water running fast by, so that the same bee sweete, may with an instrument of wood (named of most men a skiffe) sufficiently water all the Beddes of the Garden, with great ease and expedition.
               Such Plantes which come spediest forwarde, through much moysture bestowed on them, as the Cucumber, Mellone, Gourde, and sundry others, the Gardener may with farre greater ease and trauaile, water after this manner, in taking woollen clothes or Lystes, and these like tongs cut sharpe at the one ende, whiche lay to the botome of the potte, filled with water, the sharpe ende hanging forth, well foure fingers deepe, and the Potte leaning somewhat forwarde, that these may through the continual dropping, hastily speede the increase of the aboue sayde plantes, so that to eache plante a like potte prepared be set, which manner of doing, is termed filtring.
            
            
               At what tyme diuerse plantes sprung vppe, ought to be remoued and set againe, as out of one bedde or bordure, into another, with the breaking or s
                     •
                  ipping of sundry settes from old bodies, which with skil require to be bestowed in the Earth. Chap. 25.
               
               The Husbandman or Gardener, whiche woulde haue plantes growe vnto a greater bignesse than customable, ought to remoue

after four or fiue leaues be well come vppe, and set them againe, as out of one bedde bestowed into another, and like from one Bordure into an other. Although the owner maye (at all seasons) dispose plantes, at hys will and pleasure, yet is it better commended, that all plantes bee chaunged into other Earth prepared when showers of rayne haue well moystned and softned the same.
               The plantes also remoued, and set agayne into a fatte Earthe well laboured and dressed, needeth besides, as Columella witnesseth, no other amendemente by dung.
               The skilful Neapolitane (Palladius Rutilius) in his worthy worke of Husbandry reporteth, that when the Gardener hath bestowed sundrye kindes of seedes in one bedde togither, whych after the dyligente watering bee so rysen, that foure or fiue leaues of diuerse plantes are sprung aboue the Earth, suche then after this Authours consent, maye well bee remoued and set agayne (into beddes workmanly prepared) a certaine distance asunder, being such plantes that (before the setting) require to hane the toppes of the leaues, and endes of the rootes cut off, wherby they may the freelyer grow vppe broade in Touffe or bigge in roote.
               Those kindes of seedes, which after their committing to the Earth, and dyligente wateryng, neede not, after certaine leaues sprung vp, to be remoued, maye the owner or Gardener bestowe (as Rutilius witnesseth) in the Beddes the thynner, the Moone herein remembred.
               The worthy Columella (in instructions of the Garden) wylleth the owner or Gardener, hauing an occasion to pull vp plantes, and sette them agayne in Beddes, and that the grounde the same tyme (for the lacke of rayne, bee ouer drye and harde) to moysten and soften well the Earth a daye before, with water sprinckled forth, by a wateryng potte, seruing onlye to that vse.
               And certayne of these, whiche require to bee sette a good distance asunder, the worthy Rutilius wylleth to clippe off the toppes of the yong leaues, and the endes of the rootes to cutte awaye, before the bestowing agayne in Beddes workmanly prepared, as lyke the Coleworte, Cabedge, Lettuce, greate Leeke, Nauewe, and Rape.
               
                  agayne, a good distaunce asunder, are the Cucumber, Gourde, Melone, Artichocke, Nigella Romana, and sundry other
                     •
                  : which thus placed in Beddes artly prepared, may the readyer and handsomer be weeded, and cherished by earth digged about, so often as neede shall requyre, wherby the plantes, through helpe of diligent watering, and furtheraunce of the Moone in the setting, are after procured to increase the better, and delectabler to the eye.
               The yong settes for the Garden (of pleasant delight and smell) may the owner or Gardener also bestow in Bordurs at al seasons (although better commended, to bee done in the Spring time) in breaking of the slyps or Braunches of one yeares groweth, from the bodies of olde stockes, and in wrything the endes aboute, so to set them a good deapth into the Earth, the Moone at that time drawing neare to hir chaunge, and knowen to be vnder the Earth, which much furthereth the settes in the sooner taking of roote.
               But the skilfull Columella rather willeth to cleaue the ende of the Braunche or slyppe beneath, into whyche clefte an Ote grayne to bee thrusted or pu
                     •
                  , and in ye setting deepe into the grounde, to bestowt Ote graynes rounde about the same, (the Moone then neare to hir change) rather than any dung.
               And those yong Herbes, whiche the Gardener myndeth to remoue, neede not (sayeth thys Columella) to bee stryked aboute the rootes with any Dung, but rather that the endes of theyr rootes (before the setting agayne) be cutte off, as I aboue vttered.
               The Marigolde, Daysie, Collumbine, Primrose, Conslippe, sweete John, Gilyfloures, Carnations, Pinckes, and sundry other delectable floures, are procured to increase the bigger, fayrer, and doubler, if the owner or Gardener do often chaunge these into Beddes workmanlye prepared, the Moone at those tymes consydered, to bee increasyng of lyghte, and that a diligence bestowed in the often watering.
               As touching the pulling vppe of sundry dayntie Hearbes of pleasaunt sauour, and that these 
                     •
                  o be sette agayne in Beddes (orderly prepared) after the course of the Moone, with a care and dilygence to bee bestowed particularly on moste plantes of the Garden, shall at large be vttered in the seconde parte of thys treatise, where we purpose 
                     •
                  o i
                     •
                  
                  treate of many laudable and weighty matters besydes.
               
                  The plantes (which after certaine leaues spring vppe) neede not to bee remoued into other Beddes, are the Spynage, Arache, Dyll, Sperage, Sorrell, Cheruile, Parsely, and dyuerse other of like sorte.
            
            
               The laudable instructions of the wise, in the gathering and preseruing of the greater number of Kitchyn Herbes and rootes, with the times aptest, for the like doing by a
                     •
                   floures, dainty Herbes, and rootes, to the vse of physicke. Chap. 26.
               THe best and worthyest rootes of Hearbes, are for the more parte, to be gathered in apt places when the leaues are beginning to fal off, and the fruites or seedes already shedde, so that the season be fayre, for done in a raynie time, the rootes be caused the weaker, and filled wyth rude moysture.
               The floures in like manner are to be gathered, as the Borage, Buglosse, and al others of like sorte, when they be wholly opened, and before they feble, except the floures of the Rose, and Jacemyne, whyche ought to bee gathered for the better and longer keeping, before they bee much or rather but little opened.
               The leaues and whole Herbes are to be gathered, whē these be come to their ful growth and perfection.
               The fruites, as the Melone, Cucumber, Cytrone, and Gourde, when these appeare yealowe, and be come to their perfitte growth and perfection.
               The seedes in like condition are to bee gathered, when they be well ripened, and before ye seeds shed on ye earth, but those which remayn after the Herbes through dryed, ought to be rubbed furth with the hands, and kept, vnto the time of sowing.
               Here remembring that the seedes ought to bee gathered in a cleare season, and in the wayne of the Moone.
               And this for a general rule obserue, that al those to be gathered, as the Hearbes, floures, rootes, fruites, and seedes, are to be done in a fayre and drye season, and in the decrease of the Moone.
               The Hearbes which the owner mindeth to preserue, are afore to bee cleane picked and clensed, and dryed in the shadowe, being a place open

towardes the South, not moyste and free from smoake and dust.
               These after are to be put in leather Bags, rather than into Canuase, the mouthes at the hanging vppe faste tyed, and into wooden Boxes of the Boxe tree, to the ende the Hearbes maye not lose theyr proper vertue, as wee see those persons to doe, whiche preserue daintie Hearbes for the winter time. So that the Potecaries in my opinion are verye negligente, which hang vppe the Physicke Hearbes in their open shoppes and warehouses, through whiche, the vertue of these not onlye breath away, but the bags charged and clagged with duste, Copwebs, dung of flyes, and much other filth.
               The floures oughte not to bee dried in the sunne, nor in that shadowe caused by the Sunne at Noone, nor in no Chamber or hyghe place aboue, for asmuch as these, through theyr softnesse and tendernes doe lightly of lyke occasion, breath away theyr proper vertue, but especially through the sharpe heate of the sunne, and heate of the ayre, onlesse it be our Rose of ye Garden, which to be preserued for a long time, requireth to bee dryed in a high place standing open to the Sunne at Noone, or that the Sunne beames enter vnto, and yet touche not the Rose leaues.
               The better way for drying floures, is to lay them in a temperate & darke place, free from moysture, smoke and dust, and to stirre them too & fro, that these in the drying corrupt not, and to be either close kepte in bagges, or continually couered ouer wel, that these in the meane tyme lose not their colour, nor naturall sauour.
               After being well dryed, these ought to be close stopped in a glazed earthen vessel.
               The fyner Seedes are to bee preserued in leather bagges, or in carthen vessels, hauing very narrowe mouthes, or else in Glasse bottels, or gallie glasses very well s
                     •
                  opped.
               But the Seedes of the Onyons, Chybolles, and Leekes, as also of the Poppie, are to be preserued in theyr Hu
                     •
                  kes and heades.
               For the preseruing of rootes, the owner ought to learne and exercise two meanes, the one for keeping the freshe, and the other for the round rootes, as the Nauew, Radysh, Carrotte, and others of like sorte, and for to preserue them drye.
               
                  The waye and meanes to keepe or preserue rootes freshe, is to burie them in a Sellar, in eyther Grauell or Sande, well turned vppon, them, or in a Garden grounde reasonably deepe digged, euen so d
                     •
                  epe as the Gardener doth for the Radishe and Nauewe in the Earth, to enioye the commoditie of them for the greater parte of the wynter: To preserue rootes dry, the owner or Gardener, after the plucking of rootes out of the Earth) ought to washe them verie cleane, with Cunduite or spring water, after to cut away all the small and hearie rootes, whyche done, to drye them in a shadowie place free from the beames of the Sunne, as beeyng somewhat darke, if so bee these are s
                     •
                  ender & thynne of rynde, as bee the rootes of the Fennel, Succorie, Parselye, Endyue, Borage, Buglosse, Sperage, and sundry others like, but if the rootes be thicke of rynde, of a grosse essence and bigge, then may the owner lay them to drye in the Sunne at Noone daye, as the roote of Gentiane, the Earth Apple, Brionie, Raponticke, Aristolochia, or any others like.
               After that these be well dryed, and lyke prepared, ought the owner to hang them vp in some Garrette or open roome a high, being sweete & dry (through the suns dayly shyning on the place at noone, or open to the North, where nothing damaged by smoke, nor duste, nor that the Sunne beames may harme in any maner, euen as that auntient and singular Physition Hypocrates instructeth, who wylleth the Hearbes, floures, and rootes, so well freshe as drye, not to bee bestowed, in anye manner, in an open place, to bee dryed of the wynde, but rather close stopped, in Glasses, Earthen pottes, and square Boxes of woode, to the ende, that these lose not their vertue, which otherwise they might soone doe, by lying open to the winde.
               All the fielde plantes, floures and rootes, are stronger in nature, but in substaunce inferioure to the Garden plants. &c.
               Among the wylde plantes, those growing on the mountaines or high Hils, do excel the other in propertie.
               Among all Plantes, those also are of a stronger nature whyche shall bee of a liuelier coloure better taste and sauour.
               The force besides of plants, doe indure (for the more parte) vnto two or three yeares.
               
                  The Herbes which a man woulde vse for the Kitchin, ought rather be gathered with a knife, somewhat aboue the Earth, when these are shot vppe vnto theyr perfit growth, as the Beetes, Succorie, Arache, Borage, Marigold, Coleworte, Endyue, Clarie, Rocket, Basil, Maioram, Lettuce, Parsely, Mercury, and many others.
               When the owner mindeth to vse certaine Herbes, hotte of qualitye, hee ought to gather them for the more parte, rather freshe, than drie, but if hys intente bee, rather to heate lesser, than seeing the moysture of the greene, doth much mytigate the heate consisting in it, for that cause is he willed rather to gather the hearbes for Physicke, before they begyn to alter their colour.
               This for a generall rule note, that all floures, hearbes, and rootes, ought carefully be gathered in a drye fayre season, and not in cloudye, mysty, nor rayny weather. The rootes besides ar not to be gathered, but after the fall of the leaues, and these especially from the middle of September, vnto the beginning of the moneth of Nouember. But floures are chiefly to bee gathered from the middle of the month of May vnto the beginning of July, and after.
               And for the fruites of sundry Hearbes, these properly are to be gathered, according to the diuersitie of the Hearbes.
            
            
               The worth
                     •
                  e remedies and secretes auayling against Snayles, canker wormes, the long bodied Mothes, Garden fleas and earth wormes, vitiate and gnaw, as wel the potte Hearbes, as trees and fruites. Chap. 27.
               THere is none so dul of eyesight (as I beleeue) whiche not throughly perceiueth and seeth, howe that the Garden riches bee diuerslye annoyed and harmed by diuerse creeping wormes and beastes, aswel aboue, as vnder the Earth, and that through the same occasion, often procured to feeble and waste, and vnlesse speedie remedies shall be exercised, that these in the ende do fal downe and perish.
               For the Pestilent companye of these increase and are seene manye tymes to bee so manye or greate in number, that by no deuised meanes, neyther by fyre, nor Iron ingine (from the Garden groundes or field
                     •
                  s) in which these once shal be lodged or abiding, can

eyther be driuen away or destroyed: therefore I shall doe heerein a most gratefull matter (as I suppose) both to Husbandmen and Gardeners, if against this pestiferous annoyance and destruction, I shall vtter and teach those worthy remedies, that both the aunciente and later men by great skill inuented and noted in their learned workes.
               From words to come vnto the matter I thinke it time to intreate, and first that singular, Africanus among the Greeke writers of Husbandrie reporteth, that Garden plantes and rootes may well be purged and ridde of the harmefull wormes, if their dennes or deepe holes bee smoked, the winde ayding with the dung of the Cowe or Oxe burned.
               That worthy Plinie in his Booke of histories writeth, that if the owner or Gardener sprinckleth ye pure mother of the Oyle Oliue without any salte in it, doth also driue the wormes away, & defend ye plants and Herbes from being after gnawen of them. And if they shall cleaue to the rootes of the plantes, through malice or breeding of the dung, yet this w
                     ••
                  deth them cleane away. The Plants or Herbes will not after be gnawen or harmed by Garden fleas, if with the naturall remedie, as with the Herbe Rocket, the Gardener shall bestowe his beddes in many places.
               The 
                     ••••
                  wortes and all pot Herbes are greatly defended from the gnawing of the Garden fleas, by the Radishe growing among them. And the worthy Anatolius in hi
                     •
                   Greeke instructions of Husbādrie affirmeth the like, so that some bitter fitches bee also bestowed with the Radish in beddes. And this Seede committed in beddes with the Radish and Rape, doth greatly auayle, as the auntient witnesse of experience. The eag
                     •
                  e or sharp vinegre doth also preuayle, tempered wyth the Juice of H
                     ••
                  ban
                     •
                  , and sprinckled on those Garden fleas. To these, the water in whiche the Herbe Nigella Romana shall bee stieped for a night, and sprinckled on the plantes, as the Greeke Pamphilus reporteth, doth like preuaile against the Garden fleas.
               If from other creeping things the Gardener would defend ye Seedes committed to the E
                     ••
                  th from being gnawen or harmed, let him stiepe those Seedes for a night (as I afore vttered) before the sowing in the Juice of the Seng
                     •
                  ene or Houselecke, which Seedes also the Gardener shall preserue vngnawen, if hee bestowe of them in the shell of that Snayle, which I suppose to bee the same, named the Tortuise, as the

former Authour Anatolius writeth, in whiche place I may not omi
                     •
                  te the same practise of the skilfull Paladius Rutilius, who reporteth, that the noysome vermine or creeping thyngs will not breede of the Pot-Hearbes, if the Gardener shall before the committing to the Earthe, drye all the Seedes in the skynne of the Tortuese, or sowe the Herbe Minte in many places of the Garden, especially among Colewortes. The bitter Fitche and Rocket (as I afore vttered) bestowed among the Pot Hearbes, so that the Seedes be sowen in the first quarter of the Moone, doe greately auaile: As vnto the Canker and Palmer wormes belongeth, which in many places worke great iniurie both to Gardens and Uines, may the owner or Gardener driue away with the Figge tree ashes sprinckled on them and the Herbes.
               There be
                     •
                  some whiche sprinckle the plantes and Hearbes with the 
                     ••
                  e made of the F
                     •
                  gge. Tree ashes, but to destroy these Wormes, to strowe (as experience reporteth) the ashes alone on them.
               There be others which rather will to plant or sowe that bigge Onyon, named in Latine, Scilla or Squilla heere and there in beddes, or hang them in sundry places of the Garden.
               Others also will, to fixe riuer Creuisses with nayles in many places of the Garden, which if they shall y
                     ••
                   withstand or contend wyth all these remedies, then may the gardener apply or exercise this deuice, in taking the Oxe or Cowe Urine, and the mother of Oyle Oliue, which after the wel mixing togither, and heating ouer the fire, the same be stirred about vntill it be hote, and when through colde this mixture shall be sprinckle
                     •
                   on the Pot Hearbes and Trees, dothe maruellously preuayle, as the skilfull Anatolius of experience deporteth.
               The singular Plinie in his practises vttereth, that those harmefull Wormes, touched with bloudy r
                     •
                  ddes, are likewise driuen away.
               The worthy Paladius Rutilius reporteth, that if the owne
                     •
                   o
                     •
                   Gardener burne greate bundels of the Garlike blades without heads dryed through all the Alleys of the Garden, & vnto these the dung of Backes added, that the sauoure of the 
                     ••••
                  ke (by the help of the w
                     ••
                  de) may bee driuen to many places, especially to those where they most abound and swarme, and the Gardener shall see so speedie a destruction, as is to bee wondered at.
               That worthy Plinie of great knowledge reporteth, that these maye

be driuen from the Pot Hearbes, if the bitter Fitche Seedes be mixed and sowen togyther with them, or to the branches of Trees. Creu
                     •
                  sses hanged vp by the hornes in many places, doth like preuayle. These also are letted from encreasing, yea they in heapes presently gathered, are destroyed, as the Greekes report of obseruation. If the Gardener by taking certaine Palmer or Canker Wormes out of the Garden nexte ioyning, shall seeth them in water with Dill, and the same beyng thorough colde, shall sprinckle on the Hearbes or trees, that the mixture may wet and soke through the Neastes, euen vnto the yong ones, cleauing togither, that they may tast thereof will speedily dispatche them. But in this doing, the Gardener must be very warie, and haue an attentiue eye, that none of the mixture fall on his face nor hands. Besides these, the owner or Gardener may vse this remedie certaine, and easily prepared, if aboute the bigge armes of Trees, or stemmes of the Hearbes, he kindle and burne the stronger Lime and Brimstone togyther. Or if the owner make a smoke with the Musheromes growing vnder the Nutte tree, or burne the houses of Gotes, or the gumme Galbanum, or else make a smoke with the Hartes horne, the winde aiding, by blowing towardes them.
               There bee also some, which infuse the Uine ashes in water for three dayes, with whiche they after sprinckle abundantly, both the Herbes and Trees. Manye beddes make soft the Seedes, sti
                     •
                  ped before theyr committing to the Earth, in the Lye made of the fygge ashes.
               The Husbandmen and Gardeners in our time, haue found out this easie practise, being now common euery where, which is on his wi
                     •
                  e, that when these, after shoures of Rayne are cropen into the warme Sunne, or into places standing againste the Sunne, may earely in the morning shake eyther the fruites and leaues of the Pot Hearbes, or the 
                     ••
                  ughes of the trees, for these as yet 
                     〈◊〉
                   through the colde of the night, are procured of the same the 
                     ••
                  ghtlyer and soone
                     •
                   to fall, nor able after to recouer vp againe, so that the Palmer Wormes thus lying on the ground, are then in a readinesse to the killing of the Gardener.
               If the owner minde to destroy anye other creeping thyngs noyous to Hearbes and Trees (whyche Palladius and Ruellius name, both Herbe and Leeke wasters, then lette hym harken to this inuention & deuise of ye Greeke Dyophanes, who willeth to purchase ye Mawe of a

Wether Sheepe newe killed, and the same as yet full of his excrementall filth, which lightly couer with earthe in the same place, where these most haunt in the Garden: for after two dayes, shal the Gardener finde there, that ye Mothes with long bodyes, and other creeping things wil bee gathered in di
                     •
                  ers companies to the place right ouer it, whiche the owner shall eyther remoue and carrie further, or digge and burie verye deepe in the same place, that they may not after arise or come forthe, whiche when the Gardener shall haue exercised the same but twice or thrice, hee shall vtterly extinguishes, and quite destroy all the kindes of creeping things that annoy and spoyle the Garden plantes. The Husbandmē in Flanders, arme the stockes, and compasse the bigger armes of their trees with wispes of Strawe handsomly made and fastned or bound about by whiche the Palmer wormes are constreyned to creepe vp to the toppes of the trees, & there stayed, so that as it were by snares and engines layde, these in the ende are eyther driuen away, or thus in their way begunne, are speedily or soone after procured to turne backe againe. As vnto the remedies of the Snayles particularly belongeth, these may the Gardener likewise chase from the Kitchin Herbes, if h
                     •
                  e eyther sprinckle the newe mother of the Oyle, Oliue, or Soote of the Chimney on the Herbes, as if he bestowed the bitter fitche in beddes among them, whiche also auaileth againste other noysome wormes and creeping things, as I afore vttered. That if the Gardener woulde possesse a greene and delectable Garden, let him then sprinckle diligentlye all the quarters, beddes, and bordures of the Garden, with the mixture of water, and powder of Fenny Greke tempered togither, or set vpright in the middle of the Garden, the whole bare head without fleshe of the vnchast Asse, as I afore wrote.
               That worthy man Iulius Fronto reporteth, that all Kitchin Herbes may greately be holpen, if among them the herbe Rocket shall eyther be sowen or planted. But an intollerable iniurie shall bee wrought to the Husbandly Gardener, if the G
                     ••
                  se dung dissolued in brine, be sprinckled on the Kitchin Herbes, as these worthy writers, Democritus, Fronto, and Damageron in their chosen precepts of the Greeke Husbandry, haue left noted to our age.
            
            
               
               The skilfull inuentions and helpes againste the Garden Moles, antes, Gnattes, Flies, and Frogges, euerting, harming and wasting as well Kitchin Hearbes, as Trees and fruites. Chap. 28.
               FOr asmuch as the Moles in manye places of Garden groundes, through their casting vp and hollowing of the same, the Seedes afore bestowed in beddes they on such wise vncouer, and the plantes in like manner turne vp, and vnbare of earth, to the great griefe and paine of the carefull Gardeners, in dayly renuing and repairing of their former laboures, for that cause hathe hee iust occasion to trauell and busie himselfe, in searching out, and deuising by all skilfull meanes, in what maner he may surest and best preuayle againste this harmefull blynde best. And that I maye doe a most gratefull matter to all Gardeners in the same, I will heere vtter all▪ such singular practises, that eyther the worthy Greekes or Latines haue vttered and noted to be auaylable against them.
               First the skilfull Paxanus hathe lefte in writing, that if the Gardener shall make hollow a bigge Nutte, or bore a hollow hole into some soūd piece of wodde beeing narrow, in filling the one or the other with Rosine, Pitch, Chaffe, and Brimston, of eache so muche as shall suffise to the filling of the Nutte, or hollow hole in the wodde, whiche thus prepared in a readynesse, stoppe euery where with diligence, all the goings forth, and breathing holes of the Mole, that by those the fume or smoke in no manner may issue out, yet so handle the matter, that one mouth and hole be onely left open, and the same so large, that well the Nutte or vessell kindled within, may be layd within the mouth of it, whereby it may take the winde of the one side, which may so sende in the sauoure both of the Rosin and Brimston into the hollowe tombe, or restyng place of the Mole: by the same practise so workemanly handled, in filling the holes with the smoke, shall the owner or Gardener eyther driue quite away all ye Moles in that groūd, or find them in short time dead.
               There be some which take the white Nesewort, or the rinde of Cynocrambes beaten and sarced, and with the Barlie Meale and Egges finely tempered togither, they make both Cakes and Pasties wroughte with Wine and Milke, and those they lay within the Moles denne or hole, Albertus of worthy memorie reporteth, that if the owner

or Gardener closeth or diligently stoppeth the mouthes of the Mole holes with the Garlike, Onyon, or Leeke, shall eyther driue the Moles away, or kill them, through the strong sauour, striking or breathing into them. Many there be, which to driue away these harmefull Moles, do bring vp yong Cattes in their Garden groūd, and make tame Weafris, to the ende that eyther of these, through the hunting after them, may so driue away this pestiferous annoyance, being taught to watch at their straight passages and mouthes of the holes comming forthe. Others there be also, which diligently fill & stop vp their holes with the red Okare or Ruddell, and iuice of the wilde Cucumber, or sowe the Seedes of Palma Christi, being a kinde of Satyrion in beddes, thorough which they will not after cast vp, nor tarrie thereabout. But some exercise this easie practise, in taking a liue Mole, and burning ye powder of Brimston about him, being in a deepe Earthen potte, through whyche he is procured to crie, all others in the meane time as they reporte, are moued to resort thither. There are some besides, whiche lay silke snares at the mouth of their holes. To the simple Husbandmen may thys easie practise of no cost suffise, in setting downe into the Earthe a stiffe rodde or greene braunch of the Elder tree. The worthy Plinie whyche hath left to memorie skilful practises. reporteth, that the mother of the Oyle Oliue alone, sprinckled on the heape of Pismires or Antes, killeth them. This Authoure also writeth, that the Pismires are wicked annoyers to trees, which the Gardener or Husbandman sayeth hee, maye force to forsake and leaue, if he bestrike the neather partes of the Trees round aboute with the powder of the Ruddell, and Liquide pitche or Tarre, mixed togither, and hang also by the place the fyshe named of the worthy Rutilius after the Greeke Writers Husbandrie Coracinum, and of Ruellius Graculum, for on suche wise handled, they will resorte and gather all into one place, whereby the Husbandly Gardener maye the speedelyer destroy them. Others there be, which with the powder of the Lupynes and Oyle Oliue tempered togyther, doe bestrike the lower partes of Trees and plantes, for the letting of them in creeping vp. Many kill them as I afore vttered, with the only mother of the Oyle Oliue. The skilfull Neapolitane Rutilius reporteth, that if the greate company of Pismires or Antes haue deepe holes in the Garden groūd, those may the owner chase away, or kill in the ground, by stopping the

mouthes of the holes, with the heart of ye Owle. If they creepe abrode, then sift all the Alleys where these runne with bright Ashes or else score the grounde thicke togither with the redde Okare or white Chalke, or make long strikes with Oyle on the Earthe. Further hee writeth, that the Husbādly Gardener may driue away Pismires, if on the mouthes of their holes hee sprinckle the powder of Organy and Brimston beaten togither, or burne the emptie shelles of Snayles, and with the ashes of the same, stoppe abundantly the mouthes of their dennes and holes. In which deuise, this Rutilius omitted the Storax that of Paxanius the Greeke, out of whome hee borrowed this conclusion added. The words of Paxanius be on this wise: If the owner sayeth he, shall burne certaine Antes or Emots in the middle of the Garden, the othe
                     •
                  s of the sauour will creepe away. To these, if about the mouthes of the Emots holes the carefull Gardener shall smeare the grosser Turpentine, the Emots or Antes will not after come forthe, and these he may expell or driue away from their proper resting place, or dwelling togither, if the shellie couerings of Snayles, burned with Storax Calamita, and beaten to powder, or the ashes sifted, hee shall after sprinckle on the heape of the Pismires. And the owner shall throughly destroy the Antes, if he sprinckle on them the iuce of Cyrenaicum dissolued and wel mixed in Oyle. This Authoure further reporteth, that the Emotes will not creepe on the plantes nor trees, if the Husbandly Gardener shall diligently sprinckle the bodyes and stemmes of them, wyth the powder of the bitter Lupines and mother of Oyle, well mixed or boyled togither. The selfe same matter shall the Gardener performe, if hee compas their holes with white and cleere Wolle or Bombaste, or that he marke on the groūd long strikes, or forme round circles, with white Chalke, or red Okare, all those wayes especially that these most often haunt, or compas their holes with Organy as I afore vttered: for by ye like doing as he affirmeth, the Emots after will not only leaue ye creeping vp on ye plants, but refuse also to ascend ouer ye rings made wyth white Chalke about ye bodies of Trees. There be others which report, that the Emotes will not creepe to that hony pot set on the ground, about which the like circles with Chalke or red Okare shall be fourmed, yea though the same were left vncouered, yet is it knowen to many, yt the Antes are maruellous desirous of Hony, and other sweete thyngs.
               
                  The skilfull Neapolitane Rutilius willeth, that the diligent Husbandman annoint or best rike the stemmes of plants, and the bodyes of Trees, with the redde Okare, Butter, and liquid Pitche mixed well togither. There bee certaine of the Greeke Writers of Husbandrie, which will the thicke Yuie Garlandes to bee bound about the bodyes of Trees and Uines, that by the same skilfull deuise, the Antes lodging vnder the shadowe of these, as then pledges they slay and kill.
               There be many whiche reporte, that the like may be wroughte and done with the Bulles gaule, mother of Oyle, and Liquide Pitche, smeared about the bodyes of Trees. The singular Plinie reporteth, that the Sea mudde or Ashes, stopped diligētlye into their holes, is a most sure remedy against the Emotes, so that the places be not moist or waterie. But with the surest practise and remedie of all, are the Pisemires killed with the Herbe Heliotropium. Some suppose, that the water in which the crude Tile shall bee infused for a time, to be enimie to them. The Gardiner may driue away Gnattes, if he sprinckle on the beds & plantes, the decoction of Organie in vineger, as that skilful Democritus in his Husbandrie hath noted. To these the owner may sprinkle on the Plants, the infusion of Rue in water, or vse the decoction of the herbe Fleabane, or else make a smoke either with Brimstone, or Cummyne, or the drye Oxe dung, or the gumme Bdellium. The learned Plinie vttereth, that the Gardner may driue these away with the smoke of Galbanum burned, and that worthie Neapolitane Rutilius, of experience affirmeth, that if the owner eyther sprinckle the newe mother of oyle, or soote of the chimney on the plantes, it likewise driueth thē away. That skilfull Greke Berytius hath left in writing, how that the Gardener maye dryue the Flyes farre off with this fearefull deuice▪ if mixing the pouders of the Hellebor or Neeswort, and Orpiment with milke, the same be sprinkled on the plantes and place where the Flyes most haūt, it either hastily driueth them away, or kils them soone after. The selfe same will the common Alume, beaten with Organye, and tempered with Mylke preuayle agaynst the Flies: For what plantes and herbes shall be sprinkled with this mixture will not after be resorted vnto nor touched of Flies. The Bayberries wyth the blacke Neeseworte beaten together, and infusing it in milke or water and Honey myxed, doth like profyte: for this mixture sprinkled on the Plants, and

places where the flyes moste haunt, doth after as it were by a poyson, hastily kill the flyes, or otherwise force them to flye speedilye away neuer to returne.
               As touching remedies against the Frogges, whiche in the sommer nights are wonte to be disquieters to the weried husbandmen (through their dayly laboure, by chyrping and loude noyse making, let the Husbandman exercise this helpe and secrete, borrowed of the skilful Greeke Africanus, which is on this wise: Set on some bancke (saith he) a Lanterne lighted, or other bright light before them, or on some tree (fast by) so hang a light, that by the brightnesse of the same light▪ it may so shine vpon them, as if it were the Sunne, which handled on thys wyse, will after cause thē to leaue their chirping and loude noyse making: A practise tryed by many of later yeares.
               The skilful Greeke Beritius reporteth, that if the Husbandman burie in some Banckee fast by, the gaule of a Goate, the Frogs wyll not afterward gather to that place.
            
            
               The rare practises and secrets, both of the auntient, and later writers of Husbandrie, against Serpents of the Garden, and any others veneming aswel men as the Kitchin Hearbes, trees, and fruites. Chap. 29.
               
                  FLorentius (a singular and diligent interpreter of the matters of the fielde) wrote, that serpentes in the Garden grounde or elsewhere, wil not lodge or abide, if the owner sow or plant in bordures about, or in apt corners of the Garden, eyther the wormwoode, Mugworte, or Southernwood, which if these shall some where happen to haunte, then may the Gardener (as he writeth) driue them incontinent furth of the ground, if he make a smoake either with the Lyllie rootes, Harts horne, or Goates houes.
               The skilful Rutilius vttereth, that all Serpents bee forced out of ye ground, by euery sowre sauour, and stinking smoake, flying abroade wt the winde.
               The learned Democritus affirmeth, that the serpentes assuredlye do dye, if the Gardener straw or throw Oken leaues on thē, or if any spitteth fasting into their mouth gaping or wide open.
               The well practised Apuleius writeth, that these stricken but once

with a tough reede or willowe rodde, are mightily astonied, but giuing them many strokes, do recouer & wax strong again. Tarentinus (a skilful writer of ye Greke Husbandrie) denyeth, yt any can be harmed of a serpent, if the person afore be annoynted with the iuyce of the Radish, or that hee hath eaten of the Radish, which matter (Athenaeus and Galen, with many other worthy Authours) ascribe to the Orenge or Lemon, and they confirme the same, with a pleasant Historie.
               The former Florentinus vttereth, an other singular practise against serpents of the Garden, to be wrought after thys maner: Lay (saith he) the fatte of the Harte in the Garden Earth, or else burie the Centorie roote, or the Geate stone, or else the Eagle, or Kytes dung, and the serpentes wil refuse the grounde (or at least) not come neare the place, and euery venemous worme wilbe driuen away, if the Gardener by taking (Nigella, Pelitorie, Galbanum, of the Hartes horne, Hysope, Brimstone, Peucedanum, and the Goates houfes, shall diligently bring these to ponder, and infuing the whole for a time in the strongest vineger, shall after make little balles of the myxture, with which through dried cause a sauoure and a smoke. For through the sauour of these matters sparsed in the Ayre, all creeping vermine wil eyther hastely (for the great feare) forsake the ground, or dye there incontinent. The same Authoure Florentinus, reporteth, that the serpents may like be gathered on an heape, into an olde deepe poudering Tubbe, as fish into a wele or bownette, if the same bee deepe set about that place of the Garden or field, where these most lurke and haunte: for after the speedie resorting of these to the brincke of it, they fall willingly in, not able after to recouer themselues out, Plinie writing of the withye named Siler, reporteth this, that the serpents refuse, both the tree and fruite, for whiche cause, the husband men made them staues of the woode to carrie about with them. But this by a most certaine experience or trial, proued and confirmed, that by making a smoke with old shoes burned, the serpents incontinent speed away, nor these only flye out of the Garden ground, fielde, or house, but suche as are enterd into men, by dead sleape in the sommer, in sleeping open mouthed, or with open mouth, in the fielde, do like come forth with the sayd smoke. Which matter (Marcus Gatinaria a famouse Phisitiō) confirmeth, who reporteth that the like hapned to a certayne man in his time, to whom after infinite medicynes and most

effectuous remedies were ministered, and none of them preuailed, at the last this imployed, fel out most luckylie and wonderful of all the others, in burning the leather of olde shoes, and receiuing bothe smoke and sauor by a Tunnel into ye body. For assoone as this hidious beast (which was a mighty Adder) felt the sauour of this smoke, he was seene (to the standers about) to come forth by the fundament, to ye mighty astonishment & wonder of al the beholders. And this worthy secrete, easie to bee prepared, I thought here good to place, that the same, a like case happening, might be profitable, to euerie person. But in this place is not to be omitted, yt serpents greatly hate the fyre, not for the same cause, that this dulleth their sight, but bycause the natrue of fire is to resist poison. These also hate the strong sauoure far flying, which the Garlik & redde Onyons procure. They loue the Sauine tree, the Juie, and Fennel, as Todes do the Sauge, and Snakes the Herbe Rocket. But they are mightily displeased, and sorest hate the Ashe tree, insomuche that the serpents, neither to the morning nor longest euening shadows of it, wil draw neere, but rather shun the same, & flye far off. As a like matter Plynie reporteth, was on a time proued, by inclosing a serpent, within the large cyrcle made of greene Ashetree leaues, in the middle of which a quicke fire made, to the terroure of the serpent, for that ende to proue, whether she had rather runne ouer the Cyrcle, than drawe neare to the fire, which neuerthelesse (the fire kindling more dna more) at the laste, rather crepte to the fire, where hee peryshed, tnha by any meanes woulde drawe neare to the Cyrcle of the Ashetree leaues. Yet here learne, the maruelous benignitie of nature, which permitteth not the serpents to come forth of the Earth, before the Ashe tree buddeth forth, nor to hide them agayne, before the leaues fal off. The singular Poete Virgil sayth, that the smoke made of Rosen or Galbanum, doeth hastilye chaste and driue the serpents away.
               These hytherto vttered, for the driuing awaye and killing of serpentes. But here was almost forgotten, that ye leaues of Ferne, do chase away the serpent: for which cause, many skilful thinke it profitable, eyther to sowe, or strawe the Ferne, in suche places where the serpentes haunte. The Neapolitane Rutilius addeth, that if the leaues of the same bee burned, they (wyth the sauoure onely) wyll flee or creepe hastylye awaye, yea and force them to chaunge theyr lodgings,

farre from the Garden grounde or fielde.
               Here a doubt may be made, whether the same be to purpose here to recite, that the worthy Albertus reporteth of the rounde Aristolochia wyth the field Frog, and a certaine proportion of writing Incke diligently laboured, and mixed with these, to make the Serpentes immediately to quayle as deade, if any of the myxture bee written wythall, and throwen before them.
               But I thinke it highe time to come vnto the remedies, whiche are both readie and easy to be prepared.
               If that any shal be bitten of a serpent, vnlesse hee haue a Feuer, and dryncketh a certaine quantitie of the iuyce of the Ashe leaues, with pleasaunt white wine, and applyeth also of the freshe leaues on the place bitten, shall in short time see a worthy secret, greatly to be maruelled at, and by happy successe, proued of many.
               Here briefly to conclude, if the Gardener bestoweth the fresh elder floures where the Serpents dayly haunte, they will hastily departe the place, yea these by reporte (artely bestowed in the Garden ground) do in short time destroy the Mothes, the Cākerwormes, and Palmers breading in trees.
               The other helpes and remedies necessarie to be vttered in this Chapiter, shall in apte places be declared in the seconde part, where we purpose to intreate particularly of most Hearbes growing in the Garden.
            
            
               The laudable deuises and cunning helpes against the Scorpions, Todes, Gardenmyse, Weasels, and al other greater beasts wasting and corrupting, aswel the kitchin Hearbes, as fruites. Chap. 30.
               
                  PLinie reporteth, that if slippes of the greene Heliotropium, bee sette rounde about the place where the Scorpions frequente, that they wil not after creepe thence. But if the owner either lay on or strew vpon the Scorpions, the whole Herbe, they incontinent (as he affirmeth) die.
               That skilfull writer Diophanes (in his Greeke commentaries of Husbandrie) vttereth, and the like many other, that the freshe Radish, eyther layed or strewed on the Scorpions, killeth them incontinent.
               
                  To these, if any annoynteth the hands circumspectly with the iuyce of the Radish, he may after handle Scorpions or any other venemouse thing, without daunger.
               This Authour further addeth, that a smoke made with Saudaracha and better, or the fatte of a Goate, wil driue away both them, and other venemouse things, and by burning one Scorpion, al the others flye forth of the ground.
               If any boyleth the Scorpion that stung hym, or any other in Oyle, and annoynteth the sore place wyth the same, it shal greatly auayle.
               The lyke commeth to passe, if he may kyll and bruse the same on the stinging, but perillous wil the same stinging be, if he refrain not the eating of Basill all that day of the stinging. Florentius reporteth, that the iuyce of the figge tree leaues, dropped on the stinging, mightily auayleth.
               The learned Plinie affirmeth, that the Ashes of the Scorpion drunke in wyne (if the fitte of the Feuer bee not vppon the person) to bee a singular remedie, as the pouder of wormes burned, to persons hauing wormes, or to beastes the like ministred, and anye bytten of a mad dogge, if the heares of the same be burned and druncke, do greatly auayle.
               The Todes, (as the Greeke and Latine professours of husbandrie write,) may be driuen furth of the Garden ground, with those remedies, that the serpents: for which cause, the remedies and healpes against them to repeate I thinke here superfluous.
               The wise (as the learned Apuleius writeth) wil in no maner harme or wast those seed
                     •
                  s committed to the Earth, which before the sowing are steeped a tyme in the Gaule of an Oxe.
               They will bee kylled in the grounde, if the Gardener shal stoppe their commings forth, with the fresh leaues of Rhododaphnes.
               
               There be (of the Greeke writers of husbandrie) which wil that like portions of the wylde Cucūber, or Henbane, or of the bitter Almondes and blacke Noseworte, bee orderly brused, and tempered with Meale, the same after wrought into Balles with Oyle, to be layed at the holes of the fielde, and house Myse. Plinie wryteth, that the seedes (before the bestowing in the Earth,) infused eyther in the Gaule of a Weasell, or the ashes of him committed to the Earth with the seedes, doth like

them from being harmed of Myse, yet the plants springing out of these are greatly misliked▪ for that they then giue the sauour of such a rancke beast, so that the seedes are farre better commended, to be ste
                     •
                  ped afore in the gaule of an Oxe.
               The skil
                     •
                  ull Africanus vttereth, that the Gardener may eyther kyll or driue away Weasels if he mixe salte 
                     •
                  rmoniack with wheate paste, and lay of the same in such place, where these often haunte. Others there be, which wil the carefull Garden
                     •
                  r to get one alyue, and cutting of both tayle and testicles, to let him so passe again, for by that meanes (others perceiuing the like sight) will depart the place, the easie experience of which matter, wil after bring a credite to thee in the same. For the dryuing away of the greater beastes, conceyue these remedies folowing, that if the Gardener shall water the seedes bestowed, with the olde vrine in which the ordure of a dog shall be infused for a tyme, they shal after 
                     •
                  e defended in ye growyng vp, frō the spoyle of greater beasts.
               The selfe same doth the worthy Democritus affyrme to come to passe (as I afore vttered) if that the owner take to the number of ten Riuer or Sea Creauises, and in putting them into an earthen potte full of water he set the same in the sunne for ten dayes, to bee wel heated and vapored through the hot beames, which thus handled let hym sprinckle on the beddes and plantes, that he would haue defended from the ayre, & great beastes: yet may he not water the yonger plants, but euery third day, vntil these be growen vp stronger. The skilful Africanus, and other worthy wryters of Husbandrie, report, that if eyther the Pyonie or Herbe Personata be buried, or otherwise sowen about banckes or bordures, in the Garden or field, are after (as by a secrete protection) preserued, that neyther t
                     •
                  e great nor smaller beastes, will after spoyle the plants there growing. But if the Husbandman woulde haue hys trees preserued, from being sore eaten and wasted of the greater beasts, then let him exercise (after the minde of Plinie) this easie practise, in 
                     •
                  asting or sprinckling on the leaues, the water in whiche Oxe dung hath bin disolued, so that he be sure those tymes, that rayne will fall within a day after, to the cleane purging againe of the braunches and leaues of that sauoure, a matter in verie deede wittily deuised for the purpose.
            
            
               
               The skilful practises and remedies, against Hayle, lightnings and tempestes, beating downe, and spoyling the Kitchin Hearbes, trees, and fruites. Chap. 51.
               FOr the Hayle, which for the more parte destroyeth both the labours of the Oxen and men, conceiue these fewe remedies folowing. That if the Husbandman, woulde auoyde the same daunger at hand or ready to fal, then let him draw about the grounde (whether it be fielde, Orchard or Garden) the skinne of a Seale, or Crocodil, or Hyena, and hang it after at the entrie or comming in of the place, as the worthy Philostratus, in his Greke cōmentaries of husbādry, hath noted. Others there be, which seeing the Hayle at hād, by holding vp a mighty Glasse, do so take ye Image of the darck cloud, directly ouer the place, to ye end, the abiect by the same remedy (as Rutilius reporteth) may offend, whereby as doubled, it may giue place to the other, and on suche wyse be speedily auerted and moued away.
               There were some (as Philostratus writeth) whiche with the righte hande drawing the Marrish Tortoise on hir backe, laboured so aboute the Garden grounde or fielde, and returned to the place where they began, they so layed hir vpright in the furrow made wt hir backe, and shored cloddes of eyther side, that shee might not fal, neither to one nor other side, but abide steadie vpright, to the ende she might so beholde the big & thick cloudes, directly ouer the place. And the same, at such times they exercysed in the syxt houre of the day, or night. Certayn others (seming to be of greater skil) when the Hayle approched, did spreade ou
                     •
                  t euerie space of the Garden or field, white Uine, or fastned in some place right against the Tempest immenent, a liue Owle, with the wings spredde abrode, whiche two remedies also muche auayle againste the lightnings and hayle, as sayth the singular writer of Husbandrie (Junius Columella) in his little treatise of the Garden.
               To vtter here the populare helpe againste Thunder, lightnings, and the daungerous hayle, when the tempest approcheth through the cloude arysing, as by the loude noyse of Gunnes shotte here and there, with the loude sounde of Belles, & such like uoy
                     •
                  es which may happen:
               
                  I thinke the same not necessarie, nor properly auailable to the benefite of the Garden.
               The famous learned man Archibius whiche wrote vnto Antiochus king of Syria, affirmeth, that tempestes shal not be harmefull to plātes nor fruites, if the speckled Tode inclosed in a new Earthen pot, be buried in the middle of the Garden or field. Others there are, which hang the feathers of the Eagle, or Seales skinne, in the middle of the Garden or at the foure corners of the same.
               For these three, as by a certaine secret propertie (and for truth) by a maruellous repugnancie to resist the lightnings, and that of these (the aboue sayde) in no maner to be harmed or blasted, is to memorie of the posteritie committed, and by the experiences or tryals of many skilful men confirmed. Wherfore Tiberius Caesar (as reporteth Suetonius) was wonte to weare a Garlande of Bayes, and to couer his proper tente all ouer with Seale skinnes, at such times as thunder and lightning happened, supposing himselfe to be defended from these, which he maruellously feared. Plinie reporteth that Bulbus (not for ye smalnes only of hys bodie) escapeth the force of lightning, but through a secrete and naturall repugnaunce doth this auaile against the stroke of lightning.
            
            
               The laudable deuises and helpes against Frost, blasting of trces, Mystes, and ruste, whyche be enemies aswel to Garden Hearbes as fruites. Chap. 32.
               TO most men it is manyfest, that there are two kindes of celestiall iniuries, the one, that men name tempestes, in which the hayle, storme, and such like as are ment.
               These (when any happen) are named a mightier violence and working of heauen moued forwarde, as Plinie reporteth, by the fearefull starres, whiche be Virgiliae, Hyades, Canicula, Arcturus, Fidicula, Haedi, Orion, Aquila, and sundry others, carefully obserued of the writers of Husbandrie and Physicke, and of them most diligently noted.
               The other kinde is wont to happen, the ayre being caulme and quiet, and in fayre nights, no feelyng to bee decerned, but when the same is come to passe and wrought, which bewayled calamity is one while

wont to be named rustie, an other whiles burning, and an other whiles blasting, that to all crescente things, is a strerilit
                     •
                  e, and at one worde a destruction, so that al is caused by Heauen, and wont especially to happen in the Spring time. The blasting and burning of the blossomes of Aple trees, the floures of Uines and Corne, are caused through the iniurie of the Frostes hapning in the nighte, and not as many reporte, to be wrought by the Sunnes sharp heate, burning hastily vp the deawe, or the moisture entring in, and corrupting the heads of Corne. The same also wasting the tender buddes, plantes, and branches, is commonly named burning, for that it burneth and consumeth in places so blacke as any Cole. The blasting besides of the tender blossoms of Trees and Uines, is named sideratiō, for that this especially is caused through the blast and stricking of some Constellatiō. To these we adde the rust, as a mighty enimie to fruites. The worthy Plinie reporteth, that the rust and burning, bee caused only of colde, whiche happeneth in the nighte time, and before the Sunne rising, so that the Sunne is not worker of these. And the time when the like succeedeth, is knowen to be after the minde of sundry skilful Writers of Husbandrie, at the change or full Moone, some Starres then of the fist bignesse ayding, in the rising, or setting. The suspected times and days of the rust for iudgyng of the good or euill successe of fruites, is knowen in Aprill, accordyng to the falling out of George and Saint Markes daye, and the ninth day of May, for the caulmenesse and cleerenesse of the aire. This celestiall sterilitie, dothe neither happen, nor cannot euerye yeare, for the proper courses of the Starres, both in the descending and ascending in Heauen, with the radiations or aspectes one to another. In the which working, who can not but wonder, and for the same honour and reuerence, the maruellous benignitie and goodnesse of Almightie God towardes mankinde, yet of the constellations afore mentioned, and of the others which are infinite in number, the diligent antiquitie only feared three of these greately, and obserued them for that cause, as the diligent Plinie noted, and to memorie committed. First, the constellation Virgiliae for the fruites, the constellation Aquila for the Corne, and the constellation Canicula for the gathering of fruites, so that these for ye same cause were named the Judiciall Starres, to foreknowe the seasons by. In whose dayes of the firste appearance, if the aire cleere and caulme sente

downe a kindly and feeding iuice to the Earth, then was it a sure note to thē, that such things sowen, would grow and encrease prosperously. Contrariwise, if the Moone at those times sprinckled a dewie colde on the plantes and crescent things, then as a bitternesse mixed contrarie to the sweete and nourishing iuice, the same so slewe or killed the tender things, shot forth appearing aboue the earth. But to come to the matter: there is neither frost, hayle, storme, nor tempest, so harmefull to certaine fieldes or Garden groundes, through whiche they at anye tyme cause the sterilitie and penurie of victuals, as the rust and burning heate doe, for these falling and working in open Countreys, procure for the more part through their harmes a publique calamitie & present dearthe, to the auoyding of which, shall heere be vttered those skilfull remedies, inuented of the auntient Writers of Husbandrie. If the carefull Gardener would withstand the force of Frost and rust approching, then let him burne store of Chaffe, if such plentie be there, or neere hande, but for lacke of the same, may he vse the drie weedes plucked vp of the Garden or field, and the bigge Thistles, or other wast fruites, in many places of the same, especially towarde that way whiche the winde then bloweth, for on such wise handled, Diophanes in his precepts of Husbandrie writeth, that the euill nighe or at hande is auerted. The selfe same practise may be vsed against thicke and darke mistes. Beritius in his Greke preceptes of Husbandrie giueth warning, that the Husbandman or Gardener diligently marke, whether the same bee gathered in the ayre, whiche readie to fall, let hym then burne incontinente the left horne of an Oxe, with eyther Cowe or Oxe dung, making with these a mightie smoke round about the Garden ground or fielde, but the smoke especially directed by the winde, in fleeing against it. The worthy Apuleius wrote, that the smoke of three riuer Creauisses, burned with Oxe or Gotes dung, or with Chaffe, to bee a most sure healpe and remedie against the like, that if the same be already fallen, I meane the rust, the Gardener may recouer the harme after this manner, as the skilfull Beritius reporteth, in taking the rootes or leaues of the wilde Cucumber or Colocynthis, which after the brusing and infusing in water for a night, sprinckle and wet the places well taken with rust before the Sunne rising. The like may the Gardener worke and do, with the Figge or Oke tree ashes, sprinckled in the places endamaged with rust.
               
                  All Seedes of the Garden or field are defended, as reporteth Anatolius, from al iniuries and Monsters, if the Husbandman or Gardener before the committing of Seedes to the Earth, dothe infuse them for a time in the iuice of the rootes of the wilde Cucumber.
               If the Gardener or Husbandman as Apuleius witnesseth, shal sticke and plante rounde aboute the Garden ground or fielde, many slippes, stockes, and branches of the Bay tree, these will after auayle againste the rust, for into them all the harme of the rust passeth and entreth, as the like many times hath bin obserued of the skilfull, whych very often is wont to happen in the dewie Countrey, valleys, and in places where bigge winde of a suddayne doth many times blowe. Thus muche for the rust, being enimie to fruites. Against the burning heate, whych peculiarly is wont to happe to Uines, the learned Plinie willeth the Husbandman to burne three liue Creuisses, or to hang them aliue on the Tree or Uine.
               The Greekes (as certayne Latine Writers haue noted) didde sowe Beanes as well within, as without the Garden ground or fielde, to auoyde by that meanes the Frost falling, or at least, to auayle agaynste the Frost.
               These instructions for the workemanly handling and ordering of a Garden plotte, shall at this presente suffise, and like the remedies, againste the harmes and iniuries that commonly annoy, whereby all Seedes and plantes bestowed in the same, may with gladsome cheere to the Gardener prosper and encrease, whiche the gentle Reader shall conceyue to be borrowed out of the workes both of the olde and newe Writers of Husbandrie, as well Greekes, as Latines, that by greate studie, and painefull laboure searched and obserued the most of these, or else not attempted of my part, to be published and made common to all men. Besides these, you shall well conceyue, that the better parte were confirmed in oure time, by the experiences of sundry skilfull men in the matters of Husbandrie, and by earnest sute purchased, whiche to be briefe being thankefully accepted, the Authoure hathe hys due rewarde, and so an ende of this fyrst parte of the Gardeners Lab
                     ••
                  inth.
               Vale.
               
                  
                  
                     A proper knotte to be cast in the quarter of a Garden, or otherwise, as there is sufficient roomth.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            The second part of the Gardeners Labyrinth, vttering suche skilfull experiences and vvorthy secretes, about the particular sowing and remouyng of the most Kitchin Hearbes, with the wittie ordering of other dayntie Hearbes, delectable floures, pleasant fruites, and fyne rootes, as the like hath not heeretofore bin vttered of any. Besides the Phisicke benefites of each Herbe annexed, with the commoditie of waters distilled out of them, ryghte necessarye to be knowen.
            
            
            
               
               WHere in my firste parte I haue fully satisfyed (as I trust) the exspectation of the Husbandly Gardener and owner in all such matters, which may appeare needefull or requisite to be learned and knowen, for the better ayde, in poss
                  •
               ss
                  •
               ng of a commodious and delectable Garden: in like manner I purpose to ayd the carefull Husbandman or Gardener, after the possibilitie of my skill in this seconde parte with suche skilfull healpes and secretes, as are required about the artely sowing, and particular bestowing as well of the Kitchin, as other dayntie Hearbes▪ pleasaunte fruites, delectable floures, and fyne rootes, whiche at large I purpose to vtter in the same, and likewise the Phisicke benefites to eache Hearbe I adde, wyth other matters profitable, to the ende the owner or Gardener may with better good will be moued to bestowe an earnest care and diligence aboute the often remouing, as well of daintie floures as Hearbes, with the clipping, pressing downe, breaking away, and cutting off the endes of rootes, that these may growe the thicker and bigger both in Hearbe and roote. All whyche instructions and rare secretes, are parte borrowed out of the worthy workes and treasures of the Greeke and Latine professors of Husbandrie, and parte purchased by friendshippe and ea
                  •
               nest suite, of the skilfull obseruers and wittie searchers in oure tyme of laudable secretes in Garden matters, seruing as well for the vse and singular comforte of mannes life, as to a proper gayne and delight of the minde.
            The lyke of whyche alreadye vttered, maye the owner both see and knowe by that plante, whyche in Gardens euerye where, as well those in the Countrey, as in the Citie, is placed none so common, none more plentifull, nor oftener vsed among Kitchin Hearbes, than thys familiar Pot Hearbe, named the Colewort, whyche by a diligence of the Husbandly Gardener, may well serue in the coldest of Winter, in the steade of other Pot Hearbes, so that this Hearbe by good reason, knowen to be not only profitable for the Pot, but to the vses of Phisicke ryghte necessarie, hathe moued mee the rather to begynne first wyth the Coleworte, in vttering what care and diligence is required aboute the sowyng, often remouyng, clippyng and

dressing of the same, beeyng afore bestowed in Beddes workemanly prepared.
            
               What healpes and secretes to be learned in the sowing and often remouing of the Coleworte. Chapter. 1.
               THe worthy Marcus Cato in his husbandrie preferred the Colewort before all other Pot Hearbes, and the learned Plinie in like manner ascribed a principalitie to the same of all Garden Hearbes, for whiche cause, I purpose heere to intreate first of this Hearbe, that manye of the Latines also for the mightie stemme and armes like branches named the Colewort. Suche is the nature of this plant, that the same refuseth no condition of ayre, for whiche cause it may bee committed to the Earth in any time of the yeare. This plant desireth a fat Earthe, and wel turned in with dung, but the Cleyie, grauellie, or Sandie thys refuseth, except a floud of raine water shall now and then healpe.
               The Coleworte prospereth the better, beeing placed towarde the South, but this standing open to the North, not so well encreaseth, although both in tast and strength it ouercommeth in the same place, for through the colde aire and frostes, the Herbe is caused the tenderer and pleasanter.
               The Colewort ioyeth on a hill syde, or the ground stieping downe, it delighteth in dung, and encreaseth by the often weeding, as the worthy Rutilius hath noted: when sixe leaues shal be sprung vp, or 
                     •
                  ut fiue, the same then must bee remoued, but in such manner handle, that the roote afore the setting againe, bee annoynted with softe Cowe dung, whiche ought so to be ordered in a warme day, if it bee Winter, but if in the Summer time, then at suche time as the Sunne shall be goyng downe in the West.
               The most auntient of the Greekes deuided the Colewort into three kindes only, as the crisped, which they named Selinoidea, for the similitude of ye leaues of Parselie, the same of them Lean, for the brode leaues issuing or growing forthe of the stemme, for whyche cause, some named it Cauloden. And the same whych properly is named Crabe, growyng vppe with thinner leaues, both single, and very thicke. The Colewort becommeth the bigger, through the Earthe dayly turned

light vp about the bodie. And particularly to write, the common Colewortes, which they name the long or greene, ought to be sowen from the middle of August, or from the beginning of September, that these maye bee growen vppe into bigge leaues to serue in Wynter and in the lent time. The husbandly Gardener or owner may plant yong Colewortes in October, and set them againe in December, to possesse the leaues in the sharpe winter, and ye seeds in June and July, and to make them also grow as bigge touft, as in the other seasons of the yere and as tender or rather tenderer, although not so delectable: and haue good regarde, that the seeds be not to old, for these then bring forth plāts out of kinde, of whiche the reporte goeth, that seedes sowen become Rapes, or Nauews. Such seeds as you would to indure for sixe yeres, ought to be carefullie preserued. Marcus Varro willeth the Coleworte to be sowen in saltie places, and when three leaues bee come vp, to sifte Nyter or salte Earthe on them, so fyne as the froste falling, for on suche wise handled, these are caused the tenderer & delectabler the vertue notwithstanding preserued, which like practise is confirmed, in ye Greke Husbandrie of Praxamus. There be some which vse Ashes in steade of Nyter, or for the same cause, yt eyther may kil and destroy the Canker wormes, which gretly offend & waste ye Coleworts in some Gardens.
               The singular Columella reporteth that the Colewort doth come soner softe and tender in the seething, and doth kepe the green color without Nyter, if the roote lapped aboute with three small blades of the sea weede, be againe set in the Earth.
               The worthy Plinie willeth the Reyte or sea weede, to be put vnder the stalke, in setting againe, and vnto the same ende, the delicate and tender seething vsed, so that the Colewort before ye seething, be steeped a time in Oyle and salte, but in the seething, put in a little salte, for the Nitrous and salty substance consisting in it.
               The Coleworte may be caused both bigge and pleasaunte, if thrust into a whole, you set it vnto the leaues in Earthe, that no parte of the stemme bee lefte bare, for doubte of perishing: and as the same groweth vp in heigth, and the earth shrinking from it, so continually raise the Earth high vp to the bodie, and cut away the outwarde leaues, so that no more than the top of the leaues may appeare aboue the Earth. The Coleworte often weeded aboute, and workemanly dunged waxeth

the stronger, and causeth the Coleworte to be of a greater increase, and tender of lea
                     •
                  e. Al the yeare through, may the Coleworte be cutte, seing at the yeare (as aforesayde) the same may be sowen, yet growen to feede, it ought not to be cutte. The tender tops of ye yong Colewort, is greatly cōmended for Sallets, so yt somewhat hot, both oyle & Salt be bestowed vpō. When raine after a drought in sommer time falleth, ye owner may renew those Coleworts decaying, by plucking away from thē the decayed leaues, which eyther shall b
                     •
                  e drye or eaten in manye places through. The Cabedge Cole or white Cabedge, may be sowen thick in beds, but after certaine leaues come vp, remoued into wel dressed beds, halfe a yarde asunder, growen especially to a bigge stemme or stocke, & these wel ioy vnder a colde ayre in that they are caused the tē
                  derer and delectabler through sharpe fros
                     •
                  es, and the heads couered with strawe, are caused both rounder and whiter.
               The wrinckled, crysped, and Romayne Cabedges, which of nature are more tender and delicate, ought to be sowē in the month of March, and remoued at certaine tymes of the yeare, being alwayes watered, when nede requireth.
               When the Gardener or owner at any tyme seeth that the leaues of the Coleworte either wythereth or waxeth yealowe, the same then is a note of the default of water, which like happening, causeth the leaues to be yealowe and ful of holes or lythie and feeble, or else drye, through which of necessity they must feeble and die.
               If the Husbandman or owner would haue Colewortes tender and pleasant (as afore vttered) let him breake off in the s
                     •
                  tting againe the outwarde leaues, for the inwarde leaues in the growing, will after become better of taste, and pleasanter in sauoure, than the outwarde leaues were.
               The redde Colewortes naturally growe throughe the aboundāce of hotte dung, or through the watering or well moystenyng of them wyth ye Lyes of wine, or else by the planting of thē in hot places, where the sunne dayly shyneth a long time togither.
               Neuer take the toppes of the Romayne, crysped, nor the other, for your turne and vse, but alwayes the thicke leaues downewarde, from the heade or toppes.
               All the sortes or kindes of Coleworts, may be planted at al seasons,

so that the tymes and Earth, be neyther to colde nor to hot. When you mynde to set them againe in holes made with a Dybbel, cut away the endes of the rootes least in the setting into the earth, they folde or bende to the ground, which harme them greatly, & only those of a big growth are to be set againe, which although they slowly take roote, yet are they caused the stronger. And ye rootes of these nei
                     •
                  her des
                     ••
                  e any softe dung, nor Riuer mud to be annoynted or layed about them, nor to be set in a soft earth, in that they ioy & prosper in a ground meanly dry, although the outward leaues wyther, vntil the time a sweete rayne falling, recouer their strength. Some water the yonger Colewortes with salt water, to cause them grow tender, &c. as afore vttered.
               
                  Plinie (that incomparable searcher of the matter of nature) reporteth, that pottes or other vessels, in whiche by water daylye seethyng, 
                     •
                   crust or parget, so fast cleaueth or is baked to the sides within, that the same with no scouring can be gotten off, yet by seething the Colewort in this potte the cruste immediatly and with ease falleth off.
               
                  Athenaeus wryteth, that the Coleworte ought not in any case to bee planted or sowen neare to the vyne, nor the vine in like maner nigh to it, for such is the great enmitie betwene these two plants (as Theophrastus witnesseth) that being both in one plotte togither, these so hinder one another, that the vine in braunches growing further, rather turneth or bendeth backe agayne, from the Coleworte, than stretching toward it, & it yeldeth lesse fruite there through. And the same to be true (Plinie affirmeth) the wine in the Butte or Hogg
                     •
                  sheade to bee corrupted, both in sauoure and taste, throughe the Coleworte putte into it, but the wyne agayne to be restored, through the leaues of the Beete steped in it. By which argumēt or profe. Androcides singular in knowledge (as the like Plinie writeth) reported, that the Coleworte grealye auayleth againste drunkennesse. Of whiche, it is nowe a common exercise among the Egiptians, that greatly loue wyne, to boile ye Coleworte wt their meates, yt in eating of thē like prepared, they may so anoyde ye annoyance of wine after drunke. Paxamus (a Greke writer of Husbandry) reporteth, yt if any poureth a little quantitie of wine by drops, into ye licour of ye Coleworte boyling, ye same after seetheth no more, but quailed in strēgth is corrupted & changed in licor. By a like man may contrarie gather, yt the person which would drinke plenty of

wyne, withoute being ouercome with the same, ought to eate afore a quantity of the rawe Coleworte with meate. But for this matter, heare the sentence of the singular man (M. Cato) who willeth the person purposed to drincke much wine at a feaste, and to dine or suppe freely, to eate afore supper, as great a quantitie of the rawe Coleworte as he wil, with good vineger, and being also sette downe to supper, to eate fiue leaues raw, these then wil cause him to be, as one that had neyther eaten nor drunke, whereby he may drinke as much as he wil, throughe the maruellous repugnancie of this Herbe with wine, as afore vttered, and like noted by Agrius, in the worthy worke of M. Varro.
               
               The Coleworte in like maner, ought not to be planted nighe to the Organye, Ru
                     •
                  , nor Sowes breade, for the drying qualitie consisting in thē, so that these either sowen or planted nighe to the Coleworte, and other very moyste Herbes, doe greatly hinder, and cause them to wyther. A like matter worketh the Lauander, set in beds neare to moyste Hearbes, through the heale consisting in it, as the Radish doth, whyche through ye proper tartnesse or sharpnesse being in it, burneth any moyst and tender plant growing neare to the same.
               Thys also is worthye memorie, whiche Athenaeus reporteth, that in Athens (in time past) the Coleworte was wonte to be prepared with meate for women with childe, in the steede of a certayn defensitiue against annoyances.
               There is also made of the Ashes of the Coleworte, infused in water, a salte, in that the same possesseth a Nytrous substance (as afore vttered) through whose benefite, if this be meanly boyled, and takē in broth (as we shall here after write) doth loose the bellie.
               
                  The Physicke helpes and worthy secretes of the Coleworte.
                  THe Coleworte in the vse of Physike, hath so many properties, that peculiar Pamphiletes the auntient, as Pythagoras, M. Cato, Chrisippus, Dieuches, and sundrye others, wrote of the vertues of the same. But of the monuments of these men (none are extant) sauing the same, whiche M. Cato, and Plinie, haue lefte to memorie written. Therefore a fewe vertues of this Herbe (and of the worthiest) shall after be vttered.
                  
                     First M. Cato writeth, that this Herbe cooleth and moystneth in the seconde degree, and for the hardnesse of makyng water, wh
                        •
                     ch co
                        ••
                     th for the by droppes or very straightly, hee willeth to prepare the Herbe after this manner, in taking the Coleworte leaues cleane picked, and after the bestowing of them in scalding water, to lette them seeth a whyle, which as yet halfe rawe, poure the lycoure almoste from them to these, then adde a reasonable quantitie, both of Oyle and Salte, but of cummyne a little, which done, let the whole seeth a whyle, then taking it from ye fire, and cooled, to sup a mease or draught of the broth▪ & the Colewort leaues to eate, as soone as they be thus sodden tenderer, which in like maner dayly vse, vnto the tyme the patient be 
                        •
                     ased.
                  For all manner of vlcers, and swellings, vse and applye the Coleworte workmanly brused, especially the smal stalkes and tender leaues of the same, that the Grekes name Crambe, and with vs, the common Coleworte, which like ordered, purgeth the Canker sores, and in shorte tyme healeth them, ye like of which, no other medycine properly can do. But before the patiente laye them on, he must diligentlye with muche warme water, souple and washe the sores, after applie or lay on twise a day the sayd Crambe or common Coleworte brused: with which remedie also, both loose ioyntes and bruses, yea Canker sores and vlcers in the Pappes of women, may meruailously be cured.
                  If the vlcer be so tender, that it can not suffer the sharpe working of the Coleworte, then mixing the Barlie meale with it, applie on suche wise and the reporte goeth, that there is one simple, which like preuaileth against the ioynt sicknesse or Ach of ioyntes, as the raw Colewort diligently applied, doth, if the same finely shredde, be eate with Rue and the Coriander, or else with a Corne or two of salte and Barlie meale. a
                        •
                     tly mixed with Oximel, the same be noynted morning and euening.
                  That if a person hardly heateth or but little bruse saith M. Cato) the Colewort with wine, which after the harde wringing forth, and warmed in a saucer, drop gentlye into the Eare, and in shorte time the patient shal feele ye benefit of the same. These hetherto M. Cato, whi
                        •
                     h accustomed to proue the crypsed Coleworte especially, nexte the thynne with great leaues and big stalke.
                  Leauing further to w
                        ••
                     te of the vertues, which Cato in h
                        •
                     s Husbandrie, and the singular Plinie vtter, I here minde to declare certayne

worthy practises of the Greekes as 
                        〈◊〉
                      the Coleworte, and firste they report, that the decoction of the Coleworte drunke with pleasaunt wyne, to procure the monethly cou
                        •
                     se in women, to these, the iuyce of the same mixed diligently with fine Hony, to cure the eyes, it 
                        〈◊〉
                      wittily be dropped into the 
                        •
                     orn
                        ••
                     s of them.
                  That if any hath eaten venomous Mushromes, he shal maruellously be holpen, by drincking the iuyce of the Coleworte.
                  Nor they omyt that the same doth yeeld a mightie nourishment to the body in suche manner, that children eating of the Coleworte for a time, do the speedilyer goe alone.
                  The iuyce (as they reporte) drunke with white wine, for 
                        •
                     l days togither, cureth both the disease of the Splene and Jaundise, as the worthy Paxamus (in his husbandly instructions) confirmeth. In which he reporteth, that three partes of the Coleworte, with two partes of the rounde Alume steeped in vineger, clenseth the foule four
                        ••
                      and leaprie, the same boyled and drunke amendeth the voyce and griefe of the Arteries. For whyche cause manye studentes, vse desirouslye thys Herbe.
                  To vse also the seede and leaues, with Sylphium and vineger brused, and applyed on the greeued place, doth perfitlie cure the byt, both of a dog mad and not madde.
                  And if it shal happen through a distillation or Reume frō the head, that the Vuula or roufe to bee fallen into the throte, the iuyce then of the rawe Coleworte applyed to the head, wyll in shorte tyme recouer, and staye the same in the proper place, a secrete in verye deede, worthy to be noted.
                  The rawe iuyce of the Coleworte drunke with wine, helpeth the bit of a serpent or adder, the iuyce with ye meale of Fenigreke and vyneger artely mixed, and either annointed or applyed in playster forme, doeth effectuously cure the Goute, Joynte sicknesses, yea filthy and olde vlcers, as the worthy Dioscorides writeth. The iuyce also snuffed or drawen vp into the nosethrils, purgeth verie well the head, and conueyed into the secrete place wyth the meale of darnell, draweth the reddes or termes downe.
                  The iuyce of the leaues annoynted alone, or wyth barly meale beaten and myxed, doth in shorte time qualifye inflamations, and asswage

great swellings, & with salte both breaketh Botches, and stayeth the sheading of heare.
                  The diseased of the Splene, this rawe eaten with vineger doth profite, after the boyling mixed with Hony the same greatly preuayleth agaynst eating vlcers, and Canker sores.
                  The greene stalkes with the rootes burned (or rather rosted vnder hotte imbers) which after the Artly mixing with old Barrowes grease, be in plaister forme applyed, to the dayly griefes of the flanckes or sides, doth in shorte time preuayle.
                  The iuyce of the Coleworte myxed wyth the oyle of Roses, and applyed to the foreheade, doth remoue the headache, procured by heate of the Sun. To this Coleworte boyled, if you mixe the oyle of Almonds, and Juyce of the sweete Pome Granate, the same vsed, doth in shorte time deliuer a drie coughe.
                  The Colewort (after the opinion of certaine skilful Phisitions) is founde to be harde in digestion, swelleth the Bellie, harmeth the flewmaticke (in that the same increaseth humors) and harmeth women, hauing the redde course on them, for so muche as the same increaseth such a fluxe.
                  If you would drie a moyst bellie, then after the Colewortes be halfe sodden (by pouring forth al the first in a manner) poure in other warme water speedily, which like boyle againe, vntill the Coleworte in thys seething, shal be tender and softe, and in eating, season it with a little pepper and salt: but this may not be handled on such wise, if you wold vse it for loosing of the bellie, for then after the shifting of it out of the first hot licour, into a panne standing fast by with oyle and a little salte prepared, you must boyle againe vnto the tyme the same be readie.
               
               
                  
                  The commended benefites of the distilled water of Colewortes.
                  
                  THe leaues of the greene and common Coleworte, are to bee distilled in a fayre and apte tyme, aboute the beginnyng of June.
                  This water ministred or receiued vnto the quantitie of three ounces at a time, morning and euening, stayeth womēs reddes. The distilled water of the Coleworte, profiteth the byrth of chyld, when the time of deliuerie is at hande, if a Napkin wete in it be applyed often to the nose, to smel vnto, for by that meanes may shee happily be delyuered. The like quantitie druncke, healpeth the dropping of the vryne: And druncke vnto the quantitie of three ounces, at a time, morning and euening, stayeth a loose Bellie.
               
               
                  The Phisicke helpes of the water of the redde Coleworte.
                  THe leaues of the redde Coleworte gathered, are to bee distilled in the ende of May.
                  This water drunke in the morning fasting, vnto the quantitie of sixe or seuen ounces at a time, softneth a harde belly, and three ounces at a time vsed (for a moneth togither) putteth awaye the gyddynesse of the heade: thys water profiteth againste the Apoplexie, and convulsion or Cramp in the members, either drunck or annoynted on the greeued places. This water helpeth the trembling and quiueryng of members, if those bee often rubbed and suppled with it, and the water suffered to drye these into partes by it selfe.
                  
                     The linnen clothes wet in it applyed on inflame 
                        〈◊〉
                     , putteth away the heate, and ceasseth or 
                        ••
                     ageth the sw
                        •
                     lling
                        •
                      and orderly drunke, healeth vlcers, both within and without the body, so that the vlcers without, be applyed with linnen clo
                        •••
                     s, both morning and euening.
               
            
            
               What worthy instructions to be concey
                     •
                  ed in the sowing and ordering of the Beete for the Po
                     •
                  te. Chapter. 2.
               THe Beete more often eaten at poore mens tables, ought to be bestowed in a most fatte Earthe, and sowen at any season, but rather the Seedes to be committed to the Earth abou
                     •
                   the middle of December, and vnto Marche, and like in August, to possesse Seedes, which may indure for three yeares. The Seedes ought rather to be thicke than thinne sowen in be
                     •
                  dde, and shot vp to some growth, as that four or fyue leaues be sprung aboue the Earth, then in the Summer time, the plantes are to be remoued, if the beddes afore were moystned or wet with floures, as the singular Columella writeth: but if the grounde bee drie in the Haruest time, then to remoue them where shoures lately fell and softned the Earth.
               The Beete loueth or ioyeth to be often digged about, and to be fedde with much dung, for which cause, the yong plantes to be sette againe, ought after the endes of the rootes cut off, and the toppes of the leaues clipped, to be striked or annoynted about with newe Cow Dung, and then bestowed in beddes a good distance asunder, which after the plants be more growen vp, to be diligētly weeded about, and the vnprofitable weedes throwen away, for by that meanes they growe the fayrer and bigger, being as I said bestowed in fatte Earthe and well dunged.
               The Beete may be caused to growe bigge and brode as 
                     
                        •
                     ostion in his Greeke instructions of Husbandr
                     •
                  e affirmeth: if before the Beete shall be growen vp into a stemme, and shot forth in stalkes, the owner lay vpon ye head a brode Tile, Posthard, or some other thing of waight, to presse the toppe gently downe, for by that practise or meanes in the waightie bearing downe, the Beete is caused to spreade into a breadth with the leaues.
               The Beete becommeth the whiter and farre greater, if the Husbandly Gardener annoynte or couer the roote with newe Oxe or Cowe

dung, and that hee cutte the roote and toppe of the yong Bete▪ as the Leeke handled before the setting, and after a bigger growth to p
                     •
                  asse it downe as afore vttered. To haue the Beete growe redde, water the plant with redde Wyne Lyes or set the same in a hote place, where the Sunne dayly shineth long. The Beete rosted in Imbers, taketh away the stincking smell and sauoure of Garlike eaten, if the same be eaten vpon or after the Garlike, as the Greeke Menander hath noted. Thys is maruellous to heare by the Seede of the Beete, that it yeeldeth not the whole perfection or perfite Seedes in the first yeare, but an increase in Seedes somewhat more the seconde yeare, and in the third yeare a full perfection, from the first sowing. And Plinie reporteth, that the Beete speedie
                     •
                   comm
                     •
                  th forwarde with the olde Seede, than with newe for whiche cause the matter demanded of a skilfull Gardener reported of experience, that the Seedes of the Beete to sowe, ought not to be gathered, before the Beete had borne a thirde yeare, after the first sowing of which Seedes sowen in due time of the Mone, the best Beetes come, and this not to be forgotten, that when the tast of Wine, through the Colewort (as afore vttered) is corrupted in the vessell, the same againe by the sauoure of the Beete, as through the leaues put into it, is recouered. These hitherto of the Beete.
               
                  The Phisicke benefytes of the Beete.
                  FIrst all the kindes of the Beete, haue a cold & moyst qualitie, and the white Beete as Diphilus the Husbandly Phisition reporteth, looseth the bellie, and the redde Beete, moueth or prouoketh vryne, Galen affirmeth this Beete to be endued with a nytrous qualitie, through which it both purgeth and clenseth filth, whiche vertue is more effectuous in the white, in so muche that it causeth the bellie laxatiue, and purgeth the body of euill humors, yet the fame passed to the stomacke, byteth and plucketh it. The iuice of the common Beete drunke, louseth the bellie, but the same harmeth the stomacke, in pinching or biting it, especially those persons whiche haue a tender and delicate stomacke, so that the Herbe is better commended sodden, than the rawe iuice vsed.
                  The iuice of the Beete mixed with the oyle of bitter Almonds, after the heating in a sawcer, supped or drawen vp into the nosethrills, doth greately healp the stopping of ye nose, & recouer smelling thorough

the purging or clensing of the head. The roote of the Beete boyled in water, and three or foure droppes of the licoure dropped into the eares, doth remoue the rage and paine of the. And the iuice of the Beete rubbed in the gummes, doth aswage the raging of them. The iuice of the rawe Beete, annointed on any bald place of the head procureth ye heare to growe, and killeth Lyse. The decoction of the leaues and rootes, doe also clense the head of Nules and Dandrie. The Beete after the tender boyling▪ applyed on Whel
                        •
                     es, and blisters of skalding or burning, doth in short time heale them. The iuice of the Beete, drunke with Cumin or Dyll Seedes, remoueth the gripings of the Bellie. The blacke or redde Beete boyled with the pulse Lentiles, and the same receyued, stayeth a loose Bellie, whiche (as I aboue said) the white Beete looseth. This white Beete also 
                        ••
                     dden and eaten with raw Garlike, doth driue away the Wormes of the Bellie. The Beete boyled, healpeth the obstructions or stoppings of the Liuer, more than the great Mallowes or hollie Oke doth, especially when the same is eaten with Mustard or Uinegre, and eaten in like manner as with Mustard or Uinegre, dothe maruellously aswage and healp the corrupted Splene. The iuice auaileth against the holy 
                        〈◊〉
                      S
                        •
                     ingles. This Herbe is rather eaten after this manner, for Phisicke causes, than for nourishment, in that there is but a small nourishment of this, as of all other Pot Hearbes, whiche to the full eaten of at a time, or often eaten, dothe not only grype and bite the stomacke, but encreaseth euill humors as wel in the healthfull, as sicke persons.
               
               
                  The speciall effectes of the distilled water of the white Beetes.
                  THe time of the destilling of this Herbe, is in the ende of June, and that both the leaues and stalkes togither. The newe water of the white Beete, drunke morning and euening, vnto the quantitie of foure ounces at a time, dothe maruellously preuayle againste the Sunne, in that the same consumeth it. This quantitie like drunke, preuayleth against the griefe of the Stone, in that it purgeth the Loynes and Kidneis. Th
                        ••
                      ceasseth, the 
                        ••
                     xing paine of ioy 
                        〈◊〉
                      aches, by applying wette clothes on the 
                        •
                     late
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      it.
               
            
            
               
               What fate drawe
                     •
                   and 
                     〈◊〉
                   to be learned, in the sowing and setting of the Blete. Chapter. 3.
               THere are two kindes of this Blete, as the white, and the redde, or blacke, both at this day very well knowen through their growing as common in the field as Garden. The stalkes and leaues of the redde waxe so redde in the growing, that they appeare as dyed with a scarlet coloure, but after a further growth, in time, these from that coloure are changed into a purple, and at length waxe blacke of ye eye, of which the same also is named o
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   the blacke Bleete. The roote besides of this Hearbe in the breaking, appeareth so redde as any bloud.
               The white Blete possesseth or rather 
                     •••
                  deth forthe branches and leaues like to the Beete, and the same without any sharpnes or biting, being vnsauerie, and eche is of the same cōdition, that it spedely springeth in the Garden, as Plinie reporteth.
               And the white or redde Blete may be sowen in any earth, but rather in a well dressed ground, in the moneth of March, as the skilfull Neapolitane Ruellius willeth, whiche strongly growen in the Earthe, or fully come vp, continueth and yearely reneweth of it selfe, without any proper sowing, so that in time this so taketh roote by the seedes yearely falling, that the Gardener after can hardely weede the same out of hys ground, if he would wherefore this once sowen in a fertile Earth, prospereth many yeares by the yearely yeride and falling of the Seedes, and requireth neyther raking nor weeding about it, as the worthy Palladius reporteth.
               
                  The Phisicke healpes and commodities of the Blete.
                  THe worthy Galen in his Booke 
                        
                           •
                        span writeth that the Blete is a Pot Hearbe much and often eaten of the s
                        ••
                     pler 
                        ••
                     te, and in qualitie colde and moyst.
                  This as Plinie writeth is thought to be vnprofitable to ye stomacke, and so much molesting the bellie, 
                        •
                     hat in some 
                        •
                     h
                        •
                     s moueth and causeth the Choller to increase, 
                        〈◊〉
                      the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of the 
                        〈…〉
                     . Y
                        ••
                      this moueth also vomitings, with gripings of the Bellie, 
                        〈…〉
                      and

stirred vp, which by the dayly or too much eating of it at a time proceedeth, yet the Blete of practise knowen, dothe lesse harme the stomacke and bellie, if the first water powred forth, and the softe Herbe put into a Panne, bee fryed with Oyle or Butter, and a little Salte added, or Uinegre, and so eaten. But this notwithstanding may not bee often eaten, nor to the ful at a time, for somuch as this (of experience knowē) procureth vomiting, and engendreth paine in the stomacke, griping in the bowels, and to be laxatiue, through the mouing of Choller. And in the eating also this is to bee remembred, that the Hearbe bee not eaten with Oyle alone, and a little Salte, but rather with Uinegre added for the more parte, in yt the same otherwise is knowen to be enimie to the stomacke. This Hearbe (as aboue vttered) hath a propertie in softning the Bellie, especially whē the force of it is encreased, by some other slipperie and clammie matter. These hitherto Galen. This notwithstanding drunke in Wine (as Plinie reporteth) preuayleth against the bitte of a Scorpion, and layed in playster forme, on the thicke skinne of the feete, and in like manner, for the beating payne of the Temples, and with Oyle on the Milte, doth greately profite. And the worthy Hipocrates writeth, that the same eaten in the manner (as afore taughte) doth restrayne or stay the Tearmes. These hitherto Plinie.
                  
               
            
            
               What diligence and skill is required in the sowing and setting of the Garden Arage. Chapter. 4.
               THe Garden Orage for the Potte, ought by the agreement of the skilfull, to bee sowen in the Moneth of March and Aprill, and in ye other Monethes following, vnto Haruest, the apt seasons and times heerein considered. But in some places are the Seedes bestowed in the Moneth of December, in a well dressed and dunged Earthe, and the plantes better prosper, being thinne sowen. These also may bee sowen by themselues in beddes, and togither with other Herbes, and they alwayes desire to be cut or broken off with an iron instrumente, that they ceasse not yeelding forth of yong. The Orache ioyeth in the often watering, if the season and ground be very drie. The Seedes of the Arage ought diligently to bee couered, incontinent after they are bestowed in the Earthe, and the rootes of the Hearbes to be often digged vnder, and

left hollow of Earthe, that the rootes may growe within the stronger.
               This Hearbe is supposed to grow
                     •
                   the greater, beeing not remoued at all, and for that cause the plantes thinne bestowed in beddes, do euermore ioy and encrease the better. The plant in like manner encreaseth and becommeth the sooner greate, through the often and diligent weeding exercised about the same. To be briefe, this plant after the mind of Rutilius requireth to be watered all the hote and drie seasons, vnto the time of Haruest, in that the same delighteth and encreaseth the faster, through the dayly moysture bestowed on it.
               
                  The Phisicke benefytes of the Orache.
                  THe Seedes of this Herbe may bee kepte to vse for foure yeares, and
these through their clensing qualitie, healpe greately the stopping of the Liuer, causing the sheading of the Gaule, or yellowe Jandise. Two drammes of the Seedes brused, ministred with two ounces of Hony, and a draught of warme water, and drunke fasting, dothe on such, wise by vomiting, caste vp Choller. The Herbe in qualitie is knowen to be colde in the firste degree, and moyst in the second, through whyche reason it softneth the bellie. The Herbe smallie nourisheth, in that the licour or iuice of it is waterie
and slipperie, through whiche it lightly looseth the bellie, and the leaues after the brusing layd in playster forme on hote impostumes and swellings, and like on the Shingles, doe both speedelie coole and heale them. The Seedes after the brusing, taken with a quantitie of Hony, and the same sundry times, healpeth such as fetch the winde hardly. The Seedes like vsed, doe expell the Wormes in the Bellie, and prouoke vomiting. Pythagoras greately misliked the Orach, in that the same (as he affirmed) caused by the often eating both a palenesse of face, and the kings euill. But the worthy Dioseorides far
                        •
                     e otherwise iudged, in that hee affirmed the Arache Seedes to healp the Jandise. The Arache also helpeth suche, as haue a hote Lyuer. If the Hearbe Mercurie with the Orach be diligently boyled, and the broath sundry times vsed, it doth both loose the Bellie, and deliuereth the paine of the Bladder. The person dayly vsing the decoction or broth of the Orach, with the Hearbe Mercurie and Beetes, for a time togither, doth speedely deliuer and ridde the Agew, The Orach eaten, is thought profitable

for the person spitting bloud. The Herbe brused and applyed to the bellie, not onely clenseth the defaultes or corrupt matter within the priuie place, but ceasseth in shorte time the paynefull griefe of the Matrice. The Orache brused and layd in playster forme on any member hurte eyther with Thorne or Nayle, doth with expedition drawe the same forth, and healeth it. The Herbe boiled with hony, and applyed on rough nayles of the fingers, dothe within short time loose them off. The Orache brused, and after the mixing with hony, applyed in playster forme, doth in short time remoue the aching paine of the hote Goute in the feete. The Hearbe so tender and soft boyled, as any other Potte Hearbe, and eaten of the patient, doth not only soften the bellie, hardned or costiue by heate, but remoueth diuers swellings.
               
            
            
               What singular skill and secretes to be knowen in the sowing, remouing, and setting againe of the worthy Hearbe named Sperage. Chapter. 5.
               THe field and garden Sperage, ioyeth in a fatte, moist, and wel dr
                     •
                  ssed Earth, and the Hearbe growen vp to heigth, hath by euery leafe growing forthe, a redde Bearie hanging downe, in whiche a Seede is, that the Hearbe in the sowing commeth of.
               The Seedes to be committed to the Earth as the worthy Didymus in his Greeke instructions of Husbandrie reporteth, ought to bee bestowed in the Spring time, into little holes of three fingers deepe, in whiche the owner or Gardener may putte two or three Seedes togyther, well halfe a foote distante one from the other, whyche thus bestowed, require after no more trauell nor care for the first yeare, sauing the digging about, and plucking vp of weedes growing among them.
               But for the sowing and increase of the Sperages, it shall be to great purpose and commoditie, to heare the wittie preceptes and instructions of Marcus Cato, Columella, Plinie, and Palladius like agreeing.
               The Seedes (say they) as muche as three fyngers can take vppe to one tyme, maye the owner or Gardener workemanly putte, and lyghtely couer, in Earthe bothe fatte and dunged, and in verye little furrowes, so straight made as a line, whyche on this wise handled, will by the fortith day after growe so inward in the Earthe, that the rootes shot forth, wil clasp and fold one in another, as if they ioyned

togither in one, and for the same named of the auntiente Gardeners Earth Spunges. If the places in whiche you purpose to committe the Seedes shall bee drie, then these layd in soft dung, lying alowe in the furrowes, shall on suche wise bee ordered and couered, as if they lay or were bestowed in little Hyues. But in a contrary manner shal the owner or Gardener worke and doe, in continuall moyst places, for the Seedes in like places shall bee bestowed on high ridges, workemanly raysed with dung, that the moysture maye lesser annoy the plantes in the growing, which only ought to be fed or watered with the moysture passing by, and not still to abide in that moysture, to be cloyed with it. The Seedes on such wise bestowed, will yeelde a Sperage in the firste yeare, whiche the owner or Gardener shall then breake, or cutte off beneath. But if the owner assay to pull at it neere the ground, the small rootes (as yet tender) and weake in the Earth, may happen to rise and followe with the whole Spunge, whiche therefore workemanly broken off, ought thus to be fedde and nourished in one proper place, growyng still for two yeres with dung, and diligent weeding. In the other yeres following, the Sperage shal not be broken off by the stalke, but plucked vp by yt roote, that the same may so open the eyes of his branching, for except the plant be handled on such wise, the stemmes broken off, will not encrease the eyes of the Spunges, but rather growe as blinde, so yt these will not after suffer the Sperage to yeeld or send forth the proper encrease. The same shal ye Gardener preserue, of whiche hee gathered the seede, and burne after the croppes & knobbed endes or iointes of the same Herbe. After this, about the Winter time, shal the owner lay or bestowe on the Spunges, both ashes & dung, whiche the learned M. Cato rather willeth to be Sheepes dung. There is another manner and way of sowing, by Spunges onely, which after two yeares, ought to be remoued into a Sunny & wel dūged place. The like furrowes ought to be made well a fote distante one from the other, and not aboue twelue fyngers deepe, in which the tender & yong Spunges are so to be set, that lightly couered with Earthe, they may easily spring and shoote vp. But in the Spring time, before they shall come vp or appere aboue the ground, the Gardener or owner with a forked Iron, cōmonly named a debbill shall so loose the earth, yt the end of it may appere out, & the roote of the Herbe loosed frō the ground, may by that meanes increase of a more bignesse.
               
                  The same M. Cato willeth the plante to be raked and diligently weeded about, but so handled in the digging aboute or weeding, that the rootes of the plante bee not loosed, or in the weeding by it bee otherwise febled in the treading downe.
               In the wynter time, the little groue of Sperages shall be couered ouer with thinne and light Matteresses of strawe, least it shoulde be bitten and greatly endamaged, with the frostes and colde ayre, whyche in the Spring time shal be opened and vncouered againe, and fedde wyth dung about the rootes, that the plants may the speedier come forwarde & increase, through the comfortable feeding of the dung and moysture, orderly done.
               The worthy Didimus (in his Greeke instructions of Husbandrye) reporteth, and after hym the learned Plinie that manye Sperages do spring vp throughe the hornes of wilde Rammes broken into grosse pouder, and these strewed along in little furrowes, and after the light couering wyth Earth, often watered, whiche although it seemed not credible to the worthy Dioscorides, and that he much mislyked the reason of the same, yet if ye Gardener or owner shall make a profe or trial, he wyll after confesse (I dare affyrme) thys experimente to bee moste true.
               There bee which farre maruellousser reporte, euen that the whole hornes of Rammes, not broken a sunder, nor cut into small pieces, but only boared through in many places, and then bestowed in the Earth, to bring forthe or yeelde in shorte time the Sperages, whiche if the owner woulde possesse of them for all the yeare to feede on, when hee gathereth the fruite, must then in the digging about (as the sayd Dydimus writeth) open those rootes, whiche scatter and spreade in the toppe of the Tyrfe, for the yong plant thus ordered, wyll speedilie sende forth newe tender stemmes, and yeelde Sperages, whiche lightly boyled in water and fat broth, and to the same both salte and oyle or sweete butter orderly mixed, and a little quantitie of vineger poured vpō, wil after yeelde a singular delight to the eaters therof.
               But in thys place I thinke it necessarie to be remembred, that the Sperages require a small boyling, for to much or long boyled, they become corrupt or wythout delight in the eating.
               Of whych the worthy Emperour Drufus, wylling to demonstrate

the speedye successe of a matter, was wonte to say, the same shoul
                     •
                   bee sooner done, than the Sperages boyled.
               As touching the making of the sauce or pickle, the tender stalkes sprinckled with salt, and wrought vp in rounde heapes, ought so to bee lette alone to sweate in the shadowe, after to bee diligentlye washed wt the owne licoure, vntill they bee sufficientlye abated and cleared of the moysture in them, at the leaste, clensed from the pickell, and in the laying on of a weight (after such maner) pressed forth. Then poure 
                     ••
                  to an apt vessel two partes of vineger, and one of the pickel, which workmā
                  ly thicken with dry Fennel seedes, in such maner as the tender stalkes and leaues, may wel be pressed downe & couered in the same; and that ye lycor retch vp vnto the toppe or brimme of the Earthen potte.
               
                  The Phisicke commodities and helpes of the Sperage.
                  THe fruite and seede are vsed in medicine, and indure for a yeare in perfite vertue, the Herbe by nature heateth and moystneth, and so the same refourmeth and helpeth the Palsy, the Kings euill, and Stragurie. The Garden Sperage prepared with meate and eaten, both not only helpe a harde mylte, but stopping of the Liuer. The roote of the Sperage boyled in wine, and ministred in apt time of the Moone, recouereth ye shedding of ye Gaule, & is the same by experience knowen. The meate of the Sperage, is reported to be most profitable for ye stomacke, whiche with Cummyne myxed, both tem
                        ••
                     eth the swelling of the bellie, and chollicke.
                  The meate of the Sperage orderly prepared, and eaten, doth not only procure vrine (easilye to passe) but dissolueth, and sendeth forth the small stones in the Bladder, through the iuyce of the Lemmon added to, whiche experience wil well confirme. There be some which minister the roote (artly boyled with sweete or white wine) for griefes of the womans priuie place. There be which affirme, that the person shal not bee stinged with Bees, if he annoynte the naked partes with Sperage and oyle brused togither. The decoction of the roote, not only profiteth the persons hardly making water, but aswageth all maner of griefe & paine of the gummes, teeth, and mouth, by holdyng the same for a time, and washing the mouth therewith.
                  
                     The worthy Plinie writeth, that the Sperages (workmanly boyled) do maruelously profite and helpe the griefes both of the breast and Chyne of the backe. To these, the Sperage to procure and moue forewarde the veneriall acte, and to loose gently the bellie.
                  
                     Dioscorides reporteth, that the Sperages eyther rosted or sodden, do mytigate the dropping paine of the wyne, the difficultnesse of the same, and the perilous flixe Disenteria. Galen affirmeth, the Sperage to cleare the kidneys and stopping of the Liuer, especially with the roote & seeds.
               
            
            
               What skil and obseruation to be folowed, in the sowing, and ordering of the Spynage. Chap. 6.
               THis plant aptest for ye Lent time (or for yt the same oftner or more cōmon vsed in that season) may in any ground be bestowed, for it cometh vp very wel in euery place. And the seedes are to be committed to the earth in the monethes of Septēber and October, to serue for the Lent insewing for yt it is the first pot Herbe, which is foūd in Gardens about the lent time. But in the monethes of December, Januarie, Februarie, and March, for al the sommer folowing. And this plant very wel indureth the extremitie of times and seasons, as the colde, frostes, & Snow. And although Spynage commeth wel vp in any ground, yet ye earth ought to be diligently labored before, & the same to be somwhat moiste. The plants after the cōming vp, which appeare by the seuenth day after the sowing, nede no weeding to be done about them, but only to clip off the tops of the tender leaues, wherby they may
                     •
                   grow vp the comlier & fairer to ye eye. If the Gardener would haue the bed of Spinage indure a long time, & to profite he ought to cut halfe the bed along at one time, and the other halfe, at an other time. This pot Herbe (after the tops cut and throwen away) ought to be sodden without water, in that the same (in the seething) yeldeth much moysture, for contented wt the proper licoure, it refuseth anye other broath added, so that thys otherwise sodden, looseth the kindly and natural iuyce of the same, and besides to hastily drowned or ouercome with the same. This being very tēder after the seething ought to be finely chopped wt a wodden knife, or otherwise stamped and turned often in the beating of it, which wrought vp into rounde heapes, and fryed in the sweetest oyle or butter, must so be prepared with a quantitie of Ueriuy
                     •
                  e and Pepper 
                     ••
                  used, that it may the more delight the tast.
               
                  
                  The Phisicke benefites and helpes of the Spynedge.
                  THys Herbe for the potte, named Spynedge, moysteneth and cooleth (after the minde of the skilfull) in the ende of the firste degree. The Spynedge both softneth the bellie, and moystneth the bodie, and remoueth the grie
                        •
                     es of the Breast and Lungs. This gathereth winde in the bodie vnlesse the excrementall humoure be sente forth by purge: but applyed in hotte causes this greatly profiteth.
                  And if wee may credite the Phisition Serapion, this more nourisheth than
                        •
                      ye Arage, looseth the bellie, and leaueth after it a better nourishmente, yea clenseth, mundifyeth, aswageth Choller, and profiteth both the breast and lunges. The Hearbe boyled and applyed, helpeth the sorenesse and griefe of the throte, proceeding of bloude, and the redde Choller. The dayly eating of this Herbe, doth maruellously profit such hauing a hoarse voyce, and that hardly fetch breath, and much molested with the coughe, if the Herbe after the proper seethyng and ordering (as aboue taught) bee eyther fryed with sweete Butter, or the oyle of sweete Almondes, and that to it Ueriuyce and Pepper brused, be wittilye added. For on such wise handled, the same (dayly eaten) doth expel euil humors, where in a contrarie maner, the decoction and Herbe simplie being dayly eaten, doth (by agreement of the skilfull) ingender in like condition Melancholie, as the dayly eating of Lettuce doth. The Herbe prepared (as afore taught) and eaten with the decoction of the same drunke, doth not helpe without doubt the grieuous paynes, and ache of the backe, but looseth a costiue bellie.
               
            
            
               What skil and diligence is required, in the sowing and ordering of the Garden Sorrel. Chap. 7.
               THe Sorrel of the Garden, although it wil wel ynoughe come vp in grounde not dressed, yet the seedes are euermore bestowed in laboured Earthe, not dunged at all, in the moneth of Aprill, and to bee muche and often watered, vntil they bee wel come vp, in that the same especially ioyeth being placed neare to water.
               And the Gardener mynding to possesse the seedes of the Sorrel,

ought, after certaine leaues come vp, to remoue the plants, in letting them growe, vnto the ful rypenes of the seedes, which after the through drying, to be kepte vnto the sowing time. The Sorrel come vp, neither well abydeth frostes, colde, nor ouermuche moysture, and to haue the beddes of Sorrel continue seemely to the eye, all the sommer through, let the owner or Gardener cutte the toppes of the Sorrell, three or foure times in the yeare.
               The like diligence may bee imployed, in the sowing and ordering of the Garden Pimpernel.
               
                  The Phisicke commodities and helpes of the Sorrel and Pympernel.
                  THe Hearbe Sorrel cooleth and dryeth in the thirde degree, and the Hearbe eaten, remoueth lothsomnesse, and procureth an apetite to meate. The Sorrel sauced with vineger, and eaten fasting in the morning, is a preseruatiue for the Plague. The leaues wrapped in paper, and rosted vnder hotte imbers, whyche after the brusing and mixing wyth a little oyle of Roses, applyed on swellings, doth bring them in shorte time to mattering.
                  The seedes of the Sorrell brused, and druncke either wyth water or wyne, aswageth the daungerous flyxe Dissenteria, and the payne of the bellie of a continuall flyxe, and the abortement of the stomacke. The rootes of the Sorrell boyled with vineger, or rawe imployed and annoynted, doe heale the Leprye and Ringwormes, and rough nayles, but it behoueth to rubbe ouer the places afore, with salte Nyter and vineger in the hotte Summer. A decoction of the rootes ceasseth the ych of the bodie, if with the same the bodie in a Bath be gently rubbed and suppled, the roote besides boyled in wine aswageth both the griefe or payne of the eares and teeth. Manye in remouing of the kings euyll, weare the roote about their neck. The iuyce of ye Sorrel, tempered with oyle Olyue, and rubbed on the heade, remoueth the grieuous payne of the heade proceeding of an vntemperate hotnesse. The rootes boyled with wine and drunk or eaten, remoue any sicknes comming of heate, as the Jaundise, proceeding of the liuer or Mylte, in the like manner druncke, and the rootes after the brusing applyed in plaister forme to

the priuie place, do stay the reddes of women long cōtinuing. The sedes boyled in wine, do staye all manner fluxes of the bellie, and remoue the swelling of the mylte. The leaues of Sorrel wel brused, and applied on the wreast, do aswage the burning of the Feuer.
                  The Pympernell of the Garden, heateth and dryeth in the seconde degree. The Herbe is especially applyed for poison, in that the same clē
                     seth al the outwarde fylth of the body. The roote boyled in wine, and drunke, remoueth the euil and venemous bloud from the heart, of which the plague is easily caused to proceede, and ceasseth the headache. If a man be wounded vnto the skul, the iuyce of this Herbe dropped into the wound, and applyed vpon, doth in short time recouer and heale yt same without griefe. This dropped into vlcers and other woundes, cureth them. As for proofe take a cocke, and 
                        •
                     trike him into the skull with a knife, but not pearcing it, after take the iuyce of thys Hearbe, and instyll two or three droppes into the wounde, and it wyll immediately bring the same vnto a skar. The Hearbe mixed with Rockette seede and vineger, and drunk, moueth sweate, expelleth poyson and euil humours, boyled with wine and drunke, remoueth the disease of the Hyppes, and especially helpeth an euil cough, & purge
                        •
                     h the breast. The Herbe boyled in wine & receiued, breaketh ye stone of the Kidneys and Bladder, & remoueth ye strangurie. In the same maner imployed, profiteth against ye gripings of the bowels. But this especially auayleth against the stopping of the Liuer & Mylte. The Pympernel, to be briefe, helpeth the stone, moueth vrine, aswageth the strangurie, purgeth the breast, & expelleth the poyson of the plague from the hearte. The iuyce of it boyled, and drunk before the fit of the Ague, putteth away any Feuer. The roote may also be canded, as ye Ginger, with Sugar or hony, and to preuaile the like againste the aboue sayde diseases.
                  The Herbe boiled, remoueth a cōtinual Ague: the iuyce of the herbe, a tertiane Ague, so that the same be drunke before the fit.
                  A worthy experiment against the Phtysicke of the Lungs Take of y• Pympernel brought into very fyne pouder two ounces, of new Pympernel water, and of Sugar, as much as shall fuffise, making therof an Electuarie, of which take daily two drammes.
               
               
                  
                  The commended helpes of the distilled waters, both of the Sorrel, and Pympernel.
                  THe Sorrel is to be distilled, wyth the whole substāce, in the spring tyme. The water tempered with T
                        •
                     iacle, preuaileth agaynst the plague. The water drunke, remoueth al maner of inward heates, ceasseth thirst, helpeth the Liuer and Mylte, by the drincking and imploying of the same, with linnen clothes wet in it. It remoueth the shingles being applied and drunk, it helpeth scalding or burning, & putteth away the kings euil. It anayleth in Agues, to coole the burning heate. &c.
                  The roote and Herbe with the whole substance, shred and brused togither, ought to be distilled in the ende of May. The water of the Pimpernel drunke morning & euening, vnto the quantitie of three or foure ounces at a time, doth helpe the stone of the kydneys and Bladder, and purgeth the Reynes. This helpeth the plague, drunke within sixe daies once. It profiteth women, whose Matrice is euer colde, and sendeth down ye reddes, This drunk, with a little quantitie of Castorie in fine pouder, putteth away the shaking of the members. This drunke vnto the quantitie of foure ounces fasting, preserueth the person that day frō any natural sicknesse, in that it remoueth all manner of griefe from the hearte, expelleth euil humors, and procureth vrine. This drunke, lyke profiteth against poyson, it causeth also a cleare skinne and faire both in face and handes, if the partye for a tyme washeth daylie those partes with it.
               
            
            
               What skil and diligence required, in the workmanly sowing and ordering of the Borrage and Buglosse. Chap. 8.
               
                  THe Borage, & Buglosse or Longdebeefe seruing for the Potte, when the leaues are yet tender, and theyr floures for Sallettes, requyre to bee sowen in the moneth of Auguste, and in September, to serue the wynter time, and in the moneth of Aprill (the Moone increasing) for the Sommer tyme, in that the seedes (especiallye of the Buglosse) prosper not so well, to be sowen at any other tyme, for so muche as it ioyeth to be placed in a warme & Sūny

place, the Earth afore diligently laboured and dressed. These may the owner or Gardner remoue (after certain leaues sprung vp) at any time of the yeare, and to bee placed in Beddes, either alone, or in Bordures, rounde aboute the newe Beddes of other Hearbes. The seedes both of the Borage and Buglosse require to be gathered in a maner halfe ripe, to the ende they fal not out of their Huske. And the whole Hearbe wyth the seedes of eyther ought to be layed in some high place, open to the warme Sunne, that they may rypen the speedier, which full rype, rub tenderly betwene the handes the seedes forth on a linnen cloth or sheet, and these may you kepe for two yeares.
               
                  The Phisicke benefites and singular helpes both of the Borage and Buglosse or Longdebeefe.
                  THe Borage, whiche otherwyse of Galen and Dioscorides, is named the Buglosse or Longedbeefe, is (by the agreement of the skylful) affirmed to be moyste and hotte in the firste degree, which the selfe same Galen witnesseth, saying, that the Buglosse is of a moyst and temperate hotnes, for which cause, steeped in wine, it is thought to procure a gladsomnesse and ioy to the drincker of it.
                  The Borage boyled in wine, and the same drunke, procureth good bloud in the creature. The iuyce of this Hearbe mixed artely with Sugar, and drunke fasting, maruellously helpeth the gyddinesse or swimming of the heade. The Sirupe made of the iuyce of Borage, to which a like weight of Suger, and a little quantitie of the pouder of the bones of the Harte, these after the workmanlye boyling, drunke fasting for a tyme togither, maruellously recouereth the trembling and beating of the hearte. If the iuyce with the simple Sirupe of Borage and Senee equallie myxed, shall bee drunke morning and euening, doth not only increase memorie, but remoue Melancholie. The floures raw eaten with distilled vineger and Sugar, do not onlye procure good bloud, but stay the tremblyng of the hearte, whiche like they in wine, and drunke, preuaile. The floures dryed and preserued for a yeare, doe like profite in all the abouesayd griefes, as the Hearbe doeth. The Syrupe of Borage vsed for a time, preuaileth against the Kings euil.
                  The floures steeped for a tyme in the oyle of sweete Almondes, and

after the wringing forth of this tenderly applyed to the stomacke, and region of the heart, doe maruellously comfort the weake patient. The Syrupes both of the Borage and Buglosse, are applyed in Phisicke, for the only purpose of comforting.
                  To such hauing weake Lungs, and a drie cough, the Buglosse stieped in Wine and drunke, greately preuayleth: for the roughnesse of the throte and cough only applye or drinke (as Galen instructeth) the Buglosse boyled in Mulse, or water and Hony. The Buglosse stieped in Wyne, and tempered with Mellicrate, procureth after the drinking gladsomnes to the creature. It purgeth the redde Choller, proceeding of ouermuch heate, being often drunke with sweete Wine. This drunke in the like manner, recouereth the Cardiacke passion, yea it expelleth the noysome humors of the Lungs.
                  The iuice of the Buglosse, remoueth the swelling of the feete, beyng drunke with warme water.
                  The Wyne for a time drunke, in which the Buglosse shall be stieped, doth preserue a good memorie.
                  The same wine of the floures stieped and drunke for a time, not only comforteth greatly the heart, but engendreth good bloud in the creature.
                  
                     The figure of the fornace named Balneum Mariae.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The singular healpes and Phisicke benefytes of the distilled waters, both of the Borage and Buglosse.
                  THe commended time for distilling of the Borage, is for the more parte, aboute the ende of the Moneth of May, when as it beareth floure, whiche wholly with the roote, shredde and brused, ought then to be distilled in such a like furnace & vessel, as here before is placed, named of the worthy Phisitions Balneo Mariae, for that the same more naturally distilleth all maner of delectable floures, and comfortable Hearbes, than any other drie Fornace by Ashes doth.
                  The water destilled in this Fornace, drunke vnto the quantitie of two or three ounces at a time, both morning and euening, dothe maruellously remoue and asswage, both the gripings and swellings of the bellie, yea this cureth Dissenteria, and the hardnes of fetching breath.
                  This water drunke fasting, vnto the quantitie of two ounces, dothe not only cōfort the heart and brayne, but rendreth a healp to memorie and witte, yea purgeth the euill bloud, and remoueth phrensinesse.
                  This water easeth the griefe and paine, caused by the sting and venoming of a Spider or Bee, by laying linnen clothes wet in it on the place. This with the redde Sarcenet layde on the eyes, dothe not only aswage the payne of them, but procureth a cleerenes of sighte, yea the water applyed on the eares and necke, dothe remoue the ringing and paine of the eares. The water of the Borage floures drunke, preuayleth by a like manner in all those griefes, as the water of the proper Hearbe dothe, yet the water of the floures accompted the worthier, for that the same purgeth the bloud, expelleth Melancholie, and maruellously comforteth the heart. This also amendeth euery manner of distillation of the head, by drinking two ounces euery euening, before the going to bed. This drinke profiteth againste burning Feuers, and the Jaundise, and drunke or applyed with linnen clothes wette in it, doth speedely coole and amend the heate of the Lyuer. The Buglosse oughte rather to bee destilled in the beginning of June, in the like furnace afore placed, named Balneum Mariae. This distilled water drunke, profiteth all such, which are molested with the Flixe, Disenteria, the paineful fetching of breath, and decay of minde, besides the penslue and troubled,

and those whiche are weake of brayne, if this be drunke morning and euening with Suger, vnto the quantitie of two or three ounces at a time. This drinke preuayleth against all hote sicknesses, agewes, defaultes of the Lungs, the Liuer, and Milt: it purgeth also the bloud, and remoueth the pricking about the heart and brest.
                  The water of the Hearbe drunke, amendeth the Jandise, clenseth the Leprie and Scabbes, and stayeth the stilling of the head. This ceasseth the paine of the head, and burning of the eyes, applyed with linnen clothes on the head or eyes, this in like manner handled, remoueth the ringing or sound of the Eares. The Buglosse floures, and Hearbe, of eache two great handfuls, to which added of Sinamon foure ounces, a little brused before, these togither destilled in Balneo Mariae, do yeelde a most pretious water, for the comforting of the heart and brayne, if the same in the dayly taking, be drunke with the confection of Manus Christi, made in tables with pearles.
               
            
            
               What skill and secre
                     •
                  es to be learned, in the sowing, remouing and setting of the Marigold. Chapter. 9.
               
                  THe Marigolde named of the Herbarians Calendula, is so properly tearmed, for that in euery Calends, and in each moneth this renueth of the owne accorde, & is found to beare floure, as wel in the Winter as Sommer, for which cause, the Italians name the same the floure of euery moneth▪ but some tearme it ye Sunnes floure, or the folower of the Sunne, and is of some named the Husband mans Dyall, in that the same sheweth to them, both the morning and euening tide. Other name it the Sunnes Bride, and Sunnes Hearbe, in that the floures of the same follow the Sunne, as from the rising by the South, vnto the West, and by a notable turning obeying to the Sunne, in such manner, that what part of Heauen he possesseth, they into the same turned behold, and that in a cloudie and thicke ayre like directed, as if they shoulde be reuiued, quickned, and moued, with the Spirit of him. Such is ye loue of it knowen to be, toward that royall Starre, beeing in the night time, for the desire of him, as pensiue and sadde, they be shutte or closed togither, but at the noone time of the daye fully spred abrode, as if they with spred armes lōged, or diligētly attended, to embrace their Bridegrome. This Marigold is a singular kinde

of Herbe, sowen in Gardens, as well for the potte, as for the decking of Garlandes, bewtifying of Nosegayes, and to be worne in the bosome.
               The Seedes of this floure, are commonly bestowed in a Husbandly and well dressed Earth, but this rather done by the counsell of the skilfull in the increase of the Moone, whereby the floures may growe the bigger and broader. But to procure the floures to growe the doubler, bigger, and broader, the owner ought to remoue the plantes often, and to set them in new beddes, lying in Sunny places, heerein considering at those times of remouing, that the Moone bee increasing so nigh as you can.
               Besides some will, that many Seedes be put togither into one hole, in the first quarter of the Mone, and to be sundry times watered, in the first comming vp of them, vnlesse the moisture of the aire otherwyse healpe.
               These after certain leaues sprūg vp, if they be oftē remoued & clipped by due course of the Moone, yeelde a bigger, broader, and fayrer floure, and they yeeld always more floures in the Haruest, than in the Spring time.
               
                  The Phisicke benefytes and healpes of the Marigolde.
                  THe iuice of the Hearbe and roote, applyed vp in glister forme, recouereth in short time the Palsie members. The floures and leaues dried, keepe vnto vse, for if a woman deliuered of childe, the after burden come not, kindle or burne this Hearbe and floures dryed with waxe, and with the same make a smoke belowe, for this is a sure and laudable experiment, to bring them downe (the child afore deliuered) as the learned Brumfelsius reporteth. For the pappes of women swelled, through the stopping and stay of the reddes, minister the floures with Spikenard and Wyne, in that the same ceasseth or aswageth, and prouoketh the monethlie course.
                  The floures of the Marigolde boyled and drunke, stayeth the fluxe of pissing bloud.
                  The iuice of the leaues wringed forthe, and dropped into the eares, killeth the wormes.
                  The rindes of the rootes dryed, brought into powder, and applyed on

foule pushes, do heale them in short time.
                  The rinde of the Marigolde pierceth and digesteth euill humors, whiche boyled in Wine and drunke, helpeth the stopping and other griefes of the Liuer.
                  The floures of the Marigolde stieped in Uinegre and Salt, and reserued, reteyne their proper vertue for two yeares.
                  These comforte the stomacke and procure an appetite to meate, yea they consume the humors of the stomacke, and heate a colde breast.
                  The said iuice of the floures mixed with a little pure vinegre warmed, and rubbed well on the Teeth and gummes, is a soueraine remedie for the aswaging of the grieuous paine of the Teeth.
                  The iuice of the floures drunke vnto the quantitie of two ounces at a time, in the fitte of the Plague, shall speedely be holpen, if the patiente (after the drinking of the iuice) lying on bedde, be well couered wyth clothes, to sweate throughly. The conserue of the floures is a preparatiue against the plague. If seauen graynes waight of the iuice of the floures bee drunke with three ounces of white Wyne, and repeated sundry mornings, it helpeth the quartaine.
                  The powder of the rindes of the rootes of the Marigolde, mixed with the iuice of Fennell, Wyne, and a little Oyle, and boyled vnto a thicknesse, to whiche a little waxe added for the apter making of it an oyntment, and so applyed on the Milte or colde stomacke, dothe greately profite.
               
               
                  The commended healpes of the distilled water.
                  THe worthy Hieronymus a most expert Herbarian reporteth, that the distilled water of the Marigolde floures, drawen in Balneo Mariae, do recouer al defaultes of the eyes, whether these proceede of heate, or through colde caused, and to procure cleere eyes, besides the putting away of all griefes of the head.
               
            
            
               What skill industrie and secretes to be learned, in the sowing and ordering of the Parselie. Chapter. 10.
               
                  THe Parsely in the bestowing in the Earthe, requireth small laboure and diligence, and loueth a stony and Sandy Earth, so

that the same needeth small fatning, whereby it maye well agree to be sowen in shadowie places, neere to the Hedge or Herber in the Garden, and this especially requireth muche watering, for the speedier shooting vp. The olde Seedes, if we may credite Theophrastus, doe sooner come vp, yea and the elder Seedes are better for the turne: the plantes shot vp, do endure a long time without sowing any more, in such condition, that the owner or Gardener shall not neede to sowe or set of the plantes agayne, for fiue yeares after. The Parsely when it hath growē a yeare, it sendeth vp or beareth stalkes and Seedes, and a yealowishe floure. The new Seedes of the Parsely committed to the Earthe, doe most slowly come vp in beddes, in that these not before the fortith, yea fiftith and sixtith day after the sowing, do for the more part appeare, as the learned Plinie reporteth, yet this ease and commoditie ensueth, that once sowen and come vp (as aboue vttered) it yearely encreaseth of the owne accorde, without renuing for many yeares. The Seedes as the worthy Neopolitane Rutilius witnesseth; ioy in any earth, and as well in the colde, as warme places, sauing the Seedes in the first commyng vp require much moisture, through which watering, they come so speedely strong, that after no ayre nor grounde hindereth them. Bothe the Seedes and plantes (as Columella instructeth maye prosperously be bestowed, to increase the speedier, neere to Springs, and little running waters. If the owner or Gardener would haue the leaues growe verye broade then let him attende to the words of the worthy Greeke Florentinus, who willeth to take vp of Parselie Seedes at one tyme, as muche as can handsomly be holden betweene three of the fingers, and these after the tying vp in a thinne or well worne linnen cloth, to be set into a shallowe hole with dung, handsomly mixed in the Earth, which on suche wise handled, will after come vp and growe, with so large a lease, for the increase of al the Seeds wil then be ioined, & shote vp togither in one blade, as the worthy Rutilius hath noted, and before him the singular Columella. But ye Parsely shal growe biggest, (as the worthy Florentinus reporteth) if ye owner by digging about ye rootes, bestowe chaffe about them, & after ye couering with lightearth, to water thē wel & often. The Parsely may ye Gardener cause to growe crisped in leafe, if he thrust and bestowe the Seedes a little before the sowing in a ball stuffed with them, whiche broken somewhat with a staffe, and as they

were spoyled, committe them (as Columella willeth) to the Earth.
               Or the Gardener otherwise with lesser paine may procure them to growe crisped, in what manner soeuer they be sowen, if he turne on the bedde and plantes a round stone, or bigge roller, as soone as the plantes bee somewhat growen vppe aboue the Earth: and the like may the owner doe with the plants come vp, if he treade them often downe.
               The best commended time, for committing of the Seedes to the Earth, is from the middes of May, vnto the Sommer solstice in June, in beddes thicke togither, and to be often watered, for that these speedyer encrease and come forward, through the heate in the same season. If the owner or Gardener woulde haue the Seedes sooner breake and shote vp, let him infuse the Seedes for a certaine time in Uinegre, whiche bestowing in a well laboured Earth, fill halfe the beddes with ashes of the Beane coddes. After the Seedes are thus sowen, water them often and lightely with a small quantitie of the best Aqua vitae, and soone after the sprinckling and moistning of the Beddes, couer the beds ouer with some peece of wollen cloth, to the ende the proper heate ministred, breath not away, for by that meanes, the plantes within one houre will begin to appeare, so that the owner must then take off the cloth, and sprinckle or moisten the plants appeared oftentimes, whereby they may the sooner shoote vp into a high stemme or Blade, to the wonder of the beholders. To Florentinus, doe 
                     
                        •
                     unius Columella, Plinie, and Rutilius agree, that there are two kinds of the Parsely, as the Male and Female, the Male (as they describe it) hath blacker leaues, and shorter roote: but the Female possesseth crispeder leaues, and hard, a bigge stemme, in tast soure and hote: but neyther of these two doth Dionisius & Chrisippus ye Phisition, alow to be eaten with meate, as Plinie writeth: Although the same muche vsed in Plinies time, as at this day, bothe in brothes & sawces, for a better delight and appetit. They report, yt by the often eating of the Female blades, wormes engender in the body, and yt the female eaten, doth procure the woman barein, as ye Male the mā. And further, ye Parsely eaten of women with child, doth cause ye birthes to haue the falling sicknes, yet they affirme the Male to harme lesser, so yt for the same it was not altogither misliked nor condemned of the antient, among the wicked fruites. Therefore it is not to be maruelled at, if ye late Phisitiōs do aduise & warne persons, hauing ye falling sicknes,

and women with childe, not to eate ye Parselie: To these, if the Greekes forbad Nourses, and women with childe the eating of Parselie wyth meate, although an other occasion may also ensewe of the same, that it may hinder womens Milke Springs, and extinguish the comming of milke: besid
                     •
                  s that, this procureth the eaters of it, vnto the venerial acte.
               Certaine reporte, that the sicke fishes in Pondes, are mightely recouered and made lustie, through the Parsely layd in them.
               There is nothing that doth like sweeten the mouth, as the freshe and greene Parselie eaten, so that the Hearbe often eaten of them whyche haue an vnsauerie or stinking breath, & sendeth forth an odious smell to be abhorred, dothe in shorte time maruellously recouer and amende the same: A matter very commendable and necessarie, both for Maydens and widowes, to deceyue their wowers, by the chawing and bearing about of the Grene and fresh blades, whereby they may so remoue for the presente the strong smell of the breath, yawning or otherwise issuing forth, and by the customably eating, send forth a sweeter breath.
               Sundry in times past, preserued the blades of Parselie in a pickell, vnto vse, whiche receyued or conteyned two parts of Uinegre, and a third part of Brine.
               
                  The Phisicke benefites and healpes of the Parselie.
                  THe Garden Parselie is hote in the beginning of the thirde degree, and drie in the second, or it heateth and drieth by nature in the secōd and third degree. The iuice of Parselie, Turpentine, Wheaten Meale, and the Oyle of Roses, artely mixed and boyled togither with a little quantitie of Sarcocolla, of which by arte, an abstersiue or clenser made, doth most perfectly clense and incarnate ye vlcers of Carbuncles, and other impostumes. The Parselie boyled with leaues of the Coleworte and Melilote, of whiche a plaister made with Otemeale, Oyle of Camomille, Dill, and Oyle of Roses, and applyed, doth maruellousely resolue the impostumes of the pappes, caused through the ranckling of Milke stayed backe, by part drying vp the Milke, and part by purgyng the same.
                  The Parselie eaten eyther rawe or sodden, doth amend the stopping of the Lyuer, prouoke Urine, stayeth loosenes of the Bellie, and hathe a propertie in strengthning of loose partes.
                  The Parselie also hathe the nature of pearcing, for whyche cause it

moueth vryne, and very much preuaileth againste the stone, as wel the seede, as roote.
                  The Greeke Florentinus writeth in his husbandrie, that the Parsely with crummes of bread, applyed in the steede of a playster, doth heale the Shingles, but the decoction of the same drunke, to breake the stone, and the like to perfourme by applying outwardly.
                  To these, for such hardly making water and diseased in the kidneys to helpe aswel by the leafe, as by the roote.
                  The blacke spottes to restore to the proper colour, if the decoction of the seedes be applyed vpon, and to soften the hardnesse of the pappes, by applying the leaues brused on them.
                  
                     Plinie writeth, that the brused seedes annoynted with the whyte of an Egge, or the seede boyled in water and drunke, to amende and helpe the kidneys, and brused in colde water, to profite and remoue the vlcers of the mouth, this also with olde wyne ministred, to breake the stone in the bladder, which like doth the roote perfourme.
                  Thys profiteth giuen for the Jaundise in white wyne, and to such women whose monethly courses doe not orderlye proceede, or be stayed.
                  This is worthy to be noted, that the rawe Parsely yeeldeth sweeter waters in the drinking, as the worthye Plinie hath noted, and to the mouth (as Galen writeth) the same pleasaunt and very delectable to the stomacke.
                  The seed taken in meate, doth expel winde in the body, the same brused and applyed on a foule Scabbe, doth very wel clense, and procureth a fayre skinne.
                  The seeds eaten, doth remoue the swelling of the stomacke, and profiteth the dropsie men, in that the seeds drye and pearce the euil humors, and consume them.
                  The Parsely profiteth those persons, which haue gotten the Leprie of Fleumaticke humors. It clenseth the Liuer, and remoueth the payne of the Loynes and Bladder.
                  A sauce prepared of the Parselye, wyth Sorrell and vyneger myxed togyther, and eaten, preuayleth agaynste the burnyng of a Feuer.
                  If after the drying of the Parselye rootes, and beaten fynelye to

pouder the same, be mixed and drunke with the purest wine, doth not only procure a sounde brayne, and perfite memorie, but purgeth the bloud.
                  The Seedes (after the agreement of the best writers) are principall in the causes of Phisicke, the rootes next to them, and the leaues as third in working.
                  The rootes, Herbe and seedes of the Parsely, applyed in meate and drinke, do procure vrine, remoue the stone of the Loynes drawe downe the reddes, dissolue winde in the bodie, take awaye the gripings of the bellie, aswage the strangurie, paine of the backe, griefe of the Kidneys and bladder, and swellyng of the stomacke.
                  The person bitten of a mad dog, by boyling and drinking the decoction of Parsely, and applying a playster made of the seedes and Herbe shal be speedily holpen.
               
               
                  The Phisicke helpes of the distilled water of Parsely.
                  THe commended time for the distilling of Parsely is in the beginning of September, and that the fresh rootes and Herbe, wyth the whole substance be distilled togither in Balneo Mariae.
                  
                  The water of the Parselye drunke vnto the quantitie of three or foure ounces at a time, morning and euening, for thirtie or fourtie dayes togither, profiteth against the stone of the kydneys and Loynes, purgeth the kydneys and bladder, and greatlye moueth forwarde the vrine.
                  The water drunke in the same manner, helpeth digestion, procureth an appetite to meate, purgeth the Liuer, easeth the strangurie, and where so euer thys water is annoynted on the heade or bodie, heares do soone after shedde.
               
            
            
               
               What skil and diligence required, in the sowing and ordering both of the Garden and wilde or running Time. Chap. 11.
               
                  THe Garden Time, although it seeme better to agree, to be placed nigh to Beehiues (for the commoditie of Honye) than in Gardens, yet our purpose is here, somewhat to write of the same, in that this is so carefully bestowed in Gardens, as well for the commoditie of meates, as for the deeking of Garlandes. There are found to be two kindes of it, the one white with a wooddy or hard roote, growing on little Hilles, which is accompted the worthiest.
               The other aswel in kinde, as floure▪ blacke, which Actius (in meates) disaloweth, for the same inwardly receyued lightly putrifieth, and increaseth Cholericke humors.
               The Tyme of the Garden growing bushie, and full of slyppes, is seene to shoote vp▪ two handfuls high, bring most sweete and delectable of sauoure, and decked with a number of smal leaues, bearing also purple floures, tending to a whitenesse, and the toppes after the fourme of Antes bending in bodie. The Garden Time better cōmeth forwarde, being bestowed in a leane and stony ground, for which cause, it neyther desireth a fatte nor dunged Earth, but ioyeth to be placed in a Sunny and open place. This wel ynough prospereth, being bestowed in beds, either in the seede or plant, but this speedier cōmeth forward being only set, yea this increaseth, being set againe with the floures bearing, as the singular Theophrastus witnesseth. The owners of Hiues, haue a perfitte forsight and knowledge, what the increase or yeelde of Honye will bee euerie yeare, by the plentiful or small number of floures growing and appearing on the Tyme about the Sommer solstice. For this increaseth and yeeldeth most friendly floures for the Bees, which render a coloure and sauoure to the Hony.
               The saide Theophrastus writeth, that the floure of Tyme (spreade abroade is destroyed and dyeth, if a big shoure of raine happen to fal.
               The worthy Neapolitane Rutilius in his husbandrie instructeth, yt the whole plant is to be rather set than sowen, about the middle of April in a well laboured Earth, lying open to the Sunne, and that the same may prosper and come the speedier forwarde.
               
                  Hee willeth the owner to water the Plantes of time, or to moysten them al a day with water finely sprinckled on the beddes, in that the tyme so fast drincketh in. If the owner or Gardener woulde possesse ye seedes, he must diligently gather the floures (in whiche the seedes are contained) and not laboure to separate the one from the other.
               The running Tyme ioyeth to bee set or sowen neare to springs of water, as by a Wel, or Ponde, for on such wise bestowed in the Earth, the same yeeldeth the fayrer leaues. This neyther requireth, a fatte nor dunged Earth, but only to be bestowed in a Sunny place, and ioyeth, in the often remouing. The running time doth many tymes proceede or come of the Basill, rudely or wythout care bestowed in the Earth.
               
                  The Phisicke helpes both of the Garden and running Time.
                  THe Garden Tyme heateth and dryeth in the thirde degree.
                  The Tyme after the well drying, brought to fyne pouder, and giuen vnto the quantitie of foure drammes at a time, with a draughte of Oximel (or vineger and Hony boyled togither) not only remoueth the ioynte sicknesse and ache of partes, but purgeth Choler, and all other Humoures. The like quantitie gyuen, helpeth the passions of the Bladder.
                  The fine pouder of Tyme, ministred vnto ye quantitie of one drāme at a time, with a sponefull of water and Hony wel mixed togither, preuaileth in shorte time, agaynst the swelling of the Bellie.
                  The pouder taken, vnto the quantitie of three drammes at a tyme, with a draught of Mellicrate, remoueth the griefe of yt Hyps, aswageth the payne of the Loynes and sides, amendeth the breast, and the inflations of Hypochandria or the flanckes.
                  The pouder giuen, vnto the quantitie of three drammes at a time, with a draught of Oximel fasting, doth maruellously helpe the Melancholicke, the troubled in minde, and feareful.
                  The pouder ministred vnto the quantity of three drammes at a time, with the beste white wine, both morning and euening, doeth maruellouslye cure the blearednesse of the eyes, and the vehemente payne of them.
                  
                     This pouder in like quantitie vsed wt good wine, aswageth ye griefe of the colde Goute and the deadnesse of mouing, and helpeth the stiffenesse of Limmes, drunke morning and euening.
                  The pouder drunke morning and euening, vnto the quantitie of three drammes at a time, with a draught of Oximel, doth in short time aswage the swelling of the Testicles: these hytherto Aetius.
                  
                  The pouder drunke with white wine, morning and euening, vnto the quantitie of halfe an ounce at a time, not onlye moueth vrine, and purgeth the Bowelles, but sendeth downe the after burden, and Termes in women.
                  The forme of a Sirupe made of the Tyme with Pure Hony, a
                        •
                     tly boyled, and drunke fasting, doeth in shorte time amende the harde fetching of breath, and remoueth all other griefes of the breast, through the spilling forth of the corrupt matter.
                  The pouder is thoughte to helpe greatly the clearnes of sight, being sundry times taken with meate: but ye Time ought moderately be vsed, in that (through the often eating) it mightly heateth.
                  The time giuen to such hauing the falling sicknes, greatly auayleth in that through the smelling to it (in the time of the fit) they are much reuiued, but suche oughte to sleepe for a whyle on the softe Beddes of Tyme.
                  The leaues fynely beaten and strewed on wolle, and with oyle applyed on loose partes of the bodye, myghtilye preuayleth, and on burnte or scalded places, to great purpose annoynted with Barrowes grease.
                  Here conceyue, that the Tyme which is blacke (as afore vttered) is altogither to bee refused, and onlye to vse the same bearing a purple floure, and tending to a whitenesse, is best commended for al purposes.
                  The running Time sowen in Gardens, is by nature hotte and dry, and this somuche heateth, that it both moueth vrine and the reddes, yet the same is sower in taste, as the worthye Phisition Galen witnesseth.
                  If any drinke the fyne pouder of the running Tyme with pleasant wine, morning and euening, for a certain time togither, doth break the stone of the kidneys and Bladder. The Herbe layed on the sting of

a Bee, speedily helpeth it.
                  The Herbe boyled in pleasant wine and drunke, healeth the bit of an Adder or Snake, the smoke of the same, driueth awaye venemouse wormes. This Herbe boyled with vineger and Hony, and drunke vnto the quantitie of a draught at a time, profiteth the spitting of bloud: the iuyce of the Herbe drunke, perfourmeth the same, beeing myxed wyth vineger, and drunke vnto the quantitie of foure ounces at a time.
                  The Hearbe stayeth the Reume and stillings of the heade, commyng of a colde cause, it likewise amendeth the cough and colde stomacke, if the same be taken morning and euening, with good white wine.
                  The Herbe steeped in Rose vineger and brused▪ being with the oyle of Roses diligently fryed and annoynted, doth speedilye remoue the headeache. The same oyntemente applyed on the heade, amendeth Frensinesse and the Litharge or often slumbering.
                  The Herbe boyled in wyne and drunke, openeth the stoppyngs of the Lyuer and Mylte, and moueth vryne: thys drunke in wyne sendeth downe the termes, and causeth vrine, and recouereth the bytte, of venemous beastes. The same boyled in wyne and oyle, aswageth the swellyng in the throte, if the throte bee dayly applyed with it.
                  The Herbe boyled in wine, with the iuyce of Licoras, recouereth the cough, and purgeth the breast: the iuyce of ye same drunke with vineger, vnto the quantity of two drammes at a time, staieth the bloudie vomitings.
                  The Herbe boyled wyth Annys seedes in wyne, not only heateth the stomacke, but remoueth wynde in the Bowels, and easeth the Strangurie. The Seede in wine, doth greatly moue vrine, and expelleth mightily the stone.
               
               
                  
                  The worthie helpes of the distilled water of the running Tyme.
                  THe Hearbe, stalke and roote, wyth the whole substance shredde, ought to be distilled in Balneo Mariae, about the ende of the moneth of June.
                  The water of the running Time, drunke morning and euening vnto the quantitie of three ounces at a tyme, doeth not onely strengthen and amende the heade, brayne and stomacke, but procureth an appetyte to meate, remoueth the noyse or rumblyng of the bellie, softneth the hardnesse of the stomacke, and moueth forwarde the vryne.
                  In the lyke maner it drunke not onlye comforteth the sighte, and consumeth humoures and the destillations of the heade, but myxed with the water of wormewoode, and drunke, helpeth a Quotidian Ague. The same drunke to the quantity of three ounces at a time, amendeth a cooled Liuer and Mylte, and recouereth or healeth the bowelles exulcerated.
                  This in like order drunke, openeth the stopping of the Nosethrils and eares, restoreth hearing, helpeth gyddinesse, stayeth the desire to vomite, and expelleth the grypings of the bellie and bowels.
                  This drunk sundry tymes, both morning and euening, breaketh the stone, and moueth vryne. This water applyed with a lynnen cloth on brused members, doth in shorte time cure them.
               
            
            
               What skill and diligence is required in the sowing and ordering both of the Myntes and Holyhocke. Chap. 12.
               
                  THe Garden Mynte desireth to bee bestowed, neither in a dunged, nor fat erth, but rather in an open, and Sunny place: yet this best ioyeth in a moyste place, or by some well. And where the like is not, the Minte in yt ground ought to bee often watered in the first bestowing in the earth, or this otherwise in short time withereth and dyeth.
               
                  The Minte ought to be set in the roote or whole stemme, in Haruest or in the spring time. The owner or Gardener lacking or not hauing the Minte seedes to sowe, may in the steede of them, vse or bestowe in hys grounde, the seedes of the fielde or wilde Myntes, in setting the sharper endes downewarde of the seedes, whereby to tame and put awaye the wildnesse of them. This plant wel growen vp, needeth not after to be renewed or sowen euery yere, in that once sowen or planted, it after commeth vp yearely of the owne accorde. And for the delectable sauoure which it enioyeth, much desired and vsed, both in Brothes and Sallets.
               But thys plant after the comming vp, maye in no case bee touched with any Iron instrument, in that the same soone after dyeth. Thys plant flourishing in the Sommer, becometh yelowish in the wynter time.
               The Holyhocke or greater Mallowes of the Garden, as Ruellius out of the learned Theophrastus affirmeth, doeth often shoote vppe into the fourme of a tree, and waxeth so great, that the stemme or bodye of it may serue to the vse of a staffe, which sendeth forth bigge stalkes, and leaues both large and rounde.
               The floure of this plant for the proper time flourishing, is named ye winter Rose, in that this plant yeeldeth floures like to the Rose, from the beginning of Haruest, vnto the winter time, which floures both of ye red and white, lesser than the fading or vanishing Rose, longer indure and inioy force.
               This Rose of the auntient Greekes, was named 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , in that the leaues (as Columella reporteth) turne about with the Sunne, which at Noone time of the day are fully opened. The auntient Romaynes did also name it the sowen or Garden Mallowes. The cōmon people in time past greatly pleased wt the beautie of ye same, named it ye beyōd sea Rose. For in comelines, nether of thē giueth place to ye Rose, which if the same inioyed a sauour, it were not inferoiure to the Rose, seeing in coloure they be equall in bering of the red carnation and white, so yt in sauoure the Rose only excelleth.
               This for the worthy comelynesse and beautye, to bee sette in windowes, is at thys day diligently sowen and sette in Gardens.
               The worthy Rutilius (in his treatise of the Garden instructeth, that

the Seedes to be committed to the Earth, ought rather to be bestowed about the middle of Aprill, in a well dunged and fatte grounde, and to be often watered, vntill the plantes be well sprung vp.
               The skilfull Columella in his Husbandrie vttereth, that this rather ioyeth to be bestowed in a fatte Earth, well turned in with dung, and that moyst dung be layd about the rootes of the yong plantes, in the setting againe, whiche the sayde Authoure willeth to remoue, after foure leaues are well shotte vp aboue the Earth.
               This learned Columella writing of the holyhoke, reporteth, that the floure (as the Marigolde) openeth at the rising of the Sunne, full spred at the Noone time, and closeth agayne in the going downe of the Sunne.
               
                  The Phisicke benefites and healpes, both of the Mint, and Garden Malowes or holyhoke.
                  THe Garden Mint is reported to be hote and drie in the seconde degree, and this in medicine oftner vsed drie than greene.
                  The worthy Florentinus a singuler professor of the Greeke instructions of Husbandrie, writeth, that the Mint for the same, mighte well bee accompted an vnprofitable Hearbe, seeing the Herbe applyed on a wound, defendeth the same from waxing whole, and to come to a skarre.
                  If the Minte bee put into Milke, it neyther suffereth the same to courd, nor to become thicke, in somuch, that layde into courded Milke, this woulde bring the same thinne againe, so that by the same vertue and propertie, he sayeth to resist and abate the generation, as well in Man as woman: But others of a cōtrarie minde defending the Herbe, accompted in very holsome, and beneficiall to man.
                  If the Herbe boyled in Wine and Oyle, be applyed on the Pappes of the newe milch Woman, doth not after suffer the Milke to courde, nor to be thicke, and the Milke courded, to become thinne again, wherby it amendeth the hard and ranckled breasts, in daunger to breake, thorough the Milke courded. For whiche cause, this Herbe is wittily added in the potions of Milke, that in the courding of the Milke within the stomacke, no perill of strangling through the benefite of thys Herbe

might ensew.
                  The Juice or water of the Hearbe, drunke with the iuice of the Pomegranat, stayeth the resting or belching of the stomacke & vomiting, as the worthy Democritus in his Husbandrie hath noted.
                  The Mint broughte to fine powder, and ministred in Milke, profiteth against the long wormes in the body.
                  If the swollen priuities, bee often soupled with the decoction of the same, it doth in short time remoue the swelling of them.
                  This drunke in water with Amylum, aswageth the force of the painefull Fluxe of the bellie, and scouring with bloud: besides, it stayeth the ouer greate course and shew of the reddes in women, and the same healeth vlcers on the Infants heads.
                  The sauoure of this quickneth the spirites and minde, and the tast worketh an appetite, and earnest desire to meate.
                  The iuice of the freshe Hearbe drawen vp, amendeth the defaulte in the Nosethrilles, which also in the paine of the head, and beating of the Temples, is profitably annoynted.
                  The iuice of the Hearbe applyed with Uineger, retaineth and stayeth the inward courses or Fluxes of bloud.
                  The Minte after the brusing with the Oyle of Roses, applyed in plaister forme on harde pappes, whiche bee swollen through the Milke, doth not onely soften, but defendeth them from mattering.
                  The Hearbe eaten with Uineger, looseth the bellie, but dayly eaten for a time togither, dothe maruellously procure a seemely colour to that creature, and this Hearbe at any time vsed, is very profitable and holesome.
                  The iuice drunke with vineger, profiteth the spitting forth of bloud: the same annoynted on the forehead, dothe aswage the griefes of the head: the iuice with Hony and water applyed, remoueth the paine and noyse or ringing of the eares. The iuice tempered with Hony, and annoynted on the eyes, remoueth the moystnes and dimnesse of sighte.
                  The Mint after the boyling in Wine receyued, amendeth a stinking or strong sauour of the mouth: the mouth after the adding of Uineger to it washed diligently, not only helpeth the teeth, but purgeth the mattered Gummes: If the teeth in like manner be washed fasting, with the decoction of Mintes, it letteth the mattering of the Gummes. The decoction

in Wine, with a little Uineger added, remoueth (through the sundry times taking) ye blistering of ye tung, proceeding of heate. The Hearbe also tempered with Uineger, and annoynted neere and aboute the eyes, doth in short time remoue the spottes in them.
                  The Mint in colde sicknesses, yeeldeth a mightie comforting reioyceth the minde, and stayeth the will to vomite. The iuice after the mixing with Uineger and Brimstone, annoynted with a feather on the Shingles, doth with expedition ceasse the paine.
                  The Hearbe boyled in Wine, aswageth the payne of the bowels and Kidneys, and boyled in Wyne with Oyle, beyng applyed in playster forme, doth both dissolue and cure impostumes.
               
               
                  The Phisicke benefites of the Holyhoke, do heere ensewe.
                  THe Malowes of the Garden or Holyhoke, is the like moyst by nature, as the other kindes of Malowes, and serueth as well to outward, as inward griefes.
                  The Herbe, roote, or Seedes, boyled in eyther Milke or Wine, and orderly drunke, doe remoue a hote cough, recouer the Lungs blistered, and is a singular remedie against the consumption of the Lungs.
                  The Holyhoke boyled in eyther water or Wine, and tempered wyth Hony and Alume, if the same decoction be gargalled and holden for a time in the mouth, doth speedely cure the blisters and putrified sores of the mouth and throte.
                  The leaues of the Holyhoke, after the boyling with meate, eaten with Sallet Oyle and a little Salt, looseth the bellie, and amendeth the hoarsenesse of voyce: The roote and Hearbe boyled vnto the consumptiō in a maner of the water, wil leaue a clamminesse aboue, which applyed on any impostume, ripeneth & softneth the hardnes of the same.
               
               
                  The commended healpes of the distilled water of the Holyhoke.
                  THe distilled water of the Holyhoke Roses (in Balneo Mariae) gargelled, or applyed without with linnen clothes, is greately commended for the breakings out of the mouth, and profiteth as well agaynste the outward as inward heates: besides, cureth the Shingles and vlcers of 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        ••
                     ote, and all other swellings.
                  The sayd water often drunke, is a pretious water vnto all inwarde heates of Feuers, in yt the same cooleth & softneth all impostumes of the

Lungs and sides. It healeth and mitigateth the perilous flixe Disenteria, the hote swellings of womens places, the Kidneys and Bladder.
                  This asswageth the payne of the Bladder, expelleth the stone, purgeth the Kidneys and Bladder, beeing drunke for a time morning and euening.
                  The water applyed on ye Temples in a hote Feuer, procureth sleepe, if the feete of the patiente in a hote Feuer be bathed with it, procureth rest, and ceasseth thirst.
               
               
                  The commended benefytes of the distilled water of Mintes.
                  THe Herbe w
                        •
                     th the stalkes finely shredde, ought diligently be distilled in Balneo Mariae, about the middle of May.
                  The water drunke morning and euening vnto the quantitie of three ounces at a time, strengthneth the stomacke, and digesteth the meate receyued. The water drunke in the same manner, profiteth against the stopping of the Liuer and Milt. It openeth also the wayes of Urine, as of the Kidneys and Bladder.
                  The water in like manner drunke, procureth an appetite to meate, stayeth belching and vomiting, the like dothe this applyed without on the stomacke. The mouth often washed with the same, recouereth a stincking breath, and putride gummes.
                  The water drunke stayeth sounding, and giddines of the head. If any taking a slice of Barlie bread, and stieping it in this water, tempered with Wine or Uinegre, shal applie the same warme to the Nosethrils, the sauoure incontinent yeldeth a maruellous refreshing and strengthning of the feeble person.
                  The water in like quantitie drunke, purgeth the Matrice, and a linnen cloth wet in it warme, and applyed to the priuie place, like preuayleth. The water applied on hard pappes, dissolueth the milke courded in thē, the same for a time drunke, healeth the ruptures within, both of olde and yong persons. The water after the mixing with Rue and the Coliander, gargelled in the mouth, restoreth the Vuula fallen 
                        〈◊〉
                      of the Hearbe stieped in Lie, be washed on the Scabbes of Children, healeth them speedelie.
                  
                     This like drunke, profiteth againste wormes, drunke with Wyne, comforteth and heateth a colde stomacke.
               
            
            
               What care and skill is required in the sowing and workemanly ordering of the artochoke. Chapter. 13.
               
                  THe Herbarians write the Artochoke to be a kind of Thistill, of them named, the Thistill of the Garden.
               The Artochoke which before grew wilde in the fieldes, came by diligence (for the benefite of sale) to bee carefully bestowed in the Garden, where through trauell, broughte from his wildenesse, to serue vnto the vse of the mouth and bellie. The Artochoke growing with thicke scalie 
                     •
                  ares, in forme to the pinaple, and sufficiently knowen to most persons, ioyeth in a loose and dunged earth, yet the same better commeth forward, being bestowed in a fatte ground, and by that meanes defended from Moles, as the worthy Rutilius reporteth, but sowen in a fast Earth after their growth, be not so lightely digged vp of an enemie. The sayd Rutilius willeth the Seedes of the Artochoke, to be cōmitted to the Earth in the moneth of March, the Moone then increasing of light, and that in beddes well dunged, and workemanly prepared, which bestowe in the Earth halfe a foote asunder, yet these not deepe put, and in such maner deale with the seedes, that taking so manye vp, as you may handsomly with three fingers thrust or set those vnto the middle ioyntes in the Earth, couering them lightely with loose Earth, which if hote weather happen to ensewe, the Gardener with diligence must water the plantes for a time, for the plantes on suche wise handled, will yeelde a tenderer fruite and fuller head, as the worthy Varro reporteth, yet maye not the owner hope or looke for fruites or heads to come to their full growth and perfeitnesse for the eating in the first yeare. If the Gardener would bestowe seedes to profite, hee ought to make little furrowes on the bedde, w
                     •
                  ll a foote distante one from the other, being in breadth and deepenes of halfe a foote, which after fyll with olde dung finely broken, and blacke Earthe in like manner small, in whiche so handled, bestowe the Seedes to the depth of the middle ioyntes, and after couer them lightely with fyne Earth, not pressing or t
                     ••
                  ading it downe. And as soone as the plantes

haue yelded foo
                     •
                  th leaues suffic
                     ••••
                   greate, the owner ought to water them often, and to continue the ly
                     •
                  e watering in a grounde very drye vntil the herbes yeld or send forth heads both tender and sufficient big, when the plantes shal be wel growne vp, the Gardener must clense and purge dayly the beds of weeds, & dung about the roots of the plants (if he wil credit Columella) store of ashes, for ye kind of dung the said author reporteth to be most apt and agreable to that potherb, of whiche by the kinde of the dung, this hearbe taketh the Latine name.
               The owner or Gardener must haue a special care, that he bestow not the sedes in the earth with the contrary ends downeward, for these will bring forth Attochokes crooked, weake & very small, if we may credite the Neapolitan Rutilius. If the owner wold haue the herb yeld beds or Artochockes without prickles, hee muste after the instructions of the Greeke writers of husbandry) either breake the sharpe ends of the seeds, or make blunte the prickes (before the bestowing in the earth) on some stone rubbed, whiche also many affirme to come to passe, if the Gardener paring off the rinde of the Lettuce roote, and shreading or cutting the same into many small pieces, dothe after the bestowing of the seedes into 
                     •
                  che piece, diligently set these a foote distance asunder, wil after yelde heads the lyke.
               The Gardener shall possesse Artochokes of pleasaunt sauoure, if he laye the seedes to sti
                     •
                  pe for three dayes before the sowyng, in the iuyce of the Rose or Lillie, or oyle of bays, made with the sweet Almonds, or in any other pleasant iuyce or lycour, whiche after the drying in the aire from the Sun beames, he cōmitteth them to the earth, for on suche wise handled, the fruites yelde the same sauour as the licour in whiche the seedes were soked and receiued. For by a lyke example, the heades shall sauour of the bay, if the owner sti
                     •
                  pe them with the leaues of the Bay tree, or he otherwise making holes, bestowe the seedes within the bay berries, before the cōmitting to the earth: And a lyke practise maye he exercise in all seedes that be greate.
               The fruits of the herbe named the Artochoke (wil become swete and delectable in the eating (if ye owner before the cōmitting of the sedes to the earth) doe sti
                     •
                  pe them for two or three days, either in new milk, honey, sugred water or wine aromatized, and after the drying in the aire, doth then bestow them in beds a foot distance one from the other. The

Artochocks be set in Haruest, which is about the moneth of October, that these may yeld plentie of fruits or heads, ought to be those bearing big leaues & stalkes, wyth big stems growne or shot vp in the middes: which big leaues after serue to none other purpose but to be broken frō the bodies, and the plants to be bestowed agayn in beds, with ye stems in like maner cut off and cast away, as seruing to no vse, well tourned in with dung: these set in such maner that the tendrer leaues grow vptight, & the stemmed in ye middle being low broken off, to be diligently couered with light earth. And herin the Gardener must haue a care to ye watering of them, at times nedeful, if the seasons sufficiētly moyst not, either in the winter or in any other time of the yeare, to set forward or procure spedily the Artochockes to come: & set again the tender plants in well dunged beddes, couering them well aboute with Ashes and black earth, the better to beare & suffer the cold Winter tyme, which in the yeare followyng, will yelde newe fruites.
               Many skilfull Authours write, that if the leaues of the Artochoke be well couered in the grounde, aboute the beginning of Winter, they will after become not only white, but pleas
                     •
                  unter in the eating, whereby to serue among the Winter meates.
               Here I thinke it profitable to the owner to know, that the big leaues or braunches ought yeerely to be broken off, from the olde stemmes or bodies, leaste the elder in their yeelde might bee hindred, and the yonger plantes in farther distances set, that these may prosper and sende forthe their fruites the better, for suche is the fruitefull and plentyfull yeelde of this Plante, that the braunches or great leaues broken off from the tender stemmes, and set againe in the earth, will after cleaue & ioyne togither, as certaine reporte, and oftentimes to yeelde in the same yere, both the stemme & outward roughnes wyth prickes on it. The skilfull writers of the Greeke Husbandrie will, that the owner or Gardner in the opening and digging away of the Earth, to cut them vp with a sharpe hooke, leauing some part of the roote in the earth, which so pulled vp, and annointing the roote with softe dung, set again in a well labored groūd, turned in with olde dung wel three foote a sunder, & often water them, when the drye season commeth, vntill the plantes shall bee sufficientlye strengthned in the Earthe.
               Those which the Gardner mindeth to let run or growe vnto Seede,

such shall hee separate from all the yong plantes, as Palladius willeth, and couer the heads eyther with a thinne Potshard, or Barke of a tree, in that the Seedes 
                     ••
                  e commonly wo
                     •
                  te to bee corrupted through the Sunne or shoures of Raine, and by that meanes these to perishe and come to no vse, whiche if the Seedes be eyther burnt with the Sunne, or putrifyed with the moysture of shoures, will after yeeld to the Gardener no commoditie in the bestowing in the Earth.
               The owner or Gardener may not gather the fruites of the Artochokes all at one time, for asmuche as the heads ripen not togither, but one after the other, so that the owner ought then to gather the fruites, when as these onely haue floures belowe in forme of a Garlande, and not before that time, wherefore if the Gardener doe stay vntill all the floures be shedde, the fruites will be the worser, and lesser delectable in the eating.
               The Gardener must carefully looke vnto, that the Mice haunt not to the rootes of the Artochokes, for once allured through the pleasaunte tast of them, they after resort in great number from farre places, to the maruellous spoyle of the rootes, as the Greeke Varro in his worthy instructions of Husbandrie hathe diligently noted, yet not leauing the same without a healpe and remedie: for he reporteth, that the sharp assault and enterprise of them is withstanded and driuen awaye, if the Gardener eyther lappe Woolle aboute the rootes, or Swynes dung, or bestowe the Figgetree ashes in like manner about them.
               The Moles in like manner doe maruellously harme, and be iniurious to the rootes, in so muche that through their often casting, and hollowing of the ground, the whole plantes are procured to fall or leane, through feeblenesse in the Earth, for remedie of whiche annoyance, the Gardener may eyther bring vppe and learne a yong Catte, or tame a Weesill, to hunt dayly in those places.
               There be which 
                     〈…〉
                   plantes of the Artochoke, in a fall and drie grounde, to the ende the Moles should not so lightly in their working, ouerthrowe them.
               The owner whiche woulde vnderstande and knowe other healpes, let him resort vnto those experiments, whiche wee haue vttered in the first part.
               
                  
                  The Phisicke benefites and helpes of the Artochoke.
                  THe Artochocke eaten greene or rawe with vineger reformeth the sauoure of the mouth. The Eared and scalie kernels cleauing or sticking round about the heade, being tenderly boyled (after the manner of the Sperage) from which after the licoure poudered, the Eares agayne boyled with Butter, and seasoned with vineger, and Salte, doe yeelde a delectable sauce with meate right profitable.
                  There be some, which rather eate the Eares 
                        〈◊〉
                      than sodden, being afore prepared with Salte and the fine pouder of Pepper or Coliander seedes strawed vpon, for by that meanes (as they affyrme) is the natural sweetnesse of them more kindly and delectably represented and felte.
                  Certain reporte, that the Eares only steeped in wine, to cause vrine and moue the venerial act, as the worthy Hesiodus reporteth, whiche (as Ruellius hath noted) at the bearing of the floure, the Grashoppers then do lowdest sing, and women greediest to the venerial acte, but men at the same time flowst.
                  The roote (after cleane scraping and keping forth of the Pyth) boyled in wine, and drunke, not onlye amendeth the hardnesse of making water, but the ranke sauoure & stinking smel of the Armeholes, which Xenocrates affirmeth, of experience, to send forth on such wise ye stincke in the vrine, caused by the heate of the smal pockes, or of any other occasion.
                  The Artochocke tenderly boyled and eaten, is sayde to strengthen ye stomacke, and helpe somewhat the priuie places, that men childrē may be conceiued, as the Athenian Cherias and Glaucias affirme,
                  The worthy Galen reporteth, the meate of the Artochocke to bee of an euil nourishment, and incommodious to the stomacke, especially when the same shall be harde at the first yeelding of the floure, for then the Eares possesse a great quantitie of Cholericke iuyce in thē
                     ▪ which for the same, ought rather to bee eaten boyled, than raw yet some be of this minde, that the yonger heades, tender and ful of iuyce, being prepared (as afore taught) may with the more delight, and lesser harme be eaten.
               
            
            
               
               What skil and diligence to be learned in sowing, and workmanly ordering, both of the Endyue and Succorie. Chap. 14.
               
                  THe Endyue, otherwise named the Sycorie or soure Lettuce, serueth rather for the vse of Medicine, than for other purposes, so that by a trauel caused to grow acceptable in the Garden, for as muche as this of it selfe, by nature, is euermore soure, although it bee a kinde of the Lettuce, which ought often to be remoued and changed into sundry places, that the nature of it may on such wise be altered, with lesser trauaile to the Gardener.
               The Endyue thus bestowed in Beddes, may wel abyde the colde season of wynter, wherefore in colde Countries, this better agreeth to be sowen neare the ende of Haruest, and well growen vp, to be remoued and layde againe in the earth, that these, in the lying, may on such wise become whyte, if so be (before the couering) the Herbes be strewed ouer with riuer sande, and often watered (if not holpen by shoures of rayne) which then couer with light earth, letting these so rest, vntill by a diligence in the watering, they become sufficientlye white for Salettes or other purposes. The yong plants of the Endiue are not to be remoued, before that soure leaues be sufficiently sprong vp, and these cutte at the endes of the rootes, aswel as the toppes of the leaues, with softe Cowe dung annoynted about the rootes, before ye bestowing in the earth, whiche lightly couered, water so long, vntil the plants, be sufficient strong in the Earth.
               The Sycorie is of the nature of the Endyue, which in like maner retayneth the proper bitternesse, being not like remoued and ordered as the Endyue. This desireth a moyst grounde and the Earth to bee well laboured, when soure leaues be come vp: the plants after the remouing, ought againe to bee set in a wel dunged earth, and that these may yelde faire, large and long leaues, let the owner, after the leaues be somewhat more shot vp, or on the myddle of them lay a peece of a Tylestone, for by the waight of the same, wyll the leaues spreade out, and inioye more Touffrs or grow thicker. By this workmanly ordering, wil the bitternesse of the leaues be remoued, & they aptly serue in the winter tyme,

for the vse of the Sallets, if so be the plants be set againe, in the ende of August, or rather in the beginning of September, when the leaues are shotte vp big, and in the pulling vp, the Earth not knocked of the rootes, but with soft Cow dung the rootes gentlye annoynted aboute, and bestowed after in beds wel turned in with dung.
               The leaues layde along in wel dunged Beddes (to be white) couer so ouer with lose Earth, that the rootes maye lye vpwarde, and ouer them lying a long in the Earth, make some couerture in the forme of a herboring place, or rather strewe vpon them the chaffe or corne, for the better defence of the colde, and bitter windes.
               Certayne report, that the like may be purchased, if the owner, after certaine leaues of the Sycorie shotte vppe, byndeth altogither, with a browne threede, and couereth them after with a potte of Earth, to the ende that those may dayly drawe by the rootes, a nourishment from ye earth, which by the same meanes, shall purchase both a whitenesse and tendernesse, and loose a greate part of the proper sourenesse.
               
                  The Phisicke helpes, both of the Endyue and Sychorie.
                  The Endiue, which by another name, is termed the wilde Lettuce, is reported to be colde and drye in the seconde degree, and of this, onlye the leaues & seeds serue to the vse of Phisicke, yet are the leaues brought apte to be eaten in Sallets.
                  The roote, by the consent of al writers, is to little vse, therfore in our time, seldome applyed in Medicine.
                  The greene leaues exercised in Medicine, are to great purpose, but ye drie, preuaile little or nothing at al.
                  The greene serue to comforte, for which cause they preuaile against the stopping of the Liuer and Mylte, through the occasion of Choler, and these like preuaile againste a simple and double Tertian, and against the heate of the Lyuer, and against hot or burning impostumes eaten eyther sodden, or rawe with vineger. The Syrupe made of the decoction of the Hearbe with Sugar, auayleth in al the abouesayde.
                  The iuyce or Syrupe giuen with Ruberbe, about the fourth or sixt

day after digestion of the matter, greatly preuaileth for the heate of the Liuer, and a burning impostume, the saide Hearbe or iuyce applyed in plaister forme, greatly auayleth. If the leaues can not be had, then vse the seeds brused and boyled, it to applying the same hotte places, which greatly profiteth.
                  The iuyce of leaues applyed on hot pushes, qualifieth and draweth forth the heate in them, the Herbe brused and layd on hot impostumes greatly helpeth. The herbe aplyed on the left pap with vineger, mightily profiteth the Cardiacke passion, the same on the bellie, stayeth the flyxe.
                  The Sirupe made or the Endiue and Hartes tongue, preuayleth against the kings euill, the Herbe applyed in plaister forme, with Ceruse and vineger, healeth the Shingles, hot impostumes, and swellings: the iuyce applyed with vineger and Rosewater on the temples, aswageth the headache. The drinking of the iuyce, euery seconde day, recouereth the spitting of bloud, and aswageth the excesse of Sperme. The iuice is effectuously annoynted with Ceruse and vineger, on all partes, whiche are healed by cooling.
                  The Sicorie is of a drie and colde quality, yet somewhat more than ye Endyue, this Hearbe (as Aegineta reporteth) is both of cooling & drying in the first degree, and hath also the vertue of bynding.
                  The Hearbe brused with the roote, and rounde Trochyses or flatte Bals made of the same, which after dissolued in Rosewater, & annoynted on scabbed places, doth both cure them, and causeth a fayrer skinne. If any vse this potion, made with the iuyce of Cychorie, Endyue, and Harts tong, to which a quantitie of Sugar added, in the boyling with water and a little vineger, doth in short time recouer the stopping of ye Liuer and Mylt.
                  So that pilles of Ruberbe be after ministr
                        •
                     d, and the comforting Electuarie of the three Saunders taken.
                  If any prepareth this playster made of Serapium, & Myrre, of each a like waight, to which the oyle of Camomil and Hony in like proportiō added, & the same applyed warme to the womans priuie place, doth on such wise purge the Matrice, yt she may after conceiue with child. And in the proper purgings of the women (as Plinie reporteth) the decoction of the Hearbe in water somuche preuayleth, that it draweth

forthe the dead yongling.
                  The iuyce of the Herbe boyled, and ministred, looseth the bellye, helpeth the Liuer, kydneys, and stomacke, boyled in vineger remoueth the vexing payne of the vryne, yea the kings euill, applyed with Milke or water and Hony, if it be without a Feuer.
                  The Cychorie taken with vineger (as Discorides reporteth) is profitable to the stomacke, for that the same in meate aswageth ye heate and infirmities of the same. And by it selfe applyed, and with barlye meale layed playster wise on the regyon of the heart, greatly helpeth, in the plague, and burning Agues the same is to be vsed to great purpose. It also qualifieth Pestilent pushes, if the water of ye decoction of ye same be applyed on the places, with linnen clothes. The floure throwen into a pismyers hyl, soone after becommeth as red as bloud.
                  Thys Herbe boyled in wine, and taken with meate, is verye profitable to the stomack, in that the same helpeth digestiō, the floures brused with the rootes, and applyed in plaister fourme on the Goute, doe incō
                     tynente aswage the paine of the same proceeding of heate. This playster applyed on the Shingles, doth maruellously▪remoue the mightye heate.
               
               
                  The commended vertues of the distilled water, both of the Endyue and Cychorie.
                  THe time aptest for the distilling of Endiue, is in the end of May, the leaues (before the distilling) plucked from the stemmes, and finely shredde.
                  The Endiue water drunk vnto ye quantite of two ounces at a time both morning and euening, profiteth the straightnes and stopping of the breast, in the same maner drunk, is auailable to women with childe in that thys both strengthneth them, and amendeth senses.
                  The Endyue water mixed with the water of Plantein, Rose water, and the white Sief without Opium, of which an oyntement made after arte, doth in short time recouer vlcers distempered of a hot matter, and especially those hapning on the priuities.
                  The sayd water with the iuyce of the Marche Mallowe rootes, oyle of Roses and Camomil, Saffron, barlie meale, & the yolkes of Egges

mixed altogither ouer the fire, and applyed in plaister forme, is a presēt remedy, both for the Goute of the handes and feete.
                  The Endiue water drunke vnto the quantity of foure or fiue ounces at a tyme, both morning and euening, recouereth the plague, repelleth or putteth away the kings euil, ceasseth thirst, & in good quantity drunke aswageth the heate of the Liuer.
                  This helpeth the stitch in the side, and pricking felte about the heart, drunke vnto the quantitie of three or foure ounces at a time, both morning & euening, a lynnē cloth or bolster of hempe applyed on a hot Liuer, qualifieth the heate, or in what part of ye body the like hapneth, but as the linnen clothes waxe drye, euermore to wet them in this water.
                  The best time for distilling the Cichorie, is in the middle of Maye, the herbe & roote to be finely shred, before the distilling in a tin Limber
                        ••
                     .
                  The water of Cychory drunke vnto the quantitie of two ounces at a time, both morning and euening, and at Noone, or taken with drinck in this manner, remoueth the heate of the stomacke. This drunke in the like maner or applyed with linnen clothes on the region of the Hearte, both comforteth and strengthneth the heart and stomacke.
                  And as this applied wt linnē clothes on the Liuer, aswageth the heate of it, so it openeth the stopping of the same. This drunk in the sayd maner, preserueth the creature from the plague This like auayleth for carbuncles, eyther drunke, or applyed with linnen clothes on the places: this also often drunke, stayeth the rysing of the lungs vnto the throte, and stoppeth the perillous flixe Disenteria.
                  
                  The water in like quantitie drunke, openeth the stopping of the Liuer & Mylte, this gargelled in the mouth and drunke, helpeth the swelling of the Vuula and throte, it helpeth also wasted members, if those be often bathed with the same and drunk in like condition or applyed with linnen clothes, helpeth the bit of a venemous beast.
                  The floures after ye gathering in ye morning, distilled in Balneo Mariae and orderly applyed, serueth vnto dyuerse impediments of the eyes, as vnto the vlcers of them, the mistynes or dymnesse of sight, the Pynne, web, and spottes in the eyes, and vnto many other like griefes.
               
            
            
               
               What care, skil, and secretes to be learned in the sowing, and workmanly ordering of the Lettuce. Chap. 15.
               
                  THe Garden Lettuce, desireth a wel laboured ground, fat, moyst, and dunged, appearing for the more part by the fourth daye aboue the Earth, so that the Seede in the Earth be not burned of the sun, or the ground vnfruiteful. The seed may be committed to the earth, al the yere through if the place for the growing, shal be battle dunged, and moyst. The seedes may be sowen in beds thicke togither, and in the moneth of March or beginning of April, in that the tender plantes can not indure the nipping frostes, nor colde ayre. Those seedes whych the owner bestoweth in beddes in the moneth of September, will so be hardned for the winter time, that the plantes may well endure to bee remoued and set at any tyme, and watred for two or three days togither, vnlesse these be otherwise moystned with the dayly and sweete shoures of the ayre. And in committing of the seedes to the Earth, the owner oughte to haue a care, for watering of the beddes, leaste the heate consisting in the dung, breatheth or casteth the seedes forth of the earth.
               The plantes r
                     •
                  sen or sprong vppe, well foure or fiue leaues aboue the Earth, ought then to bee remoued and sette agayne into a fatte grounde, a good distaunce one from the other, and to water them well at the rootes, so that it freese not, nor the season bee very
                     •
                   hotte.
               The owner or Gardener maye not remoue (to sette agayne) the small or common Lettuces, but the greate, whyche wyll become crisped and thicke (named of diuerse, the Romayne Lettuce) that yeeldeth whyte and farre bigger seedes: these if the Gardener bestoweth agayne in Beddes, wyll shoote vppe farre fayrer and greater in Touff
                     •
                  , and in taste pleasaunter, if hee especially breake awaye the firste leaues before the setting of them in Beds, for as much as the first or outward stalks haue much milke in thē, which wil lightly become bitter through the heate of the Sunne.
               If the owner would possesse fayre and whit Leettuces, he ought to

bynde the leaues vp togither with a threede, well two dayes before the plucking vppe▪ and setting againe in other Beddes, whych so done, he must straw thicke ouer, with riuer or sea sād, which the worthy Plinie seemeth only to ascrybe to those which yeelde the white Seedes, whose nature is such, yt they best indure the cold winter. But if these through ye defaulte of the place, season, or seeds, waxe harde, the Gardener may procure the plantes to grow tēder, by plucking them vp, and setting thē in wel wrought beddes.
               The Lettuce spreadeth into a breadth, if so bee the owner eyther setteth it asunder, or when it is growen into bigge leaues, the tops gently cut off, it be pressed downe with a Turffe of Earth, Tile or Potshard, wherby it may the lesse shoote vp into a stēme. For through the waight thus layed vpon (the plante kept vnder) is forced to crepe, and shed forth into a breadth, as the singular Florentinus in his Greeke husbandrie, & after hym Columella, to these, Plinie and the worthy Neapolitan Rutilius vtter.
               The Lettuces are caused to grow broade, rounde, thicke of leaues, crysped, and low by the earth, if the plants remoued when they be shotte vp a hande breadth, be after the cutting awaye of the hearie rootes, annoynted wel about with newe Cow dung, and in heaping the Earth well about them, be often watered, and assoone as these are growen to a more strength, to clip the tops of the leaues off with a sharpe payre of sheares, and to couer them with pottes of earth new filled, in such maner that the tops beaten or pressed down, may grow touffed round vp, and white, as the sayde Florentinus (in his Greeke instructions of husbandrie) reporteth that he did.
               If the owner myndeth to inioye Lettuces sweete in taste and smell, let him (two dayes before the pulling vp) bynde vp the toppes of the leaues harde togither, for by that meanes in the farther growing, will the plants be the fayrer, sweter, and whyter. Herein remembring, that at the tying (on such wyse) of the plantes, & they stronger growen to be then pressed down, as afore taught, with either Tile or potshard or Turfe of Earth.
               The skilfull Florentinus (doth also affirme) that the plants may bee caused to grow swete and pleasant of smel, if the owner bestoweth of ye lettice seedes, into the citron seedes, before the committyng to the earth

whiche likewise the Gardner may performe, by infusing the seedes in eyther damaske or muske water, for certayne dayes.
               Here I thinke 
                     〈◊〉
                   not impertinent to the matter, to recite in this place the meruaylous deuise of Aristoxenus Cyreneus: This man as Plinie wryteth, leauing his proper countrey, for the earnest desyre hee had to Philosophie, and setting a felicitie in banketting dishes, watred at euening diuers Lettuses (as they grewe on the earth) with wine and honey mixed togither, & with the same lycour so long filled thē, vntil the herbes had sufficiently drunke: whiche after he had left them vnto the next morowe, boasted that hee had purchased dilicates from the earth. This no doubte a worthie inuention for a proper banket, but no philosophie consisting in it: therfore leauing further to reporte of this, wee will returne to our former matter.
               The Lettuce obtaineth a tenderer leaf, or the leaues become the tenderer, if the roote (as aforesayde) be diligently anoynted about with the best Cowdung, and watered at nedefull tymes with riuer or running water, or the toppes of the leaues, as I afore wrote, tyed close togither with a threade, well two days before the pulling vp and setting again.
               If the Gardener desire to haue a plāt to grow of a maruelous form, & diuers in tast, he shal with an easy cost and light trauaile (as the skilfull Greeke Didymus reporteth) performe the same, if he will properly make a hole into a round pellet made of Goates dung, and into the same put of the Lettuce, Cresses, Basill, Rocket, and Radish seedes (as the lyke Rutilius writeth) and that ball wrapped in dung, be bestowed in a well labored earth, the furrow not being depe, and soft dung layde ouer, with the light earth: and this often and gently (or by little and little) sprinckled with water: For the radishe shooting downe performeth the roote, but the other seedes shoote into a heighth, the Lettuce rising withall, and eche yelding the plant in their proper taste.
               There be some which in two or three terdyles of the Goate or shepe brused, and made vp into a ball, bestowe the forsayd seedes, and tying this in a linnen cloth, doe sette it into the earth, with the lyke care and diligence, as aboue is vttered.
               Many of the Latin writers of husbandry taught the same in an other maner, by gathering whole leaues of the Lettuce, growing nexte to the roote, in the holowe pittes and places of which leaues, the owner

to bestowe, excepte the Radish (as Rutilius writeth) or the Parseley (as Ruellius instructeth) all the afore named Seedes, which leaues annointed aboute wyth softe dung to be sette into a well dunged grounde, and the Seedes diligently couered ouer with Earthe.
               If anye woulde possesse Lettuces for the winter tourne, oughte to conserue them (as Columella instructeth) after this manner, in plucking firste awaye the outwarde leaues rounde aboute, that the tender leaues lefte apparante and vncouered, might well bee salted in an earthen pot or other vessell, and lefte couered for a daye and a nyghte, after suche manner, vntill these with the helpe of the Salte, yeelded forth a Brine.
               The Brine throughlye pourged awaye wyth freshe water, and the licoure pressed forth of the leaues, to let them lye abroade on a Lattesse, vntill the leaues bee sufficiente drye, then to strawe the drye Dill, and Fennell on them, after this to laye the heapes or handfulls of the Lettuces into the vessell agayne, on whyche to powre the licoure made of twoo partes of Uineger and one of the Brine: after this, so to thruste downe the whole substance with a dry thickening, that the licour may flote and appeare well aboue all, whyche on suche wise ordered, muste diligently be tended vppon, that as often as the substance aboue, seemeth to lye bare and vncouered, to fyll alwayes vppe with the saide licoure, but with a Spunge keepe cleane the lyppes and outside of the potte, washed diligentlye aboute wyth freshe Conduite water, and this so often vse, as neede shall require.
               
                  The phisicke benefites and helpes of the Lettuce.
                  THe Lettuce colleth and moistneth in the seconde degree, Aegineta affyrmeth that the Lettuce both manifestly cooleth and moistneth, throughe whiche, it procureth slepe, and as the same among other potherbs greatly norisheth, euen so is it a worker and causer of good bloud.
                  Certain report, that Augustus Caesar by vsing of the Lettuce in the tyme of his sicknes recouered to health: And no meruayle, in that the same helpeth digestion, and ingendreth better bloud, than any of the potherbes. The Lettuce found of experience to be commodious to the stomacke, procureth also sleepe, looseth the belly, and causeth plentifulnesse of mylke in the breastes. The Lettuce seede giueth to Noursses

the plentifulnesse of 
                        ••
                     lk, and sharpneth the sight, being taken in drink. The same drunke in wine procureth sleepe: a plaister only made of the lettuce, and applied on hot impostumes and the Shingles▪ doth mightily coole: The lettuce sodden and mixed with the oyle Oliue, receiued inward by potion, doth helpe in shorte tyme the dropsie.
                  The iuyce of the Lettuce annoynted on the forhead of him that hath the feuer, & can not slepe, procureth rest & slepe to the pacient (as ye skilful Florentinus writeth) which also affirmeth, that a man shal not be ouercome wt drink, if he afore eat with a fasting stomack, grene lettuce.
                  To these he addeth, that seedes of the Lettuce brused and drunke▪ to stay the sheding of Sperm, for which cause this is profitably taken or drunk against the night pollutiōs, hapning to many yong persons.
                  Thys author besides vttereth, that the Lettuce layde vnder the couerlet, the sick person not knowing therof, and gathered after this maner, as with the left hande pulled vp by the roote before the Sun rising, dothe soone after cause sleepe. A lyke to this hee reporteth, if fyue, three, or one leafe be layde priuily vnder the bolster of the sicke, but in such maner, that the bigger ende of the stalke and leafe lye to the feeteward, and the toppe or smaller ende to the head.
                  Here learne, that the plentifull and dayly eating of the Lettuce of marryed persons, is verye incommodious and noysome to them, as the Greeke wryters of Husbandrye haue noted, in that the same (as they write) not only doth diminish the fruitfulnesse of childrē, but the children after borne, to become idle, foolish, and peuish persons. But the physitions in our time write contrary: for they say, that Lettuce neither doth increase euil bloud, nor the same throughly perfect, yet is the Lettuce (by their agreemēt) worthier than the other potherbs: For the Lettuce is preferred (as Galen writeth) & not without good reson to other her
                        •
                     es, in yt there is none known or found to be of better norishment.
                  This also in the Sommer time (as the saide Authour writeth) is a gratefull and profitable meate, forasmuch as by nature it cooleth. This ministred too hotte and Cholericke stomackes, is maruelously auailable: yet the often vse dulleth the sight of the eies, & procureth a moistnes, yea and abateth the desire of the venereall act. This also through the often eating greatly harmeth such fetching the winde short, spitting vp, of bloud, and the fleumatike. This herbe besides too oftē and much vsed

as wel sodden as raw) is no lesse perillous than the eating of the Hemlock. The Lettuce in the sommer time is vsed rather for Physik sake, than for the proper nourishment which it yeldeth, as vnto the moystening and cooling: yet this seing it may be discerned colde, who needeth to doubt, that it can ingender in any manner sounde and pure bloud in vs: for the substance of it common to vs, whiche is both mylkie and sweete, and to these meanly digested, is for the same readily and lightly chaunged into bloud. The Lettuce therfore eaten moderately, doth procure in vs good bloud, and helpeth many tymes the tertian agewe, and the herbe is sayd to loose the belly, in that this thorough the proper moysture and coldnes, both colleth and tempreth the immoderate heat of the lyuer, whiche notwithstanding for the speedy and vehement distribution and carying away of the meate and drinke, is many tymes wont to bynde the belly. The herbe eaten either rawe, or boyled with vineger and Suger, doth dissolue the stopping of the milte and lyuer, yet eaten rawe in much quantitie, is sayd to trouble the sight, and both harme the eyes, and cause a mistinesse that thickneth and dulleth the visiue spirites, and causeth the christalline humor troubled, and offendeth the animal spirite through the proper coldnesse consisting in it.
                  Many vse the Lettuce before it bee risen into a stalke, boyling it in water or broath, which likewise (the worthy Galen reporteth) that he did in his olde age, yet not eating the 
                        •
                     ame before the boyling, for the hardnesse which he founde to ensue by the eating of it rawe: notwithstanding the sayd Galene in yong age vsed the rawe Lettuce, to represse the heate of choler in the stomacke: but when he came to olde age, he vsed to eate the lettuce boyled at supper, to procure the sweeter and longer sleepe in the night: so that the lettuce boyled and eaten at supper, or at the houre of going to bed, was to him a singular remedie to cause a quiete sleepe.
                  The auncient vsed not to eate the Lettuce at the beginning of supper, but at the latter ende, the reason of which was, that seing the Lettuce (as we haue aforesayd) is of a cold and moyst nature, therefore the eating of the same at the ende of supper, and mixed with the other dainties in the stomack, it causeth the sooner and sounder sleep in the night, and this the readyer represseth the vaporous fumes of heady wine and drunkennesse: also it is the sooner maistre and stayed thorough the

mightie moistening of the braine. The Lettuce seedes brused, and mixed wyth the white of an egge and womans 
                        ••
                     lke, applyed in playster forme on the temples of foreheade warme, at the going to reste, doth maruellouslie procure sleepe: A lyke to this, dothe the iuice of the Lettuce, and womans milke, of eche a like quantitie, to whyche halfe an ounce of white Popie seede brused, and applied warme on the forehead.
                  The Seede brused and druncke, ceasseth the often imaginations of the venereall acte in sleepe, and represseth the desire of the naturall acte.
                  The worthy Phisitions in oure time, haue deuised a more healthfull way for the eating of rawe Lettuce, at Dynners and Suppers in the Sommer tyme, by mixing with it vineger, oyle Olyue and salte, (which so prepared) ioyning with other meates on the table, that the same may stirre vp the feeble appetite, caused by great heate, and bothe temper the burnyng of bloud, and mitigate the heate of the lyuer and hearte, notwithstanding the herbe in this maner prepared, ought waryly to be vsed, se
                        •
                     ng the immoderate vse of the herbe (as afore vttered) doth extinguishe the earneste will to the venereall acte.
                  The married persons (desiring the procreation of children) oughte soberly and measurably feede on the Lettuce, but to the Cholericke persons this hearbe is not denyed, so that the coldnesse of it with Rocket, Cresses▪ Mintes, Maioram, and suche like be afore tempered, to the apter cooling of their stomackes.
               
               
                  The commended vertues of the distilled water of Lettuce.
                  THe Garden Lettuce gathered aboute the middle of Maye, oughte after the finely shredding, to be distilled wyth a softe fyre in eyther Balneo Mariae or Tynne Lymbecke. This water of the crisped or Garden Lettuce druncke to the quantitie of twoo ounces at a time, bothe morning and euening profiteth the Lyuer, in that by nature it cooleth and comforteth the same, and cooleth the bloud inflamed The water in like manner drunke, stayeth the perillous Flixe Disenteria, and other vehemente Flixes of the bellie: this amendeth the trembling of m
                        •
                     mbers, and healpeth those whiche cannot quietly sleepe: this annointed on the Temples of the heade, and p
                        •••
                     ses of the hands procureth sleepe.
                  The water druncke, 
                        〈◊〉
                      women lacking milke, if they eyther

take it alone or in drinke, 
                        〈…〉
                      suche wise this procureth store of milke in the Breastes. The water ceasseth and amendeth a hotte and drye coughe taken in drinke, mollifyeth the throate, clenseth the breaste and tungs, ceasseth thirste▪ tempeteth the heate of the stomacke, lyuer, and kidneys, this besides in good quantitie taken looseth the belly.
               
            
            
               What care and skill requyred in the sowing and ordering of the purselane and Rocket. Chap. 16.
               
                  THe Garden Purselan, how diligētly the same is bestowed, so muche the larger it spreadeth on the earth, and yeeldeth the thicker leafe. This desireth to bee sowen in Februarye, Marche, Aprill, Maye and June, and in no other times, for this hearbe cannot well endure the colde season. This plentifullye yeeldeth and spreadeth, 
                     •
                  eing bestowed in beds well turned in with olde dung, or in grounde very fat of it selfe, or otherwise sowen amongest Colewortes, Onions, & Leekes. And after these haue ioyed a yere in the Garden, they will yearely come vp wythout paynes to the Gardner, of the owne accord, yet the hearbes desire euery yere, to be often watered, to the ende that these maye yeelde the bygger Tuf
                     ••
                  , and thicker leafe.
               The Seedes ought to be 
                     •
                  owen vnder the shadowe of Trees, and in an Harboure where trees growe not too thicke, for these otherwise bestowed vnder a thicke shadowe, growe thinne and small of leafe. The Purselane is one of the Garden hearbes, serued firste in Sallets wyth Oyle, Uineger and a little Salte, aswell at the meane, as riche mens tables, yea thys for a dainty dish with many serued firste at the table in the winter time, preserued after thys manner.
               The greatest stemmes and leaues of the Purselane wythout rootes were gathered in that the smaller sti
                     •
                  ped (lightly decayed and withered) and these wyth water clearely and throughlye clensed from the fyne Sande, hanging on, and the f
                     •
                  lthe or corrupte leaues if any suche were cleane purged away, and these so long they dryed in the shadowe, vntill they were somewhat withered, for otherwise (through the plentie of moisture) they either moulded or rotted in the lying. After these were they infused in ueriuice made of so
                     ••
                  e grapes, strewed thicke ouer

with greene Fennell, bestowed in an earthen pot glased within, or for the lacke of it, in a sweete vessell of woode: after this, the who
                     •
                  e sprinkled well ouer wyth salte, laying greene Fennell againe ouer the Salte, and sundry courses of Purselane, wyth Salte and Fennell bestowed to the filling vp of the pot, and ouer the vpper bed of Purselane againe, a thicke course of greene fennell strowed, whiche settled the whole mixture downe into the pot.
               These being done, the licours whiche was tempered or mixed wyth twoo parts of vineger, and one of veriuyce made of grapes was poured vpon, in such order & so full that the same reached vppe to the brimm
                     •
                   or lip of the vessell. The same prickle or sauce at the ende, close couered with a lid, was set vp in a dry place to be preserued for 
                     〈◊〉
                   the beames of the Sun coming, least the substāce through the standing of the place might gather a vinew or mouldines ouer the same which also as they affirme may be auoided, if the Purselane be not suffred to lye f
                     •
                  oting aboue, but always couered well one
                     •
                   with the licoure when they vsed & serued it at the table, they afore clensed it with warme water or wine, & pouring 
                     〈◊〉
                   oyle on the Purselane, they set it as a fi
                     •••
                   dish
                     •
                   on the table, to procure an appetite to the guests satte downe to meate. The Rocket is added to the Lettuce in Sallets, to the ende it may tempe
                     •
                   the con
                     •
                  tarye vertue of the same, so that the Lettuce is seldome eaten with meate without the Rocket, and the Sallet on suche wise prepared is caused the delectabler and yeeldeth the more healthe to ma
                     •
                  . And the worthye Galen in hys booke de aliment. 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   willeth no man to eate the Lettuce or Purselane without the Rocket, nor the Rocket cō
                  trariwise in any sallet, without Lettuce or purselane, that in asmuch as the one cooleth and harmeth the venereall acte, the other throughe the heating in the eyther ma
                     •
                  ter profiteth man▪ The seedes may be committed to the earth and the Hearbe planted, aswell in the winter tyme, as in sommer, for it neyther f
                     •••
                  eth the colde, nor anye other distempe
                  
                     •
                  aneye of the ayre, nor this requireth greate laboure about the bestowing of the seedes in the earth, and after the commyng vppe, it especially ioyeth to be often weeded, but the seedes to be sowen in a sandie or 
                     •
                  rauelly grounde, ought afore to be well 
                     〈…〉
                  .
               
                  
                  The phisicke helpes and remedies both of the Purselane and Rocket.
                  THe Purselane cooleth in the thirde degree, and moistneth in the seconde, the Herbe vsed freshe and greene, is better allowed: (for thys dried hath small vse and vertue) in that it mitigateth and moisteneth.
                  The Purselane throughe the proper coldenesse, asswageth hotte and Cholericke flures, through the often applying and cooling, and helpeth the persons afflicted with a burning Feuer, and the teeth astonished or on edge, by eating of sowre things, is amended by the only eating of the freshe hearbe. The Juice of this applyed, healpeth the Shingles, and both bridleth the venereall acte, and abateth sleepe. The herbe expelleth the wormes of the belly, & drunke with wine, stayeth the perillous Fluxe Disenteria. The decoction of the Purselane, holden for a whiles in the mouth, ceasseth the tothache, if the Juice be annoynted, healpeth outward inflamations. The person which hath a hot stomacke, or the mouth of the stomacke swollen, shal throughly be holpen by eating of the fresh Purselane. The Juice drunk, mightely cooleth inward heats, the hearbe eaten, amendeth the vlcers of the priuities, yet hurtfull to the eyes, and somwhat cooleth the body. A plaister made of the Purselane, and applyed with barly meale on hot vlcers (where a feare is that the matter in them putrifyeth) much profiteth, or if it shall be a hot impostume, which f
                        •
                     eeth within from one member to another, this greately amendeth. The Purselane also remoueth the vlcers of the heade, if brused it be tempered with wine, and the heade washed with the same.
                  Thys applyed, healpeth swollen eyes, and preuayleth againste the spitting of bloud, yet eaten rawe, filleth the stomacke with a clammye humoure, the daily eating of it, abateth the desire to the venereall acte, yet eaten wyth Uineger, it remoueth the burnyng Feuer: the Hearbe brused with Barly meale, and heated on the fyre, and then applied to the stomacke, qualifieth the heate of the same the Purselane vsed of women molested with the monthely course, stayeth it wythout griefe in shorte tyme.
                  The Purselane 
                        •
                     hawed in the mouth profiteth againste the bleeding of the Nose, the same doth the Juice performe annointed on the Foreheade. The Purselane mixed with harly meale, and applied in playster

forme, ceaseth the headache, extinguisheth the heate of the eyes, stayeth the perillous flixe Disenteria, and strengthneth bothe the kidneyes and Bladder. The iuyce gyuen in drinke, helpeth burning Feuers, kylleth the wormes in the Bellie, and stayeth the spitting forth of bloud.
                  The iuyce bestowed in glister wise, helpeth the excoriations in the bowels of women, and the rawnesse of the priuie places within, procured by distillations from the heade.
                  The iuyce of the Herbe is profitably annoynted on the heade, wyth the oyle of Roses, or oyle Olyue, againste the headache caused by the heat of the sun and wounds dangered by blasting, or in a furious heat this mightily mytigateth, with barly meale anoynted.
                  The Hearbe (to greate purpose) is applyed on the Nauyll of infantes fallyng forth by crying, and the Hearbe chewed or rather the iuyce boyled, stayeth the griefe and loose teeth of the heade, yea the iuyce eaten rawe, aswageth the kernels and vlcers in the monthe and swelling of the gummes.
                  
                     Leontinus a Greeke writer of husbandrye wryteth, that the leafe of the Purselane holden vnder the tong of the person molested wyth thirst to mitygate the desire of often drinking, and Plinie writeth, that the iuyce to remoue wartes, by annoynting the places many dayes togither, and hee also wryteth, that the inflamations of the pappes and Goute maye bee aswaged and healed by the iuyce of Purselane with Hony.
                  The sayde Plinie reporteth, that the roote of the Herbe hanged with a threede (about the necke) remoueth the griefe of fall of ye 
                     Vuula, which like hapned to a Judge in Italie, as he writeth.
                  The Herbe Rocket heateth and moysteneth in the seconde degree, the seedes and leaues are only vsed in Medicine.
                  The Herbe boyled and eaten, increaseth the Sperme in the man, whiche Aegineta (lib. 
                     
                        •
                     .) like witnesseth, saying, that the Rocket obtayneth a great vertue in heating, and supposed to increase Sperme, and for the same, to stirre vppe a desire to the Uenereall acte, besides to cause (through the often eating alone) a gyddinesse and payne of the heade.
                  The Rocket 
                        ••
                     creaseth a strong heate, for which cause the same is

hurtfull to the heade, but the Garden Rocket boyled with the Lettuce & Beetes, worketh or causeth no harme, and in such maner 
                        〈◊〉
                     , the same encreaseth the milke in women giuing s
                        •
                     cke, and Nurses.
                  The Rocket eaten, and applyed in playster wise on the pe
                        •
                     ten, causeth vrine, softneth the bellie, cōforteth the stomacke, and helpeth digestion, the iuce of Rocket myxed with an Oxe gau
                        •
                     e, recouereth blacke scarres vnto a whit
                        ••
                     sse, the pymples or pushes on the face, the iuyce with Hony annoynted amendeth in short time.
                  The iuyce or seede myxed wyth Hony, and annoynted on the head, and often vsed with meate, doth kyll the Nyttes and wormes of the heade, but the often vse of Rocket, procureth gripings of the bellie. The roote after the tender boyling brused, and applyed in playster fourme on broken and brused bones, doth put awaye the payne, the Seede brused and drunke in wine recouereth the bytte of venemous beastes. A skilful practicioner reporteth, that if three leaues of the Rocket, bee gathered wyth the lefte hande, and after the boyling in water and Hony mixed togither, takē in drink, the same (sayth he) maruelously auayleth against the Jaundise and hard swelling of the mylte.
               
               
                  The commended Vertues of the distilled waters of Purselane.
                  THe Herbe, stēme, and leaues of the Purselane shred togither ought to be distilled in Balneo Mariae, about the ende of May,
                  The water of Purselane drunke vnto the qua
                        •
                     tine of three ounces at a tyme, both morning and euening, for three or foure dayes togither amendeth the spitting vppe of bloude, and the perillous flyxe Dysenteria.
                  
                  The water drunke in like quantitie at a tyme stayeth any fluxe of the belly, yea putteth away a hot and drye cough
                        •
                     
                     ▪ thys lyke profiteth against the heate of Liuer, ceasseth thyrst, helpeth the plague & remoueth the shortnesse of fetching breath.
                  This water also profitable to infants against heate and the wormes, gyuen in drinke both morning and euening, vnto the quantitie of two ounces at a time.
                  If in two ounces of water of Purselane, 
                        〈…〉
                     
                     
of the Seede of Psilium or fleaworte be steeped for a night, and after a Sp
                        •
                     nge deeped in thys ye tongue bee washed three or foure tymes a daye, whyche through greate heate in a Feuer or other sicknesse is adusted, and draweth to a blackenesse, thys in shorte time recouereth.
                  It helpeth vnto a cooling of the inflamed bloude, either drunke alone or taken in drinke and repelleth the griefes of the Bladder.
               
            
            
               What skil and diligence required, in the sowing and ordering of the Cheruil Smallage, Taragon, and Cresses. Chap. 7.
               
                  THe Hearbe Cheruell ioyeth to be sowen in a well dunged Earthe, in the monethes of Februarie, March and April, sometimes in August and September, to possesse the Herbe in the winter tyme, and this the better prospereth, thorough the often watering, vntill it bee well come vp.
               The Smalledge seedes ought to be sowen in a wel labored Earth, and neare to a stone wal or thicke Hedge, thys Hearbe wel ioyeth in the shadow, and commeth wel vp in any ground. And after this Herbe bee once bestowed in the Garden, a man shall hardely weede it forth quyte, and the Gardener may leaue a stemme or two, to shoote vp into Seede, frō yeare to yeare, for this Herbe wyll indure for euer, without any weeding at al. The owner may committe the seedes to the Earth, after the myddle or ende of Februarie, vnto the beginning of September. Thys Herbe hath the like vertue and properties, which the Parsely possesseth.
               The Taragon of the Garden, bearing Seede like to the Flaxe, ought to bee bestowed in a wel dunged Earth, and after the plants bee shotte vp neare a foote high, the Gardener ought then to take vp the hole bodies, and set them agayne in the selfe same Earth, whych often water, vntill they haue taken strong roote in the Earth. The Taragon enioyeth the like properties, as the Rocket, and maye not be eaten a part or alone, but rather with the Lettuce, Purselane, and such lyke Herbes.
               
                  The Garden Cresses is a soure Herbe in taste like to the Onyon, which the Germaynes (in many places) do often vse in Sallets, but it seemeth that the Herbe is not eaten, withoute other cooling Hearbes matched with it, as the Lettuce, Sorrel, Purselane and such like, which temper the fire or burning force of the Hearbe, euen as the worthye Phisition Galen hath willed it, who forbad the rocket to be eaten without the Lettuce, that the contrary vertue might be tempered. This Herbe ioyeth to bee sowen in moyste places, as by small ryuers or running courses of water, Wels, and springs: for no other labour (after the Seedes bestowed) doe they require, sauing a dayly watering, for the plantes in the comming vppe, desire oftentimes a day to be watered by little and little.
               The Seedes of the Cresses (after the minde of Rutilius) bestowed in Beddes wyth the Lettuce, increaseth verye well, for they ioye in moysture, and hate the dung: And sowen in a shadowie place, in Februarie and Marche, the Plantes reasonablye prosper and come forwarde.
               
                  The Phisicke remedies and helpes both of the Cheruil, and Garden Cresses.
                  THe Cheruel heateth in the thyrde degree, and dryeth in the second, thys Herbe of al persons is eaten rawe with vineger, & in brothes boyled.
                  This Hearbe taken in drinke, procureth vryne, and sendeth downe the Termes in women, brused wyth wine and drunke, mytigateth the griefes and stitches in the side.
                  Thys drunke wyth water and Honye, resolueth or looseth flewme, it putteth away grypings of the bellie, and ingendereth winde.
                  The iuyce of Cheruel taken wyth vyneger, kylleth wormes in the bellie, the Cheruell brought into pouder, and mixed with Honye, healeth a Canker, being annoynted vppon. The Herbe boyled in wine, and drunke, ceaseth the ache and griefe of the Hyppes.
                  The Herbe with the whole substance boyled, if the same bee after mixed wyth vineger, and the heade washed with the same, doth remoue

the dandrye of the heade. In the like manner ordered and applyed, healeth running sores and Cankers.
                  It healeth the bytte of a madde dog, if the person shall drincke of the Seede brused, and shall wash the wounde with the same. The roote of Cheruill boyled with the Hearbe Saxifrage, and drunke, breaketh the stone of the Bladder, and prouoketh vrine. The Cheruell boyled in wyne, and drunk, dissolueth the gathered bloude into knobbes, or otherwise clotted in the bodie.
                  The Herbe after the brusyng, and tempering with waxe and Barrowes grease, applyed on impostumes behynde the Eares, doth in short time dissolue and heale them.
                  The Garden Cresses heateth and dryeth in the thirde degree, but the learned Platearius affirmeth, that the Cresses to be hotte and dry, in the fourth degree.
                  The seede especially serueth to the vse of Medicine, and is preserued in great efficacie, for fiue yeares. The Hearbe greene, is of great efficacie, being somewhat dryed.
                  The seede possesseth ye vertue of heating and drying of superfluous humours▪ and in a maner inioyeth the like vertue of Mustarde seede, the seede after the brusing drunke in wine, expelleth the deade yonglyng, drunke with wine, remoueth the swelling of the Milte, eaten with Honye, is a remedie for the cough, and looseth the breast, it auayleth against the Palsie of the tong, if the seede chawed be retayned a time in the mouth.
                  It profiteth not if the Cresses be eaten alone, for that the same dyminisheth mans strength, and engendreth euil humours, for this Herbe ioyeth to bee bestowed in a moyste Earth, and vnder a shadowe from the Sunne.
                  The seede hole taken, restrayneth the distillings of the heade, without daunger or harme, the seede brought to pouder, and drawen vppe by the Nosethrilles, clenseth the brayne and helpeth the paynes of the heade.
                  The seede of the Cresses helpeth against the paulsie, beyng boyled in wyne, and applyed hotte in a bagge to the Paulsye member, the pouder of the seede blowen vppe doth cause the patiente sneese, amendeth the Lethargie or sleeping out of measure.
                  
                     The Seede boyled wyth drye figges, and a Gargyll made of the same, doeth sende vppe and drye the Vuula loose hanging.
                  Agaynste infections of the heade, knobbes and dandrie, mixe the seedes of the Cresses with Goose grease, and diligently brused, annointe all aboute sundry times, the pouder of the seede annoyted with oyle of Roses, doth stay the going forth of the fundament.
                  The seede drunke in wine, doth expel the noysome creeping things, as the rounde and flatte wormes in the bodye, but forcibler by mynts added thereto, thys profiteth againste the hardnesse of fetching winde, and the coughe, wyth Organye myxed and sweete wine, and the same dyuerse tymes drunke: the decoction of the Hearbe in Goates Mylke helpeth the griefes of the breaste: thys amendeth the ach of the Hyps, and griefe of the Loynes, by anoynting with Barlie meale and vineger mixed with it, on the greeued places.
                  Certayne reporte, that the dayly eating of the Cresses for a tyme, purchaseth a readier vnderstanding and quicker wit. The seedes after the bestowing into a bagge, boyled in wyne, and applyed on the flancke, doeth remoue the payne greeuouslye vexyng, and lykewyse the Cholicke, applyed on the bellye, proceedyng of a colde cause.
                  For the selfe same, and for the strangury, doth the simple Herbe boyled in wine and Oyle preuayle, being applyed vpon. For weakenesse of the kydneys, proceeding of a fleumaticke matter discending from the head, the raines of the back annointed with Hony, strew the fyne pouder of the seedes, with cummyne, and Colofonie.
                  A certayne practicioner reporteth, that the iuyce of Cresses distilled or dropped into the Eare, doth remoue and deliuer the grieuous pain of the teeth. The seede boyled in wyne and drunke, and a playster wyth Fygges applyed without, doth in shorte tyme aswage the swelling and griefe of the Mylt.
               
               
                  
                  The commended vertues of the distilled waters, both of the Cheruel and Garden Cresses.
                  THe chosen time for the distilling of Cheruel, is whē the Herbe and roote, with the whole substaunce may be finely shred and distilled, whiche time best answereth in the middle of May.
                  The water of Cheruell drunke, vnto the quantitie of foure ounces at a tyme, both morning and euening, helpeth men bursten, and harmed by a greeuous fal, and resolueth the bloude clotted in lumpes. The same drunke, profiteth against the stone of the kidneys, a greate quantitie of this drunke, at one time looseth the bellie.
                  The water drunke (as aboue sayde) procureth a good stomacke, confirmeth and comforteth the hearte, putteth away the shaking of the Feuer, the same healthfull or profitable to the heade, and comforteth the senses.
                  This like drunke, remoueth grieuous paynes and prickings, helpeth the Lungs, and the diseases of the same.
                  The conuenient time for the distilling of the Garden Cresses, is in the ende of May, in a Tinne Lymbecke.
                  The water of Cresses auayleth againste the Measels, and impostumes behinde the eares, if the same mixed, with Hony, be applyed on the places, with linnen clothes dipped in it, which being dried, again moysten them, for this remoueth the redde spottes.
                  If the Measels be on the legges, then let bloud on the Anckle of the foote, and drink the same morning and euenyng mixed with strawbery water, and refrayne after from al hot meates.
                  The water of Cresses drunke morning and euening, vnto the quantitie of foure ounces at a tyme, aswageth a swelling, and expelleth wormes of the bellie, thys mitigateth vlcers, and swellings of the gummes if they be often rubbed with it.
               
            
            
               
               What care and skil required in the sowing and ordering of the Buckes horne, strawberie, and Mustardseed. Chap. 18.
               
                  THe Buckes or Hartes horne, whose leaues be sweete in tast, & somwhat saltie, is at this day sowē in Gardens, & yerely vsed in Sallets, and requireth a small labor, before the bestowing in the Earth, for as much as this Herbe, so wel ioyeth in the earth not labored & dressed, as afore prepared.
               But if the owner mynde to haue the Herbe thicke toufte, & fayre to the eye, he must often clyppe the toppes of the leaues, and presse the heade downe by some wayghte, or properly treade wyth the Foote on it: for on suche wise handeled wyll the Hearbe be procured to growe downeward and into a breadth.
               This especially in Sallets in the sommer time, although the same haue no apte sauoure nor tast.
               The Strawberies require small laboure and diligence in the bestowing in the Earth, sauing that these ioy to bee sette in some shadowie place of the garden, in that these rather desire to grow vnder the shadow of other Hearbes, than to be planted in Beddes alone, and planted vnder the shadowe of high trees, these prosper without any trimming of the Earth.
               Here note a maruellous innocencie in the strawberies, that although these creepe law by the Earth, and that diuerse venemous things creepe ouer the Hearbes, yet are these in no manner infected with any venemous contagion, which is a note, that the Herbe (of propertie) hath no aff
                     •
                  nitie with poyson. This Hearbe by diligence of the Gardener, becommeth so great, that the same yeeldeth faire and big Beries, as the beries of the Bremble in the Hedge, and hereof it seemeth, that Virgilianus Seruius named the strawbury, the Mulbery of the Earth. Certaine skilful men, by a diligence and care, procure the beries to alter frō the proper red coloure, into faire white delectable to the eye.
               The Mustarde seedes desire to bee sowen in a fatte grounde, and to be cōmitted to the Earth wyth fyne pouder dust, both before and after ye winter, these after the comming vppe require to bee often weeded

and watered. But the Seedes may not be sowen too thicke, in that the plantes multiplie and spreade into breadthe. After the plantes haue enioyed strong roote in the Earthe, they are hardely plucked vppe by the rootes, and the Seedes may well be kepte for fyue yeares, whyche the newer they be, so muche the better to sowe, and to be eaten. The goodnesse of the seede is knowen in the breaking or cracking of it betweene the teeth, whether the same be founde greene, or white within: for if this be white the Seede is olde and nothing worth, neyther to sowe, nor to eate. The seedes which the owner would keepe for to eate, those plants muste he remoue, after certaine leaues sprung vp, and set them a good distance a sunder, whereby the toppes may bushe and spreade the broader, but suche plantes which the owner woulde haue runne vp to seede, those maye he not chaunge, nor remoue oute of the proper places.
               
                  The phisicke remedies and helpes of the Buckes horne▪ Strawberie, and Mustard seede.
                  THe Hartes horne hathe the propertie of heating and drying, for whiche cause takē in drinke, it ceasseth the grypings of the belly, yea this vsed, healpeth the griefes of the ioyntes, strengthneth and expelleth the euill matter in them.
                  This herbe after the minde of Dioscorides, hathe the propertie of binding, so that the same be profitably giuen in redde wine, for the perillous Flixes.
                  Certaine reporte that if foure rootes of the Buckes or Hartes horne, be eyther diligently hanged about the necke, or bounde to the pulses of bothe the handes, that these in shorte time, do put away the Feuer, or at the least, moysture the heate or burning of the feete.
                  The Berries aswell as the Hearbe of the Strawbery haue the vertue of cooling and moystning in the third degree, and the Herbe it selfe endureth not aboue a yeare.
                  
                     Vigonius writing of the Strawberie leafe affirmeth the same to be of a colde qualitie especiallie, the Juice of whych Hearbe mixed with the wine of Pomegranates, and a little quantitie of Rose water, applyed on hot impostumes (bothe in the beginning and encrease of them) doth maruelouslie healpe. The Berries eaten with white wine, and a little

suger, doth maruellously amende the hardenesse and swellyng of the splene, the selfe same doth the iuyce of the berrie, taken with honye, the leaues, sundry tymes vsed in a bath, is said to be most profitable against the stone. The leaues and roote orderly applyed, doe heale as well woundes as vlcers: these also procure the termes, stay the bloudy flixe Dysenteria, and cause vrine: the decoction of the herbe and root drunk, helpeth inflamations of the lyuer, and clenseth both the kydneys and bladder.
                  If any shall be mightily molested with grieuous ache and paynes of the hyppes, lette him take three or foure handfulles of the Strawbery leaues, and boylyng them tender, sitte in the bath, and rubbe the legges well (with the licour and leaues) from the nether parte vpward: Whiche done, and thoroughly dryed with a warme cloathe, applye thys Oyntmente following, prepared after thys manner: Take of the oyntmente of Marche Mallowes one ounce, vnto whiche myxe halfe an ounce of stone honey, and a dramme weight of Waxe, makyng thereof an oyntment by a softe fyre: this on suche wyse handeled, not only amendeth the griefs of the hippes, and softneth the matter hardned in them, but prouoketh vrine, applied on the proper place.
                  The decoction of the Hearbe and roote, holden in the mouthe, and washing or rubbing the teethe and gummes with it, dothe not onlye strengthen the gummes and fasten the teeth, but stayeth the distillings from the heade.
                  The Berries in the Sommer tyme, eaten wyth Creame and Sugar, is accompted a greate refreshing to men, but more commended, beyng eaten wyth Wine and Sugar, for on suche wise, these maruellouslye coole and moisten Chollericke stomackes or suche beyng of a Cholericke complexion.
                  The Juyce of the Berryes pressed forthe, and the water of Plantaine added of eche eight ounces, to these mixe twoo ounces of Rosed honye, one ounce of the Juice of the Mulberries, of white Greeke pitche and the flowers of the Pomegranat, of eche a dramme wayghte, these after the diligent beating and mixing togither, washe and gargell the same in the mouth sundry tymes, for this in shorte time remoueth and putteth away the impostumes of the throate. Among other commodities whiche the Berries yeelde, the Juice or wine pressed forth of them,

is a soueraigne remedie for the remouing of the greate rednes, spots and red pimples, which happen on the face, through the heate of the Lyuer, the selfe same asswageth and putteth away the rednesse of the eyes, the spots, & hot distillings frō the hed, by dropping of it sundry times into ye eyes. The decoction of ye roots & leaues of the strawbery in wine is maruellous profitable for the Jandise, beyng takē diuers mornings fasting. The decoction only of the root taken, doth mi
                        •
                     igate the heat of the liuer, so that the same be drunke in the morning, and at noone, the herbe eaten with vineger & a little white pepper, doth greatly helpe such fetching the winde shorte: the Beries also eaten, doe ceasse and coole thirste, for whiche cause profitable to the stomacke, but these especiallye commodious to the Cholericke. The Mustard seede heateth & dryeth in the fourth degree and it is like to the Rape seede, sauing that the rape seede is bitter, & the Mustard seede sowre. The goodnes of the mustard seede is knowen in the breaking of it, which if the same be white and moiste within (although new gathered) yet profitable to vses. This hathe the vertue of heating & ripening. The force and nature of the mustard seed, is to heat extenuate, and draw forth, as the worthy Dioscorides reporteth. The mustard seedes brused with the freshe roote of Enula Campana, and applyed on impostumes breaketh them without paine, the seedes brused & tēpered with vineger applied on the bit of a venemouse beaste, doth spedilye cure the same. The seedes chawed and retained vnder the tongue, preuaile against the palsey of the tongue, the seedes do like profit against all the kindes of palseys, hapning in any parte of the bodye, if a linnen bagge filled with the sedes, and boiled in wine, be applied on the grieued place, being especially vsed in the beginning of the infirmity. The seedes after the brusing with cummin and figs eaten sundry mornings, doth deliuer and helpe ye dropsie: the seedes after the mixing with water & hony sundry times gargelled, amendeth ye blistering or sores of ye mouth, & aswageth the swelling of the throate. The Juice of ye mustard seede, taken diuers mornings fasting, doth procure a good memorie, the oyle drawē out of the seedes, is a soueraigne ointment for the colde Gowte, sciaticke, & feeblenes of sinews. The Juice of the mustard seede dropped into the eyes, doth remoue the dimnesse of sighte, & put away the spots and web in them, yea this in the eating causeth thirste, & procureth the venereall acte.
                  
                     The persone which euery mornyng fasting, shall swallowe downe twoo Seedes at a time, shall be free that daye from the falling sicknesse, the seedes boyled in wine, and drunke, amendeth the hardnesse of fetching breathe: the powder of the Seedes drawen vp by the nosethrills, not only procureth the creature to sneese, but maruelously purgeth and amendeth the Braine.
                  If a like waighte of the Mustarde seede, Pellitorie and Ginger bee brused, and after the well mixing wyth rosed Honye, the mouthe bee washed with the same, and this for a good whiles holden in the mouth, doth maruelouslie clense the Braine of euill humours, of which the greuous paine of the heade moste commonlie succeedeth. The same also amendeth the falling of the Vuula, and vlcers of the throate.
                  The Mustard seede, (as Dioscorides writeth) eaten, draweth downe and purgeth by the mouthe, the fleume gathered in the heade: the Juice of the herbe mixed with water and hony, gargelled and holden a whiles in the mouthe, dothe remoue the harde knobbes and swellings of long continuaunce of the Jawes, the powder blowen or drawen vp by the nose, to procure the creature sundry times to sneese, not only profiteth suche a one hauing the falling sicknesse, but amendeth the suffocation of the matrice, and falling out of place. And agaynste the dulnesse of the heade, and often sleeping, (the heade afore shauen) is the ointment or plaister of the seedes profitablie applied: the decoction of the Mustard seede in wine, holden in the mouthe for a whiles, dothe ceasse the ache and paine of the teeth comming of colde, and drunke, breaketh the stone in the Bladder, and procureth the Termes.
                  The person whiche coueteth to prepare a cleare voice to sing, ought to take the meale of Mustarde seede (and after the working of it wyth hony) to make little balles of the same, and of these to take one euerye daye, whyche on suche wise vsed, wyll procure in shorte tyme a cleare voice.
               
               
                  The commended vertues of the distilled waters bothe of the Strawberie, and plante of the Mustarde seede.
                  THe beste tyme for destilling of the Berrie is, when they are neare ripe, yet that they be not ouer ripe and softe, which after the gathering

and sprinckled ouer with Sugar, oughte so to stand close couered in a glasse, vntill they appeare mouldye, before the distilling in Balneo Mariae. The Beries which growe in woodes standing on hilles, are better commended to vse.
                  The water of the Berries drunke, and mixed with the same, amendeth an euill or an vnnaturall heate, and ceasseth thirste, proceedyng of the liuer, or of Choller. The water drunke vnto the quantitie of foure ounces at a tyme, bothe morning and euening, not only cooleth the liuer, looseth the Breaste, refresheth the hearte, purgeth the bloude, and helpeth the kings euill, but preuayleth against the stone, of the Loines, Kidneys, and Bladder.
                  The like quantitie drunke, profiteth agaynste blysters, and sores in the mouth, the vlcers and swellings in the throate, and strong sauour of the mouth, proceeding of the gummes and teeth, if this water also be gargelled in the mouthe and throate.
                  The water in like order druncke of women, purgeth them, and procureth the Termes. The water druncke vnto the quantitie of foure ounces at a tyme, bothe morning and euening, (or at the leaste in the morning) and linnen clothes dipped in it, being applied twice a day to the leg broken, doth in shorte tyme recouer and helpe the same.
                  The water healeth all foule legges, if after the dayly washyng both Mornyng and Euenyng, linnen clothes wette in it, bee applied vppon: Thys in like manner cureth filthye woundes, if they shall bee washed wyth the same, or if any shall vse of the water in hys drinke, thys water also aswageth the swelling of the face, by the often washing with it.
                  The water drunke Mornyng and Euening, vnto the quantitie of foure ounces at a time, with an ounce of pure Aqua vitae, healpeth (no doubt) the Leaprie, in that this drinke pourgeth bloude, by the sundrye times vsing, or otherwise a white toste of breade, after the wetting with this be eaten fasting, whyche on suche wise vsed doth remoue the foule scurffe and scabbes on the body.
                  The water after the well tempering with Sugar, distilled ouer againe in Balneo Mariae, is very soueraigne for diuerse purposes, in that the same not only cooleth, cleareth, and remoueth spottes of the eyes, but comforteth nature, expelleth poysons, prouoketh the Termes, asswageth burning humours, and comforteth conception: yea thys

is a moste effectuous ointment for the eyes, in that the same stayeth teares or watering of the eyes, cooleth the greate heate in them, and restoreth a dimme sighte.
                  This water also applied sundry times with a linnen cloth wet in it doth maruellously coole & put away the red pimples and rednes of the face, yea and cleareth the same, contrary to hope.
               
               
                  The vertues commendable of the distilled water of the Strawbery leaues.
                  THe apte time for the distilling of the hearbe in either Balneo Mariae or a Tin Limbeck is inethe middle of May. This water drunke vnto the quantitie of foure ounces at a time, both morning and euening doth remoue and helpe the kings euill.
                  The water in like order drunk looseth the breast, purgeth the Lungs helpeth the coughe, and clenseth the Lepry. The water dropped into the eyes bothe morning and euening, dothe remoue the rednesse of the eyes, and mitigateth the heate in them
                        •
                     .
                  The water like drunke ceasseth the ouermuche sweating, and for the heate and stopping of the Lyuer, there is nothyng more healthfull and profitablee.
                  The whole herbe bearing flowre of the Mustard seede, after the finely shredding, oughte to be distilled in a Tinne Limbecke, in the beginning of June. The water amendeth the vlcers of the gummes, if the same be holden a while in the mouthe, and the gummes often washed therwith. This water helpeth vnto the consumption of mēbers, if they bee bathed and rubbed wyth the same: for the members thoroughe the same, doe recouer in shorte time strengthe and fleshe. This water heateth the marow in the bones, if they be often rubbed wyth the same, and the water to drye in alone. Thys water profiteth against a colde disease and ache of the ioyntes, if they be often rubbed with the same, and the water suffered to drye in by it selfe.
               
            
            
               
               What skill and care is requyred in the sowing and workmanly ordring of the Lekes and Liues. Chap. 19.
               
                  THe Leeke for that it is a roote of the Garden to be eatē and often vsed in the potte, therefore I will firste entreate of the same, whiche (as the moste skilfull reporte) desireth to bee sowen in a fruitfull and battle place, and lying especiallye open, whether the same be in a lowe place, as the worthye Rutilius writeth, and to these, that the beddes be leuelled, deepe digged, diligently turned, and very wel dunged. The husbandmē in time past, noted twoo kinds of this herb, as ye one which grew into a head, like the Onion, and the other into many deuided blades, both long and straight, whose bush sprung vp, is wont to be cut neare to the grounde, and this with vs named the vnset Leeke. The owner or Gardner which would possesse vnset Leekes, oughte to cutte the greene blades come vp in the beddes, after twoo monethes of the sowing. For these (after the mind of the learned Columella) wil endure the longer, and encrease farre bigger, if after this cutting they be remoued and set againe, and how often the greene blades shalbe cut, so often the herbe is holpen wyth water & new Cowe dung. And vse instructeth euery carefull owner as the saide Authoure reporteth, that in the remouing, suche skill muste be vsed for the newe setting, as when they be growen into a bignesse in the heade, to be remoued certaine distances asunder, as foure fingers breadth betweene eyther set, and when they shalbe growen to a farther strength and bignesse, to be agayne cutte. The Leekes oughte so often to be watered, dunged, and weeded, as neede requireth the same, and the place is to bee often raked ouer, wherby the plantes may encrease the better, through the helpe of the often killing & casting forth of the vnprofitable herbs or weedes. As touching the Ciues and vnset Leekes, they may like be bestowed in the earth, as the Leeke bearing the heade: And the seedes of these maye bee committed to the earth at any tyme, if so be the owner forceth not for the yelde of the seedes, but they otherwyse oughte to bee sowen in the Monethes of December, Januarie and Februarye, for the gathering and occupying after the Moneth of Marche, vnto the middes of Auguste. And the plantes after the sowing, when the blades bee well shotte vp, oughte lyghtely to bee troden downe

with the foote, and not to bee watered for foure dayes after. When the yong and tender blades bee shot oute of the seedes, and that the owner mindeth to haue the heades growe big, he ought not after the pulling vp to set them agayne, before all the small rootes bee cutte awaye, and the greene blades nighe halfe cut off, which done, that small pote shardes, or oyster shelles, be layde (as it were) right vnder eche heade, and then diligently couered with earthe, whereby the heades may so encrease the bigger, in the which dooing, the worthy Greeke Sotion forbyddeth the watering of thē til foure dayes after (if a drouth ensew) otherwise water thē not at all. The skilfull Neapolitane Rutilius instructeth, that when the Leekes be growen to a finger bignesse, by cutting the blades halfe awaye, and the hearie rootes quite (leaste these seede and drawe away of the substance) then in the setting in earth mixed with sand and annointed fresh with Cow dung, let the plants be distante in beds well foure or fiue fingers one frō the other, & when these haue sēt forth rootes sufficiēt long, let the owner (gently putting vnder his Dible) raise softly the heades, that these remaining (as hanging in the Earthe) maye on suche wise fyll the roomes or emptye spaces by the greatenesse of the heades growing. And that in fewer wordes I vtter thys instruction, if so be the owner woulde enioy vnsette leekes, hee maye bestowe the seedes in beddes the thicker togyther. If these to growe into a heade, then the thinner in the earthe, and shall cause them to prosper the better throughe a dayly weeding, and feeding with freshe Cow dung.
               The seedes oughte to be committed to the Earth, in the moneths of Aprill, May, and June throughout, to possesse the herbes in the Sommer time, in the Harueste, September, and October, for to enioy the plantes in the Winter tyme, but these especiallye requyre, to bee often weeded and dunged, which growe into heades. The Leeke shall yeelde a far bigger heade and stemme, as after Columella Rutilius wrote, yea before them both the worthy Greeke Sotion, if in thinne linnen cloutes, or clothes muche worne, the owner shall bestowe and tye vp manye Seedes togyther, whyche so handled, to couer diligentlye wyth softe dung and earthe, and immediatly to water them so lying in the earthe, for these thus knitte vp (throughe the runnyng of the Seedes into one) will send forth leekes of a wonderfull bignesse, which practise also may the husbandly Gardner trye in the other seedes of plantes.
               
                  I like experience wil come to passe, if the owner bestowe a Rape seede into the heade of a Leeke, with out making a hole, with anye Iron instrument, whiche so handled, sette into the Earth, for on suche will it grow verye bigge, as both Rutilius and diuerse Greeke instructers of Husbandrie report. There bee some, whyche makyng holes in the heade with a woodden pricke, or piece of Elder Cane, or else reede sharpened, bestowe (in place of the Rape) the Gourde seedes. Others there are, whiche taking vppe so many seedes as they can handsomely retayne with three of the fingers, and poured into a thinne Reede, doe commit those to the Earth, wyth softe dung couered and layed about, whiche practise doth euen like agree, to the former vttered.
               The sayde Greeke Sotion commendeth and affirmeth, that immediately after the seedes shall be sowen, the softe earth of the Beddes, bee troden wyth the feete into small and shallow furrowes, and the Beddes for three dayes (as if they were neglected) not watered at all, but in the fourth daye, to bee holpen through the sprincklyng of water on the Beddes, for suche wise handled, to the Blades commyng vppe, wyll growe (as hee reporteth) the more bushie and fayrer to the eye, yet if the owner, betweene the sowing and planting, shal mixe Sande with the Earth, the Blades wil shoote vp the fuller and bigger.
               The sayd worthy Greke Sotion addeth and affirmeth, yt if the owner shal eate a little Cummyne seed before, he shal breath forth no stinking sauoure at all of the Leeke, although hee shall eate a great handfull at a tyme of the Leekes, for by eating of the Cummyne seed is the strong sauoure extinguished or put away.
               Here out of Petrus Crescentius I haue added, as a matter worthye of the noting, that the Leeke seede throwen into a vessel of wine, causeth that the wine soureth not, but rather that veneger returneth into wyne, that is, putteth away al the egernesse.
               This to conclude conceyue, that the Leeke in the eightenth day after the sowing, to shoote appeare (for the more part) aboue the Earth, and to indure for tenne yeares, after whyche tyme to yeelde seedes, and dye.
               
                  
                  The Phisicke helpes of the Garden Leeke.
                  THe Leeke, after the minde of the auntient, heateth in the thirde degree, and dryeth in the second, especially, the Garden Leeke whose Seedes may wel indure to purpose, for two yeares.
                  The worthy Greke Sotio (of whom we haue afore mentioned) vttereth, in his singular precepts and instructions of Husbandrie, that the Leeke, brused and applyed, to cure the bitte of a venemous Beast, sooner than any other Medicine, and the seede of it drunke with the Licour of Reasons, to recouer and helpe the difficulties of makyng waters.
                  To these, to helpe and stay the long and olde spitting vp of bloude, if at conuenient tymes, in two drammes of the iuyce, with a like waight of the pouder of Myrtyl beries or Gaules, and the meale of Frankensence the same be drunke.
                  But the singular Hippocrates willeth the iuyce to b ministred without any myxture at al, & forbiddeth the daylye, or too much eating of Leekes, in that this not only harmeth and dulleth the sight of the eyes, but offendeth the stomacke whych shall be procured the lesser harmeful, if so bee the Leeke shall so long be boyled, vntill it become (as softe in a maner) as pap, for on suche wise handeled, the same is supposed no lesse to norish than fleshe.
                  The iuyce of the raw Leeke (is recyted and accompted with Plinie) among the venemous matters: for the report is, that Mela (a man of worthy Byrth) accused and sharplie blamed of Tiberius for mysusing of the office giuen to hym of the prince, who after falling into mighty desperation, and drinking vnto the waight of three siluer pence of the iuyce of the Leeke, dyed immediately without griefe of body. But such like are rather with silence to bee ouerpassed, than opened for instruction sake.
                  But to returne to ye Phisicke helpes, ye Leeke twice sodden before the eatyng, draweth downe the Termes, procureth vryne, and obtayneth a superfluous heate. The iuyce of the Leeke my red wyth vyneger, applyed on the foreheade, stayeth the bleeding at the nose. The Leeke eaten raw causeth vomitting and is venemous, this also putteth away drunkennesse, being eaten raw.
                  
                     The iuyce of the Leeke taken with womans mylke, amendeth an olde cough, and the vlcers of the Lungs. The Leeke brused and myxed with Salt, applyed on euil pushes healeth them. The Leeke brought into pouder, and tempered with the oyle of Roses and vineger, & dropped into the eares, remoueth the griefes of them. The same also profiteth, in like maner applyed agaynst the toothe ache.
                  The Leek brused with Hony and applyed, purgeth vlcers, a plaister made of the same, & applied on bruised members, doth not only aswage the swelling, but remoueth the bloud clotted.
                  The iuice of it drunk with womans milke, staieth the fluxe of bloud after byrth, the same also applyed with vineger, ceasseth the bleeding of the nose, if ye fine pouder of Frankinsence be added to it, and drawen by by the Nosethrels.
                  The iuyce of the Leeke drunke with Honye, profiteth agaynste paynes or aches of the Hyppes, the iuyce of the Leeke taken wyth Honye, recouereth all defaultes of the breaste and stomacke, the same ceasseth an olde coughe, and griefes of the breaste and Lungs: and it helpeth the dropsie, through the sundrye tymes takyng fasting.
                  Here I will not omit the practise out of Galen, that the Leekes tartnesse maye bee abated, and to engender the lesse wynde, if the same boyled in two waters, the colde Licoure in the ende be poured forth, and the Hearbe eaten, by whyche meanes it is sayde, that thys stayeth the flixe of the belly, and to amende a hoarse voyce, yea through the softnes of it, to make smooth the roughnesse of the iawes and mouth.
                  For to purchase a cleare and sounding voyce, Nero accustomed to eate the Leeke with Oyle, in certayne dayes of euery moneth, when hee contended for ye segniorytie of loude pronouncing and vttering of wordes. It whiche tymes, he only toke or eate nothing, sauing bread, as Plinie writeth of him, which reporteth yt this to be ment of the vnset Leeke, to which the prince Nero attributed a singular commendation.
                  If two partes of the iuyce, wyth a thyrde parte of Honye bee myred, and applyed into the Nosethrels or eares, doeth maruellously helpe the greeuous paynes of the heade, the iuyce applyed vp, doth maruellously preuayle against the exulcerations of womens priuie places.
                  
                     The seedes of the lacke brused, and drunke either with Cuite or pleasante white wine, doth loose the difficultnes of making water, and openeth the vrinal passages: the iuice of the Leeke drunke with wine, dothe aide forwarde the deliuery of childe, the Leeke seedes, after the brusing with Mirre in the Juice of Plantain, is very soueraigne for the spitting of bloude, and staying the bleeding of the nose.
                  The Juice of the Leeke, powdred on suche woundes, whyche are become colde and putrified, doth both clense away the rotten flesh, and cureth the woundes if the Juice be mixed with the rootes of white Lillies and annointed warme on the hips, it doth speedelye remoue the ache of them. The freshe Juice applied with salte on newe cuttes or woundes, doth incontiment close them.
                  The learned Dioscorides reporteth, that the Leeke moueth and prouoketh the venerial acte, the same with Hony, in forme of an Eclegma, sucked or suffered to melte downe, clenseth and amendeth all defaultes of the beast, the same like vsed, recouereth the wasting of the Lungs: yet the Leeke often, and much at a time vsed, doth burden the stomacke, procureth thirst and inflameth the bloud.
               
               
                  The commended helpes of the distilled water of the Leeke.
                  
                  THe roote only of the Leeke, beyng shredde, is to be distilled in a Tynne Lymbecke, in the moneth of June.
                  The water drunke vnto the quantitie of two ounces at a time, both morning and euening, is a soueraigne remedye for ye spitting vpon colde bloud: this also is auailable, being sundry tymes drunke, for a Barrayne woman.
                  The water of the Leeke, stayeth bleeding of the nose, if cotten dypped in it, beoften applyed: the same drunke amendeth a costyue bellie, and ache of the Hyppes, purgeth the

kydneys and bladder, procureth vryne, and expelleth the stone.
                  The water speedily healeth woundes, if they bee washed mornyng and euening with the same, this also profiteth vnto the exulceration and fracture of womens places, which is wonte to happen after the delyuery of childe, if so be the places be washed with the water, both morning and euening.
               
            
            
               What skil and diligence required in the workmanly sowing and ordering of the Onyon. Chap. 20.
               
                  THat the Onyons haue a bodie compassed and compact with many cartilagies, there is none (I beleeue) whiche knoweth not.
               The auntient husbandmen (as witnesseth Columella) named these Onyons, bycause they grewe in one rounde heade togither, yet not ioyned togither with so manye heades round about, as the Garlike, which vnto this day is familiarly named the Onyon of the Husbandmen with vs.
               The Onions for the more parte oughte to be sowen in the moneths of Januarye, February, and Marche, in a fatte Earthe, well dunged, moiste, and diligently trimmed, whiche shot vp to some heigth, ought to be remoued in the moneth of Aprill, a good distance the one from the other, and these further growen, oughte carefully to bee weeded aboute, and often laboured to cause them growe the bigger, and to defende thē (in time of a blustering winde) by helps set against. The worthy Neapolitane Rutilius writeth that the seedes desire to be bestowed in a fatte earthe, often tourned and raked, moiste and dunged, and red also, as the Greke Sotion in his husbandry willeth: which afore ought to be cast vp, that it maye putrifye throughe the colde and frostes in the Winter tyme, (as the skilfull Columella vttereth) after these the Earthe to bee dunged, and wythin twoo dayes after, the grounde leuelled forthe, and caste or trodden into beddes, all the rootes and vnprofitable hearbes afore clensed out. These workmanly handled in the moneth of March, being a calme and pleasante daye, the South or Easte winde (at that tyme blowing) the seedes shall workmanly be committed to the earth, wyth Sauerie intermedeled betweene them (as Plinie wylleth) for so

the plantes prosper the better. The woorthie Greeke Sotion admonisheth the Gardener which would set Onyons, to cut away all the hearye rootes and toppes of the greene blades (before the bestowing) wherby they may growe to big heades. Others there are, whiche only pluck away the blades nigh to the root, for on suche wyse they sende the iuyce to the neither partes, to cause the head grow bigge: But these (after the mynd of Rutilius) ought in this maner to be placed or set thinne in beddes, and both raked and weeded (if these not often) yet foure tymes at the least, as Plinie willeth: who also taught, that t the ground be digged & cast vp three tymes before the bestowing of ye seedes in the earth.
               If the Gardener commit seeds to the earth in the wane or decrease of the Moone, he shal possesse smal and soure ones, if the seeds in the increase of the Moone, then strong or bigge, and of a moyster taste, wyth the sourenesse maystred. But the same not to be vnremēbred nor ouerpassed, that in al the kindes of Onyons, the same somewhat long and sharpe, is wonte to bee sourer than the rounde, and the redde one more than the white, to these the drye one, more than the greene, and the raw more than the boyled, the freshe also, more than that seasoned or poudered with salte, or the sodden one.
               The Gardener or owner shall possesse farre greater Onyons, if whē there is a place or roome for the setting againe, they bee layed in Earth well laboured for twentie dayes space, and so long left drying agaynst the sunne, vntill all the moysture be gone or drawen forth by heate of the sunne, after the instruction of the worthy Greke Sotion, which Ruellius (out of Palladius) semeth greatly to mistake, in that he ascribeth the same to be done to the Dill, and not the Onyons, whose heades maye also be bared, by plucking off the vpper skinne, before the setting againe in the Earth, to prosper the better, and yeelde the bigger seedes, if they be set in the Earth well a hande bredth asunder.
               The heades to be eaten before the ful rypenesse, that these maye bee the sweeter, ought rather to bee sowen in a moyste grounde, among the young Plantes of the Cucumbers, Gourdes and Melones.
               If the owner wil rightly possesse, and gather the seeds in due season: when the greene stemmes are shotte vp highe, and yeelde bigge heads, they are then to bee guyded wyth two smal forkes of wooded, fixed

on eyther side (as Columella willeth) that the stems, though the stayes shoaring them vpright, maye not in anye bygge wynde, knocke the heades togither, to the spilling and losse of the Seedes on the Earthe, which are not asore to be gathered, that they inioye a blacke colour, as after the Greekes Columella, and Rutillius like vttered.
               The stemmes and knops, in which the Seedes are contayned, ought to be gathered in the decrease of the wane of the Moone, in a fayre and warme time, when the leaues or blades begin of themselues to wyther and drie, and that the seedes beginne to appeare blacke of themselselues, for then ought the stemmes to be plucked vp by the rootes, which knit togither in forme of garlands, or otherwyse bounde vp, to be layd in the Sunne to drie and rypen. The Onyons will continue long vncorrupted (as the sayd Sotion hath noted) if so the Onyons be put into hot water, or (as Plinie willeth) into saltie and warme water, and after layed in the hotte sunne, vntill they be through dry, which lette bee hidden or couered with Barly straw, and in such manner bestowed, yt nether touch other by any part. In many places, the Onyons be hanged in the smoke and in Chimnies nere the heate of the fire, and on such wise preserue them a long time.
               The auntiente, and skilfull writers of Husbandrie vtter, that if the Gardener would possesse Onyons of a wonderful bignesse in the heade, the seedes of the Onyons put within the seedes of Gourdes, whyche so handeled, bestowe in moyste beddes, well turned in with dung, into a like bignesse, wil the heades of the Onyons increase, if the Earth digged rounde about, the small heades of the Onyons, in the heauing or lifting of the earth, shal be lifted vp, yet in such maner done, that the heades not quyte raysed out of the erth or plucked vp quite by the rootes, as I afore vttered to be wrought with the Lecke. The like also shall the owner obtayne, if boaring the heade of an Onyon, with a woodden pricke, in sundrye places, and putting into the holes Gourde seedes, he bestow thē togither in a wel laboured Earth.
               But in this place I thought not to omit, that if the Gardener shall commit the seedes of the Onyons in due tyme to the Earth, they wyll after growe into a head, but they shal yelde lesse stoare of Seede. But if the Gardener shal bestow little heades in the ground, the heades wil after whyther and ware drye, and be shotte vp into a round stemme.
               
                  To these I adde, that the Onions plucked out of the ground and lying vpon the Earth, or hanged vp in ropes, do continue longer sounde in the ayre, but if we may creedit Aristotle in the sōmer Solstice, these, as the Penny royal, & many other Herbes, do at the same time flourish, which may be as if they were of a doubtful life, that one whyle takyng nourishment out of the Earth, and an other whyles from the ayre. But the Onyons lightly budde and shoote out, not being in the earth, and sende forth fayre greene blades by occasion of the moysture in the hrades, but after the stemme shall bee full shotte out, the heades wyther.
               To whiche Plinie wrote, that the Nuttes bee contrarie, in that these do abate the strong sauour of the Onyon. I read that many skilfull Gardeners vsed to sowe the Onyons and Garlike neare to Garlande floures (but especially the Rose) to procure them to yeelde a sweter sauoure, and the same done by the counsel of the Auntient and the worthy Plinie, which (in my opinion) deserueth to be followed.
               Truely, this one thing is gretly to be maruelled at, that the Onyon alone of all other Hearbes, as Plutarch writeth, receyueth no damage of the Moone, and hath contrary vertues of encreasing and diminishing to hir: for the Oniō becommeth grene and buddeth forthe in the wane or laste quarter of the Moone contrariwise she encreasing of Light, the Onion then withereth and rotteth.
               For which cause, ye Egiptian Priestes in time past, refused the Onion in their Religious meates, where otherwyse fruites, Hearbes, Trees, and Beastes, receyue a domage or diminishing and increasing through the occasion of thys starre, so that the Onyon onlye obeyeth vnto the contrarie turnes of the Moone, whose preseruing vnto wynter tyme, Columella prepared after thys manner, hee chose the Onyon or Sealiones (that are all alyke) whyche be not budded forth, or that greene blades appeared, and these dryed afore in the hotte sunne after which cooled agayne in the shadowe, by strewing vpon Tyme or Sauorie, he thē laied thē by courses, wt either of these strawed betwene in an Earthen potte, and by pouring the Licoure vpon, which was iii. parts of vineger, and one of Bryne: he strewed then a good handfull of Sauery (in such maner) that the Onions were couched or pressed vnder the Licoure, which when they had drunke vppe the Licour, and seemed

to lye drye, hee poured vppon and fylled the vessell wyth the like mixture, and in an apte place set the pot to preserue them to vse.
               This one thing I will not omitte, althoughe the same maye seeme childish, in that it is noted by the learned man Cato, who writeth, that the letters drawen and written with the Iuice of the Onion, are inuisible, whyche then shewe and appeare euidentlye, when the paper shall be heated at the fire. To conclude, the Onions set in the middle of Auguste in a red earth, doe yeelde the yeare following their high stemmes and seede, but the worser will those be, which are bestowed in the earth, to serue greene in the Lent time.
               
                  The phisicke commodities of the Onion.
                  ALthoughe the worthye Greeke Hippocrates more commended the sighte, than the eating of the Onion, saying that the same in sighte to be good and in body euill, forasmuche as it is hotte and burning: yet I purpose here to entreate somwhat of the phisicke benefits of the Onion, and of these, parte faithfully gathered out of the Greeke, and parte out of the Latin writers, aswell phisitions, as cunning and moste diligent searchers of husbandly secrets.
                  The onion hath the propertie of heating in the fourth degree, and of a grosser substance, as Galen witnesseth.
                  The Greeke Sotion (both husbandman and phisition) is Authoure, that if any shal daily eat the tender Onion fasting with Hony, it shal maintaine the continuaunce of health. The saide authoure reporteth besides, that the same recouereth and cureth vlcers: to these, that it remoueth the foule spots on the body, beeing diligently rubbed with it in the Sunne, and to profit the eares running, by dropping the Juice into them. The same annointed, helpeth the swellings in the throat, and these rosted vnder hot embers, & eaten with Oyle, doe healpe the cough.
                  The Onion after the rosting eaten wyth honye, dothe remoue the griefe of an euill stomacke: the Onyon eaten rawe harmeth the members, in that it too muche drieth the moisture of the bodye: the Onion also eaten rawe, procureth a rough throate, and swelleth the stomacke: the Onion notwithstanding applyed with vineger on Piles, dothe in shorte time open them: the Juice of the Onion is profitably annointed

with hony for the clearing of the eyes, and bothe remoueth the Pinne and Webbes, and amendeth the bloude shotten eyes, the Juice annointed on a balde place, recouereth the heates shed away.
                  There be which affirme, that the greene Onion applyed with Uineger, doth helpe the bitte of a madde dog within three days, but I rather suppose that the Juice added with Rue, Salte, and Honye, and after the beating togither workemanly applyed, to performe the same. The often eating of the Onion, harmeth the Cholericke, by procuring them hotter and dryer in stomacke: but thys is to great purpose vnto the flewmaticke, in that it cutteth asunder, and consumeth the superfluous humoures in them.
                  The Onion rosted in embers, & applied with barly meale doth stay the dropping of the eyes, and helpe the vlcers of the Priuities: the Juice besides dropped with womans milke into the eares, is saide to amende the pain & noise of the eares. Whiche also many haue giuen to persons sodainly swollen, by the drinking of water: and they haue prosperously gyuen the Onion, to suche as are molested wyth the perillous fluxe Dysenteria: and these applied, haue maruellouslye profited the griefes of the Loynes, and the Juice of them with the Juice of Fennell, expelleth and helpeth the water beginning betweene the fleshe and skinne, which togither with the Rue and Hony, recouereth the downe righte slumbering and sleeping, and with reasyns or figs, applied on impostums, both ripeneth and speedely openeth them.
                  The Onions after the rosting vnder hotte embers eaten both morning and euening, not only helpe the paines of the breaste, but cause an easy spitting vp of grosse humoures, and purge the stomacke: the Onion after the mixing with hony and salte, applied on wartes, doth make them speedely fall off, euen by the rootes.
                  If the Onions be often vsed through theyr sharpenesse, they ingender in the stomacke euill humoures, procure thyrste, swellyngs and windinesse▪ yea cause headache, and to become foolishe, throughe the fumositie of them, ascending to the heade, and harme the Braine: for whyche cause, the daily and too often vsing hinder reason, and procure terrible dreames, if so be a weake person, newly crepte out of sickenesse, shall much eate of them, but especially rawe, in that these giue no nourishement to the body.
                  
                     I adde out of Galen, that if the Onyons shal be twice sodden, eache water separated, and in the thyrd water boyled, to giue a very good norishment to the eater, being boyled with fat fleshe, and other pleasaunte spices added, yet are they weaker than the green in working, although the euilnesse of the iuyce no longer remayning, nor felte.
                  The raw Onyon moderately vsed, according to the rule of Phisick, heateth and cutteth asunder grosse and clammy humours, openeth the wayes of the vaynes, prouoketh the Termes and vrine, and increaseth the appetite, the iuyce also drawen vp by the Nosethrels, or the sauor receiued by the Nose, purgeth maruellously the heade.
                  The Onyon is better commended to be eaten, than the sauoure allowed, in that the person whiche dayly eateth of the yong and tender Onyons with Hony fasting, shall continue a longer time in perfitte helth and strength.
                  The iuyce remoueth the white spottes as wel on the face, as bodye, the iuyce applyed wyth Hennes greace, healeth the kybes gallyng of the heeles by a straight shooe: The Juice mixed with Hens greace and annointed, remoueth the red and wanne spottes of the face, the Onion brused with vineger, and annointed on scabbed places, both healeth and causeth a cleare skinne. The Onions after the boyling in wine or water, fried in Oyle, and applied in plaister forme vnder the nauell, aswageth the painfull gripings and fluxe, happening to women in child bed: the Onions rosted vnder hotte embers, and mixed with leuen and oyle of Lillies, and applied in plaister forme on impostumes, speedily breaketh and procureth them to runne.
               
               
                  The commended vertues of the distilled Water of the Onions.
                  THe moste chosen and aptest time for the distilling of Onions, is in the first moneth of Haruest, for then ought the roots to be shred, and workmanly distilled. This water drunke foure or fiue times, vnto the quātitie of two ounces at a time, recouereth the swelling caused by the bitte of a mad dog, or other beast: the same drawne vp by the nostrels, aswageth the greuous paine of the head. The water helpeth the ache & payn of the teeth, if they be eyther rubbed or washed with the same: thys also causeth heares to growe in any balde place of the head, if the same be annointed wyth it: the drinking of the water expelleth wormes.
               
            
            
               
               What care, skill and secreates to be learned in the sowing and ordering both of the lesser, and greater Garlike. Chap. 21.
               
                  THe Garlike muche desired, and often eaten of the husbandman, with fat Beefe, and other sodden meates, ioyeth in an earth especially white, diligently digged and labored, without any dung bestowed in it, whose cloues broken off from the heade, ought to be bestowed on the borders of beds rounde about, well a handbredth asunder, about the same tyme when the Onions are: and these with the beddes or little ridges made (in forme to suche in the fielde) to be highe raised, wherby the plantes commyng vp maye the lesser be harmed with the shoures falling, and the naturall moisture consisting in the earthe. The Cloues set in the ridges and borders of the beddes, may not be deepe, nor the earthe raysed on them like to hillockes (as manye do) but in an euen manner, and vnto the middle ioyntes bestowed, whych when they shall haue yeelded or sente vp three blades, then these to be diligently weeded about, for throughe the often dooyng they encrease the better, and yeelde a bigger heade.
               The Neapolitane Rutilius (writing of the Garlike in his instructions of Husbandry) willeth that the seedes to be committed to the earthe in the moneths of Nouember, December, January and Februarye, in a grounde well digged and laboured, and the same white, without any dung bestowed in it, besides the earth the same tyme indifferent drye, & in a warme day, for the seedes on suche wise handled, are caused to prosper and yeeld the better. Although the learned Plinie seemeth to write that the seedes bestowed in the earth doe slowly come vp, whereby these in the firste yeare, only yeelde a heade no greater than a Leeke, but in the seconde yeare, they growe deuided, and in the thirde yeare come to their full growth and perfection, and suche some suppose to be the fairer and seemelier.
               The Seedes of the Garlike wyth vs, better agree to be bestowed in the moneths of September, October, February, and March, in a earth white, indifferent drye, and well laboured wythout dunging. If anye happen to remaine in beddes (as 
                     〈◊〉
                   reporteth) after the seedes full

ripe and gone, those then renew in the yeare following of the owne accorde, both in the roote and blade, yea yeelde seedes the same yeare, whiche may after be sowen in well laboured beddes, to sende forthe greene Garlike. If the owner woulde possesse Garlike both great and bigge in the Heade, then before the same bee shotte vppe into a stemme, hee muste workmanlye tye all the toppes of the greene blades to an other growing nexte to it, whiche after treade softly downe with the foote.
               The worthy Rutilius willeth, that when the stemme begynneth to appeare, to couer the same with Earthe after the treading downe, whiche in suche maner to foresee, that it encrease not into a bushe or many blades, this so handled in the hard treading downe, to be dayly applied that the Juice may run to the roote, and cause the head to waxe the bigger. The like of which Plinie in his time firste experienced. The worthy Sotion in his greke obseruations of husbandry: & also Rutilius with certaine others reporte, that if the cloues of Garlike heades be committed to the Earthe, and the like pulled out of the grounde, when the Moone shall bee discending and vnder the Horizone (as hidde to vs) that the stinking sauoure will in a manner bee extinguished so that the breath of the eaters, shall very little be felte: which Plinie seemeth somwhat otherwyse to vtter, instructing that the heades (vnto the same purpose) oughte to be bestowed when the Moone shal bee vnder the Earthe, and to bee gathered when the Moone shall bee in coniunction, or wyth the Sunne.
               The saide Greeke Sotion seemeth to affirme, that the Garlike heads maye bee caused to growe sweete of fauoure, if in the setting the kernels of Olyues (after the ioynyng wyth them) be bestowed togyther in the Earthe, or the sharper endes blunted on some stone, and then committed to the earth, or else in the setting, that lies of the Oliues be bestowed with the cloues. The singuler Didymus (Ruellius noting the same) vttereth, or rather Sotion (as the Greeke copy sheweth) that the lothsomnesse or stinking sauoure by the eating of Garlicke heades is abolished or put away, if the greene and rawe beane bee soone after eaten. Others there are, which will the roote of the Bete to be eaten, after the rostyng vnder hotte embers, affirming the same to be sufficiente to remoue the strong sauour: Also with the like remedy Menander one of the Greeke writers witnesseth, as Plinie writeth of him, the sauour to be dissebled

and bidde. Oure later writers of husbandrye and Phisicke reporte▪ that the rancke sauour of Garlike may be extinguished, with the onely eating of greene Parsely blades.
               The commodiouser & apter time for gathering of the Garlike heads is in the decrease or wane of the Moone, the daye beyng drye and faire, when the blades be withered, that they leaue or hang downe.
               Many of the aunciente writers of husbandry vtter, that the Garlike heades will endure a long time, and be to better purpose afterw
                     ••
                  des, if they bee eyther hidde in chaffe, or after the tying togither hanged vp in thesmoke. There bee others whiche after the infusion of the heades a while in warme salte water, and letting them drye, doe likewise hide them in the chaffe.
               But the heads handled after either manner, doe for the more part remaine barraine, or prosper not after the bestowyng in the earth. To others it was sufficient to haue dried them ouer the heate of the fyre, that they mighte after growe. The learned Plinie vttereth, that those heades of Garlike bee of a sowrer tast, whiche possesse the more cloues round aboute, and he addeth that no more loathsomnesse or strongnesse of sauour doth consist in them after the seething, than in the Onion like ordered. Nor hee omitteth not, that the Garlike heades afore eaten, to be in steed of the white Neeswort for the Pioners, if they minde to auoide & escape the hazard of deathe. There is another wild Garlike, which the Greekes name Ophioscoridon, in english Ramsies, growing of the own accorde in the fallowe fieldes, through whiche the Kines milke by feeding on the greene blades, is caused to sauoure of the Garlike, yea the chese made of the same milke, doeth sender in the eating the like rancknesse of sauour: The husbandmen name this both the wild and serpentine Garlyke.
               This Garlike on suche wise boyled, that it may not growe againe, and bestowed on beddes, doth greatly auaile against the harme of birds to Seedes, as afore is uttered in my first part, there writing, that the same of Plinie is named Alum. But here commeth to minde a maruellous matter, not to be ouerpassed, whiche is, that neither the Weasell nor Squirrell will after the tastyng Garlike presume to bite anye fowles, by whiche practise. Pullets and other soules in the night bryng sprinkled ouer wyth the lycoure of the Garlike maye bee defended from

harme of eyther of these.
               There is yet a matter more worthy the remembrance, and the same farre maruelouser, which Volateranus vttereth, that in his tyme hapned a husbandeman to sleepe open mouthed in the field by a hey cocke, caste vp in the Haruest tyme, which when he had unwittily suffered an Adder to creepe into his body, wyth the eating incontinente of Garlike heads, was (as by a certain preparation against poison) deliuered, yet the venome & death of ye adder, consisting or remaining within the body distilled & shed forth in the coeating a matter to be marueled at of ye wise.
               But this also is maruellous in the Garlike, that if it be boiled wyth a salte lycoure, the same dothe effectuouslye destroye the mites or little wormes in either peason or beanes, so that the walles and floores of the barnes be wet with this mixture. Here also I thought not to ouerpasse the maruellous discorde of the Adamant stone and Garlike, whiche the Greekes name to bee an Antipathia or naturall contrarietie betweene them, for suche is the hatred or contrarietie betweene these twoo bodies, (lacking bothe hearyng and feeling) that the Adamante rather putteth awaye than draweth to it Iron, if the same afore be rubbed with Garlike, as Plutarchus hathe noted, and after hym Claudius Ptolemaeus. Whiche matter examined by dyuerse learned, and founde the contrary, caused them to iudge, that those skilfull men (especially Pt
                        •
                     lomie) mente the same to be done with the Egiptian Garlike. Which Dioscorides wrote to be small Garlike, and the same sweete in taste, possessing a bewtiful head, tending vnto a purple colour. Ther be which attribute the same to Ophioscerido, whiche Antonius Microphonius Biturix, a singular lerned man, and wel practised in sundry skils, vttered this approued secrete to a friend whom he loued. And the same as last, shal here be placed, that diuerse Garlike heades hanged on the braunches of trees, do driue far off birdes from the spoyling of fruites, as the like Democritus noted in the Greeke instructions of husbandry.
               That bigge Garlike named of certaine skilful Authours the Affrica Garlike, is of far bigger increase, than the Garden Garlike with vs. Whiche the worthye Greeke Sotion, Columella and Rutilius instructe, that the cloues to bee broken from the heade, and bestowed in a white ground, well laboured and dressed without any dung, and set in high ridges of beds, to the ende y• natural moisture of the earth, nor shoures

falling may offende.
               The tyme commended for setting of the cloues, is in the moneths of January, Februarye, and Marche, but some will to bestowe them in the Earthe, from the beginnyng of October, vnto the ende of Nouember, well a hande breadth asunder, and vnto the middle ioyntes, or rather a finger deepe in the Earth, whyche growen vppe to some heigth, to be often weeded aboute, and the Earth diligently raked, wherby the plantes may the better prosper.
               These further growen vp, the skilfull teache, to tye the toppes of the blades, by two and two togither, which done to treade the blades down with the foote, that the iuyce by the same meanes may run to the roote to increase the heades bigger.
               The other instructions neede fully to be learned, may the owner cō
                  ceyue by the former taught of the garden Garlike, which for the Physik benefits deserueth a place in euery grounde, especially in the husbandmans Garden.
               
                  The Phisicke helpes and commodities of the Garlike.
                  THe learned Plinie seemeth to me, not to haue vnaduisedly written, that the Garlike doth serue vnto many vses in Phisik, & to the husbandman especially is profitable, for which cause of sundry it is rightly named, the husbandmans Triacle.
                  This (according to the agreement of the skilfull) heateth and drieth in the fourthe degree, the Onion, Garlike, and Leeke (as the skilfull Argineta witnesseth in his first booke) indued with a soure vertue, doth heate the body, extenuate and cutte the groste humoures in the same yet the Cholerik ought to beware, that they do not too often eate the Garlike, especiallye in the Sommer tyme and hotte seasons, for at suche tymes the Garlike inflameth and dryeth the body, and encreaseth bothe the red and aduste Choller. The worthy Greeke Sotion (principall of the writers of husbandry) vttereth, that the Garlik eaten with meat, or hanged against the region of the stomacke, doth expel worms in ye bodye, & applied in plaster forme, preuaileth against the bit of either snake or adder. The heads burned & mixed with hony, and the same applied, doth remoue the black and blewe spottes, and cause a faire colour.
                  
                     The Garlike eaten, putteth away the inward swelling of the body, softneth and openeth impostumes, and draweth forth matter, being afore sodden, and applyed thereon.
                  If the heade be annoynted with the iuyce of Garlike, it killeth both Lyce and Nittes. The Garlike also is drunke to greate purpose, with the decoction of Organy (as Dioscorides witnesseth) against Lice and Nits of the heade.
                  The heads eaten do moue vrine, and are supposed to amende the defaultes of the kydneys: and a cloue holden in the mouth, ceaseth the toothache, proceeding of a colde cause.
                  The Ashes of the Garlike heades, after the mixing with Hony, annoynted, stayeth the shedding of heare, in the same manner vsed amendeth the defaultes or spottes of the skin. If the ashes be strewed on foule vlcers, which are open, it speedily cureth them.
                  The ashes of the heades, after the diligent mixing with Honye and May butter annointed, doth in short time remoue the foule scabbes and Leaprie, and cleareth the skin, if the same be dayly exercised in the bath or hotte house.
                  The Garlike tenderlye sodden and eaten, procureth a cleare voyce, and recouereth an olde cough, and correcteth the stomacke cooled, the same mightily dryeth vp the moysture of the stomacke.
                  If any shal afore eate of the Garlik, he shal not be endamaged by the byt of anye venomous worme or Serpent, the Garlike brused and applyed on the bit, doth speedily cure it.
                  And the same in these is maruellous (as writeth the skilful Serapio) that although the heades eaten, doth harme the sound sight of the eyes, yet dor these comforte and relieue the dulnesse of sighte, thorough the moysture consisting in them. The boyled heades eaten with oyle and salte, doe cure the mattering and breaking foorth: of whelkes, and remoue, both pimples and 
                        •
                     etters. Aswell the rawe as boyled heads eaten, doe recouer an olde Coughe: but the boyled heades eaten, are farre more profitable than the rawe, and lykewise the sodden, than the rosted: and on suche wise to the voyce they doe more profite and helpe. The person which shall afore haue eaten sundrye Garlike heads, if hee after happen to drinke poyson, shal not be harmed by it.
                  The heades with the greene blades boyled in wine and drunke,

doth not onlye moue vrine, but procureth the Termes and draweth downe the after burden, if the bellie afore be annoynted with it: the like also may a smoke of the Garlik procure, if a woman sitting in a hollow Chaire, and couered close about with clothes, receiueth the fume.
                  The Garlike brused with the fig tree leaues and Camomil floures, by a like quantitie, and applyed in plaister forme, doth cure the bit of a mad dog or other beast.
                  The person which weakly digesteth meate eaten, through the coldnesse of the stomacke, shall finde great helpe through the sundry tymes eating of the sodden heades with oyle and vyneger.
                  
                     Praxagoras vsed the Garlike in wine, against the kings euil. Hippocrates supposeth that ye after burden to be drawn down through the sitting ouer the smoke, and Diocles, 
                     
                        •
                     rensie persons they doth gretly helpe, if they after the boyling shalbe eaten, and the fame the dropsie persons, boyled with Centorie: and the Garlike eaten, stayeth the fluxe of the bely, whych ye skilful report, the grene more effectuously to performe, brused and drunke in pure wine with Coliander.
                  For an old cough proceeding of a colde cause, let the soles of the feet, paulmes of the handes, and chyne of the backe, be diligently annoynted wyth the Barrowes greace, finely tempered with three heades of Garlike cleane pilled.
                  The Garlyke eaten wyth freshe butter, or applyed in playster forme on the stomacke, doth in shorte tyme kyll the wormes in Children.
                  The Garlike boiled wt vineger, and drunk wt water and Hony, expelleth the brode wormes in the bodye, and what other harmeful creping things in the bowels. The heades boyled with oyle, and applyed in playster forme, doth cure the bit of venomous things, in what part so euer the same happeneth.
                  The harmes and swellings of the bladder, are remoued with this oyntment, if it be sundry times applyed without.
                  The Garlike boyled wyth Mylke, and eaten, doth heale the vlcers of the Lungs.
                  The Garlike boyled with Centorie in wine, and sundry tymes drunke, remoueth the dropsie, gathered of a colde cause. The Garlike brused and myxed with Coliander, and on such wise taken with wine,

helpeth the griefes of the Lungs, and difficultie of the vrine. The heads boyled and brused with Beanes, and tempered either with oyle Olyue or oyle of Poppie, and of the same an ointement made, remoueth headache, annoynted on the temples.
                  There is no better thing for the toothach proceeding of a colde cause than to wash and retayne, for a time, the decoction of the Garlike three cloues bruised in vineger, which undoubtedly ceasseth the paine.
                  The heads also boiled with vineger and Nitre, do remoue the itche, and taken in a white broth, ceasseth the grieuous payne of the goyng often to the stoole. A Garlike heade after the boylyng in sweete wyne, with a halfe Penny waight of Beniamine drunke, doth in shorte tyme expell the quartaine.
                  The same brused and mixed with freshe butter, profiteth very muche the pyppes of Hennes and Cockes.
                  The person hardly makyng water, and subiecte to the stone, shall greatly be eased of the grieuous payne, by eating of Garlicke sundrye times.
                  The worthy Galen vttereth, that the heades tenderly boyled in two or three waters, do remoue the sourenesse of them, but these then yeelde a very small nourishmente, in respecte of the rawe eaten wyth vyneger.
               
               
                  The inconueniences of Garlike out of Plinie.
                  THe defaultes of the Garlike are (as Plinie writeth) that it dulleth the sight, causeth windinesse, harmeth the stomacke, and much at a time eaten, causeth thyrste.
                  So that for all causes it is better commended sodden than raw, and boyled than rosted.
                  The Garlik boiled and rosted, brought to fine pouder with Mastick & Pellitorie, if the mouth be washed with the same decoction, doth maruellously helpe the toothache.
                  The Garlike profiteth Craftes men, husbandmen, and the Fluematicke, and those which for the more part drinke water, and both vse colde meates, and hard of digestion.
                  
                     The Garlike auayleth against the infection of waters, mutation of places, and other contagious ayres (which hastilie annoy) by the eating afore of it, in such suspect places.
                  As touching the Affrica Garlike, the same maye serue vnto all the diseases and griefes in a manner, whyche to fore are written of the Garden Garlike.
               
               
                  The commended vertues of the distilled water of Garlike.
                  THe heades with the greene blades finely shredde oughte to bee dystilled in the Canicular or dogge dayes, in a Tynne Lymberke.
                  This distilled water, helpeth the swellings in the throte, if a linnen cloth wet in the same, be workmanly applyed, & drunke vnto the quantitye of two ounces at a time, or gargelled so often in the mouth and throte, vntyl the patient be better amended.
                  The water drunke euerye morning fasting, vnto the quantitye of two ounces at a time, doth maruellously amende the greene sicknesse, and swelling of the Splene, being vsed for twelue or fourteene dayes space.
                  The water also drunk, profiteth vnto al the said sicknesses and griefes, which tofore are vttered of the blade and roote.
               
            
            
               What care and skil is requyred in the sowing and ordering, both of the Scalion and Squyll Onyon. Chap. 2
                     •
                  .
               
                  THe Scalyons better prosper and come vp, being set than sowen, for when they are committed to the erth in the Seedes, the owner may not hope for a seemely groweth of them, before the seconde yeare. The owner may bestow ye Scallions in wel dressed beds, frō ye beginning of Nouēber, vnto the end of Februarie, for to enioy the proper yelde the next Spring following: and they require to bee likewise set in the grounde, as afore taught of the Garlik.

But they are to bee plucked vp to vse, before that the March vyolettes be in their full pride and flourish, for if these be longer suffered, as vnto the time of the perfit flourishing of the violettes, they are then founde feeble and wythered. And for to knowe when the Scallions are rype, it behoueth the Gardener to marke whether the blades beneath be wythered, for on such wise seene, denoteth the ful rypenesse of them. And to possesse Scalions with bigge heades, it behoueth the Gardener, to bestowe rounde about the rootes softe Cow dung, and to water them often, which growen to a reasonable height, he must also treade downe and order as afore vttered in the using of the Leeke.
               The Squyl Onyon better commeth forwarde in the Garden, being set with the heade, than sowen in the seede, for when the seedes are committed to the Earth, they yeelde slowlye their seemelye bushe and heades.
               The owner maye bestowe the heades of the Squyll Onyons in well laboured and dressed Beddes, so that the ground bee of a drye nature, and tending vnto a Saltnesse, whether grauellie or Sandie, for they desire a like diligence to be bestowed on them, as is afore vttered of the Onyon and Garlike.
               The auntient and latter writers reporte, that there are two kyndes of the Squil Onion, as the Male and Female, the Male yelding white leaues, and the Female blacke. This strong by nature, will continue in the hanging vp (in a shadowie place) a long time greene, and it lightly groweth (as Theophrastus writeth) bestowed in drie Earth, & speedily shooteth vp to a height, it keepeth fruites to be preserued, especiallye Pomegranates, the stalkes afore broken off: and this is sayde to beare floure thrice in a yere, foreshewing by it, the three seasons of cōmitting seedes to the Earth, as the first tyme of bearing floures, to signifie the first tyme of plowing, the seconde time of floure bearing, the seconde time: the thirde, the last time: for how many times these appeare, euē so often is the Earth accustomed to be laboured.
               The floure also of the Squil Onyon (as Beritius writeth) shooting vp in a straight stemme, if so be it doth not hastily wyther, signifieth the large or plentiful yeelde of fruites.
               
                  
                  The Phisicke helpes both of the Scalion and Squil Onion.
                  AS touchyng the benefite of the Scalions, there is no other ayde nor profite to be hoped after, sauing that these yeelde a more delight to the mouth, than the helth of the body, for the Scallions serue to no other purpose, than to styrre vppe or moue persons vnto the veneriall act.
                  The Squyll Onyon hath the vertue of heatyng in the seconde degree, and cuttyng especiallye of the toughe matter in the stomacke.
                  The Squyll Onyon vsed rawe, is verye hurtful to the body, especially to the inwarde members or partes, for which cause, the Squyll Onyon is not inwardly to be taken, except they afore be either rosted or boyled, or by some other maner prepared.
                  The worthiest force of the same in Medicines is, by sharpuing it especially with vyneger, for whyche cause (being so prepared) named the Squilitike vyneger, the makyng of whyche is after thys manner.
                  Take the heades cleane pilled from the outwarde skynnes, those (after the shredding) hang in a Sunnye place, being stytched through wyth small Packthreed (in suche manner) that the partes bee a prety dystance asunder, whcyh like handled, let hang for xl. days space.
                  The drye peeces after bestowe into a Hogs heade of moste sharp
                        •
                      vineger, but in suche manner, that these of no parte touche the vessell. The Hogs heade after couered so close, that no vapours maye breath forth, and set into the hotte Sunne.
                  After the xlvii. daye, let the vessell be lift vp, and the pieces taken forthe, whyche done, the owner shall then possesse a moste sharpe vineger.
                  There are others, whych make the Squiliticke wyne after thys maner: ye pieces of it shred, they bestow into a vessel of wine new made (yt being put in) it may on such wise heate togither, & they vse this wine to those purposes, as the vineger.
                  The Physicke commodities of the Squill Onyon are (as the learned Constantyne, in hys booke de gradibus vttereth) to amende the

dropsie persons, suche fetching the winde hardely, the defaultes of the Liuer and Mylte proceeding of clammy humours.
                  The persons sicke of the Ague, and hauing exulcerations or soares wythin the bodye, oughte to refrayne the taking of the Squyliticke vineger. For the Squiliticke vineger or wyne, purgeth grosse fleume, and corrodeth, procureth the going to the stoole, and vrine, and causeth vomyting.
                  The Squil Onyon (after the minde of Dioscorides) is rosted after thys manner, thys wrought in Paste or Elay sette into an Ouen, or couered wyth coles, vntyll the paste or crust about it bee sufficientlye baked, which drawen or taken forth, if the heade be yet not sufficiently softned, then after the couering of it wyth paste, the seconde tyme and set in an Ouen, bake the same throughly.
                  The Onyons are also kindly baked or rosted in an Earthen potte, the mouth well stopped wyth dowe or course paste, and sette into the Ouen.
                  Thys besides cut into rounde pieces, and after the flitching through wyth Packthreede, that these be a prety distaunce asunder, hang in the ayre from the Sunne beames, for on such wise handeled, it serueth to the makyng of the Oyle, vineger, and wine.
                  The singular Dioscorides teacheth the manner of boylyng the Squyll Onyon, after thys sorte: Take the middle partes (the outwarde skynnes pylled awaye) whiche after the slycing into partes and boyled, throwe the firste water forth, on whyche poure other water, boyling in lyke condition, and thys so often doe, vntill no more bytternesse nor tartnesse in the water be felte: after these, the slyces hanged vppe, and dryed in the shadowe, as aboue vttered, whych done, if halfe a dramme of the fine pouder bee sucked downe wyth Honye, the same amendeth the long continuance of the hard fetchyng of breath, an olde coughe, and the griefes both of the Lyuer and Mylte, yea the dropsie and Jaundise. The lyke worketh the Squiliticke vyneger, and the same expelleth wormes, and other corruptions in the bodie.
                  The Oximel made of the Squilitick vyneger, expelleth Malancholie, remoueth ye Apoplexie & falling sicknes breaketh & sendeth forth ye stone, the same also purgeth the Matrice of Clammye humours, and helpeth

the ache in the Hippes. The Squilliticke vineger fastneth the teeth, by sundrye tymes washing and rubbing of them with it, and amendeth a stinking breath.
                  The same dropped into the eares, remoueth the clammye humours hyndering the hearing. The oyle in which the squil Onion shal be steeped, anoynted on places, putteth awaye wartes, and cureth both the choppes & cliftes of the feete: the same annoynted on moyst or running scabbes, healeth (or at the least) correcteth them, putteth away the dandrie of the heade, and profiteth annoynted on the bit of Serpents, and other venemous wormes.
                  The Squil Onyon contayneth in it an Oyle whych is blacke: thys oyle tempered with Hony, and annoynted on a balde place, procureth heare to grow. The Squillitike vineger holdē in the mouth, amendeth the corrupted and foule gummes. The same vsed, procureth a clearer sight of the eyes, healthful and profitable it is to the griefes of the sides and stomacke, if a little be taken twice a day, but hastily drunke down, it ouercommeth the partie for a whyle.
                  The Squiliticke Onion boyled in wine & drunk, expelleth al the inwarde diseases of the bodie, and helpeth especially a hot and corrupt Liuer.
                  The Squil Onyon prepared in the abouesayde manner, and boyled with Wormewood and Masticke in water and vineger, and sweetned wyth Sugar, helpeth vnto the stopping of the Lyuer and Mylte, recouereth the kings euil & dropsie, myghtily causeth vrine, draweth down the termes, and expelleth the dead yongling. If Mice happē to drink of the water, in which the Squiliticke Onyon shal be steeped for a night, they soone after dye.
                  The distilled water of the Squil Onion, mixed with meale whiche Mice willingly eate, and bestowed in suche places where they haunte, doth in short time kil those which eate of the same.
               
            
            
               
               What care and skill is requyred in the preparyng and ordering of the Garden Saffron. Chap. 23.
               
                  AS touching the Garden Saffrone, it ioyeth to bee bestowed in a meane and chalkie grounde, and euermore well laboured, and it may very well be sette in the beddes, where Onions haue bene newly plucked vp. The Saffron refuseth wateryng and moysture, for wh
                     •
                  che cause the heades oughte to be set in beddes (betweene which) furrowes made, that these may receiue the moisture falling, whiche they greatly feare. Besides these, the heades are muche endomaged throughe the resorte of Mice and Moles, whiche greatlye couet to feede on the rootes or Onions of the Saffron.
               The remedies against these twoo noyouse Beastes, are fully taught in my firste parte, whiche the reader maye resorte vnto.
               The heades are rather to be bestowed in the Earth, than the Seedes, in that the Seedes (after the committing to the Earthe) prosper not.
               The heades are to be sette on ridges, in the month of Aprill or May, and the heades layd on a heape, to lye and wither in the shadowe from the Sun beames, for the space of eight days before, whiche done, to set them with the hearie rootes in the Earth well laboured and dressed, and a lengthe one by another, well halfe a hande breadth asunder, and three fingers deepe. Certain there are which will them to be set for the better yeelde, after the middes of Auguste, vnto the middle of September, letting these so to remaine for twoo or three yeares, and that euerye yeare in the month of Aprill and May the leaues or blades then dry, to break off orderly, the other prospering to weede aboute, and to raise the earth after, twoo fingers deepe, but in suche manner, that the heades bee not touched.
               After that the hearbes be sufficiently clensed, when as the flowers be withered and deade, especiallye in Auguste and towards Haruest, whiche, flourishe not aboue a moneth, then these are to bee gathered in the morning after Sunne rising, and after the drying by a gentle fire to be kepte togyther in bagges of leather, in a close and drye place.
               And this one thing as maruellous, is worthy to be noted, that the roote or Onion standyng quite oute of the Earthe, yeeldeth notwythstanding

the proper floure of continuance but a daye or twoo after the full openyng, at the season of the yeare: but the heade afterwardes (as depriued of nourishement) withereth and rotteth.
               The blades be freshe and greene all the winter throughe, in that the heades be full of iuice, and sufficient strong to endure the colde season. When the Saffron is set, and in the thirde yeare digged vp, there are founde aboute eche heade fiue or sixe heades growing, and ioyned togither wythin the Earthe.
               The beste Saffron is the same, which is freshe and newe, and excelleth in the goodnesse of coloure, in such maner, that the toppes in whiche the Seedes are contained be white, and mixed with a rednesse: the chiue also is not lightly brokē, and rubbed in the hand, coloureth the skin, and is in sauour comfortable, wyth a gentle sharpnesse. And this is named the Orientall Saffron.
               
                  The phisicke benefits and helpes of the Saffron.
                  THe Saffron hath the propertie of heating in the seconde, and drying in the firste degree, as Aegineta witnesseth. The Saffron endureth for fiue yeares in perfecte strength, being close kepte in a leather bag, and set in a drye place.
                  Take a scruple of good Saffron, or the third part of a dramme, and halfe a graine waighte of pure muske, this mixed togither with the best and hotte wine, drinke fasting, for it is a singular remedy agaynste the harde fetching of breath, of what cause soeuer the same shal happen.
                  The Saffron procureth a freshe and faire coloure to the drinkers of it, it comforteth the harte: purgeth and causeth healthfull bloude, and remoueth poysons from the heart. Taken in meate, it causeth a long and easie breathing and helpeth the Asthma.
                  
                  Agaynste the infection and plague inwarde, manye after the fortifying of the Saffron. Triacle and Mustarde Seede, in an emptye eggeshell close stopped, doe make an electuarie, wyth other spices adioyned, whyche after the takyng expelleth the poyson or infection by sweates.
                  The vse of it profiteth impostumes in the brest, & those that be short winded, it amendeth the milte, moueth the venereall a
                        ••
                     e, and causeth

vrine, this also auaileth agaynste the vehemente aking and paynes of the heade if suche a playster bee made wyth the same: take of Saffron Gumme, Arabicke, Euphorbium, and Myrre, of eche a like waight, these after the finely working to pouder, and tempering with the white of an egge, applye in playster forme to the foreheade, for this wythout doubt auaileth.
                  The Saffrone taken either in meate or drinke, procureth vrine, and the Termes: this also amendeth the yelowe Jaundise, drunke especiallye with sweete Wine or Malmsey: this giuen besides to an vlcered breaste, stomacke, liuer, lungs, kidneys, and bladder, greatly profiteth.
                  For the grieuouse paine of the Goute, take a quantitie of Saffrone, which with the yolke of egs, oyle of roses, and rose water, an ointment made, apply with a fether on the grieued place: the Saffron with crums of white breade and milke, after the boyling togyther, applyed in the forme of a pultise, on swellings, impostumes, and vlcers, doeth greately assuage both the swelling and pain, yea mightily softeneth and breaketh impostumes.
                  If with Opium, Barley meale, milke and the white of an egge, an ointement be made after arte, and annointed on any painefull and sore place, it doth assuage the griefs in shorte time. The Saffron (as Vitalis writeth) doth greatly amend the feebling of the hart, and weaknesse of stomacke. The saffron comforteth palsey members, and softneth the hardnesse of partes: for the which cause, the same named Oxicrocie, is right profitable. The Saffron remoueth the griefe of the eyes, eyther of bloude or other blemishe, if with rose leaues broughte to powder, and mixed with the yolke of an egge, the same be applyed in playster forme on a linnen clothe to the eye. The Saffron remoueth all swellings and griefes of the eyes, if the same be especially mixed wyth wine, and applied in plaister forme.
                  The Saffron is profitable mixed with womans milke and annointed, for the distilling of the eyes. The Saffron remoueth drunkennesse, drunke with Cuite. The person also which shall drinke the pouder of Saffron in wine, shall not bee ouercome by drinkyng. This besides is very profitable for remedies of the eares.
               
            
            
               
               What skill care and diligence to requyred in the workmanly sowing and ordering of the Nauewes. Chap. 24.
               
                  THe nauewes and Turnups are sowen after one maner, in earth well tourned vp, and orderly dressed, or if the owner will in earable grounde, and will indure in a manner any ayre: yet these desire a drye grounde, rather leane and grauellye and diligently turned uppe.
               The seeds wel prosper, bestowed in a fine poudered earth, wel laboured afore: and to possesse faire Nauewes, lette not the Seedes be aboue three yeares olde: for being elder, the Seedes runne into Colewortes. If the plantes in the comming vp appeare too: thicke togither, the owner may plucke them vp; and sette them thinner in other well dressed places. These also in the growing vp, oughte diligently to be weeded and the Earthe to be digged aboute, and lette the greater and fairer still growe, to possesse theyr Seedes, whyche in the moneth of Auguste, diligently bestowe in a well laboured Earthe.
               To committe Seedes to the Earthe the owner oughte to stay vntill the grounde be well moistned with showers, for bestowed soone after, they prosper and come the spedier vp: But the owner or Gardner ought in any case to take heede, that he bestowe not the seedes in a shadowye place, for the shadowie places are disagreable and hurtful to the plants, althoughe the grounde be good fertill and well laboured.
               The property many tymes of the grounde doth alter the Nauewe into a Turnupe, and the Turnupe into a Nauewe.
               The owner ought to gather the Nauews in the moneth of Nouember: and to possesse them all the winter time, he muste burye the rootes in Sande lying in a seller, that hee maye not onlye eate of them in the Winter tyme, but all the Lente throughe.
               The worthier Nauewes be those, which are rather long, and as they were crisped, and not big, and possessyng fewe rootes, at the moste but one seemely roote, and the same straight and sharpe downeward.
               There be which make a singular composition of the Nauews, with Radishe rootes, a little Salte, Hony, Mustarde, delectabler spices, and Uinegar: yea the same may bee made wythout spices, bothe wholsome and profitable.
               
                  
                  The Phisicke benefits of the Nauewes.
                  THe worthy Galen reporteth the Nauewe to be hotte in the seconde degree, and moiste in the first.
                  The Nauews tenderly boyled, do nourishe much, yet euilly or hardly digested, and they make softe fleshe, and the same puffed vp, yet this lesse than the Turnup, who afore oughte to bee boyled in water, and that firste water after the boyling poured forthe, then into a second water bestowed, diligently boyle them, for the hardenesse of their substance, will well be tempered, and meanely ingender a nourishment betweene good and euill.
                  The Nauewes whiche are not throughly boiled, doe euilly digeste, and procure a windinesse in the body, besides a stoppyng of the veynes, and naturall powers: for which cause, these yeeld a more commoditye to the stomacke, and digeste better, beyng twice boyled in faire water, and shifted a thirde time into a moste fatte brothe, where boyled vnto a sufficiente tendernes, and then eaten, there be which boile them a thirde time in newe Cow milke, for the better digesting.
                  The Seedes confected wyth Sugar, and eaten, encrease Sperme in man. But the Seedes brused and druncke, doe especiallye auaile against poysons, for the which cause, there are profytable ministred with Triacle.
               
            
            
               What care and skill is requyred in the sowing and rightly ordering of the Rape and Turnup. Chap. 25.
               
                  THe Rapes be not muche differing from the Nauewes and Turnups, sauing that these bee bigger, and sweete in the eating. For the Rapes or Turneps be muche greater, and in the eating pleasanter than the Nauewes: The Rapes require a like ordring and dressyng of the earthe, as afore vttered of the Nauewe, whiche for fronth ought to bee rather sowen in the Moueth of September, than in any other tyme, in a moyste Earth, well dunged, diligently turned in and dressed: for by that meanes they prosper and come the better forwarde, and are caused to bee fayrer, tenderer, bigger, and sweeter of taste thorough the colde season

folowing, like as the hoarie frostes, snowe, and colde mistes, than in the drye and warme season of the yere.
               After these be come vp, and ready to bee remoued, the owner muste carefully see vnto, that the leaues bee not gnawen neyther of spiders, nor of any other vermin or worms, & for the auoiding of like anoyance it shall be profitable for the Gardner (well a daye before the committing of the Seedes to the Earth) to mixe the Seedes with the pouder or dust of planke boordes, or rather with the foote of a chimney, whyche after wette wyth water, to the ende the Seedes may receyue some moisture, and being thus ordered, bestowe the whole togyther in the Earthe the nexte day folowing.
               The skilfull Neapolitane Rutilius reporteth that the Rape or Turnup (as the Nauew) prospereth vnder euery aire, and desireth to be bestowed in a fat and loose earthe, and the same so loose, that it in a manner falleth to pouder, whereby the Seedes may prosper, and come the speedier forward.
               The seedes also are to be bestowed with fine poudred Earthe, to the ende the plantes may not come vp too thicke togyther, about the ende of July, vnto the middes of September: and if raine happen not the daye before, then the day folowing, moisten the grounde with water gently sprinkled vpon.
               If the seedes committed to the Earth be bestowed thinne, the plants in the comming vp (by diligence of the Gardner) will encrease the bigger, for whiche cause, where the plants grow thicke togither, and these come so some strength, the owner may plucke vp sundry; and bestowe those a good distance asunder, wherby they growe the bigger in roote.
               And for the better furtheraunce of their growth the owner shall sundry times water and weede about the plants. The seedes may be sowen in the open fielde, and where Corne grewe, if so be the grounde be diligently plowed, and the rootes weeded foorth, these after the bestowyng in the Earthe, may the owner only couer with the harrowe or rake, bicause the seedes lye shallow on the ground.
               The Seedes ioy in an open fielde, far from the shadowe of Trees, in that these lying vnder shadow be muche harmed: if the owner minde to commit Seedes to the earth in a drye season, he may then bestow them in some well dressed place being moiste and shadowie, thicke togyther

after the maner of the Coleworte.
               After this, when the plantes be well growen vp, and the earthe sufficiently moistned with shoures, the owner maye remoue and sette the plantes in larger places well dressed, from the ende of August vnto the entring of the Sunne into Libra or middle of September.
               The Rapes to serue in the winter time, oughte to be gathered in the moneth of October, and those whiche are the fairer, by plucking away the outward leaues, may be set againe in well dunged and dressed earth to yeelde Seedes the Sommer following.
               And to preserue the Rape or Turnup rootes, to serue the Winter and Lente time, the owner may worke after this manner, by washing first the rootes, and these raw, bestowe in rankes one vppon another, and in eche rank strew salt, fennell seedes, and sauerie, or only couer them with salte, close couched, and on suche wise letting these remayne for eyghte dayes, poure so muche faire water vppon, as will well couer them: Whiche done, lette the vessell stande in some vaulte or Seller, to serue for the aboue saide times, or longer if the owner will, if so be he fill vp the vessell, when these lye bare and drye. These hitherto Ruellius in his instructions of husbandry.
               This one thing is in maruellous and worthy the noting, so small a seede to encrease in roote, to suche a bignesse as wee manye tymes see them, of which the like hathe bene seene to haue wayed thirtie, yea fortie pounde weighte, to the admiration of many.
               The owner oughte especially to take heed, that the seedes to be committed to the Earthe, be not aboue three yeares olde. For the grounde otherwise of the Rapes, will change and bring foorth Colewortes.
               For to enioy faire and big rootes, let the owner new sette those rootes which be grown vnto a finger bignesse, wel a span distant one from the other. Which done, and these somwhat more growen, the owner ought to treade downe with the 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and diligentlye couer the heades thicke with Earthe, whereby the Juice of the leaues and stalkes may runne to the encreasing of the rootes.
               The rootes after the gatheryng in the moneth of Nouember, maye likewise be preserued, to serue the Winter and Lente time, as afore is vttered of the Nauewe.
               
                  
                  The phisicke vertues and helpes of the Rapes.
                  THe Rapes brate in the seconde degree, and moisten in the firste: these cause many humoures, hardely digests, and encrease muche winde. The sowen Rapes are harde of digestion: whyche notwythstandyng boyled doe swell the bellye, and encrease humours in the body.
                  The Rapes haue a maruellous propertie in sharpning the sighte, as the singuler Auerrois writeth: Yet these throughlye boyled, as I afore vttered to be done by the Nauewes, doe yeelde a nourishement, and are profitable to the body: contrariwise these eaten rawishe or not wel boiled, doe hardelye digeste, cause winde in the body, and moleste the stomacke.
                  The Rape seedes vsed in the steede of Triacle, recouereth and helpeth poysoning, if any hauing druncke or eaten poyson, shal take the seeds brused in water and honye, this of experience knowen, represseth or abateth the force of the poison, that the same can not harme.
                  The Rape or Turnup roots confected with vineger, doth coole and ingender winde, yet these extinguishe the hot and dry bloude, of whiche moste greate and perillous sicknesses are caused. The rootes and seedes eaten doe stirre and moue the veneriall acte.
                  They are profitable to helth, being eaten after the third boyling, and if any foule arayed with scab
                        •
                     , whych represent the kinde of a Leaprie, do wash al the body with the water in which the Rape seeds shall afore be boiled, it doth wt the same cause in shorte time a fairer & clearer skin. The rape roots boiled in May butter, after the tender see thing, eatē with a little salte, doe loose the breaste: the decoction of the
                        ••
                      taken, ceasseth a drye cough, boiled with oyle Olive, and eaten with pepper and a little salte, doe helpe digestion: The rootes daily eaten, do engender grosse humoures, for whiche cause greatly misliken of Democritus, to be vsed for a proper sustenaunce.
                  The decoction or broth of the roots tenderly boyled, applied on palsie members, the hot E
                        ••
                     te, and ki
                        •
                     e
                        •
                      hecles, do speedilye amend and help these: if any in the side of the roote; after the makyng of a hole, doe bestow in it the oile of roses, and vnwrought waxe, and after the tender roastyng vnder hotte embers, doe applye the same in vlcered or sore

kybes, it shal in short time cure them.
               
               
                  The benefites of the distilled water of Rapes.
                  THe Garden Rape or Turnup, both leaues and rootes shred, ought to be distilled about the rude of June, in a Tinne Lymbecke.
                  This water preuayleth against the galling of members, if those bee dayly washed and supled with the same, and that a linnen cloth wet in it, be applyed twice or thrice a day.
                  This helpeth any burning or scalding, if the same be washed with it, but after a crust gathered on the place, the same will in no manner bee remoued, but through the dayly washing of it with this water, whiche in the ende perfitly cureth the sore.
                  The distilled water of the putrified Rapes, applyed often hot with a linnen cloth wet in it, doth greatly profit the swellyng and sores of the feete, caused of colde.
               
            
            
               What skil and diligence is required with the secretes to be learned in the sowing and ordering of the Radish. Chap. 26.
               
                  THe Garden Radish with vs, is better knowen, than I with pen can vtter the discription of the same, for in a maner euery person, aswel the rich, as the poore, the Cytizen as Countreyman, when their stomacke is slacke or yrketh at meate, they then to procure an appetite to feeding by the same roote, by cutting ye rootes eyther into a length (on eche side) or into round slyces, do workmanlye season them with salte, beating them for the more delight to the mouth, betweene two 
                     〈◊〉
                  , supposing a more tendernesse caused to the rootes, through the like 
                     •
                  doyng: whose care and diligence in the bestowing of it in the Earthe, oughte (after the minde of Columella) to bee after this manner, then the beddes, before the bestowing of the seedes, be wel labored, and workmanly turned in with dung, and when the rootes be growen to some bignesse, then the Earthe to bee raysed and diligentlye heaped aboute them, for if the rootes shall bee naked or lye bare of Earthe, that doth the Sunne and ayre beate vppon them, then wyll

they become, in their further growth, but 
                     •
                   harde and hollow like to the Mushrome, as Plinie reporteth, whyche prescribeth to these, both a loose and moyst Earth.
               The worthy Rutilius (in his instructions of Husbandrye) vttereth, that the Radishes refuse a harde, Sandie and Grantllie grounde, and do ioy in the moysture of the ayre: besides, these ought to bee sowen in Beddes a good distaunce asunder, and the Earth deepe digged after a late or new rayne fallen, excepte the place by happe shall be moyst, and soone watered.
               The Seedes committed to the Earth, ought immediatly (and with dyligence, to bee couered lighte wyth the Rake, and neyther dung bestowed within, nor strawed vppon the Beddes (although Columella otherwise willeth) but only chaffe of Corne, as after shall further be vttered.
               The skilfull practised in Garden matters reporte, that these better prosper being orderly sette, than curiously sowen and that these to bee bestowed in the Earth, as both sowen and sette, at two tymes of the yeare, as in the moneth of Februarie, and beginning of Marche, if the owner woulde enioy the rootes tymely, and in August vnto the middes of September, if the owner woulde enioy them much sooner: and these then bestowed in the Earth, are without doute farre better, for as much as the Radishe in the colde season, groweth and encreaseth especiallye in the roote, and is the same time tenderer, wheras the plants otherwise in the fayre and warme season, runne vp into a leafe and stemme. Yet thys manner of trauaile, to possesse them in the sharpe winter, is little in vse with vs, bycause the Radishe can ill abyde the bytter ayre, which once bytten and taynted with the frostes either wythereth, or soone after dieth, yet the learned Plinie wryting of the Radish vttereth the same to ioye so much in the colde ayre, that in Germanye hath sometymes bin seene a Radish, which grew in cōpasse so big as an infants middle.
               The skilfull Aristomachers (in hys learned instructions of husbandrie) wylleth that the leaues of the Radishe in the wynter tyme bee broken off, and throwen awaye, and to heape the Earth high about them, leaffe puddles of water doe stande in the Beddes: for the rootes on such wise increase, and be bigge in the Sommer tyme.
               Howsoeuer the rootes shall bee handeled, certayne it is, that the colde

ayre and frostes do increase and sweeten the rootes (as afore vttered of the Rape) if so be they maye continue the wynter tyme: for the colde ayre conuerteth the increasement into the rootes, and not into ye leaues, although that those (as Theophrastus vttereth) do waxe then harde, in many places.
               The rootes are caused to growe the sweeter in eatyng, and more delectable in taste, if the leaues be broken off (as Plinie hath noted) before the Radishes shoote vp into a stemme.
               And the leafe of the Radishe, howe muche the smaller the same shall be, euen somuche the tenderer and delectabler roote wyll it yelde, whyche by watering with a Salte Lycoure or Pickell, causeth to breath forth the bytternesse quite, if any such rest or be in the roote.
               As the lyke Plinie wrote, that the Radishe to bee fedde, yea and willed the rootes, for the tendernesse, to bee often watered with Pickle, or salte water.
               The Egiptians watered with ye Nytre, to the end the rootes might be commendabler in sweetenesse and delight to the mouth, which possesse a Cartilage and thicke rynde, to these, in many rootes, sharpe in taste, yet delectable in the eating, which part left bare aboue the ground becommeth toughe and harde, through the occasion afore vttered, and hollow (like to the Mushrom) vnlesse they be wel couered aboute wyth light Earth.
               There are Radishes supposed to be of a Feminine kynde whych bee so sharpe, and these possesse smaller leaues, and to the eye be a fayrer greene, as Rutilius vttereth of them.
               If the owner couete to enioy sweete rootes in taste, then after the counsel and minde of the singular Florentine, let hym stiepe the Seeds for two dayes before, in either water and Hony, or Cuyte, or else Sugered water, and these dryed in the shadowe, to commit them orderlye to the Earth.
               If the Gardener desire to possesse fayre and greate rootes, let him (after the minde of the Neapolitane Rutilius) when the rootes bee growen to some bignesse: plucke away al the leaues, sauing two within to growe stil, which done, couer the Earth often ouer the heades, whereby the iuyce may the more run to the rootes, in causing them to grow the sweeter and pleasanter.
               
                  A like experience in causing the roote to become maruellous big, doth Plinie skilfully vtter and teache, after this manner, by taking a greate dyble, with the whiche making a hole in the Earthe well sixe fingers deepe, fill it vp with fresh Chaffe, after bestow a seed of the Radish with dung & light erth ouer the mouth, couering the same in like maner euen with the Earth, these performed, the roote will growe and increase vnto the bignesse of the hole.
               The skilfull practicioners reporte, that the goodnesse of the Radish is knowen by the leaues, which the sweeter they be (after the manner) somuche the tenderer and more pleasaunt are the rootes in the eating, the like teacheth or sheweth the rynde, which the thinner ye same is, somuch the delectabler is the roote in tast of the mouth.
               The thinne bestowing of the Seedes in wel dressed beds, from the ende of Jugust vnto the middes of September, and after the comming vp diligently weeded about with the leaues broken off, the light Earth couered about, and often watered with salt water, do procure the rootes not only to waxe, or growe the bigger, but tenderer and sweeter in the eating, for as much as the salte pickle very much abateth the bitternesse consisting in them, as by a like we customably see, that these bee eaten with vineger and salte.
               And the plantes better prosper, comming vp in an open ayre, than bestowed in a shadowie place, where in the increase, the rootes be much hyndered.
               If the owner happen to commit seedes to the Earth in a drye season, let them be sowen the thicker in beddes, and if the same may be, in a moyste grounde lightly watered.
               The plantes growen to a reasonable height aboue the Earth, and ye shoures haue moystned the grounde a day before, the plantes may then be remoued, and set into beddes wel laboured and workmanly dressed, which by diligence bestowed, growe the bigger and pleasaunter in the eating.
               That the Radishes maye not bee harmed with the Garden 
                     •
                  leas, Theophrastus willeth to sowe in the Beddes among them, the pul
                     ••
                   named Eruum.
               
               Other singular helpes for the most Hearbes, may bee learned in my first part: which I haue gathered for ye most part out of antient writers.
               
                  Here is not to be ouerpassed, that in Radishes a bitternesse consisteth according to the thicknes of the rynde, as the worthye Plinie vtereth, which writeth that these also do offende the teeth, by blunting or setting them an edge.
               But in this place commeth to mynde, a secrete very profitable, and to bee esteemed with vinteners, whiche the Authour freely vttereth to them.
               If the vintener cutteth a Radishe into slyces, and bestoweth those pieces in a vessel of corrupt wine, it doth in short time draw al ye euil sauoure and lothsomnesse (if any such consisteth in the wine) and to these the tartnesse of it, like receiueth, which if the roote be not able to ridde and drawe quite forth this defaulte, let the same immediately be taken forth (and if neede shall require) put in a fresh roote like ordered. For thys no doubte hath often bene proued, and profited many by vnderstanding of the secrete.
               This no doubte is a secrete very maruellous, that the Radyshe in no wise agreeth to be placed or growe nigh to the vine, for the deadlye hatred between them, in somuch that the Uyne nere growing, turneth or windeth backe with the Braunches, as mightilye disdayning and hating the Radishe growing fast by: If we may credite the learned Plinie, Galen, and the Neapolitane Rutilius, whiche seeme to haue diligently noted the same.
               And the reason they reporte to be like as afore vttered of the agreement of the Coleworte with the vyne, whych is, through the hyd discord of natures consisting in them, so that if the places were changed, yet for all the remouing, will they in no manner ioy togither.
               Of whiche Androcides affirmed the Radishe and Colewort, to be a sigular remedie against drunkennesse, so that the auntient in Greece, cōmonly ioined and matched the drinking of wine, with the Radish, as I afore vttered in the Chapter of the Coleworte, so that no maruel it is, if these bee vsed so common.
               The Radysh in time past hath bene of suche accompte, and so worthily esteemed, that Moschion the Greeke wrote a large pamphlet of the worthy prayses of the same: yea the Radishe before other meates, was so preferred in Greece, that at Delphos in the Temple of Appollo, the Radishe was esteemed as Golde, the Beete as Siluer, and the Rape

or Turnup as Leade.
               The Radish also is sayde to polishe very fayre the yudr
                     •
                  e, and but
                     •
                  
                  ed in a heape of salte, doth alter and reduce ye same into a watery pickle.
               The Radish to conclude, in the remouing and settyng again, looseth the sharpnesse resting in it, and this hath a singular delight in the rinde, so that the same bee newe gathered and not too olde of growth, therfore by the example of many seldome eaten, do vnaduisedly refuse and omyt the vsing of it.
               And drawing to an ende, I thinke it righte profitable to vtter the makyng of vineger with the Radishe, as the learned Petrus Crescentius (in his work of Husbandry) hath noted the same. The rootes of the Radish (sayth he) being dryed and brought to fyne pouder, and bestowed into a vessel which hath wyne in it, let stande to settle (after the well laboring and mixing togither) for certayne dayes: which done, the owner shal enioy a Radish vineger, very laudable and much commended for the dissoluing and wastyng of the stone in the kidneys, and many other paynful griefes.
               
                  The Phisicke benefites and helpes of the Radish.
                  THe Garden Radish (after the mynde of the learned, heateth in the thirde degree, and dryeth in the seconde, but the wilde Radishe in phisicke causes, is more effectuous.
                  This one incommoditie (among the physicke helpes) doth the Radish possesse, which is, that it procureth many tymes belching, after the eating at Supper: for a remedye of this annoyaunce or incommoditie, may bee or shee incontinent rate, certaine braunches of Isope, Tyme, or Organy, or rate the roote with pure Oyle.
                  And for thys one incommoditie ioyned wyth it, the roote yeeldeth a maruellous number of benefites, for the health and case of persons.
                  Here further learne, the other incommodities written by the wise, whiche are, that the Radishe eaten, eyther before or after meales, doth cause wynde, the resting of the stomacke, dulleth the brayne, eyes, and reason.
                  The singular Greeke Florentinus (in his instructions of Husbandry)

writeth, that the Radish doth profit very muche the Fleumaticke, and maruellously helpeth the stone in the kidneys, and stopping of the vrine by Grauell: If any especially boyle the rinde with white wine and water, and drinketh the same morning and euening, or the rynde of the Radish brused and strayned, and drunke fasting in the morning, and that the patient shall perseuer or continue wyth the same for certayne dayes.
                  The freshe rynde after the steeping in whyte wine for eight houres drunk with a fourth part of the pouder of Medler kernels, like auaileth.
                  The Radish taken fasting in the morning, with warme water prepared, procureth vomytyng, for whiche matter, the Phisitions rather appointe the seedes boyled, than the roote. If the roote be eaten wyth oyle Oliue, it stayeth the belchings of the stomacke, whiche are woonte to bee caused by the same, in that the oyle suffereth not such winde to rise.
                  The iuice drunke with Cuite, cureth the kings euil, and drunk with water and Hony, amendeth the cough, whiche on such wise ministred, doth helpe those fetching the winde short and painefullye.
                  The whole substaunce of the roote, so muche auayleth agaynste poyson, that takyng the same fastyng, it shall nothyng harme the creature.
                  And the handes annoynted with the iuyce of the Radishe, as afore vttered in my first part, may handle Serpents without feare.
                  The iuyce of the Radishe dropped into the eares, doth speedily aswage the winde and noyse in them, the same drunke with water and Hony, recouereth the Jaundise. The leaues boyled in porredge in steed of Colewortes, and eaten sundry times, amendteh the stoppings of the Liuer and Mylte.
                  The seedes brused and giuen wyth white wine, is right profitable against all sorts of poysons, and other dangerous diseases.
                  And if any by a punishemente, receyue grieuous strokes and spottes by whypping, by brusing, and applying the Radish on the places, shall speedily cure them.
                  The same also cleareth scarres and reduceth wanne spottes vnto the persit colours, and remoueth the pimples in the face: this besides deliuereth the quartayne Ague, if the same be dayly giuen by the way of a vomite, at the comming of the fit.
                  
                     The iuyce of Radish boyled wyth Hony, and after the adding of a lyttle vineger, the same strayned and drunk, profiteth against the quartaine ague, and stopping of the Mylte.
                  The Radish applyed in plaister forme, deliuereth the water betwene the skinne, and helpeth a hard and swollen Splene, as Dioscorides witnesseth.
                  The Radish well digesteth, being eaten wyth meate at Supper, for it heateth the stomacke, yet the same causeth a strong breath, by sleeping soone after meate.
                  The Seedes after the brusyng drunke wyth whyte wyne, doe cause vryne, and drunke wyth vyneger, aswageth the swellyng of the Mylt.
                  The iuyce annoynted on olde vlcers, both cleareth, and eateth awaye the Canker in them, the lyke perfourmeth the pouder of the roote.
                  The Radish boyled with Mulce water or Hony and water, and drunke warme, amendeth an olde coughe: it remoueth the clammy Fleume of the breaste, by spitting vp, in the dayly drynkyng for certain dayes.
                  The freshe ryndes of the Radish well brused and taken with vineger and Hony procureth the patient to vomite, the like perfourmeth the Seedes, drunke warme with water.
                  The Seedes haue a singular propertie in expellyng, for which reason, these are right profitable to them hauing eaten Mushromes, which they can not dygest.
                  If a round flyee of the Radish be applyed on the nauyl, it doth spedely ceasse the grypings in women, as the skilfull Hippocrates wryteth.
                  The often eating of the Radish, procureth plentye of Mylke to women gyuing sucke and Nurses.
                  The iuyce of the roote drunke with Hony, sendeth down ye Termes, and expelleth the wormes in the bellie: the iuyce gargelled wyth Hony and vineger, aswageth the swelling in the throte.
               
               
                  
                  The commended helpes of the distilled water of the Radishe.
                  THe roote finely shred in the beginning of September, oughte to be distilled in a Tin Limbecke, or rather glasse bodye in Balneo Mariae. The distilled water of Radishe drunke morning and euening vnto the quantitie of three ounces at a tyme, healpeth the digestion of the stomacke, the kings euill, and killeth the worms of the belly: the radishe also receiued, clenseth the stomacke of all clammy humoures and other matters, which hinder digestion, this besides openeth all maner of stoppyng of the inner members & vaines. This drunk in the like order and quantitie, dothe extenuate the clammy humoures in the lungs, and amendeth the swelling of the milte: this also clenseth the breast of clammy humoures and causeth a cleare voice.
                  The water drunke vnto the quantitie of three ounces at a time, bothe morning and euening, recouereth the poysoning taken eyther in meate or drinke. The same quantitie drunke at a tyme, profiteth agaynste the Quartaine Ague, draweth downe the Termes, and sendeth foorth the Stone.
                  This water helpeth those which are stinged eyther wyth the Bee or Waspe, or venomed with the spider, if they shall wash the grieued place with the same, and shall apply linnen clothes wet in it. This water helpeth the pricking and stitches of the side, if the same be bathed with the water. The water dropped into the eyes, cleareth the humoures falling whiche dimmeth the sighte, it also remoueth the spottes of the face, by the often washing with the water, this remoueth the yelow or blackish spots by beating, if the places be often rubbed with the same.
                  The water gargelled, and reteined in the mouth, amendeth the swelling of the throate, and vlcers of the gummes, for this resolueth, consumeth and breaketh them.
                  The water often drunk morning and euening, chiefly at the going to bed vnto the quātitie of three vnces at a time, for thirtie days togyther, not only clereth the kidneys and bladder, and the places which containe the stone, but breaketh the stone, and causeth vrine.
                  This water drunke for three or foure weekes togither, vnto the quā
                     titie of three or foure ounces at a time, both morning and euening recouereth the water betweene the skinne, and sendeth the same forthe by

the vrine, so that the patiente refraineth the ouermuche drinking: for howe muche the lesser hee drinketh, so muche the more water by the vrine is sent foorth, throughe whyche the patient is also sooner recouered.
               
            
            
               What care and skill is required in the sowing and workmanly ordering both of the Parsnep, and Carote. Chap. 27.
               
                  THe seedes of the Parsnep and Carote, require one manner of diligence in the sowing, and to b
                     •
                  e bestowed in a ground painfully digged, well turned in with dung, and workmanly dressed before: but the seedes to be committed to the earthe, maye not bee bestowed in beddes verye thicke togither, to the ende these in the encreasing, maye growe the fairer and bigger.
               The plantes are in the like maner to be set, and at those tymes sowen as afore vttered of the Radish, as sowen in December, January, and February, to serue in the Lent and Spring time, but these better commended, to be sowen in the Harneste time to enioy them all the Lente.
               The Gardner which wold possesse faire and big roots, ought to pluck away the leaues often times, and to couer light earthe on the heades, as afore vttered of the Radishe: besydes these growen to some bignesse, at the leaste so big as the finger, ought to be thinner set, and often weeded aboute, whereby the rootes maye growe the bigger and sweeter in the eating.
               
                  The phisicke benefits and helps of the Parsnep and Carot.
                  THe vertues and properties of these two rootes are in a maner like, and serue rather for the kitchen, than to the vse of phisicke, in that they bee of a small nourishemente, and lesser nourishe than the Turnep or Rape doth.
                  The Parsnep roote (by the agreement of the Auncient) heateth in the middle of the second degree, and moistneth in the firste, but this in causes of phisicke smally allowed.
                  The roo
                        ••
                      is brought to a more temperamente for the body, if so bee

it be boiled in twoo or three waters before the eating, for on suche wise handled, it harmeth the stomacke the lesse.
                  This otherwise sodden (but in one water) ingendreth winde in the body, throughe whyche it causeth and moueth a desire to the veneriall acte, and often vsed, ingendreth euill bloude.
                  The root tenderly sooden in two waters, and remoued into a third, procureth vrine, assuageth the Colicke passion, and sendeth downe the Termes in women.
                  The Garden Parsenep, eaten wyth butter and pepper, and a little salte, profiteth the Melancolike, and as Vitalis writeth, this encreaseth good bloude.
                  The Parsenep seede drunk, and applied to the priuie place (as the lerned Dioscorides writeth, draweth down the terms, helpeth the straightnesse of making water, recouereth the water betweene the skin, and amendeth the stitches of the side or pleurisie.
                  This commended for the sting or bitte of anye venomous worme or beaste: This also applied to the priuie place, draweth forth the dead yongling, the leaues shred and applied with hony, doth throughly cleare and amend the great 
                        •
                     ating in of vlcers.
                  It is thoughte that no venomous beast may hurte the creature whiche weareth or carrieth the roote about him: and the roote hanged about the necke, doth profite against the swelling of the throate.
                  The Garden Carote is thoughte to heate and drye in the thirde degree, but the leaues and stoures especially, and many times the one vsed for the other in phisicke causes.
                  There is another kinde of Carot (being red in coloure) whiche maye be eaten rawe, but the same sodden with the Turnep, seemeth a pleasaunt and dainty dishe: and this may in the like order be sowen, as the others aboue taught.
                  The Carote growing of the owne accorde; which of moste men named the wilde, more auayleth in the leafe and floure for phisicke purposes, than the roote dothe: So that the leaues are to bee gathered to vse, when the same yeeldeth the floure, whyche after the separating of the roote, oughte to be dried in a shadowie place, and kepte in leather bags for the whole yeare: for these haue the propertye of dissipating, consumyng, and attracting, and is of qualitye drying by substance.
                  
                     The heade bounde aboute with the powder of this herbe, made sufficiently hot, amendeth a colde reume: the hearbe (after the boyling in wine) drunke, and a good quantitie of it after the stieping in wine and oile for ten days, boyled so long, vntill the wine bee wasted, and after the harde wringing forth of the herbe, the whole sette ouer the fire, and a little waxe put to it, in making therof a plaister, which applied, amendeth the paine of the stomacke, proceeding of winde or throughe colde, the strangurye, and stoppyng of the vrine, and bothe the Collike, and Iliacke passion.
                  This Carote boyled in wine, wyth a quantitie of figs to discretion, and the same drunke fasting, remoueth a dry cough: the decoctiō drunke dothe likewise helpe the harde fetching of breath; If the head be washed with the water or lye, in which the hearbe afore is sodden, doth remoue the fluxe of the heade proceeding of a colde cause.
                  If three handfulls of this hearbe be boyled in wine, to whiche oyle added in the boyling, and applied to the bellye, doth remoue winde and beate the stomacke: if a Sirrope be made of the hearbe and floures, and the Juice of Fennell, and the same drunke morning and euenyng, amendeth without doubt the stopping of the liuer and milte.
                  The hearbe boyled with Mallowes, and hearbe Mercurye, bothe in wine and water, and the same after the boyling, applied on the nauell, amendeth the vexings and gripings of the belly.
               
               
                  The vertues and helpes of the distilled water of the Parsenep.
                  THe herbe with the roote finely shred, oughte to be distilled about the ende of Marche, in a Tin Limbecke with a softe fyre.
                  This distilled water drunke morning and euening, vnto the quantitie of three ounces at a time, and the trembling members bathed wyth the same, doth in shorte time amende the shakyng of them.
                  If the water euery euening (at the going to bed) be drunke vnto the quantitie of sixe ounces at a time, doth not only moue forwarde the veneriall acte, but encreaseth Sperme.
                  This water drunk vnto the quantitie of foure ounces at a time, both Mornyng and Euening, recouereth in shorte time the straightnesse or painfulnesse in the making of water.
               
            
            
               
               The diligence and skill to be vsed, both in sowing and ordering of the Garden Poppie. Chap. 28.
               
                  THe Garden Poppy (after the minde of the Neapolitane Rutilius) oughte to be committed to the earthe' in the moneth of September, if it bee in a hotte and drye place: but the Seedes in colder and more temperate places, may be bestowed after the middle of February vnto the ende of Aprill, and sowen in beddes among the Colewortes.
               The plantes come the better forwarde, if so be vine braunches or other boughes of trees be burned in the places, where you after mind to bestowe the Seedes. To be briefe, the seedes of the Poppy and Dyll, require the like order and diligence in the bestowing in the earth, as afore vttered, of the herbe Cheruill, and Arache.
               
                  The phisicke benefits of the Garden Poppie.
                  THe white Poppy as al ye other kindes, cooleth in the fourth degree, and the seedes full ripe, before the gathering in the Sommer tyme may be preserued for fiue yeares.
                  The grene heads of the garden Poppy, boyled vnto the thicknesse of Hony, profit vnto many griefes: thys receyued procureth sounde sleepe, remoueth the cough, it also stayeth the fluxe of the bellye, if any annointeth the belly with it.
                  The Poppie Seede (after the bringing to pouder) mixed with newe milke or brothe, and giuen to children to drinke warme, procureth them to sleepe.
                  The seedes brused and spred on a toste of Butter, doe cause children to sleepe: the seedes confected with Suger, and eaten, doe maruellously preuaile, in procuryng the weake patiente to sleepe soundly.
                  The Sirrupe of Poppy helpeth the reume, cough, and lacke of sleepe, by preparing it after this maner: Take of the newe heades both of the white & black Poppy one pounde, of raine water foure pints, boyle these so long togither, vntil a pinte and a halfe remaine, to whiche after the straining adde of Suger, and ye Pennites, of eche six ounces: these boile

vnto a heigth, according to art, and this they name, the simple Sirrope.
                  The compound is made after this manner: take of the freshe heads, both of the white and blacke poppy, twelue ounces of maiden hear two ounces of licourice, fine drammes of tuiubae, thirty in number, of lettuce seedes fiue ounces, of the Mallowes and Ouince seedes an ounce and a halfe, these after the boyling in foure pintes of water vnto two, straine throughe a cloth, to which adde of Sugar and the Prunits one pounde, making thereof a Sirrope according to arte: for this recouereth a drye coughe, the consumption of the Lungs, the Reume, and debilitie of sleeping.
                  A plaister made of either seede, to whyche womans milke, and the white of an egge added, this applied on the Temples, procureth sleepe.
                  The Seede or Herbe of the white Poppy, (after the tempering with the oyle of Roses) applyed on an vlcer caused throughe a bruse, draweth foorthe the heate in it, and the same applyed on a hotte Liuer, greatly profiteth.
                  The pouder of the white Poppy Seedes, mixed with oyle oliue, and annointed on the chine of the backe, remoueth the griefe of the Joyntes, and strengthneth them, the seedes after the brusing with oyle Oliue, applyed in plaister forme aboute the heade, not only procureth reste, but sounde sleepe.
                  The patiente which cannot sleepe, may bruse certaine beades, and after the heating, presse forth the Juice, with whiche washing the face, like auaileth. The heades of the greeue Poppy, boyled vnto a thicknesse of bony, profite vnto many causes: for this taken procureth sleepe, remoueth the cough, stayeth the fluxe of the belly, if any annointe hym with the same. The Juice of Poppy, mixed with the oile of Roses, and annointyng the feete therewyth, remoueth the rage of the Goute: the seedes of the white Poppy brought to ponder, and mixed with the oyle of Violets, and the chine of the backe annoynted with the same, profiteth againste the Ague, and heate of the Liuer.
               
               
                  The commended vertues of the distilled water of the white Poppy.
                  THe aptest time for the distilling of the white Poppye, is in the beginning of June, and that the hearbe finely shred bee distilled in a

Tinne Limbecke with a softe fyre.
                  This water profiteth againste the red spottes of the face, if the same be washed with it twice a day, this procureth white handes, if they be washed with it.
                  The distilled water druncke vnto the quantitie of foure ounces at a time, before the going to bed, and anointing the Temples or beating veyns of the Wrests, doth not only procure quiet rest, but sound slepe, this also vsed, mitigateth the paine of the heade proceding of heate.
                  This water applied with linnen clothes wet in it, extinguisheth any heate, and profiteth a burnt skinne through the Sun, in remouing the heate, by the often applying of linnen clothes wette in it.
               
            
            
               What skil, diligence and secrets is to be lerned in the sowing and ordering of the Cucumber. Chap. 29.
               
                  THe auntient in time paste confounded or rather contrarye matched the Gourds with Cucumbers, as the lyke also Plinie did, and Euthydemus the Atheniā in his booke which he wrote of pothearbs, named the Gourd, the Indian Cucumber, and Menedorus a folower of Erasistratus defineth twoo kinds of the same: the one, to be the Indian, which as he vttereth, is the Cucumber: and the other to bee that, which is named the common Gourd. The Cucumber besides (after the sentence of Varro) is so named, for the crooking of it, and the Greke phisitions named it both Sicyon and Sicys, for that it staieth and represseth (as Demetrius writeth) the veneriall acte, throughe the coldnesse consisting in it.
               But leauyng further to vtter of the kindes, let vs come to the matter, in teaching what diligence is required, about the well handling of the Cucumber.
               The Seedes after the minde of the Neapolitane Rutilius, desire to be bestowed in furrows not thicke togyther, and these raised well a foote and a half high, but in breadth three foote, and between the furrowes muste the owner leaue spaces of eyghte foote broade, whereby the Cucumbers (in the growyng) maye freelye wander and spreade abroade.
               These after the cōming vp, need neither to be raked nor weded about,

for that in theyr fyrst comming vp, they ioye and prosper the better, by growing among other herbes, of whiche these are greatly strengthned and ayded.
               The plants creepe a long, on the Earth, and spredde into braunches muche like to the Uine, whiche for the weakenesse of the stalke, are caused on suche wise to spreade abroade on the grounde, except these be otherwise shored vp in their growing, with proppes workmanly sette in the Earth, for the better staying vp of the weake armes and braunches, that the fruites corrupte not by lying on the Earth.
               The Seedes for the more parte, appeare by the sixte or seauenth day after the sowing: being sufficientlye moistned with store of water for that space and time, by a pot or pottes of water dropping continually downe with a liste or wollen clothe hanging foorth of the mouth of the potte, which manner of watering is named filtring.
               Thys kinde of wateryng, is one of the chiefest matters required, in that the plantes prosper and come speediest forward through the muche moisture, in which they mightilye ioye: Yet these are muche hindered, and greatly feare the frostes, and colde ayre. For which cause the plants oughte at suche colde times to be workmanly fenced wyth mattresses of strawe diligently spred ouer them. The skilfull Rutilius writyng of the workmanly orderyng of the Cucumber, willeth the Seedes to bee committed to the Earthe in the moneth of Marche, and for daunger of the colde or frosts, to couer the beddes with mattresses of straw, vnto the middle of Maye, at whiche time the plantes oughte to be remoued, and sette againe into beds wel dunged and thicke layde for to run foorth and creepe abroade on the grounde, but the plantes yeelde the more: if they be bestowed in beds wel filled with earth & dung, and these raised aboue afoote highe.
               In the bestowing of the Seedes in the earthe, the owner oughte to haue a care, that hee sette the Seedes in beddes a lengthe, and these well twoo foote asunder one from the other, herein considering whether the Seedes be broken by the eighte or tenthe daye followyng, whyche founde ryther harde or broken, doeth denote a perfectnesse or goodnesse of the Seedes: But these in a contrary manner descerned softe, are vnprofitable, and to bee caste awaye, in whose places others requyre to be set, prouing by the sixte or eighte day, if the Seedes

bee broken or otherwise soft, which in a contrary manner seene, bestowe others in the places, as aboue taught.
               The plantes, after the comming vp, neede not to bee weeded in any manner, for as muche as the plantes better prosper and growe the fairer, by comming vp among other Herbes, of whiche these take a norishment.
               If the seeds before the sowyng, be stieped for two days in sheeps milk as Rutilius willeth, or in water and Hony, as Plinie instructeth, or in Sugered water, which cause the Plantes, after their perfite growth, to yeelde Cucumbers, (both swete, tender, white, and most pleasant, aswel in tast, as in sight, as the singular Columella hath uoted, and before him the Greke Florentinus, also after both, Plinie and Palladius, to al which experience confirmeth.
               The Gardener which woulde possesse Cucumbers timely and verye soone, yea and all the yere through, ought (after the mynde of the Neapolitane) in the beginning of the Spring, to fill vp old worne Baskets and Earthen pannes without bothomes, with fine sifted Earth tempered afore with fat dung, and to moysten somewhat the Earth wyth water, after the seedes bestowed in these, which done, when warme and Sunny dayes succeede, or a gentle rayne falling, the Baskets or Pans with the plantes, are then to bee set abroade, to be strengthned and cherished by the sunne and smal shoures: but the euening approching these in all the colde season, oughte to bee sette vnder some warme couer or house in the grounde, to bee defended from the frostes and colde ayre, which thus standing vnder a couer, or in the warme house, moysten gently with water sundry tymes, and these on such wise handle, vntyl al the Frostes, Tempestes, and colde ayre bee past, as commonly the same ceasseth not wyth vs, let aboute myddes of Maye.
               After these, when oportunitie or an apte daye serueth, the Gardener shall bestow the Baskets or Pannes vnto the brymme, or deeper in the Earth well laboured and trymmed before, with the rest of the diligence to be exercised, as afore vttered: which done, the Gardener shall enioye verye forwarde and tymelyer Cucumbers than anye others.
               Thys matter may bee compassed, both easier, in shorter tyme,

and with lesser trauel, if the owner (after the cutting of the waste branches, doth set them in wel laboured Beds, for these in far shorter time and speedier, do yelde fayre Cucumbers.
               This one thing I thinke necessarie to be learned, for the auoyding of the dayly labour and paynes, in the setting abroade and carrying into the house, either halfe Tubbes, Baskettes, or Earthen Pannes, whiche on this wise, by greater facilytie, 
                     •
                   may be done, if so be the Gardener bestowe the vessels with the plantes, in Wheelebarrowes, or suche lyke with wheeles, for these, to mens reason, causes maruellous easines, both in the bestowing abroade, and carrying again 
                     •
                   into the warme house, as often as neede shall require.
               The yong plants may be defended from cold and boistrous windes yea frostes, the colde ayre, and hotte Sunne, if Glasses made, for the only purpose, be sette ouer them, whiche on suche wise bestowed on the Beddes, yeelded in a manner to Tiberius Caesar, Cucumbers all the yeare, in which he toke a greate delight, as after the worthy Columella, the learned Plinie hath committed the same to memorie, which euerye day obtayned the like, as he writeth.
               But wyth a lesser care and laboure, may the same be perfoumed, as Columella writeth, if in a Sunny and well dunged place (sayth he) besundry roddes set a rowe, aswel of the Osior as Bremble, and these so planted in the Earth, after the Equinoctiall of Haruest, to cut a little wythin the Earth, whose heads after the wider enlargyng with a stiffe wooden pricke, to bestowe softe dung eyther within the pithes of the Osiers and Brembles consisting in the middes: these done, to fixe or putte Seeds of the Cucumber into the places, which after the growing to some bignesse, ioyne with Oslers and brembles.
               For the plants on such wyse growyng, are after not fed with their owne, but as it were by an other mother roote feeding, whyche by the same meanes yeelde Cucumbers, that wyl indure the colde season and frostes.
               The learned Plinie vttereth the same matter, admonyshyng here the reader, of the wrong instructions of Columella, although he seemeth to alledge an Authoure, for whych cause it shal bee to great purpose to heare the sentence of Plinie in this, who remouing the erroure of Columella
                  
vttered, that Cucumbers may be enioyed all the yeare greene, instructeth and willeth, that the greatest roddes of the Bremble▪ bee set agayne into a Sunny place, where these be cutte, well two fyngers long, aboute the Equinoctiall Spring or myddle March, and into the heades of these, after large holes made, the Seedes to bee bestowed lying especiallye within the Pythes of the Brembles, and fylled wyth softe dung, whiche done, that fatte dung and fyne Earth, after the well myxyng togyther, ought to bee thycke layed, and dylygentlye heaped aboute the rootes, which maye the better resyste the colde.
               But howe so euer these ought to bee handeled, it well appeareth, that Plinie doth dysagree wyth Columella, in thys instruction.
               For Plinie wylleth these to be set, about the Equinoctiall Spring, but Columella, aboute the Equinoctiall Haruest, as the Neapolitane Rutilius interpreted and noted the same, to whom, as it shoulde seeme, he bare a fauoure.
               The plantes muche feare the Thunder and Lyghtning, for whych cause, the Gardener may not set nor remoue them at those tymes, besides if the tender fruites bee not couered ouer wyth sheetes or thynne Couerlets, when such Tempests or stormes happen, they commonlye after perish and wyther.
               The Gardener myndyng to possesse long and tender Cucumbers, oughte to sette vnder the young, fruites growyng, an Earthen Panne, Bole, or halfe Tubbe fylled wyth fayre water, wel fiue or sixe fyngers, yea halfe a foote distaunce from them, for these by the nexte daye, wyll bee stretched vnto the water, so that settyng the Pannes lower into the Earth, or raysyng the fruites higher, ye shall daylye see them stretched forth towardes the water, vnto the admiration of the owner, for the length of them, which depriued of their vessels of water, shall in a contrarie manner see them wynded and crooking, so muche these ioye in the moysture, and hate the drouth. The fruites likewise wil grow of a maruellous length, if the floures be put to grow wythin hollowe Canes or Pypes of the Elder. But the same, is

otherwise to be learned of the Oyle, for as the Cucūbers so deadly hate (as Plinie writeth) yt setting vessels of the oyle, in steed of the water vnder them, they after▪ bend and wynde away, as disdayning the Licour, whych the owner shal wel try and see that these to haue bended so croked or winding as an Hooke, in one nights space.
               But there muste be a special care, as Columella (after the Greke Florentinus) admonisheth, that no woman, at that instant, hauing the reds or monthly course, approcheth nighe to the fruites, especially handeleth them, for through the handling, at the same tyme, they feeble and wyther.
               If she in the place be like affected, shal she after kyl the yong fruites, with hir onlye looke fixed on them, or cause them to grow after vnsauerie, or else corrupted.
               The Cucumber will yelde fruites without seedes, if three dayes before the sowing, the seedes be stieped in oyle Sesaminium or Sauine oyle (as the Neapolitane Rutilius hath) noted, or that the seedes afore be steped in the iuyce of the Herbe named of Plinie Culix, or as the same in Greeke may be coniectured Coniza, in English Fleabane.
               The like shal be wrought, if the first armes or branches (after the conditiō of the vines) be on such wise digged about, that only the heads of them appeare naked, which a thirde time to be like bared, if neede shal so require, yet such a diligence to be exercised in the same, yt what branches growe out, and spreade on the earth, to be workmanly cut awaye, preseruing only the stem and branches, that last shote foorth ▪which on such wise handeled, yelde fruites with the only Pulpes, hauing no sedes in them.
               If the Gardener desireth to enioye Cucumbers, hauing Romayne letters, strange figures, and skutchings or Armes imbossed on the grene rynde without, he may, after the liuely coūterfayting of formes on the Mouldes of woode, bestowe of the potters Clay or playster of Parys, vnto the thicknesse of a finger, which like handeled, and cut into two partes, let drie in a fayre and hot place, that these may the sooner serue to vse, after bestow into the hollow mouldes, framed to a like bignesse and length as the fruites, of the yong Cucumbers, which fast bound about, and so closse togither, that no ayre breath in, let these on such wise hāg, vntil the fruites haue filled the mouldes within, which they ioy to do,

and be readie to be gathered.
               For the yong fruites of propertie, by the reporte of the skilful, doe so much desire or be so wonderful desirous of a new forme, that into what workmāly vessel or moulde ye yong fruites be bestowed, they by an earnest wyll and desire, represent the figures counterfayted wythin, as the same founde noted, in singular worke of Husbandrie which why Rutilius may ascribe to Gargilius Martialis) I see no reason.
               To be briefe, as the cōming of the moulde shal be, such wil the beautie of the fruites, bee for many fruites haue bin seene (as Plinie reporteth) whiche represented the image of a winding Dragon on them.
               The owner minding to enioye Cucumbers, a long time freshe and fayre ought to bestow them in white wine lies vncorrupted or not turned, the vessell, after the wel pitching without, couered with a heape of sande, in some lowe Seller or vaulte in the ground.
               The Cucumbers doe lyke continue a long tyme, if they bee beestowed in a proper Pickle, made of water and Salt.
               But the freshnes and delight of them, will a longer time be preserued, if after the husbandlye instructions, the owner hang them so hygh in Barrels or Ferkyns, beeing a quarter filled or somewhat lesse, that these in the hangyng doe in no manner touche the vyneger.
               And the vessels shalbe dilygentlye pitched about, whiche the owner prepareth to serue to thys purpose, that the force of the vineger, in no maner breatheth forth, for by nature is otherwise penetrable or perceth, through the thynnesse of partes. And by thys practise, may the owner at due tymes, all the winter through, make delectable Sallets of them.
               The Cucumbers, by report of the skilful) are the longest time preserued freshe and greene, if so be these are bestowed in a Glasse vessel, filled with the purest distilled vineger, which if the owner will, hee maye also preserue a long time, if that he cutteth them off, whyles they yet bee young and small, and these bestowe in a vessell of hotte water to bee scalded, whyche done, laye the Cucumbers abroade all the night tyme, to be throughly cooled, after lay Cucumbers into a vessel filled with a sharpe Pickle, made of water and salte for thys wil preserue them, by the former meanes, vntil new do come or may be had.
               
                  The Auntient reporte, that a Pickle maye be made, to preserue the Cucumbers and Gourdes a long tyme, wyth Salte, vyneger, Fennell, and Maioram, if so be the Cucumbers in some vessell be layed by courses, and these aboue named, strewed betwene.
               There bee others, whiche affirme, that these maye a long time bee preserued freshe and greene, if they bee bestowed into the Pickle made of vyneger and Mustarde Seede wroughte togyther.
               The lerned Plinie wylleth the Cucūbers to be laid in a furrow made in a shadowie place, strewed after the forme of a Bed with sifted sande, which on such wyse handeled, to be couered ouer wyth Earth and dry Hey.
               
                  Athaeneus reporteth, that the Cucumbers bee byggest and fayrest to the eye, at the full of the Moone, so that these receyue an increase, acording to the Moones light, through the watrye moysture consisting in them.
               For which cause, if the Gardner myndeth to enioy fayre and bigge Cucumbers, let those be gathered at the full of the Moone, where in the decrease or wane of the Moone, they be then slenderer and not so sightly to sale.
               To these, thys Athaenaeus (fauoured of Plinie) addeth, that how often it thundereth and lightneth, the Cucūbers so often (as stricken with a feare) turne and bende.
               Thys one thyng is maruellous, that Moyles and Asses are exceedinglye d
                     •
                  lyghted with Cucumbers, in so muche that they receyuing the sauoure farre off, are by a maruellous delyghte allured to runne and breake into the place, where these manye tymes grow. For which cause, the hedges and bancks about must be strongly made, wherby they may in no manner, breake in to treade downe and waste the Cucumbers.
               But the same is more maruellous whyche in the Greeke instructions of Husbandrye is noted, and of manye hath beene proued, that if an Infante sicke of the Ague, and suckyng styll of the Breaste, bee layed on a Bedde made of the Cucumbers to sleepe, beyng framed of lyke lengthe to the Chylde, and that hee sleepeth on the Bedde but a little tyme or a nappe, he shall immediatly be deliuered

of the same, for whyle he sleepeth, al the feuerous heate passeth into the Cucumbers.
               If the owner would enioy Cucumbers, hauing but little water in them, hee muste digge a furrowe, of a reasonable deapth, and the same filled halfe vp wyth chaffe, or the wast braunches of Uynes or trees, fynely broken, couer ouer wyth Earth, into whyche then bestowe the Seedes, of a reasonable distaunce asunder, and in the comming vppe water not the Plantes, or these moysten very little, but in the rest, order the Plants as afore taught.
               As to the loosing and purging of the bodye belongeth: if the owner shall steepe the Seedes in the rootes of the wylde Cucumber brused, eyther Ruberbe, Turbyth, Agaricke, Ellebore, or any such lyke made into a Potable water, for three dayes togyther, and for fiue dayes togyther, after the Plantes shotte vppe, doeth often moysten them wyth thys licour, he 
                     •
                   shall after enioy fruites, whych wyl gently purge the belly.
               And they may be caused to worke the stronger, if the rootes, while they sende foorth theyr braunches, bee digged aboute, and the smaller rootes vpwarde cutte awaye, in the places of whyche, a quantitye of the Ellebor, or some other purgyng simple layde, and the Earth dilygently couered about.
               
                  The Phisicke commodities and helpes of the Cucumber.
                  THe Garden Cucumber, is moyste and colde in the seconde degree, but the seeds dryed, haue the qualitie of drying in the firste, or begynnyng of the seconde degree.
                  
                     Dyphilus Carystus (a Physition among the Greekes berye well learned, and in Husbandry singular) disallowed or rather forbade the Cucumber to bee eaten at the begynning of Supper, as a meate incommodious to the Creature, in that the same (after the eatyng) procureth the person like to reste, as the Radyshe doeth, but thys eaten laste at the meale, worketh an easier dygestion of the meate, where otherwyse in manye, thys casteth vppe the meates eaten.
                  
                     The tougher part inclosing the seedes, is of a harde digestion, but the softer Pulpe or substance wythin, is of a farre speedier and easier digestion, and profitable to the Chollericke, and hotte and drye stomackes, beyng moderately eaten, for that this both cooleth, and extinguisheth thyrst.
                  The whole substance of the Cucumber, maye moderately be eaten with vineger and salte of such, which dayly exercise some laboure of the Bodie.
                  But to such which laboure not, or bee Fleumaticke, this altogither denyed, for as much as this greatly harmeth especiallye the stomacke & sinows, yet hath the water (workmanlye distilled) and the iuyce cleare strayned foorth, the propertie of remouing the Ague, and mitygating thyrst.
                  The Cucumber is not to be eaten sodden, but rather raw, with oyle and vineger, and the better fruites are those, whiche bee gathered at the full rypenesse, or in the hand, discerned somewhat light.
                  The seedes brused and drunke, do amende the strong sauour of the vryne, but the decoction more auayleth in thys, and aswageth the heate of the kidneys, yea it abateth the heate, and thirste of the Feuer.
                  The sayde Diphilus instructeth, that the seedes haue the vertue of coolyng, and for the same cause, hardelye dygested and sente by the wyndyngs of the bellie, yea these (as hee affyrmeth) doe cause a greate coldenesse, ingender Choler, and abate the veneryall acte.
                  The Seedes, after the brnsyng, drunke in eyther Cuite or Mylke, doe greatelye profitte suche as hauing an vlcered bladder. To These, and suche as are payned wyth the coughe, if so manye seedes bee taken and vsed at a tyme, as maye handesomelye bee taken vppe wyth three of the fyngers, and these after the brusyng wyth Cummyne, drunke in wyne, doeth in shorte tyme amende the same.
                  The sayde pouder drunke in womans Mylke, vnto the quantitie of three ounces at a tyme, profiteth the Frensye persons, and suche molested with the perillous flixe Disenteria, yea thys pouder drunke, with a like wayght of Cummyne seedes, in pouder recouereth the spitting vp of corruption or matter.
                  
                     The whole substance and meate of the Cucumber, hath the vertue of clensing and cutting asunder, of whiche the same causeth cleare bodyes, and somuche the more, if anye after the drying, finely beating, and searsing of the seedes vseth the same, in steede of a clensing pouder.
                  The learned Galen writing of the vse and properties of the Cucumbers vttereth an instruction worthy the learning, that although these (sayth he) be well digested of the Chollericke, and that suche wythout care, eate plentie or muche at a time of them, doe after in the continuance of time, increase a cold and somwhat grosse humour in the veines, whyche not able to be digested in them, doeth after corrupte the sounde bloude.
                  For that cause (saithe he) I iudge it profitable to refraine the meates being of an euill Juice and nourishemente: although that those in certaine persons, may easily be digested: For to vs not takyng a care and regard of them, is an euill Juice gathered (after a good distance of time) in the veines, which assoone as the same once putrified by a lyghte occasion, doth immediatly kindle and cause wicked feuers: these hitherto Galen of the incommodities of the Cucumbers.
               
            
            
               What skil and secreates are to be learned in the sowing and workmanly ordering of the Gourde. Chap. 30.
               
                  AL the kindes of the Gourdes, requyre the same trauaile and diligence in the bestowing in the Earthe, as afore vttred of the Cucumbers, which after the large setting asunder, and often watering appeare (for the more parte) aboue the Earthe, by the sixte or seuenth day after the bestowing in beds.
               The weake and tender braunches, shot vp to some heigth, and coueting by a certaine propertie in nature vpward, require to be diuersly aided with poles to run vp in sundry manners, as either ouer a rounde and vaulted Harboure, to giue a more delighte, throughe the shadowe caused by it, and the seemely fruites hanging downe, or else by poles directed quite vprighte, in whiche the Gourde (of all other fruites) most earnestly desireth, rather than to run braunching and creeping on the

grounde like to the Cucumbers.
               The plants loue a fat, moyst, and dunged loose ground, as the Neapolitan Rutilius in his instructions of husbandry hath noted: If a diligēce be bestowed in the oftē watring of them, the plants require a lesser care and trauaile, in that they are very muche furthered, by the store of moisture, although there may be found of those, which resonably prosper with small store of moysture, or being seldome watered, and that they of the same yeelde fruite of a delectabler taste.
               If the owner or Gardner happen to commit Seedes to the Earthe in a drye grounde, and that the tender plants appear aboue the Earth, hys care shall then bee, to water them plentifullye for the speedier shooting vp after this manner: by taking certayn pottes filled with water, into whiche tongues of clothe afore layde to the bottoms of the pottes, that these may the workmanlier distill and droppe often on the plants, through ye stouping forward of them: which no doubt, profiteth greatly the plantes in drowth and hot seasons.
               The longer and smaller haue fewe Seedes in them, and for the same more delectable in the eating, yea these better accompted of, and solde in the Market.
               The Gardner minding to committe of the Seedes to the Earthe, oughte afore to stiepe them in a boll or panne of water for a nighte, whereby the Seedes apte to be sowen, may the surer be knowen, whiche hee shall well perceiue by those resting in the bottome, of the cunninger sorte preferred and vsed, but the others, swimmyng aboue (as vnprofytable) and seruing to no vse, are willed to be throwen away.
               The chosen Seedes are to be set in beds two togither with three fingers vnto the middle Jointes, and the sharper endes fixed vpward, but the beds afore oughte to be digged two foote deepe, and so many broad, and the Seedes bestowed well three or foure foote asunder, one from the other (in these filled vp with olde dung,) well turned in with the earth, or rather to procure them speedier to grow and yeelde the fruite the sooner, lette the beddes be filled with hotte horse dung, new taken oute of the stable.
               If the Gardner woulde possesse Gourdes of diuers formes, as long, rounde, and shorte, it behoueth hym to choose and sette the seedes accordinglye. For those Seedes taken oute of the necke of the Gourde,

shall the owner after the councell of the singular Columella, learned Plinie and Rutilius, set in well dunged ground, with the sharpe endes vpwarde. Which after the well watering (as aboue taught) yeelde fruits, long in fourme, tenderer, and better esteemed. The Seedes taken oute of the myddes of the bellye, and sette into the Earthe with the bigge endes vpwarde, doe yeelde (after the husbandely handeling) and watering, greate fruites, rounde, and large, of whiche after the through drying, and meate taken oute, bee bottels and other vessells made, to serue for diuers vses, in that these growe farre larger in the belly, than any of the other kindes.
               The Seedes taken oute of the bottome of the Gourde, and set with the grosse or big endes vpwarde, doe also yeelde after the workmanlye ordering, fruits both greate and large, yet these far lesser and shorter. And the Seedes in generall, in what place they bee sette, oughte to be bestowed in earth well dunged, and the rather with hot horse dung, new taken out of the stable, if these bee set in the moneth of March. But ye seeds in no maner, may be bestowed in low places, lest shours of rain falling, hinder and corrupte the fruites, throughe the ouermuche water cloying and standyng in the Alley or other low place. The plants shot vppe to some heigthe, oughte to bee diligentlye weeded aboute, and the earthe heaped highe vp, and when neede requyreth in the hot seasons, to water them often.
               If the Seedes happen to bee set in a Earthe smally laboured and hollowe, when the plants be somwhat growen aboue the grounde, the owner oughte to digge away of a good depthe from the yong plantes, the Earthe rounde aboute, that the rootes may the freelier runne and spreade abroad: the plants further growen and shot vp, may the owner erecte to runne and spreade like to a Uine, well a mans heigthe.
               If the plantes happen to be annoyed with the Leke or Garden fleas, the owner shal remoue and driue them away, by the only setting of the herbe Organye, in sundry places among them, on whiche (if these happen to lighte) they eyther are incontinente killed, or caused to encrease but few after, as the Greeke writers of husbandry, in their skilful practises witnesse. Out of which with diligence we haue also gathered these, that to the owner or gardner, may happily appere profitable: as the Gourde (a matter somwhat strange) to yelde fruits without seeeds,

If the Seedes before the setting be stieped for three dayes at the least, in Sesaminum, or Sauine oyle, as the Neapolitane Rutilius vttereth, or in the Juice of that hearbe infused, named Conyza, in Englishe Fleabane.
               The like may bee wroughte, if after the condition of the Uine, the principallest and firste stemme shotte vp, be on such wise digged about, that alonely the heade of the same be lefte bare. Whiche as it shall encrease, muste the owner repeate, yea a thyrd time, if neede shall require the same.
               And in this doing, muste the owner haue a care, that as the braunches spread foorth (whether vpright or on the ground) to be cutte away, herein preseruing only that stemme, which shot foorth last.
               The Gourdes on such wise handled (as the Cucumbers afore noted, will yeelde fruits without seedes, possessing only Cartilages, and a softe pulpe within. If the owner would possesse fruits timely and very soone, then after the instruction of the Greeke writers of husbandry, bestow in earthen pannes or olde baskets without bottomes, fine sifted earthe intermedled with dung, aboute the beginning of the Spring, in which the Seedes sette, sprinkle and moisten sundry times with water: after this, in faire and Sunny dayes, or when a gentle shower falleth, set them abroade, but when the Sunne goeth downe, bestowe the baskets with the plants within the house againe, and these like order so often (and water when neede requyreth) vntill all the frostes, tempests, and colde season be gone and paste. After this assoone as oportunity and time wil serue, and that a faire day be presente, bestowe all the baskets and pans of earthe vnto the brimme, in well laboured and dressed beddes, and applie that other diligence requyred, throughe whiche the Gardner shall possesse timely fruite, aswell of the Gourde as Cucumber.
               The same matter shall the owner b
                     •
                  ing to passe and cause, with lesser coste, trauayle, and time, if he cut away the waste braunches of the Gourdes, or tender shootes of the Cucumbers, for on suche wise handled they speedelier yeelde and send foorth their fruites.
               If the Gardner couereth to enioy diners formes on Gourds, or sundry caracters on Cucumbers, let him bestowe the floure or tender yong fruite of either, as the same shall yet be hanging on the braunche, into a moulde of like bignesse as the fruite. Which to handled, will after cause

whether the same be Gourd or Cucumber, to possesse on the vpper face, the like figure or caracters, as were afore imprinted within the mould.
               For the fruite of either after the minde of Gargilio so muche desireth a newe forme, that it like representeth the Image or figure imprinted within the mould. In somuch yt of what form the mould of the Gourd shal be fashioned, on such maner shal the fruite grow within ye mould: And Plinie for confirmation of the same reporteth, that he sawe many Gourds fashioned in their ful growth after the forme of a winding dragon. If the owner endeuoureth to possesse long and slender Gourdes, he muste bestowe the yong fruites newe growen, and hanging still on the Uine branches, either into a Truncke of wood, or a long Cane boored throughe all the Joyntes, whyche in tyme growing, will stretch and shoote foorth into a maruellous lengthe. For the same substance which shoulde encrease into a breadth, is caused throughe the hollowe pipe to stretch and growe slender, wherby the narrownesse of the hole so hindering the bignesse of growth, procureth the fruite to runne into a length, as the like Gourde by the same occasion, Plinie sawe to extend wel nine foote of lengthe. The like fruites altogither shall the Gardner purchase, if vnder the vines, he set of some deepenesse in the grounde earthen pans filled with water, and they distante well fine or sixe fingers from the Gourdes hangyng downe. For by the morrowe or nexte daye shall hee see the fruits stretched euen downe to the water, by which leading and handling of the pans with water they may be caused to grow of a wonderfull length.
               But the pannes for a time remoued or taken away, will cause the fruites to crooke and winde vpwarde, so muche of propertie they ioye in moisture, and refuse or hate the drouth: yet of the oyle is otherwise to be learned, for somuch as they deadly hate the same as Plinie writeth, whiche if in the steede of water it be set vnder the fruites, causeth them by the nexte daye to winde an other waye.
               If this likewise they can not do, yet doe they wrythe, and as it were disdainyng the same crooke vpwarde after the manner of a hooke, as a like forme of the fruite may be tried in one night space.
               This one matter oughte especially to be cared for, as Columella after the Greeke Florentinus warneth, that no woman come or verye seldome approche nighe to the fruites of the Gourdes or Cucumbers,

for by hir only handling of them, they feeble and wither, whiche matter if it shall happen in the time of the Termes, doeth then eyther flea the yong tender fruites wyth hir looke, or causeth thē to be vnsauery, & spotted or corrupted within. The Gourds determined to bee kepte for seede, ought after the minde of Rutilius the Neapolitane to hang stil on their Uine, vnto the Winter time, and cutte or broken from the same, to bee dried eyther in the Sunne or in the smoke: for the Seedes otherwise are prone to putrifye, and not after profitable to any vse. The Gourdes and Cucumbers will endure, and be kepte a long tyme freshe and faire to the eye, if they be hyd & couered wyth white wine lyes, not ouer egre or sowre, in the hangyng down in pipes or hogs sheads. They bein like maner defended and preserued by bestowing them in a pickle or brine. But they will a long time continue freshe and faire (as the worthy instructers of husbandry reporte) if so bee they hang so highe wythin the vessels, that they be nothyng neare to the Uineger. And the vessells appointed for the only purpose, shall diligently be pitched ouer & round about, least the spirites of the Uineger in the meane time breath foorth, whiche by nature otherwise is penetrable, thorough the thinnesse of partes. The Cucumbers maye in like maner bee kepte for a long tyme if they shall bee bestowed in a vessell of distilled Uineger: for on suche wise they putrifye not, as hathe bin tried of the skilfull searchers of secreates.
               Thus by these practises, may the owner enioy faire Cucumbers and Gourdes all the Winter to vse, whyche if the Gardner will, shall hee also preserue a long time, if whyle the fruites be tender, hee cutte them off, and scalde them in hot water, and after laye them abroade all the night to coole, and bestowe them on the morrowe into a sharpe pickle or brine, made for the only purpose, whyche on suche wise handled, wil maruelous well endure, vntill the newe be come.
               In this place commeth to minde, and that very aptly, the same whiche Athenaeus bosted, as touching his strange feast that he prepared for his friends, and especiallye in that he serued them with greene Gourdes for a dainty dishe, in the moneth of January, which so pleasauntly sauoured and eate, as if they had bin new gathered, in a manner. Which like, by study and diligence of the gardners that exercised this arte, they supposed them to be preserued.
               
                  As the like Nicander long before Athenaeus and many others report, who will the Gourds to be firste dried in the ayre, and stitched through the heads with a strong packthreed, to be after hanged vp in the smoke, that the pots filled with them, maye leysurely soke all the Winter, and drinke in of the Brine.
               At this day in Fraunce, throughe all the Winter moneths, are the Gourdes hanged vppe in the roofes of their houses, to bee preserued for daintye dishes greene, when occasion offereth to vse them, especiallye those whiche are named the Citrones, that farre longer endure, and bee not so lightly subiecte to putrifying.
               The fruites of the Gourdes, Melons, Pompons, and Cucumbers, may be caused to loose and purge, like to many others, if the seedes bee stieped for a nighte and a day in the licoure made wyth Ruberbe, Agaricke, Turbith, Senae, Colocynthis, Scamonie, or other simple purgyng medicines, and those after the bestowing in the Earth, watered for fiue dayes togither, and fiue times euery day. When the Gourde is felte vnpleasaunte, the fruites by the stieping, may after receyue what sauoure and taste the owner will, if the seedes before they bee committed to the earth, be infused for a time in any pleasaunte licoure, whether the same be damaske or muske water, for the plantes shootyng vp of these, will yeelde fruite of like sauour, aswell being sodden as rawe, after the condition of the Cucumber.
               The like altogither may be wroughte or caused without any arte, if whiles the fruite is a seething, you bestowe in the licoure what taste, coloure, or sauoure you desire to haue. For the Gourde and Cucumber are of suche a kinde, that they be voide of any qualitie.
               The rinde of the fruite of the Gourde growen to full ripenesse, becommeth so harde as woode.
               The Gourd planted in the ashes of mans bones, and watered wyth oyle, yeeldeth fruite by the ninth day, as the auntient Hermes affirmeth. Whiche man, for that he teacheth vaine matters, for the same cause he giueth me occasion to credite him weakely. Yet experience doeth many times cause the vncertaine to proue certayne.
               
                  
                  The phisicke benefits and helps of the Gourde.
                  THe fruite of the Gourde, is of a colde and moiste temperament, and the seedes especially vsed in medicine. That worthy phisition Crisippus with the Grekes, condemned or rather vtterly forbad the Gourds in meate, as vnprofitable for their coldnesse to the stomacke.
                  That skilfull man Diphilus contrarie affirmeth, that the Gourdes boyled in water and vineger, do strengthen the stomacke.
                  The learned Galen writeth, that the Gourde in no manner maye bee eaten rawe, in that the same is vnpleasaunte to eate, but either sodden rosted, or fryed in a panne, is well commended.
                  The Greeke writers of husbandry doe report, that the Gourd doth loose the belly, and that the Juice of the same dropped into the grieued eares, caused of heate, they affirme to profit, vnto whyche vse of it self, and with the oyle of Roses dropped warme into the eares.
                  The outwarde rinde pared away, and the meate with the kernels, not fully ripe, heated or parboyled in water, and after shred small like to the Cabbedge, and boyled with butter, Onions, and a quantitie of Salte. This on suche wise prepared and eaten, profiteth leane men.
                  Others after the cutting of the vnripened fruite into round slices, boyle them with butter in a dishe like Apples.
                  The wine standyng for a night abroade, in the hollowe of the freshe Gourde, and drunke with a fasting stomacke, purgeth gently the bellye costiue.
                  The meate of the Gourd, after the seedes taken foorth applied, helpeth the cornes of the toes and feete: the Juice of it boyled, and rubbing the mouth therewyth, fastneth loose teeth, and assuageth the paine of them, proceeding of a hot cause.
                  The seedes of the Gourde cleane picked from their skinne, being sodden in Barly water, strayned, and druncke, healpe the inflamations of the liuer, kidneys, and bladder, the impostumes of the breaste, and prouoketh vrine.
                  If a sicke persone of the Feuer, refuse to drincke of this water, a Sirroppe then with Sugar, may be compounded of the same, whyche mightily profiteth all kindes of Agues.
                  
                     The iuyce of the pieces of the Gourde, tempered with milke and vineger, in whyche a linnen cloth wette, and applyed on the Lyuer, verye much aswageth the heate of the Liuer.
                  When the winter approcheth, the seeds ought to bee taken foorth of the fruite, and these rubbed wel with Salte, that the clammy humours may on such wise be remoued.
                  The seedes ought after to be layed in a drye place, wherby the proper moysture may not corrupt them, and those seedes like prepared, wil indure for three yeares.
                  The pieces of the rynde of the Gourde bruised, and annoynted or applyed in playster forme one the heades of Infants, doth aswage the inflamation or burning caused of the braine, the peeces or iuyce of the same applyed, doth like mytigate the burning Goute, and qualifye the inflammation of the eyes.
                  The Gourde after the fine shreddyng, applyed in playster forme, aswageth tumours and swellings, the drye Ashes applyed on burnings, doth maruellouslye auayle, the Ashes also of the ryndes applyed on vlcers of the priuy place, beginning to putrify, both purgeth, and bringeth them to a scarre.
                  The iuyce of the Gourde, after the boylyng wyth a little Honye and Nytre drunke, gentlie looseth the bellye, the same iuyce myxed wyth the Oyle of Roses, and annoynted on the Rydge bone and Loynes, cooleth the burning of the Feuers, this besides annoynted, helpeth the shyngles.
                  Here learne that the Gourde rosted, or boyled in a dish or frying pan is more holesome, than rawe, for that through the rosting, it leaueth a great force of waterie moysture, and therefore yeeldeth a stronger and worthyer nourishment.
                  The Gourde sodden, requireth a tartnesse to bee matched wyth it, for the same otherwyse, is felte vnsauerye and wythout delyghte, so that it better relisheth, being matched with eyther salte, soure, or tarte thyngs, that nerer agree to the benefit of our bodie, and the same ought to be on such wise prepared, that it procure not the creature to vomyt, as the singular Galen, hath clearely vttered.
               
               
                  
                  The benefites and helpes of the distilled water of the Gourde.
                  THe chosen time for the distilling of Gourds, is when they be ful ripe, for those then are to be finely shred, and the kernels with the whole substance artely distilled.
                  The distilled water of the fruites, mixed wyth a quantity of Suger, drunk, not only looseth the belly, but ceaseth thirst, and helpeth the cough proceeding of a hot cause.
                  The sayde water drunke morning and euening, vnto the quantity of three ounces at a tyme; for fourtie dayes togither, doth maruellously help the stone in the kidneys.
                  This water drunke in the lyke manner for tenne dayes togyther, purgeth the kydneys and Bladder, and causeth vrine, this also drunke in the like manner, qualifieth the burning of Feuers, when no other Medicine can aswage the same: thys besides applyed without, on the regyon of the hearte, wyth linnen clothes wet in the same, like represseth the heate.
               
            
            
               Of the care, helpes, and secretes of the Pompons, Mellons, and Muske Mellons. Chap. 31.
               
                  THe auntient both of the Greke and Latin wryters of husbandry, attributed the Pompons and Mellons, to a kinde of Cucumbers which they confessed, very nere to agree with them, in that the Cucumbers, in their growth haue bin seene, to be changed into Pompons, and Mellon Pompons, which two kindes of fruite, doe differ in themselues, especially in the fourme and quantifie, for whē these appeare to exceede in bignesse, they are then named Pompons, but they growing rounde, and in fourme of an Apple fashioned, are by a biename of the Pompon and apple, named Mellon Pompons. For which cause Palladius nameth all thys kynde of forme of apples, Mellons, or as if a man should say he named them aplewise or Quincelike, which are not wonte to hang, as Plinie writeth, but to growe rounde

on the grounde, and they are then growen to a ripnesse, when the stalke is parted from the bodie and a sweete sauour from the belly striketh to the nose. Further those growing after ye forme of a Quince, which properly are named Mellons, haue a harder and tougher meat than Pompons, and they not onlye enioy lesser wrinckles on the rynde, but bee dryer, grosser, whyter of flesh, and haue more Seedes than the Pompons.
               The other kynde named Cytrons, bee in fourme and coloure lyke to the Cytron, and the leaues of ye branches deuided into many smal, partes after the forme of feathers or wyngs of Byrdes.
               The other kynde named the wynter Pompons, are nothyng so bygge of growth, as bee the common Pompons of the Garden.
               But the best kynde of al, are the Mellons, next the Turkysh Pompons, and those made sweete by Arte, when the seedes before the bestowing in the Earthe, are for a night layed in water wel mixed wyth Suger. or in Hony.
               The Mellons and Pompons hardly come vp in any Countrie at due tyme of the yeere, without a labour, cost and diligence of the Gardener in hastning them forward, nor these caused wel to spreade & yelde, before the greate heate of the yeare become, which season, some yeare, hapneth diuerse and intermedled wyth colde, and either ouer drie, or ouer moyst, which much hinder the ripening of them in the haruest time and towards the vyntage. For which cause the Gardener ought to hasten the fruites forwarde by dung▪ and heate of the beds, which alwaies procure a more helth to persons. The seedes of Mellons to be cōmytted to the Earth, ought to be suche, whiche haue bin kepte wythin the fruite, vnto the full rypenesse of the same: for these then taken foorth of the Mellon be more worth, & reserue in thē the proper substance within the bodies If the owner would possesse the fruites of the Mellon timely he ought afore to infuse the seedes in luke warme water, for sixe or tenne houres, and those after to beestowe in Beddes prepared, aboute the tenthe daye of Marche, well three or foure foote distaunte one from the other, and the Beddes to caste well two foote high, and so manye broade, and to fyll them wyth olde dung fynely broken, and with blacke Earth sufficiently loose wrought togither, for on such

wise handeled, they yeelde a bigger fuller and pleasaunter fruite. Certaine skilful Gardeners bestow horse dung in Beds, so hot as the same commeth forth of the stable, to cause the plants farre sooner to shoote vp, and they turne vpwarde sixe or tenne of the seedes of the pompone wyth ye sharpe endes downward (as certayne do foure or fiue of them to come vp) and those they lightly couer ouer, wyth much beating or treding the Earth downe on them. Rutilius in his Husbandry, willeth the seedes, both of the Mellon and Pompon, to bee thinne set in beddes, in suche manner, that the seedes bee placed well two foote asunder, and the places well digged and diligentlye turned in wyth fyne dung, for the plantes ioye in a libertie, that they may spreade at wyl hyther and thyther, and are greately holpen by other Hearbes growyng among them, as the Cucumbers are, so that they shall neede but little raking and pluckyng away of other Herbes.
               After these, for daunger of the colde and frostes, the owner may couer the plantes and Beddes, with light mattresses made of strawe, or wyth mattes spreade on roddes, shored vp with forckes sette at eache corner of the Beddes, or hee may for a seemlyer sight, laye abroade boordes or Tables on pillers or other stayes of stone, set at eche corner of the Beddes, in suche manner, that the bordes may bee lifted off, when the Sunne shyneth hotte, and sette ouer agayne, at the going downe of the Sunne or when the colde ayre is felte.
               And assoone as the Mellon hath yeelded leaues sufficiente greate, the Gardener ought to water the same gentlye and softlye, wyth a lyste sharpened at the ende hangyng foorth, and broade at the other ende (restyng wythin the Potte or Dishe ful of water) whych on suche wyse continually moysteneth (by the droppes falling) the Earthe very drye.
               The Mellons further growen, the owner ought to remove, and sette the plantes agayne, when the fruites are yeelded so bygge as Orenges, and thys especiallye muste bee done after the myddes of Maye, when as the colde of the yeare is well spente, that otherwyse myght hynder the growth of them, and sette well sixe foote distante one from the other, in Beds dilygently dunged and labored.
               The Pompons purchase a far greater sweetenesse, and pleasanter in taste, if the seedes afore bee steeped for three dayes in water well mixed

with Suger, or in water and Hony named Mulse, and in like maner ye fruites are found sweete in the eating, if the seeds steeped in new Cow milke, 
                     〈◊〉
                   then set in well dressed Beddes.
               The Pompons in like manner wyll obtayne a sauoure of Roses, if the seedes afore be layed among drye Roseleaues for twentie or thirty dayes togyther, and those after wyth the leaues, sette in well dressed beds, or ye seeds steeped in Rosewater, or other odoriferous licour, which after the drying in ye shadow, then as afore vttered, cōmited to the erth.
               As the worthy Authoure Florentinus in his Greeke instructions of Husbandrie writeth, and after hym the lyke that worthy Rutilius.
               
               Here I thynke it a matter not to bee omitted, that Cats by an earnest desire couet the Pompons, for which cause the owners haue a care to loke diligently thereunto.
               To procure Pompons to continue a long tyme without decaying or corrupting, let the owner water the plants for a time, with the iuyce, of Houseleeke.
               The other matters to be learned, are fully taughte in the secretes of the Cucumbers & Gourdes, where many deuises are vttered, that may be vsed common. As if the owner woulde enioye timely fruites, and hauing straunge formes on them, big, laxatiue, and without Seedes, let him diligently reade and consider the former Chapiters, both of the Cucumber and Gourde.
               The Mellons and Pompons ought then to bee gathered, when the stalkes begyn to feeble, and the fruites to yeelde a pleasaunte sauour in the eating, at whiche tyme the owner muste diligentlye take heede of Cattes, that haue an earnest loue and desire to them, as afore is vttered
               Also the Gardener ought to conceiue, that those named the wynter Pompons, do neuer growe to a ful rypenesse on their beds, and for that cause, to procure them speedily to rypen, hee must (after the gathering) hang them vp in the roofe of the house, and eate of those, when they appeare yellowe within.
               
                  The Phisicke commodities of the Pompons and Mellons.
                  THe learned report, that the Mellons coole and moysten in the seconde degree, yet those feale sweete in taste, are temperatly colde. The seedes also are vsed in medicine, and possesse the same propertie.
                  
                     
                     Diocles Caristius (in libris salubrium) vttereth, the Pompon to bee easie of digestion, and to comforte very muche the heart, yet the same yeldeth▪ but a small increase to the bodie.
                  
                     Diphilus reporteth that the meate of the Pompon doth make fat, yet very hardly digested, through coldnesse myxed wyth the moysture of the same, besides it rendereth a small nourishmente, and hardly moueth the bellie.
                  
                     Phaenias reporteth, that the Pompon must bee eaten after the stomacke is emptie, for that this otherwise is lightly conuerted into those humours, which of the same occasion hinder digestion, throughe the preeminence that it then obtaineth in the receptakle of the meate or stomacke.
                  Therefore he willeth the Pompons, to be eaten with a fasting stomacke, and to pause from eating anye other meate, vntill this in the stomacke be halfe digested.
                  
                     Diphilus writeth, that the Pompons eaten, do greatly aswage vnnaturall heates of the stomacke, and mytigate wicked Agues.
                  
                     Galen reporteth, that all kindes of Pompons, haue the propertie of cooling, and enioy a large moysture, yet those not without a manyfest qualitie of clensing, in that the seeds maruellously clense the face of sun burning, of pymples, and foule spottes.
                  This Authour further addeth, that the same doth yeelde and cause a wicked iuyce, although it may sometymes be wel digested of the stomacke.
                  Besides he affirmeth the same to cause Choler, and to yeelde the plentie of moysture out of order.
                  The Pompons ought to bee eaten for the firste meate, but in suche maner that such which are fleumatik to drink olde wine after the same, & the Cholericke, to drinke some soure or tarte thing after it, for on such wise handled, is all manner of harme auoyded.
                  For this kind of meate doth lightly alter into Choller, or floume, for which cause the ouer sweete Pompon doth offende the Chollericke, and the fruite vnrype the fleumaticke.
                  Many worthy men prefer the long Pompons before the rounde, yet do all the kyndes moue or loose the bellye, and cause vrine, so that they shalbe ripe. For which cause they are iudged profitable for the kidneys,

but the seedes more auayle, in so much that stones there prepared they maruellously expel.
                  The outwarde rynde of the Pompon applyed to the foreheade doth effectuously aswage and stay the running of the eyes.
                  Such which haue a hotte stomacke, and encombred wyth Choller, are greatly harmed, if they drinke wine after the eatyng of the same, in that of the owner nature it is lightly caused, and the wine immediatly increaseth it more, and causeth a sharper humoure in suche bodies, and apte to vomyte: yea thys also extenuateth, grosse and clammye humours, yet doeth it well agree, that the fleumaticke eate of the Pompon, for as muche as in the same is a substaunce tender and soluble, that is, the same which is next to the seede, for this doeth not lightly corrupte.
                  The persons whych eate of the Pompons, maye not immediately eate and other meate after thē, in that those both corrupt, and alter the same eaten.
                  At the kyndes of Pompons prouoke vomytyng, in bodies prepared, exceepte the meate enioying a good iuyce, be eaten immediately vpon, for they on such wise, moue the speedier downwarde.
                  The greater number of Phisitions write, that those eaten, doth mitygate the venerial act, and do a
                        •
                     ate the genytall seede,
                  The seedes properlye, clense the face, if the skinne bee sundrye tymes washed wyth the decoction of them, the Mellons, as Galen reporteth (in lib. de facultatibus alimentorum) haue the propertie of clensing, for which cause they may aptly cleare sūny spots, pimples, and other foule spots both on the face and body.
                  The seedes of the Mellon cleane picked from theyr vpper skyn, and diligently brought to pouder with Beane floure, thys after the artely myxing with Rosewater, and dryed in the sunne like cakes, dissolue in fayre water, washing the face sundrye times wyth it: for this maruellously clenseth, and procureth with wine a cleare face, yea the same mū
                     difyeth all foule spottes on the skinne.
                  The seedes also haue the propertie of causing vrine, yea those purge both the Loynes & kidneys, but the seedes more auayle in the Loynes, than in the Bladder, so ye a mightier remedie muste bee inuented for the stone of the bladder, than for the stone of the Loynes and kydneys.
                  
                     The roofes of the Mellons, not only clense, but heale the vlcers fuly of mattier, being applyed with Honny in playster forme.
                  Many there be, which eate the Mellon with vineger, but to it they adde and myxe, the Pennyroiall and Onyons, by which the harmeful force of the colde, might so be tempered.
                  
                     Dyphilus writeth, that a little piece of the Mellone put into a potte with meat, causeth the speedier boyling of the Nettle or Mustardseeds or the slyppe of the figge tree, on such wise ordered.
               
               
                  The commended helpes of the distilled water of the Mellons.
                  THe beste tyme for the distillyng of Mellons, is when they bee throughly rype, whiche shredde small, distill after arte, aboute the Haruest time.
                  The distilled water of the Mellons drunke, helpeth singularly the stone, procureth vryne, and clenseth the kydneys, the rather, being vsed both mornyng and euening, for three or foure weekes togyther, vnto the quantitie of three or foure ounces at a time.
                  The sayde watre, for a tyme drunke, not onlye cooleth the Lyuer, but cooleth and extynguysheth all inwarde heates not naturall, yea thys tempered wyth Suger and drunke, ceaseth maruellouslye thyrst.
                  The water drunke, in like manner abouesayde, amendeth speedilye an olde coughe.
                  The water applyed wythout the Bodye, wyth Lynnen clothes wette in the same, not onlye expelleth the heates, but the swellyngs of the Bodye, wheresoeuer those shal happen.
               
            
            
               
               Worthy instructions about the sowing and setting of sundry Phisicke herbs, to these of the greatest number of fragrant herbes, and pleasaunt floures, and first of the blessed Thistle. Cap. 32.
               
               WHere afore wee haue sufficiētly writē of the apt placing, and workmanly orderyng of the most herbes, and fruites, both for the pot and sallets, and of theyr benefits for the vse of phisicke: in this part following (for a further encrease and comforte of the simple) wee purpose to 
                     •
                  ntreat not only of the artly placing of sundry phisick herbes, but to what vses these serue for the ayde and benefit of helthe.
               And of these wee entende to beginne with that worthy hearbe named the Blessed Thistle (for his singular vertues) aswell againste poisons, as the pestilente Ague, and other perillous diseases of the hearte: Whyche to many at this daye is verye well knowen althoughe greate controuersies haue bin amongst the Auntient phisitions, about the true description of the hearbe: for both the name and forme of the hearbe, doe declare the same to be a kinde of Thistle: yet the learned Ruellius writing of the blessed Thistle, came nearer to a trouth, and faithfuller described the forme of the herbe: in that he affirmed the same to haue a big

stalke, and leaues crisped with prickles (after the condition of the Endiue) the flower yelowish, and seedes small, contained within the softe downe, (as in the other Thistles,) and that they doe late waxe ripe.
               This hearbe named the Blessed Thistle, requireth to be sowen in a well laboured grounde, and the seedes oughte to bee committed to the Earth in the firste quarter of the Moone, but those not to bee bestowed in beds, aboue three fingers deepe.
               The Hearbe also ioyeth and well prospereth commyng vp among Wheate.
               
                  The phisicke benefits and helps of the blessed Thistle.
                  THe hearbe of quality is hot and drye, whiche the bitter taste of the same well demonstrateth, besides it drieth and somwhat digesteth.
                  The Hearbe hathe the nature and propertie of opening, the stopping of members, of pearcing and causing vrine.
                  The blessed Thistle eyther eaten or drunke delyuereth the patiente from the mightie paine of the heade whyche vexeth aboute the eyes: thys also putteth awaye giddinesse of the heade, restoreth (by a like reason) memory loste, the hearing, and diseases of the Lungs.
                  The leaues broughte to pouder, and drunke in wine, consume and sende foorth the fleume of the stomacke, but the leaues are the better and handsomer taken, if of the pouder pilles be made.
                  This in like manner purgeth the breaste and bloud, and very muche profiteth the consumption of the Lungs. The leaues boyled in Wine, and drunk hotte, doth ceasse gripings, prouoke sweate, breake the stone, and helpe the monethly Termes.
                  The hearbe for a time vsed, comforteth the braine and sight, not only if the same be eaten, but if the eyes also be annointed therewyth.
                  When the Juice of the hearbe cannot be had, then let the pouder, or the Hearbe it selfe dryed, be stieped for a nighte in water, and the eyes washed with the same. The Juice also dropped into the eyes, remoueth the blonde consisting in them.
                  The blessed Thistle refraineth or stoppeth the bleeding of the nose, or mouthe, if the hearbe be applied to the place, from whence it runneth.
                  The pouder of the same hearbe purgeth the Vuula, the Jawes, and

throate, and causeth that the patient may the easier cast and spitte foorth fleume and grosse humoures.
                  The herbe drunke in wine, amendeth a weake stomacke, procureth an appetite to meate, and abateth the heate, yea this consumeth the euill bloude, and engendreth the good.
                  If the hearbe shall be boyled in water and druncke, the sam
                        •
                      
                     
                        •••
                     
                     meth euill humours, and preserueth the good, thys boyled in wine and druncke, prouoketh sweate.
                  The hearbe druncke boyled, or rawe wyth wine, breaketh the stone, the same eaten, strengthneth the palsie members, and recouereth the exulcerated Lungs.
                  The blessed Thistle boyled in the water of a healthfull male Childe drunke, profiteth the dropsie persons, healpeth the plague, and dissolueth all impostumes, yea this remoueth the Canker and falling sicknes. The pouder of the leaues, vnto the quantitie of halfe a walnutte shell at a time druncke in wine, is a most presente remedy against the plague, if the same shal be receyued within foure and twentye houres space of the tyme grieued. If wine be boyled wyth the hearbe, and druncke, profiteth the like: this by a like manner receyued, amendeth the rotten Feuers of the stomacke, and suche encumbred wyth the Feuer Quartaine. The downe proceeding of the flowers of the blessed Thistle, applied on deepe cuttes, and newe woundes, doth in shorte tyme cure them wythout paine.
                  The pouder of the herbe mixed with meale, and a plaister employed of the same with hot Uineger, helpeth the pushes and other swellings of the plague. The hearbe cureth any maner of burning, and the blisters proceeding of the same: if afore dryed, and mixed with the proper Juice it be applied on the places.
                  Thys Hearbe druncke wyth white wine, remoueth the Colliks, and putteth awaye feables the Hearbe chawed in the mouthe, amendeth a stincking breathe: the hearbe also brused, and applied on botches speedely cureth them, yea this recouereth the defaultes of womens places, and causeth the Termes.
                  The bitte of venemous beastes maye bee holpen, eyther wyth the Juice, or decoction of the herbe in water, the pouder of the hearbe eaten or drunck, helpeth stitches in the side, and the pleurisie & this also profiteth

infantes incombred with the falling sicknesse, and wormes.
                  Manye worthy phisitions affirme, that the pouder or Juice, or the decoction of this herbe doth expell al maner of poysons: The example of whiche matter, Hieronimus Tragus (in hys Herball) learnedly vttereth, wher he reporteth, that ther was a certain yong maiden, which vnknowing thereof, did eate poyson in an apple giuen to hir, whose body incontinente swelled, and no medicine coulde assuage the swelling, vntill that the distilled water of this hearbe was ministred to hir, whiche in short tyme mitigated or abated the swelling, to the wonder of many, so that on this wise the child was deliuered from al peril of the poyson.
                  A like history reported of others, that a Childe happened to sleepe in the fielde open mouthed, into whose mouthe an Adder crepte and wente downe into the bodie, but after twoo ounces of the distilled water was ministred, the Adder incontinente crepte foorthe agayne (by the fundamente) wythout further harme or hurte vnto the Chylde. Wherfore against all poysons, they affirme the pouder, Juice, decoction, or distilled water of this hearbe, to be a singular remedy applyed either within or without the body: But after the taking eyther of these, the patient ought to be diligently couered with clothes, that hee maye well sweate for three houres space.
                  The wine made in Haruest of the blessed Thistle, and druncke in the tyme answerable, profiteth and healpeth all the griefes before vttered.
               
               
                  The commended vertues of the distilled water of the blessed Thistle.
                  THe time and order of distilling of the same, is that the hearbe alone, about the ende of May be distilled.
                  The water distilled of the blessed Thistle druncke vnto the quantitie of twoo or three ounces at a time, both morning and euening, putteth away headache, comforteth memorie, helpeth the giddinesse of the head, and recouereth especiallye all the griefes of the eyes, althoughe they bee but washed with the same.
                  The water in like maner taken, profiteth suche being in a consumption of the body. The water in like quantitie drunke both morning and euening, breaketh the stone, and cureth any burning, by often, applying,

linnen clothes wette in the same.
                  The patient molested with the Quartayne or anye other Ague, by taking three ounces of the distilled water of the hearbe fastyng, well a quarter of an houre before the fytte of colde beginning, and lying down to sweate, be well couered wyth clothes: shall within certaine fittes so vsing hymselfe, be deliuered either of the one or other Ague, the like doth the decoction of the hearbe or the pouder druncke hot with wine.
                  Against eating Cankers, or any other putride vlcers, there is scarcely to be found any other worthier than the leaues, the Juice, decoction, or water of the blessed Thistle. And notable diseases hathe the hearbe recouered, especiallye in women, whose breastes were eaten and consumed with the Canker, euen vnto the bare ribbes, by clensing first the places wyth this water, and applying after the pouder of the hearbe, which on such wise handled, healed them in shorte time.
                  And Bathes are profitably made of this hearbe, for the dissoluing of the stone, and prouoking of the Termes.
               
            
            
               What care and secrets ar to be lerned in the sowing and setting of the hearbe Angelica. Chap. 33.
               
                  THe hearbe Smyrnium, which at this daye of all the phisitions and poticaries throughe out Europe is named Angelica: thys when in the firste yeare it shall come vp of the Seede, yeldeth stalkes of a foote and a halfe high, a finger bigge, rounde, tender, smoothe, and bendyng backe to the Earth: these also deuided and spreade foorth into twoo, three, and manye tymes foure smaller stalkes or armes, in whose toppe are leaues in forme like to the leaues of the Smallache, but farre greater, and those diuided into three partes, sharpe fashioned at the ende, and growyng vnto twelue fingers in heigth and breadth, and greene all the Winter.
               In the second or thirde yere, the stemme shooteth vp out of the middle of the leaues, and in heigth twoo or somtymes three cubites, encreasing a within thombe bignesse for the more parte, rounde, ioynted, whitish and smoothe, and as the same were sprinckled with dusty spots and hollowe within, beset also wyth leaues in ioynte forme, much lesser than the abouesaide. Thys also hathe little braunches, and certayne

stemmes shooting foorth, in whose toppe are greate tuffes, well fiue or sixe ynches broade, and those in forme imbosed rounde, and full of whitishe floures in whiche do after succeede twoo seedes, conioyned togyther, long, cornered, and of an ashie white coloure: those also contained within the hulke, be long, plaine, blacke without, white wythin, and the tough kernell couered with a rinde or pillyng sharp edged. This encreaseth in roote many times so bigge as the hand can clappe aboute, and somtimes bigger, yea it sendeth foorthe the roote, before the stemme bee come vppe, whyche roote encreaseth in yeares well a soote of length, or into many partes deuided, beyng blacke wythout, and white wythin, bigge, softe, and full of Juice, whiche being cut sendeth foorth a yelow Juice or licoure, from the inner side of the rinde, and a like licoure is cō
                  tained in the veyns of the leaues, but the same more watery.
               The root, sedes, and leaues possesse an eger taste, fretting the iawes, somwhat bitter, thinne, and aromaticke or sweete smelling.
               The moste effectuous of all the partes, is the proper licoure, nexte the seedes, then the roote, laste the floures and leaues.
               The hearbe Angelica ioyeth to be sowen in a well laboured earthe, and the same rather drye than moiste, for the harming by wormes, after the commyng vp, this requireth to be diligently weeded aboute, and seldome watered. This Angelica florisheth and beareth floures in the moneths of July and August.
               
                  The phisicke commodities of the Angelica.
                  THe hearbe of qualitie is botte and dry in the third degree, it openeth, extenuateth, and dissolueth.
                  This hathe speciall properties against poysons, it cleareth the bloud and the bodye.
                  The roote is soueraigne againste the plague, and all manner of poysons, the like doth the distilled water of the roote preuaile.
                  The pouder of the herbe, vnto the quantitie of half a dram, with a dramme waighte of pure Triacle, gyuen in foure or fiue ounces of the distilled water of the same, and the patient well couered to sweate, dothe maruellouslie helpe the infection of the plague, and sodaine agues or sweating.
                  
                     And for lacke of the Triacle, may a whole dramme of the pouder be ministred.
                  The roote of the hearbe (after the infusing in vineger) applied to the nose, or the pouder of the roote drunke somtimes fasting in wine, very muche auaileth agaynste a pestilent ayre.
                  The distilled water of the Angelica, or pouder of the roote, ceasseth gripings of the belly proceeding of colde, if the belly otherwise be not costine. To be briefe, the distilled water and pouder of the roote, recouereth all inwarde griefs of the body, and in the pleurisie or stitches of the sides, this is profitably ministred. The pouder of the Angelica (or as some write the distilled water of the hearbe, helpeth ruptures, and the diseases of the Lungs, it putteth away gripings of the belly, amendeth the strangury, sendeth foorth the yongling and Termes, and dissolueth all inwarde swellings of the body.
                  The roote voyled in wine, or water and hony, and drunke, preuaileth in all the aboue said griefs, being in due order ministred. The Juice bestowed into hollow teeth, stayeth the running of them, the water of the hearbe dropped into the eares, doth like auaile in the same. This also amendeth the dimnesse of sight. The leaues of the Angelica wroughte wyth the leaues of Rue and Honey in playster forme, and the same workemanly applied, doeth not onely heale the bit of a madde Dogge, but the sting of venemous wormes. This plaister applied on the heade of the patiente sicke of the ague, doth in shorte time drawe to it, all the heate of the feuer. The distilled water, Juice, and pouder of the hearbe, workmanly applied in olde depe woundes, do clense, and regenerate, or renue fleshe in the places.
                  The destilled water applied with linnen clothes wet in it, doth maruelously assuage the ache of the hippes and goute, in that the same consumeth soft and clammy humoures gathered.
                  Many other vertues of this hearbe maye bee gathered by the former helpes vttered.
                  The seedes haue like properties, as the roote possesseth, the wilde Angelica is weaker in vertue, but boyled in wine and applyed in playster forme, doth especiallye cure new and olde vlcers.
               
            
            
               
               What care & diligence is required in the artely sowing of the hearbe Ualerian. Chap. 34.
               
                  THe Ualeriā groweth vp with a long and high stemme, ioynted and hollowe, bearing on the toppe a tuffe, and flowers purple mixed with a whitenesse, or white mixed with a rednesse, after the forme of Organy, the roote as bigge as the little finger, and white, with manye other small rootes braunching in the earthe, and these yelowish of coloure, sweete in sauoure, and yeelding the force of the spike, by a certaine strengthe of the sauoure. And this doth Hieronimus booke reporte, to be the true Ualerian, and that rare to be founde, which for the rarenesse, is at this day sowen in many Gardens. The Ualerian commeth very well vp, being bestowed in a moist and wel dunged ground, and the hearbe after the comming vp, requireth to be often watered, vntill it hath yeelded a highe stemme.
               
                  The phisicke benefits of the Valerian.
                  THe hearbe of qualitie heateth in the thirde degree, and drieth in the beginning of the second, and the roote especiallye serueth for the vse of phisicke.
                  The roote of the Ualerian brought to pouder, and druncke in wine, prouoketh sweate and vrine, the like performeth the roote it selfe, being boyled in Wine: yea thys also amendeth the paine and stitches of the sides and backe.
                  The roote dried may be kepte for three whole yeares, and gathered especially in the moneth of Auguste.
                  The pouder of the roote of valerian, mixed wyth the white helelbor or neeseworte, and the flowre of wheate, this in apte places layed, killeth mice. The roote boyled in white wine with fennell and parcely seedes, doth mightily prouoke the vrine, colde, healpeth the paines in the sides, and moueth the Termes.
                  This also preuaileth againste poyson, and the plague, by drinking of it.
                  Certaine do boyle the roote of Ualerian with Fennell, Annise seedes, and Licourise, for the coughe and straightnesse of breathe.
                  
                     The greene Hearbe and freshe roote bruised, and applyed, doth mytigate the payne of the heade, staye fluxes, and profitteth the shyngles.
                  The floures or roote boyled in wine, and dropped into the eyes, procureth a clearnesse of them, healeth the great pyles in the fundamente, & other vlcers, but this especially amendeth the dymmes of sight, as Jeronimus booke witnesseth.
               
               
                  The worthy vertues of the distilled water of the Herbe.
                  THe conuenient time of the distillation of the same is that the roote, Herbe, and stem, with the whole substaunce be shred togither, and distilled about the ende of May.
                  The distilled water of Ualerian, drunke vnto the quantitie of foure ounces at a time, doth morning and euening, and linnen clothes wet in it applyed vpon, doth in shorte time amende vlcers, olde soares, and those causing swellings, yea thys auayleth againste the pyles, by applying linnen clothes wet in it.
                  The said water drunke in like quantity, both morning and euening profiteth the creature hauing any bone broken. This also helpeth a rupture, or a bodie broken and droppe in the eies, cleareth them.
                  The distilled water of the valerian, drunke vnto the quantitie of a sponfull at a time, euery morning fasting, doth expell the long wormes in children.
                  Thys water druncke in like manner, as afore vttered, profiteth againste poyson, and a pestilente ayre: it healeth newe and olde wounds, cleareth vlcers and impostumes wythin the bodye, and remoueth the ache of the hippes.
                  The distilled water orderly druncke, procureth cleare eyes, remoueth the paine in chins, and prouoketh sweate; this poured into troubled wine, causeth the faine 
                        〈…〉
                      purer to be drunke.
                  The saide water assuageth the paine of the members, proceedyng of an vntemperate coldenesse, by dayly annoynting the members wyth it.
               
               
                  
                  The vertues of the distilled water of the rootes of Valerian.
                  THe distillation of thys water is to bee wrought, from the fifteenth daye of August, vnto the eyght daye of the moneth of September.
                  This distilled water drunke, as afore taught, doth remoue poyson, and profiteth against venemous beastes.
                  The distylled water drunke fasting, vnto the quantitie of syxe ounces at a time, before the fitte commeth, deliuereth the Quotidian Ague.
                  The sayde water in like quantitie gyuen, and both annoynted, and applyed wyth linnen clothes wet in it, amendeth the stitches in the sides.
                  When two persons at variance, shal drinke a quantitie of this water out of one cuppe togither, doth after procure them friendes, and louing one to the other.
               
            
            
               The dilligence required in the bestowing of the Hearbe Bytonie. Chap. 35.
               
                  THe Betony is an Hearbe, hauing a slender stemme, and foure square, growyng in manye places a foote and a halfe hyghe, the leaues long and softe, and indented rounde aboute, like to Oken leaues, and sweete smelling, among the whiche, greater leaues are those, growing nighe to the roote, in the toppe of the stemmes is the seede, eared after the maner of Sauerie, the rootes spreading small, and beareth purple floures.
               The Herbe Betonie ioyeth to be sowen in a moist and cold ground, and by a bricke or stone wal to enioy the shadow of the same, for the Herbe much delighteth to stande in the Sunne beames.
               
                  
                  The Phisicke commodities of the Herbe Bitonie.
                  THe Herbe Betony (after the minde of the learned) is hotte and drye in the first degree complet, or in the myddle of the seconde, and hath the nature of cutting asunder, whiche is manyfest of the taste, that is soure and somewhat bitter.
                  The Herbe boyled with the floures in wyne and drunke, stayeth belching, the rawnesse of stomack amendeth, and the soure restings correcteth. The selfe same may be distilled water, or a confection made of the floures wyth suger, or the pouder of the dry Herbe it selfe, or ministred with Honye.
                  The Herbe drunke in wine, very muche profiteth the diseases of the Matrice: and this, to be briefe, is auaylable to all inwarde griefes of the body, in what maner soeuer the same be taken. For this giuen in Mulse vineger vnto ye quantite of a dramme profiteth in the sending forth of ye harmeful humors of ye stomack, liuer, milte, kidneis, bladder & matrice.
                  The person which feareth to haue drunke poison, by takyng a dram wayghte of pouder in wine, shalbe deliuered of the harme, both by vrine and siege.
                  The Herbe (after the boyling in water) drunke, profiteth the Phrensie persons, suche hauing the falling sicknesse, the Paulsie, and ache of the Hyppes.
                  The Herbe helpeth digestion, if any after supper, eateth vnto the bignesse of a beane of the same, being afore boyled in Hony, this also steeped in wine for a night, and drunke, stayeth vomyting.
                  The Herbe boyled in wine and drunke, expelleth the Ague, and ministred to the wayght of two drammes with Hidromel, sendeth foorth the water betweene the skinne, and many humours.
                  The pouder of the Hearbe to the wayght of a dramme drunke wyth wyne, doth speedily helpe the Jaundise, and sendeth downe the Termes.
                  The Betony boyled in wine and strayned, if wyth three drammes of (Hiera Picra Galem) myxed and drunke fasting, gently purgeth the belly. The Herbe boyled with Hony, recouereth the consumption of the body, and matterie spittings of the Lungs.
                  
                     The Herbe brused, and applyed in playster forme on the hurt of the heade, as witnesseth Apuleius, doth by a maruellous speedinesse close and heale the same, yea this hath such a propertie, that it fasteneth broken bones, and by his force draweth pieces forth, and dissolueth the clotted bloud.
                  The pouder of the herbe giuen to the waight of a dramme in wine, stayeth the spitting vp of bloud.
                  The leaues brused & applyed in plaister forme on ye eyes, doth speedyly helpe the eyes bruised or hurt by a strype: the rootes also of the Hearbe boyled to a third part in water, and the eyes suppled wt the same water, doe speedyly remoue the payne of them.
                  The iuyce of the Hearbe dropped into the eares wyth the oyle of Roses remoueth all manner of payne in them, the same amendeth the hardnesse of fetching breath, if the breast bee annoynted therwyth. The Herbe eaten, cause the clearnesse of the sight.
                  The Bytonie boyled in olde wyne and vineger, vnto the consumption of a thyrd part, and gargelled in the mouth, remoueth too thach.
                  This drunke in wine recouereth an 
                        •
                     ud colour of the body, the same boyled in wine and drunk, they affirme of experience to profit the diseases of the Mylte.
                  The eating of two ounces of the pouder with Honyfor eight dayes togither, aswageth the cough, two drammes of Betonie and one of Plantaine, ministred with foure ounces of warme water before the fit of colde putteth away the coridiane.
                  Three drams of the pouder, with one ounce of pure Hony, giuen in three ounces of warme water, before ye fit 
                        〈◊〉
                     , doth maruelously remoue the uttes of the Tertian and quartayne ague.
                  For griefe of the bladder, take foure drammes of Bytonie, of Parsely rootes three scruples boyled, but the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of ye Parsely afore boyled in a pynte of water vnto the consumption of the 
                        〈◊〉
                     , and then the Bitony added to, and giuen to drinke, which 
                        〈◊〉
                      the 
                        〈◊〉
                     , that 
                        〈◊〉
                      after it commeth againe.
                  The Bytony drunke in wine, 
                        〈◊〉
                      the hone, & helpeth at painful griefes of the bladder, yea this is those more effectuous in the 
                        〈◊〉
                      certain perswade, for a singular 
                        〈…〉
                     , to drinke the pouders of Bitony, veruay 
                        〈…〉
                     .
                  
                     The rootes of Bitony boyled with the leaues, vnto a thirde part away, and drunke in water, with the Herbe applyed alone, doe maruellously aswage (of experience knowen) the pain of the Gout. The leaues heated betweene two new Tyles, and applyed to the fortheade, do mitigate the griefe of the eyes and stay the running of them, in that this among the other herbes, which they apply to the heade, obtayneth a principalitie.
               
               
                  The commended vertues of the distilled water of Betonie.
                  THe time of gathering, and distilled the Bytonie, with the whole substance, is about the ende of Maye.
                  The distilled water of Bitony, as Hieronimus Brunsuicensis, a most expert Herbarian, witnesseth, drunke vnto the quantity of foure ounces at a tyme, both m
                        •
                     rning, noone, and euening, putteth away the dropsie, Jaundise, and any ague.
                  The distilled water helpeth the diseases of the kidneys, mylte, and Lungs, and all those griefes tofore vttered, the water either drunke or applyed on the places with linnen clothes wet in it, if the euil or griefe shall appeare without the body.
               
            
            
               The skil and diligence required in the artly bestowing of the Herbe Louage. Chap. 36.
               
                  THe Louage ioyeth to growe by Wayes, and vnder the Eiuesyng of an house, it also prospereth in shadowye places, but especially delyghteth to growe neare to a running water.
               Thys in the growing, sendeth vp a long and slender stem, like to the Oyl, ioynted, with leaues rounde about like to the Melylote, sweete sauouring, tenderer and softer, towards the toppe smaller and much more deuided. In the toppe of the stem groweth a touffe, in which consisteth the seede, blacke, hard, and long, like to the Fennel seed being sharpe in tast, & sweete in smelling, it also beareth a yelow floure, & hath a pale roote within, but black without, sharpe, sweete sauouring, tender, ful of iuyce, and byting the iawes.
               
                  The Herbe for hys sweete sauoure is vsed in bathe, but the seede is of greater effecte in medicine.
               
                  The Phisicke benefites of the Herbe Louage.
                  THys Herbe of qualitie is hotte and drie, in the thirde degree, the seeds indure in strength and vertue for three yeres.
                  The drie roote bruised hateth the stomacke, helpeth digestion, expelleth superfluous humours, and drunk in wine, vnto the waight of halfe a dramme at a tyme, ceaseth all inwarde griefes, this also expelleth poisons, causeth vrine and the Termes, and perfourmeth the like matters, which the Angelica doth.
                  The Herbe boyled in wine or water, and drunk, openeth the stopping of the Liuer and milte, the Herbe bruised and myxed wyth Cummyne very much profiteth if the same be drunke in wine, for this recouereth ye stomacke, and expelleth noyous windes out of the bowels.
                  The herbe Louage with Galingale and Cinamon boiled in wine, and druncke with a fasting stomacke, amendeth the diseases of the stomacke, milte, and bowelles, a pouder like to an Eclegma prepared of the Louage seedes, Cinamon, Raponticke, and Galingale, with sugar in equall proportion mixed, and druncke in wine, auayleth vnto the aboue sayde diseases.
                  If anye drinke a quantitie of the Louage seedes, in wine fasting, procureth the person to purge both vpward and downeward, the seedes after the boyling, giuen vp in glister forme, doth greatly ease the person pained with the Goute in the feete.
                  The Seedes stieped for a night in white wine, and drunke fasting, doe mightily draw downe the Terms, yet are the seedes of themselues ouer forcible vnto the vse of medicine inward, in that they ministred or applied in plaister forme, both breake and open vlcers, yea expell mightily the deade yongling.
                  For which cause the strēgth of those seeds must be tempered, by alike waight of the Fennel and Annys seedes, which on such wise ministred worketh his propertie in the bodie without harme.
                  But the seedes may safely be applyed without the bodie in any maner, without any other addition to them.
                  
                     The Louage seedes boyled artely in wine, do aswage the grypings of the belly and bowels, remoue the swelling of the stomacke, digest the humours of the stomacke, cure the bitle of venemous wormes, procure vrine and the Termes.
                  A bath made of the Louage, Rosemarie, Penieroyall, Sage, Catmynte, Cammomyl, Mellylote, the Cytryne Staechados, Mugworte, and Fenigreke, these togither boyled in wine and sitting ouer the fume to sweate, not only openeth the poares of the body, and draweth foorth euil humours, but dissolueth the stone, procureth vrine and the Termes healeth the Crampe, proceeding of the fulnesse of body, the paine of the Gout, the Palsie, the kings euil, and heateth all the inner members.
                  The roote bruised and applyed in playster forme, doth greatly auaile on the bitte of a mad dog, and venemous worme, in that the same both mytigateth and expelleth poyson.
               
               
                  The commended vertues of the distilled water of Louage
                  THe time of the distillation of the same is, that the leaues shred togither with the stems, be distilled in the middle of May.
                  The distilled water of the Louage drunke morning and euenyng vnto the quantity of two or three ounces at a tyme, doth in shorte time helpe them, payned with stitches aboute the breaste and sides, remoueth the griefe of the stone in the Loynes and bladder, cleareth the hoarsnesse of voyce, and putteth awaye the daungerous swellyng of the throte, by washyng and applying on the same, lynnen clothes wette in it.
                  The distilled water asuageth the swelling of the head, and the aking of the same, if linnen clothes wette in it, be applyed vpon, it procureth a white and louely countenaunce, if the same be diligently washed, both morning and euening with the water.
                  This helpeth the pushes, and rednesse proceeding of heate, hapning commonly from the knee downwarde, by applyng linnen clothes wet in it, that ceaseth the heate and cureth the pushes.
                  This cureth the Canker of the mouth, if it be often washed with the same, and that at eche time, the pouder of the Barberie roote be sprinkled vpon.
                  
                     This also cureth the griefe and exulceration of womens places, if these be washed therwith, for three or foure times a day, the same doeth the sayde water perfourme, if linnen clothes wet in it, be sundrie tymes applyed vpon.
               
            
            
               What care and skil is required in the bestowing of the Herbe Elecampane. Chap. 37.
               
                  THe Herbe Elecampane groweth vp wt a long stem, big and Mossie, & the leaues with mossie bears on the one side on the toppe of the stem, being many times a mans heigth, is a bigge yealowe floure growing, in which the seedes are contained, and those by feeling procure ytche.
               The roote within the erth reddish without, and white within, bigge, sharpe in tast, and sweete smelling. The roote is digged vp, at the beeginning of sommer, and slyced, dryed in the sunne.
               This especially flourisheth in the moneth of July.
               The Elecampane may not be sowen, in that the seedes bestowed in beds prosper not, but rather set the yong buds broken tenderly from the roote in Earth wel dunged and laboured afore. And those begynne to set, in the moneth of Februarye, wel three foote asunder, one from the other, in that those sende forth bigge leaues, and long rootes spreading in the Earth.
               
                  The Phisicke commodities of the Elecampane.
                  THe Elecampane of qualitie heateth in the ende of the thirde degree, and moystneth in the first.
                  The pouder of the drye roote mixed with pure Honye, and vsed in forme of an Eclegma, amēdeth the cough, ye root also of the Elecampane (artelye prepared) defendeth the Lungs of euyll humoures remoueth the ache of the Hyppes and ioyntes, and sickenesses proceeding of a colde cause.
                  Thys expelleth the grosse humours in man, and aswageth the ache of the Hucklebones, boyled also in wine, and mixed with Suger in

the drinking, amendeth that harde fetching of breath by the necke especially holden vpright, and procureth vrine.
                  The pouder of the roote druncke in like manner sendeth downe the Termes, and this is profitably ministred agaynst poyson, and the bit of venemous wormes and beastes.
                  The roote canded with hony or Sugar, is saide very muche to preuaile against the daunger of a pestilent ayre, being afore eaten, for whiche cause (the rawe roote of manye) is eaten in the plague time.
                  The roote of the Elecampane, is canded after this maner, by plucking the roote out of the Earth in the moneth of October, at what time the same is growen to a ful ripenesse, whiche then is to bee rubbed and clensed with a course hearie cloth, after this scraped faire wyth a sharpe knife, and those rootes whiche are bigge, to bee sliced into three or foure peeces so long as a finger, which after the puttyng into a brasse chafer, to be tēderly boyled with vineger, but in such maner, as the peeces burn not to the sides or bottome of the chafer: Wythin three dayes after the boyling, they are to be dried in the Sun, and then bestowed into a newe earthen potte, well pitched about, on whiche a pleasaunt Cuite poured to soke them in, and store of the herbe Sauerie pressed down vpon them: whiche done, the mouthe of the pot to be diligently stopped with a skin or thicke partchement.
                  The rootes may otherwise be ordered in scrappyng them cleane, and after the cutting of them into twoo or three peeces, well a finger long, to set those stiepe in water a whole day, ouer hotte embers, whiche done, to boyle the peeces twoo or three times ouer, in asmuche waight of honey or sugar.
                  The confirme of the Elacampane roote, maye bee made by clensing and scraping the roote in the maner aboue taught: Whiche done, to cut them into thinne round slices, letting them soke in water ouer the hotte embers, for a long space, and to boile them vntill the licoure be all wasted, then to beate those in a stone morter, lettyng them after to passe throughe a strainer or linnen clothe: this done to boyle the whole with a like waighte of hony or sugar, twoo or three times ouer.
                  All other rootes may in like manner bee canded, and made into conserue, but far pleasaunter in the eating, if to the confection a quantitie of Sinamom bee added.
                  
                     The same also they name to be canded, when the roote or the thing canded, remaineth whole after the canding, but the conserue in a contrary manner remayneth not whole, in that the same is beaten small, to the making of it.
                  The leaues of the Elecampane boyled in wine, and a playster made of the same, applied to weake and loose members, doth so muche heate them, that in shorte time they recouer strength and healthe.
                  The Elecampane putteth away yre and heauinesse, comforteth the hearte, and sendeth foorth the superfluous humoures by vrine: this also (after the minde of Hippocrates) causeth mirth.
                  The hearbe defendeth and preserueth the skinne of the face, and like garnisheth the whole body with a continuall seemelinesse, the wine also of the Elecampane made, heateth colde members, the same drunke orderly, helpeth all the diseases which are afore vttered.
                  Here note, that all wines boyled or made of the Hearbes, doe more preuayle in the morning, than at euening.
                  The Elecampane boiled with Pellitory, and mixed with oyle, applied hot to the belly, ceaseth the gripings of the bowels, and the same applied vnder the Nauel, remoueth and helpeth the strangury.
               
               
                  The worthy vertues of the distilled water of the leaues of the Elecampane.
                  THe time answerable to the distillation is, that the Herbe and roote shred togither be distilled in the ende of May.
                  This water druncke morning and euening, for fiue or sixe dayes togither, to the quantitie of an eggeshell full at a tyme, expelleth the griefe of the stone.
                  The distilled water druncke in the saide manner, or a quantitie bestowed in drincke, helpeth the person broken: the same also drunke, and the heade annointed therewith, in suche manner as the same may drye in, greatly comforteth the heade.
                  The distilled water drunke morning and euening for certaine days togither, comforteth and strengthneth the stomacke, amendeth the hard fetching of breath, the coughe, pleurisse, poyson, the stone, and termes in women.
                  
                     The distilled water strengthneth the members annointed therwith, and the more by dayly drinking thereof. This also expelleth the stone of the kidneys and bladder, and the same clereth ye parts of the body, and causeth vrine, by drinking of it morning and euening, for certaine days togither.
               
               
                  The commended vertues of the distilled water of the roote.
                  THe root of the Elecampane is to be distilled about the end of May, or from the moneth of July, vnto September.
                  The distilled water of the same drunke many dayes togither, vnto the quātitie of two or three ounces at a time, healeth an inner rupture. The distilled water drunke in the saide manner, helpeth the stone, prouoketh the Termes in women, assuageth the griefe of the stone, and prouoketh vrine: yea this drunke in the abouesaide manner, sendeth the deade yongling out of the mothers wombe.
                  The distilled water eyther drunk or applied with linnen clothes wet in it, remoueth the swelling of womens places: the sayde water also drunke or applied with linnen clothes, assuageth the swelling of the testicles, and only this druncke often, doth amende them.
                  The distilled water druncke sundry days vnto the quantitie abouesaide, both morning and euening, ceasseth the coughe, and consumeth the grosse and clammy humours about the stomacke.
               
            
            
               The care in the bestowing of the hearbe Pepperworte. Chap. 39.
               
                  THe Pepperworte is a seemly hearbe, yeelding leaues greater and broader, than the peache, or Baye tree, and those thicker, greener, & softer, the herbe also growing a foot and a half, and somtimes, two foot high, wyth a stiffe and rounde stemme, bearyng on the top white and very small floures, after these a small seede and long roote.
               The leaues are sowre, and bite in taste like pepper on the tongue, for which cause this is rightly named Pepperworte. Thys groweth euery where in Gardens, and well ordered in the ground, endureth for two

yeres, in certaine places also (as witnesseth Ruellius) it continueth grene tenne yeares. It florisheth or beareth floures in the moneth of June, and July, and nexte yeeldeth the Seede.
               The hearbe Pepperworte oughte to bee sette before the beginning of Marche, after the growing vp, to be clipped and cutte like the Siues, but this not often: for after the firste day of Nouember, the hearbe ought not to be cut, leaste it perisheth or drieth throughe the colde season ensuing. The hearbe prospereth and continueth twoo yeares, if the same be well dunged aboute, and diligently weeded.
               
                  The phisicke benefits of the hearbe Pepperworte.
                  THe hearbe of qualitie heateth and drieth in third degree, as Brunsfelsius reporteth, but Galen affirmeth the Pepperworte to be hotte, as the Cresses is, in the fourthe degree, yet lesser dryeth than it, and the leaues of this hearbe doth by property exulcerate: the nature also of the Hearbe, is to cutte and extenuate the meate receyued, and clammy humoures.
                  The Pepperworte is not to be vsed or taken inward without milke, and it hathe the like properties as the Cresses, whiche after the manner of condite things, muste be condited with milke and salte. And the same may bee made after this manner, by infusing the freshe leaues in newe milke: and after the thirde daye, the whey pressed foorthe, to whiche then greene Sauery, the drye seedes of Coriander, Dill, time, and parseley mixed, and diligentlye beaten togyther, thys well sodden and strained, to adde so muche salte, as shall suffise.
                  Seing the leaues possesse suche a sharpnesse (as Dioscorides reporteth) that they doe exulcerate partes wythin, for that cause maye they aptely serue vnto exulcerating in the paine of the hippes, if after the brusing wyth an Elecampane root, it be layd to the place a quarter of an houre. And this in the like manner lying to, assuageth the swelling of the Milte.
                  The roote beatē with barrows grease, or with the Elecampane roote, and applied in plaister forme on the hippe grieued, doth deliuer the ache in shorte time.
                  This amendeth the skinne of the face, by exulcerating, so that the

same bee after healed, with oyle of Roses and waxe. And on such wise it easily taketh away foule scabbes and Leprie, and the marks of Ulcers.
                  The roote of the Hearbe Pepperworte tyed on the Arme, or hanged about the necke, is supposed to cease or aswage the toothache.
               
            
            
               The care in the bestowing of the Celondyne. Chap. 39.
               
                  THe Hearbe Celondyne shooteth vp a foote and a halfe high, and somtymes is more slender of them, bearing many leaues, and those like to the Crowfoote, but softer and to a yelowish coloure tending, yeeldyng also a yelow floure like to the Violet.
               The iuyce in the Hearbe of yelowe coloure to Saffrone, biting the tongue, sowre, somwhat bitter and strong sauouring. The roote aboue all one, but within the earth shedde into many yellow hearye rootes: it commonly groweth in shadowie places, by walles and in stony heapes: this florisheth at the comming of the Swallowes, and all the Sommer, but it wythereth at the departure of them.
               The Celondine commeth vp in any earth, yet dothe the same more ioy bestowed in a shadowie place, and the seedes ought to be committed to the Earth in the moneth of February, which after the comming vppe, wil endure for twoo yeares, if after the shedding of the Seedes, the stemmes be cutte away, well foure fingers aboue the rootes.
               
                  The phisicke benefits of the Celondine.
                  THe Celondine is of qualitie hotte and drye, in the third degree absolute: but Platearius affirmeth the hearbe to be hotte and drye in the fourthe degree. Foure things are preserued of this hearbe, as the leaues with the stemme, the rootes, seedes, and Juice.
                  The Juice of the herbe boyled in a Copper vessell with hony on the coles, and dropped into the eies, procureth a clearnesse of them, and putteth away the dimnesse of sighte.
                  The Juice mixed with salt Armoniacke, and dropped into the eies remoueth the pinne and webbe growen on them, and causeth a clearnesse

of sight. The hearbe with the floures diligently beate boiling them after in water, and that water boyled, poure into a potte, settyng the same againe ouer the fire, and well skimming it in the boyling: when the licoure beginneth to seeth ouer, straine it soone after through a linnen clothe, whyche keepe close stopped in a glasse or a potte to vse: for this dropped in the eyes, remoueth the dimnesse of sighte.
                  The Juice of the root cleareth the leaprie, if any annointeth the places therewith, and the patient after taketh the Sirrope of Fumitorie for nine dayes togyther, both morning and euening, whyche wythout doubt recouereth and healpeth the same.
                  The Juice is to be purchased in Maye, aswell out of the rootes as leaues and floures beaten togyther, and pressed foorth, whiche after the drying in the shadowe, to be formed into little pasties.
                  The root of the Celondine, boyled in white wine with Annise sedes, and drunke fasting, deliuereth the Jaundise through stopping in the body, and applied (after the boyling in wine) or chawed in the mouthe, assuageth the toothache.
                  A handefull of the Celondine purged, boyled in an equall quantitie of Rosewater, and strained, to which an ounce and halfe of Triacle added, is a moste effectuouse remedy against the plague.
                  The roote boyled in wine, and applied in plaister forme on the shingles or Tetters, speedely healeth them, the herbe brused (as Platearius reporteth) boyled in wine, and applied vpon, or a spunge wette in the saide decoction: remoueth the Cholicke passion. The pouder of the root, sprinckled on woundes and vlcers, both clenseth and healeth them.
                  For the Canker of the mouthe, bone, or synewes, the pouder of the saide roote, with the pouder of roses wrought togyther with vineger, and boyled vnto a meane thicknesse, like to mustard, and the cankerous partes annointed with it, doth muche auaile.
                  For prouokyng of the Termes, and clensing the matrice, let a fomente be often applied with the water of the decoction of the same.
               
               
                  The commended vertues of the distilled water of Celondine.
                  THe time of gathering and distilling the Celondine is, that the herb with the whole substaunce be small shred, and distilled in the middle

of May.
                  The distilled water druncke vnto the quantitie of foure ounces at a time, bothe morning and euening, expelleth the yelowe Jaundise: this drunke in the like manner, auaileth againste the gripings of the belly.
                  The distilled water druncke in the abouesayde manner, mitigateth the ague, and remoueth scabbes caused of colde, if they often be bathed or soupled with it.
                  The distilled water drunke vnto the quantitie of twoo ounces at a time, eyther twise or thrise a daye, profiteth vnto the stoppyng of the liuer, and milte.
                  This water dropped into the eyes, correcteth the pinne and webbe, putteth away the rednesse of them, and causeth a sharpe and redy sight.
                  If the mouthe be washed with the saide water, it ceasseth the toothache and putteth away spottes of the face, if the face bee washed wyth this water.
                  The distilled water dryeth and healeth a Canker, yea Fistula also, and remoueth pestilent pushes, if a linnen cloth wette in it be applied on the places twice or thrice a daye.
               
            
            
               The care in the bestowing of the hearbe Filipendula. Chap. 40.
               
                  THe hearbe Filipendula groweth in stonye and roughe places, as on hils, bearing a leafe like to the wilde parsenep, or parseley, the stemme bigge, and a foote or somwhat more in heigth, yeeldyng on the toppe a white floure, in the moneth of July, after that the Seede like to the Orache, and a bigge roote, out of whiche many round heades or kernelles growe.
               The roote oughte to be digged vp in the ende of haruest, whyche endureth for tenne yeares.
               The Filipendula commeth well vppe in anye Earth, yet doeth the Hearbe more ioy, beyng sowen or sette in a stonye or grauellye grounde: the Seedes require to bee committed to the Earth in the moneth of Aprill, and to be like ordered, after the shooting vp in the weeding and watering as afore taught of the other hearbes.
               
                  
                  The phisicke commodities of the hearbe Filipendula.
                  THe Filipendula of qualitie is hotte and drye in the thirde degree, whiche (his vehement bitternesse) sufficiently declareth.
                  The seede, leaues, and stemme of the Filipendula, druncke in wine and hony boyled togyther, sende downe the after burden, and further the birth of childe.
                  The root of the Filipendula brought to pouder, and drunk in wine, not only helpeth the Kings euill and strangury, but the stone, payne of the kidneys, and ache of the hippes.
                  The pouder of this roote taken in wine, remoueth the swelling and coldenesse of stomacke, healpeth the hardnesse of fetching breath, and suche shorte winded, yea all sicknesses whych proceede of a colde cause. The meale of this roote mixed with meate and giuen to eate, recouereth the falling sickenesse, by sundry dayes vsing.
                  Against the hardnesse of fetching breath, take this pouder, and Gentiane in like waight, and vse the same in meate, for this without doubt auaileth in shorte time.
               
               
                  The commended vertues of the distilled water of Filipendula.
                  THe chosen time for the distilling of it is, that the whole herbe with the roote be finely shred togither and distilled in the ende of May.
                  The distilled water of Filipendula, drunk vnto the quantitie of three ounces at a time, bothe morning and euenyng, recouereth the plague. The said water druncke vnto the quantitie of foure or sixe ounces at a time, auaileth against poyson, if a man by happe hatne eyther eaten or drunke poyson.
                  The distilled water drunke vnto the quantitie of foure ounces at a time, both morning and euening, dissolueth and cureth the stone of the kidneys, and bladder.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ A necessary Table to the second part of this Booke, briefly shewyng the Physical operations of euery herbe and plant therein conteyned, with the vertues of their distilled waters.
            
               A.
               ANgelica cureth poysons, cleareth bloud, and preserueth the body against the plague. fol. 162
               Angelica auaileth against a pestilente ayre, it ceasseth grypings of the belly, it recouereth all inwarde griefs, it helpeth ruptures, it amendeth the dimnesse of sight, the bit of a dogge, the heate of the feuer, deepe woundes, renueth fleshe &c. fol. 163
               Angelica, asswageth the ache of the hippes, and the Goute, it cureth new and olde vlcers. fol. 163
               Artochoke reformeth the sauoure of the mouth. fol. 53
               Artochoke causeth vrine and venerial acte. fol. 53
               Artochoke amendeth the hardnesse of making water, and the rancke sauor of the arme pittes. fol. 53
               Artochoke strengthneth the stomacke, and helpeth the priuie places, that men childrē may be cōceiued. fol. 53
               Arage or Orage helpeth yt stopping of the lyuer, it ceaseth the sheading of ye gaule or yelow Jandise, it casteth vp choler, softneth the belly, healeth impostumes, swellings, swimmings drawing of the wind short, expelleth worms, prouoketh vomityng, helpeth a hote lyuer, it loseth the bely, & deliuereth the pain of the blader, helpeth the ague, profiteth agaynst spitting of bloud, it helpeth the matrice, draweth a thorne or nayle out of the skinne, it loaseth rough nayles from the fyngers, it helpeth the hot goute in the feet, it softneth the belly being hardened by heate, and remoueth swellings. fo. 18. 19.
            
            
               B.
               BEere looseth the bellye, prouoketh vrine, purgeth the body of euil humours, it helpeth the smellyng, the payne of the eares, the payne of the gummes, it procareth hear to grow, and killeth lyce, nittes, and dandrie, it healeth whelkes, blisters of scalding or burning, gripings of yt belly, stayeth a lose belly, driueth away the worms of the belly, helyeth the obstructions or stoppings of the lyuer, the corrupted Splene, and the shingles. fo. 14. 15
               The discommodities of the Beete: it grypesh and byteth the stomack, and encreaseth euil humours. fol. 15
               Blete softneth the belly cureth the biting of a scorpion, the beating parn of the temples, it profiteth the Oyle on the mytt, it restrayneth the Termes. fol. 17
               Borage procureth gladsomnes, it helpeth the giddinesse and swimming of the head, the trembling and beating of the hearte, it encreaseth memorie, and remoueth melancolie, and the kings euill, it doth only comforte.
               Bugiosse preuaileth for the roughnesse of the throat and cough, it procureth gladsomnesse, it purgeth red Choller, it recouereth the Cardiake passion, it expelleth the noisome humors of the Lungs, it remoueth the swelling of the feet, it preserueth a good memory, it comforteth the heart, and engendreth good bloud. fol. 28. 29▪
               
               Buckeshorne helpeth the griefs of the ioyntes, it bindeth, it putteth awaye the feuer. fol. 77
               Betonie stayeth belching and rawnesse

of the stomacke. fol. 165
               Bitonye profiteth the diseases of the matrice, & all inward griefs. fol. 165
               Bitonie purgeth all poyson, it profiteth frensy persons, falling sicknes, palsy, ache of the hips, it helpeth digestiō, stayeth vomiting, it expelleth the ague &c. fol. 165
               Bitonie fastneth broken bones, dissolueth clotted bloud. fol. 168
               Bittonye stayeth the spitting of bloud, it helpeth the eyes brused, and the paine of them, it helpeth the paine of the eares, it causeth clearnesse of sighte, remoueth toothache, the cotidian, tertian, and quartaine ague, the grief of the bladder &c. fol. 168
               Bittonye assuageth the payne of the goute &c. fol. 169
               Blessed thistle causeth vrine, helpeth the megrim, restoreth memory, and hearing, helpeth the diseases of the lūgs, purgeth fleume of the stomack and bloud, helpeth consumption of the lūgs, gripings prouoketh sweat, breaketh the stone, and helpeth the monethly Termes. It comforteth the brayne and syghte, purgeth the bloud in the eyes, stoppeth the bleeding at the nose, purgeth the Vuula, and ceasseth the Spittyng of fleume. fol. 158
               Blessed Thistle helpeth a weake stomacke, procureth appetite, abateth heate, consumeth euill bloud, prouoketh sweate, strengthneth the palsie members, recouereth the lungs exulcerated: It profiteth agaynste the dropsie, helpeth the plague, impostumes, cankers, and falling sicknes, it is a presente remedy againste the plague, the feuers of the stomacke, and the quartarn: It cureth greene woundes, pushes, swellings of the plague, any burning, the cholicke, scabbes, a stinking breath: It helpeth womennes priuities, it healpeth Stitches, Pleurifies, and infantes encombred with the fallyng sicknesse. fol. 159.
               Blessed Thistle expelleth poyson wyth two examples. fol. 160
            
            
               C.
               COleworte helpeth the hardnesse of making water, the Canker sores, the Ulcers in the pappes of Women, aches in the ioynts, hardnesse of hearing. fol. 9.
               Colewortes procureth the monethlye course of women, it cureth the forenesse of eyes, it profyteth againste the eating of venemous mushroms, it maketh Children to goe speedylyer alone, cureth the Disease of the Splene and Jaunders, it clenseth the scurfe and scaprie, it amendeth the voice, and grief of arteries, it cureth the bit of a dogge, it healpeth the Reume, and falling of the vuula, it helpeth the bit of a Serpente or adder, it cureth the goute, ioynt sicknesse, olde vlcers, purgeth the head, draweth the terms or reddes downe, and qualifyeth inflamations. fol. 10.
               Coleworts assuageth great swellings, it breaketh botches, stayeth the shedding of hear, the disease of ye splene, it cureth eating vlcers, canker sores griefs of the flanckes or sides, headache, a drye coughe, it drieth a moist belly. fol. 11
               Colewoortes bryngeth these discommodities, it hardeneth the belly, it harmeth the flewmaticke, and women hauyng the Redde course on them. fol. 11.
               Cheruill prouoketh vrine, and sendeth downe yt terms in women: it looseth fleume, it putteth away gripings of the belly, it engendreth wynd, it killeth wormes in the belly, it healeth a canker, it ceaseth ache in the hips, it remoueth the dandry of the head, it healeth running sores, it healeth

the bit of a madde dogge, it breaketh the stone of the bladder, and prouoketh vryne, it dyssolueth the bloude gathered into knobbes. fol. 72. 73
               Cheruill healeth impostumes behinde the eares. fol. 73
               Cresses drieth superfluous humours, it expelleth the dead yongling, it caseth the cough and looseth the brest, it auayleth agaynste the palsy of the tongue. fol. 73
               Cresses are not to be vsed alone. fol. 73
               Cresses restrayne the distillations of the head, clense the braine, and paine of the head, helpe against the palsye, prouoke sneesing, and amend the lethargie or sleepyng out of measure: drieth the vuula, helpeth infections of the heade, as knobbes and dandry: staieth the going out of the fundament, expelleth the round and flat wormes in the body: these helpe the griefes of the bresie, the ache of the hips, and greefe of the loynes, purchase a redier vnderstandyng & wit, remoue the Chollike proceeding of a colde cause, healpe the Strangury, remoue the paine of the teethe, and doth assuage the swelling of the milt. fol. 73. 74.
               Carots amend a cold reume, the payn of the stomacke, stoppyng of vrine, and cholicke, a dry cough, the hard fetching of breath, the fluxe of the heade, remoue winde, heate the stomacke, the stopping of the liuer, the vexings of the bely. fol. 128
               Cicory cureth scabbed places, causeth a faire skin, recouereth the stoppyng of the liuer, it purgeth the matrice, helpeth the liuer, yt vexing payne of vrine, the kings euill, the plague, burning -agues, pestilent pushes, the goute proceeding of heate, and cureth the shingles. fol. 56. 57
               Celondine, the iuyce of the herbe clereth the eyes, remoueth the Pinne and webbe, beyng myxed with salte Armonyacke: The herbe remoueth the dymnesse of syghte, the iuyce clenseth the Leapry, the roote dr
                     •
                  
                  ueth away the Jandise, and helpeth the toothache, & healeth Tetters or shingles: The herbe remoueth the Colicke passion, the powder of the roote cleanseth and healeth vlcers, healpeth the Canker of the mouth, bone or sinews, being anointed with the same boyled in vineger with the pouder of roses. fol. 78
               Celondine boyled in rose water, and a quantitie of triacle added to yt same, is a moste effectuous remedy againste the plague. fol. 178
               Filipendula is of qualitie hot and dry in the thirde degree. fol. 180
               The leaues and Stemme of Filipendula drunke in wyne and honey mingled togither, healpe the after burthen, and furthereth the birth of childe, the roote brought to pouder, healpeth the Kings euill and strangurye, the stone, payne of the kidneyes, and ache of the hippes. Taken in wyne it remoueth the swellyng and coldnesse of the stomacke, hardenesse of fetchyng breathe, and all sickenesses proceeding of colde causes. fol. 179
               The water of Filipendula being drunk Mornyng and euenyng, vnto the quantitie of three vnces at a time, recouereth the plague. The same also being drunke foure vnces at a tyme is good againste poyson, and also dissolueth and cureth the stone of the kydneyes and bladder. Folio. 180
            
            
               E.
               ENdiue preuaileth agaynst the stopping of the liuer and mylte, against the simple & double tertian agaynst the heat of yt liuer, against burning

impostumes it draweth hot pushes, it cureth the Cardiacke passion, it stayeth the flix, it helpeth the kyngs euill, the shingles, hote impostumes and swellings, assuageth headache, the spitting of bloud, the excesse of sperme. fol. 57 58
               Elecampane amendeth the cough, the ache of the hippes, expelleth grosse humours, caseth the harde fetching of breth, it procureth vrine, &c. fo. 172
               Elecampane is profitable against poison, agaynst the pestilent ayre and plague, &c. fol. 173.
               Elecampane recouereth strength, helpeth the strangurie. &c. fol. 174.
            
            
               G.
               Garlike heateth the body, extenuateth grosse humours, it expelleth wormes, cureth the bit of a Snake, taketh away blacke and blew spottes. fol. 100
               Garlike harmeth the Chollericke person. fol. 100
               Garlike putteth awaye inwarde swellings, openeth impostumes, kylleth lyce and nittes of the heade, moueth vrine, helpeth toothache proceeding of a cold cause, staieth the sheding of hear, cureth vlcers, recouereth lepry procureth a clere voyce, & remoueth an old cough, correcteth the stomack cooled, drieth vp the moisture of the stomacke, it is a preparation against the bitte of a serpent, relieueth the dulnesse of sight, healeth tetters and whelks: it resisteth poison, remoueth vrine, procureth Termes, draweth downe the after burden, cureth the bitte of a madde dog, helpeth the digestiō of a colde stomacke, the kings euill, frenfre persons, dropsy, it stayeth the fluxe, an olde coughe proceeding of a colde cause, it killeth wormes in children, expelleth the brood wormes in bodies, it cureth the bitte of venemous things, the swellings of the bladder, healeth vlcers of the lungs, dropsy being of a colde cau
                     •
                  e: it helpeth the griefs of the lūgs, and difficultie of vrine, headache, tooth ache proceedyng of a colde cause, ytche, the paine of going often to the stoole, expelleth a quartaine, cureth the pippes of Hennes, it helpeth the stone. fol. 100. 101. 102. 103
               Garlike profiteth agaynste contagious ayres.
               Gourde comforteth the stomack, loseth the bellye, helpeth the heate of the eares, profyteth leane men, purgeth gently, helpeth the corns of the toes, fasteneth loose teeth and helpeth the toothache, the inflamations of the liuer and bladder, impostumes, provoketh vrine, helpeth all agues, asswageth the heate of the liuer, the inflamations of infants heades, the burning guote, the inflamations of the eyes, assuageth tumors, vlcers on the priuie places, looseth the bellye, cooleth burning feuers, helpeth the shingles. fol. 148 &. 149.
            
            
               L.
               LEeke cureth the bit of a venemous beaste, helpeth the difficulties of making water, stayeth the spitting of bloude, dulieth the syghte of the eyes, offendeth the stomacke. fol. 86.
               The Juice of the Leek is deadly. fo. 86
               Leeke twyce sodden draweth downe the termes, procureth vrine, obtayneth a superfluous heate, stayeth the bleeding of the nose, causeth vomiting, and putteth away drunkennesse beyng eaten rawe. fol. 86.
               Leeke amēdeth an olde cough, and the vlcers of the lungs, healeth pushes, the grief of the eares, and the toothache: it purgeth vlcers, remoueth the bloud clotted in brused mēbers, stayeth the fluxe of bloud after birth, cesseth the bleeding of the nose, profyteth against paynes of the hippes, stomacke

ceaseth an olde ēough, helpeth the dropsy, staieth the flixe of the belly, and helpeth a hoarse voice. fol. 87
               Nero accustomed to eate an vnset leke with oile for his soūding voyce. fo. 87
               Leeke helpeth the paine of the heade, it preuaileth against the exulcerations of womens priuie places, looseth the difficultnesse of makyng water, aydeth the deliuery of childe, for the spitting of bloud and staying the bleding of the nose is verye profitable, clenseth the woundes, helpeth the ache of the hips, recouereth the wasting of the lung. fo. 87. 88
               Lettuce procureth steepe, causeth good bloud, helpeth digestion, looseth the belly, causeth plentifulnesse of milke in the breastes, sharpeneth the sight, cooleth impostumes, helpeth yt dropsy, cureth the sheding of sperme, procureth sleepe being layde vnder the couerict, and profyteth Chollericke persons. fol. 63
               Lettuce is noisome vnto married men, it dulleth the syghte of the eyes, it abateth the veneriall acte, it harmeth the fleumatike: the ouermuche eating of Lettuce is as perilous as Hemlocke. fo. 64
               Lettuce helpeth the Tertian ague, it looseth the beliye, it represseth drunkennesse. fol 64
               Lettuce procureth sleepe. fo. 65
               Louage helpeth digestion, expelleth superfluous humors, it ceaseth inward griefes, it expelleth poyson, causeth vrine. &c. fol. 170
               Louage expelleth the stone of the kidneys and bladder. &c. fol. 171
            
            
               M.
               Marigold helpeth the after burden of a woman, stayeth the fluxe of pissing of bloud, it killeth the wormes, it healeth pushes, & stoppings, & griefs of the liuer, comforteth the stomacke, and procureth appetite to meate, heateth a cold brest, assuageth the payne of the teeth, it recouereth the palsye, a fitte of the plague, is a preparative agaynste the plague, it helpeth the quartaine, it helpeth the milte or colde stomacke. fo. 32. 33
               Mintes vncurdeth milke. fo. 42
               Mintes staieth the belching of the stomacke and vomiting, it profiteth agaynst the long wormes in the body, it helpeth the swollen priuities, asswageth the fluxe of the bellye, and scouring wyth bloude, it stayeth the reddes in women, it healeth vlcers on the infants heads, quickneth the spirits, bringeth appetite, amendeth the default of the nosethrills, retayneth the fluxes of bloud, softneth the pappes, and defendeth them from mattering: it looseth the bellye, procureth a seemely coloure, profyteth the spitting out of bloude, assuageth the headeache, and the noyse in the eares, it remoueth the dimnesse of sight, it amendeth the strong sauour of the mouthe, it helpeth the teethe, and purgeth the gums, and healeth the blisteryng of the tongue, it comforteth in colde sicknesses, it stayeth the will to vomitte, and helpeth the shingles, it dissolueth and cureth impostumes, and helpeth the spots in the eyes. fol. 43
               Mallows or Holihoke remoue a hotte coughe, recouereth the lungs blistered, and is a singular remedy against the consumption of the lungs, healeth the putrifyed sores of the throat and mouth, looseth the bellye, and helpeth the hoarsenesse of the voyce, it ripeneth any impostume and softeneth it. fo. 44.
               Mustarde seede heateth and ripeneth, it breaketh Impostumes wythoute paine, it cureth the biting of a venemous beaste, it helpeth the palsey of the toung, and auaileth agaynst all palseis, it helpeth the dropsy, the blistering

of the mouth, the swelling of the throate, it procureth a good memory, it helpeth the colde goute, sciaticke, and feeblenesse of sinewes, it remoueth the diuinesse of sighte, and putteth away the spots and web in the eies, it causeth thirst, and prouoketh the veneriall acte. fo. 79
               Mustard seede preuenteth the fallyng sicknesse, it purgeth the brayne, it clenseth the brayne from humoures, it amēdeth the falling of the vuula, and vlcers of the throate, it draweth downe fleume from the heade, it remoueth the swelling of the Jawes, it helpeth the suffocation of the matrice, it ceasseth the ache of the teeth commyng of colde, it breaketh the stone in the bladder, and procureth the Termes, it causeth a cleare voice. fo. 79. 80
            
            
               N
               NAuews nourishe much, profyt the Stomacke, encrease Sperme in man, preuaile against poyson. Folio. 113.
            
            
               O.
               ONions mayntayne health, cure vlcers, remoue spottes on the body, profitte the eares runnyng, healpe swellings in the throat, & the cough, remoue the griefe of the stomacke, open 
                     •
                  iles, cleare the eyes, remoue the pin and web, amende the bloudshotten eyes, recouer the hears shed away, the biting of a madde dogge &c. fo. 93. 94.
               Onions eaten rawe harme the members. fo. 93
               Onions harme the Chollericke, and profite the fleumaticke person. Folio. 94.
               Onions stay the dropping of the eyes, healpe vlcers of the priuities, paine and noise of the eares, Disenteria, griefe of the Loynes, the water beetweene the flesh and the skinne, cure slumbering, and impostumes, payne of the breaste, spittyng of grasse humours, purgeth the stomake, cureth wartes. &c. fo. 94.
               Onions often vsed, engender euill humours, procure thyrste, swellings, windinesse, headeache, cause to become foolyshe, they nourish nothing. Folio. 94.
               Onions twice sodden nourishe. Folio. 95.
               Onions eaten rawe cutte grosse humoures asunder, open the vaynes, prouoketh Termes and vrine, encreaseth appetite, purge the head, remoue the white spots on the face, heale kibes, remoue the redde and wanne spottes of the face, healeth scabbes, assuageth fluxes and gripings in childbed, heale impostumes speedily. fo. 95
            
            
               P.
               PImpernell is especially applied for poyson, it driueth venemous bloude from the hearte, it ceaseth the headache, it healeth a greene wounde, vlcers and other woundes, by an experiment tried vppon a Cocke: It moueth fucate, expelleth poyson, remoueth the disease of the hippes, the coughe, and purgeth the breast, the stone of the kidneys and bladder, and remoueth the strangury: the gripings of the bowels, the stopping of the lyuer and milte, it putteth away any feuer an experiment agaynste the Phisicke of the lungs. fo. 26
               Parsely doeth incarnate Vlcers and Carbuncles, it doth resolue the impostumes of the pappes, it amendeth the stoppyng of the Lyuer, it prouoketh vrine, it stayeth loosenes of the belly, strengthneth loose parts and helpeth the stone, it healeth the shingles, the hardly making of water,

and softeneth the hardnesse of the paps: It helpeth the kidneys, remoueth vlcers out of the mouth, and Jaundise, and healpeth womens monethly course: it is delectable to the stomacke, it expelleth wynde in the body, remoueth scabbes, and maketh a fayre skinne: It helpeth the sweling of the stomack and dropsy, it clenseth the lyuer and leapr
                     •
                  e, and remoueth the paine of the loyns and bladder, it preuayleth agaynst a feuer, it procureth a sound brayne and perfect memory, and purgeth the bloud, assuageth the strangury, and helpeth the byting of a madde dog. fo. 36 37 38
               Parseleye Seedes are the principall causes, the Rootes the nexte, the Leaues as thirde in woorkyng. Folio. 39.
               Purselane assuageth hotte and Chollericke fluxes, and healpeth the burning feuer, healpeth the teeth beyng on edge, healpeth the Shingles, hindereth veneriall acte and abateth sleepe, it expelleth the wormes in the belly, it stayeth the fluxe Disenteria, ceaseth the toothache, it healpeth the stomacke swollen, it cooleth inward heate, amendeth the vlcers on the priuities, it healeth an hotte impostume, it remoueth the vlcers of the head. fo. 68
               Purselane helpeth swollen eyes, and spitting of bloud, it remoueth the burning feuer, it qualifyeth the heat of the stomacke, it stayeth womens monethly course, it stayeth the bleeding at the nose, and the headache, it extinguisheth the heat of the eyes, it staieth Disenteria, it strengthneth both the kidneys and bladder, it helpeth burning Feuers, it kylleth the wormes in the bellye, and stayeth the spittyng of bloude, it healpeth excoriation in womens bowels, and the rawnesse of priuie place
                     •
                   
                  
                     •••
                  
                  peth the headache, it mitigateth 
                     〈◊〉
                   furious heate, it helpeth the nauels of infants, it stayeth the loose teeth in the head, it assuageth the kernels and vlcers in the mouth, it mitigateth the desire of often drinking, it remoueth wartes, it assuageth the goute and inflamation of the pappes the fall of the vuula. &c. fo, 68. 69
               Parsnep and Carote moueth veneriall acte, procureth vrine, and assuageth the Chollicke, sendeth downe the Terms in women, it profiteth the Melancolicke, encreaseth good bloude, healpeth the strayghtnesse of making water, amendeth stitches of the side or pleurisyes, the bitte of a venemous beaste, it amendeth the eating of vlcers, the wearing of this roote is profytable. fo. 12
               Poppy procureth sleepe, healpeth the Reume, coughe, and lacke of sleep. folio. 129
               Poppy recouereth a dry coughe, consumption of the Lungs, Reume, and debilitie in sleeping, it draweth heat out of an vlcer, healpeth a hotte lyver, strengthneth the Joyntes, remoueth the rage of the goute, profiteth agaynst the ague. fo. 130
               Pompons or Mellons, are easye of digestion, comforte the hearte, assuageth vnnaturall heates in the stomacke, they take awaye sunneburning and foule spottes. fo. 154.
               Pompons profit the Reumaticke and Cholericke person. fo. 154. 155
               Pompons which are rounde loose the belly, and cause vrine. fo. 154.
               Pompons assuage the runnyng of the eyes. fo. 155
               Pompons mittigate the veneriall acte, clenseth the skinne, causeth vrine, purgeth the loynes, kidneys, and bladder, heale vlcers, and cause speedy boiling. fo. 155. 156
            
            
               
               R.
               ROchet encreseth the sperm causeth veneriall act, causeth a giddinesse and paine in the head, encreaseth a strong heate, is hurtfull to the head, encreaseth milke in women & nourses, causeth vrine, softneth the bellye, comforteth the stomack, helpeth digestion, recouereth blacke scarres vnto whitenes amendeth pimples, or pushes in the face, kylleth nittes and wormes of the heade, helpeth brused bones, and bitings of venemous beasts, the Jaundise, and hard swelling of the milte. &c. fol. 69. 70
               Rapes or Turnup sharpneth the sight, yeeldeth nourishment, extinguisheth, heate and drye bloud, it sturreth veneriall acte, cureth scabbes, helpeth digestion, hotte goutes, and kibed heeles. fol. 116
               Radishe eaten beefore or after meate causeth winde, dulleth the brayne, eyes and reason. fo. 122
               Radishe profiteth the fleumaticke, helpeth the stone, stopping of the vrine by grauell, procureth vomiting, stareth belchings, the kings euill, the cough, profiteth agaynst poyson, and to the handlyng of serpentes, it helpeth the noise of the eares, the stopping of the liuer, it auaileth agaynst all sortes of poysons and diseases, it cureth strokes of whippes or bruses, it cleareth scarres and pimples in the face, it delyuereth the quartaine ague. fol. 123
               Radishe profiteth agaynst the stopping of the milte, it deliuereth the water betweene the skin, and swollen milt, it eateth oute the Canker of vlcers, amēdeth the olde cough and fleume, it procureth vomitings, it causeth musheroms to digeste, it helpeth gripings in women, procureth milke, sendeth downe the Terms and wormes in the belly, assuageth the swelling in the throate. fo. 124.
            
            
               S.
               Saffron amendeth the hard fetchyng of the breath, procureth a faire colour comforteth the hearte, causeth healthful bloud, remoueth persons from the heart, causeth long breath, expelleth infections, helpeth impostumes in the breast, moueth the veneriall acte, and causeth vrine, helpeth headache, procureth the terms, remoueth the yellowe Jaundise, it profiteth an vlcered brest, stomacke, liuer, lungs, kidneys, & blader, it helpeth the goute, impostumes, swellings, the griefs of any sore, feeblenesse of the hearte, palsy, the griefe of the eyes, the distilling of eyes, remoueth drunckennesse, and diseases of the eares. fo. 110. 111
               Sperage helpeth the palsey, kings euill, strangury, a harde milte, and stopping of the liuer, it recouereth the sheding of the gaule, it remoueth the swelling of the belly, and cholick, it procureth vrine, and dissolueth the smal stones in the bladder, it helpeth the griefs of the womās priuy place, it profyteth agaynste the stinging of Bees, it helpeth the hardly making of water, the paine of the gummes, teeth, mouth, breast, and chine of the backe, it remoueth veneriall act, and looseth the bellye, the dropping payne of the vrine, the difficultnesse of the same, the flix Disenteria: It cleareth the kidneys, and stopping of the liuer. fo. 22. 23.
               Spinage softeneth the belly, moysteneth the body, remoueth the griefes of the breast and lungs, it profeteth in hotte causes, it nourisheth more than arage, it assuageth Cholar, it helpeth the sorenesse of the throate, hoarse voice, the hardnesse of breath the coughe &c. fo. 24.
               Sorrell procureth appetite to meate,

preserveth against yt plague, it ripeneth sores, it assuageth the flix Disenteria, the paine of the bellye, and aborment of the stomacke, it helpeth the leaprye and Ryngwormes, and tough nailes, the ytche of the body, the paine of the eares and teeth, the kings euil, the headache, any sicknes comming of heat, Jaundise, the reds of women, all fluxes of the belly, the swelling of the milte, the burning of the feuer. fo. 25. 26
               Strawberry leaues helpeth hot impostumes. fo. 77
               The Strawbery amendeth the hardenesse of the splene, the stone, healeth woundes and vlcers, procureth the termes, stayeth the bloudy flux Disenteria, and causeth vrine, it helpeth inflamations of the liuer, and clenseth both the kidneys and bladder, it helpeth aches & prouoketh vrine: It fastneth the teethe, and stayeth the reume: it is good for Cholericke stomackes, it putteth awaye the impostumes of the throate, it remoueth the rednes and pimples, which happen on the face throughe the heate of the liuer, it assuageth the rednesse of the eyes, the Jaundise, fetchyng the wind shorte, & cooleth thirst. fo. 78. 79
               Stalions or Squil Oniōs moue veneriall acte, cutte the tough matter in the stomacke. fo. 106
               Squil Onions amendeth the dropsye, the fetching of winde hardly, the defaultes of the liuer, the ague, exulcerations, purgeth fleumes, and the bely, causeth vomiting. fo. 107
               Squil Onions amendeth the harde fetchyng of breathe, an olde coughe, griefs both of lyuer and lungs, expelleth wormes Melancholike, apaplexie, falling sicknes, the stone, purgeth the matrice, cureth the ache of the hips, fasteneth the teeth, amendeth the sauour of the breth, helpeth the hearing, dryueth awaye waries, choppes of the feete, running scabs, the dandry of the head, the bitte of Serpents, procureth heare to growe amendeth foule gummes, the sight of the eyes, griefes of the sides, expelleth all diseases of the bodye: It killeth mice &c. fo. 10.
            
            
               T.
               TIme remoueth ioynte sicknes, purgeth Cholier, and humours, it helpeth the passions of the bladder, the swelling of the bely, it remoueth the grief of the hippes, loyns and sides, it amendeth the breast and the inflamatiōs of Hipochādria or ye flancks, it helpeth melancolike, blearnesse of the eyes, and the paine of them: It assuageth the grief of yt colde goute, the stiffenesse of limmes, it assuageth the swelling of the Testicles, it purgeth the bowells, it helpeth the hard fetching of breath, and falling sicknesse, it breaketh the stone of yt kidneys and bladder, it helpeth the stinging of a Bee. fo. 40. 41
               Blacke time is not to be vsed. fo. 41
               Time whych hath a purpure floure, is commended: all Tyme is mightilye hotte. ibidem.
               Time healeth the bitte of an adder or snake, it helpeth & spitting of bloud, it stayeth the Reume commyng of a colde cause, it caseth the coughe and a cold stomacke, the headache, frensinesse, Litharge, and often slumbering, it openeth the stoppyngs of the lyuer and milte, and moueth vrine, it recouereth the bittes of venemous beastes, it helpeth the swelling in the throate, the cough, and purgeth the breast, it stayeth bloudy vomitings, it heateth the stomacke, it remoueth winde in the bowelles, it easeth the strangury, it moueth vrine, and expelleth the stone. fo. 39
            
            
               
               V.
               VAlerian prouoketh sweate & vrine amēdeth stitches, killeth mice, moueth the terms, preuayleth against the plague, helpeth the straightnesse of breath, the headache, fluxes, and Shingles, procureth clearenesse of syght, and healeth the pyles. fo. 164. 165.
            
            
               VV.
               VVater of the herbe Ualerian distilled amendeth Ulcers, olde sores, swellings, pyles, bones broken, ruptures, cleareth the eyes expelleth worms, it profiteth against a pestilēt aire, impostumes and ache of the hippes, it prouoketh sweat, &c. folio. 165.
               Water of the rootes of Ualerian distilled, remoueth poyson, the quotidian ague, and stitches. fol. 168
               Water of white poppie distilled, cureth the red spots of the face, procureth white handes, it helpeth the headache proceding of heate, it extinguisheth any heate. fol. 131
               Water distilled out of Gourdes, looseth the belly, ceaseth thirst, ye cough, helpeth the stone, purgeth the kydneys and bladder, qualifyeth burning feuers. fol. 150.
               Water of mellons distilled, helpeth the stone, procureth vrine, cleanseth th
                     •
                   kydneys, cooleth the Lyuer, cease
                     ••
                   thirst, breaketh the cough, expell
                     ••
                   heates and swellings. fol. 15
                     •
                  
               
               Water of the blessed Thistle distilled, putteth away headache, comforteth memorie, healpeth giddynesse and all griefes of the eyes, consumption of the bodie, breaketh the stone, and cureth burnings. fol. 160
               Water of the leaues of Elecampane, expelleth the griefe of the stone, helpeth the person broken, comforteth the head, strēgthneth the stomack, amendeth the hard fetching of brea
                     •
                  h the cough, pleurisse, poison, the sto
                     •
                  e and Termes of women, causeth vrine. &c. fol. 172.
               Water distilled out of the root of Elecampane healeth an inner rupture, assuageth the grief of the stone, prouoketh vrine, it sendeth the deade yongling out of the belly, it assuageth the swellings of the testicles, it ceaseth the cough. &c. fol. 175.
               Water of Strawbery leaues distilled, remoueth the kings euill, it looseth the breast, purgeth the lungs, healpeth the cough, clenseth the leaprie, it mitigateth the heate in the eyes, it ceaseth ouermuche sweating, it is healthful for the stopping of the Liuer. fol. 82.
               Water of mustard seedes distilled amendeth vlcers of the gummes, it helpeth the consumption of mēbers, it heateth the marow in the bones, this water profiteth against a colde disease in the ioyntes. fol. 82.
               Water distilled out of Lekes remedieth the spitting of cold bloud, it profiteth a barren woman, it stayeth the bleeding of the nose, it helpeth a costiue belly, and ache of the hyppes, purgeth the kidneys and bladder, procureth vrine, expelleth the stone, healeth woundes, it profyteth exulcerations and fracture of womens places. fol. 88. 89.
               Water distilled out of onyons, recouereth swellings caused by the bit of a mad dogge, aswageth headache and tootache, causeth heares to grow, expelleth wormes. fol. 95.
               Water distilled out of Garlik, helpeth the swellings in the throate, also the greene sicknesse, and swelling of the splene. fol. 104.
               Water distilled out of Rapes, helpeth gallings, burnings, scaldings, swellings of the feete. fol. 117.
               Water distilled out of Radyshe, healpeth

digestion, ye kings euil, worms of the bellye, clenseth the stomacke, it openeth all manner of stoppings extenuateth the humors in the lunges, clenseth the breaste, causeth a cleere voyce. fol. 125.
               Water of Radishe recouereth poysoning taken in meate or drinke, healpeth the Quartaine, draweth downe Termes, and healpeth the stone: assuageth the stinging of a Bee, profyteth against the venim of a spider, healpeth the pryckyng in the syde, cleareth the eyes, and the face: It remoueth yellowe or blackysh spots by beatyng, also the swellyng of the throate, and cleareth the kidneys, breaketh the stone, and causeth vrine, and expelleth the water betwen the skinne. 125
               Water distilled out of Parseneys helpeth the palsy, moueth the veneriall acte, and encreaseth the sperme, helpeth the paynfulnesse in makyng of water. fo. 128
               Water distilled out of the roote of Louage, helpeth an inner rupture, helpeth the stone, prouoketh the terms in women, remoueth the swellings of womens places, and ceaseth the coughe. &c. fo. 171
               Water of Coleworts stayeth womens reddes, it profyteth the byrthe of a childe, the dropping of the vrine, it stayeth a loose belly. fo. 12
               Water of the red Colewortes softneth the belly, putteth away yt giddinesse of the head, healpeth the Apoplexie, the Crampe, Palsey, inflamations, swellings, vlcers within the bodye, and without. fo. 12. 13
               Water of the white Beetes, preuaileth against the stone, it ceaseth the vexing paine of Joynt aches. fo. 15
               Water of Sorrel preuayleth agaynste the plague, it remoueth al inwarde heates, ceaseth thirste, helpeth the liuer and milte, also remoueth the shingles, scaldyngs, or burning, the kings euill, it cooleth the burnyng heate of agues. fo. 27
               Water of pimpernell helpeth stone of the Kydneys and bladder, and purgeth the reines, it healpeth the plague, profyteth women whose matrice is colde, and sendeth down the reds, it helpeth the shakyng of the mem
                  
                     •
                  ers, it expelleth grief from the hart and euill humours, and prouoketh vrine: it profyteth agaynste poyson, and causeth a white skinne. fo. 27
               Water distilled out of Borage, assuageth the gripings & swellings of the bely, it cureth Disenteria, and hardnesse of fetching breath, it comforteth the harte and brayne, and rendereth a helpe to memorye and wit: it purgeth euil bloud and frensinesse, it easeth the stingyng of a Bee or spider, it procureth clearenesse of syghte, it remoueth the ringing and paine in the eares, it comforteth the the harte, it helpeth the reume, burning feuers, and Jaundise, it cooleth the lyuer, it helpeth the flixe disenteria, the paynefull fetchyng of breath, and decay of mind, the weak brayne: it purgeth the bloude and pricking about the harte and breast. it clenseth the scaprie and scabbes, and staieth the stilling of the heade, the headeache, the burnyng of the 
                     ••
                  es, the ringing of the ears, fo. 30. 31
               W
                     ••
                  er of Marigoldes distilled, re
                  
                     ••
                  ereth all defaultes of the eyes, a
                     •
                  d procureth cleare eyes, and also p
                     ••
                  ieth awaye the griefs of the head Folio. 33
               Water of Parseley distilled, profyteth agaynste the stone of the kidneys and loynes, it purgeth the kidneys and bladder, and greatly prouoketh vrine. fo. 39
               Water distilled of runnyng Tyme, strengthneth the heade, brayne, and stomacke, it also procureth appetite

to 
                     •
                  eate, it remoueth the noyse and rumbling of the belly, it softneth the hardnes of the stomache and moueth 
                     ••
                  yne, it comforteth the syght, and consumeth distillations of the head, it helpeth a quotidian ague, it amendeth a cooled lyuer and Mylte, and healeth the bowels exulcerated, it openeth yt sloppyng of nosthrels and eares, it restoreth hearyng, helpeth giddinesse, stayeth desire to vomit, & expelleth the grypings of the belly, it breaketh the stone, and moueth vrine, it cureth brused mēbers. fo. 40
               Water of Marigoldes or holihoke distilled cureth the breaking out of the mouth, as also the outward and inward heates, the Shingles, vlcers, and al swellings, it cureth al inward heates of feuers, it cooleth all impostumes of the lungs and sides, it mitigateth the flux Disenteria, the hot swellings of womēs places, the kidneis & bladder, it expelleth the stone, it procureth sleepe in a hot Feuer, & ceaseth thirst. fo. 44. 45
               Water of Mints distilled, strengthneth the stomake and digesteth the meate receyued, it helpeth the stoppyng of the lyuer and mylte, it openeth the wayes of the vryne, it procureth an appetite to meate, it staieth belching and vomityng, it recouereth a 
                     〈◊〉
                   king breath, and putrified gumme 
                     〈◊〉
                   it stayeth sounding and giddin
                     ••••
                   purgeth the matrice, it dissolue
                     ••
                   milke courded in harde papp
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   healeth ruptures wythin, it restor
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   the vuula fallen, it healeth the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of children, it helpeth wormes, 
                     〈◊〉
                   heateth a colde stomacke. fo. 45. 4
                     •
                  
               
               Water of Lichory cooleth the heate 
                     〈◊〉
                   the stomacke, it preserueth from the plague, it cureth carbuncles, it sta
                     •
                  
                  eth the rising of the lungs, and stoppeth the stipe Disenteria, it openeth the stopping of the Lyver, it helpe
                     ••
                   the swelling of the vuula & throate, helpeth wasted members, & the bit of venemous beasts, helpeth the vlcers in the eyes, and the dimnes of sight, the pinne and web &c. fol. 58
               Water of Lettuce distilled profiteth ye liuer, it cooleth yt bloud inflamed, it stayeth yt flix Disenteria, it amēdeth trembling of mēbers, & helpeth sleep it healpeth women lacking milke, it ceaseth a dry cough, it moltifieth the throte, clenseth the brest and lungs, ceasseth thirst, tēpreth heat of ye stomack, lyuer and kidneys, it looseth the belly. fol. 65.
               Water of Cheruil distilled, helpeth mē bursten, & hurt by grieuous fail, and resolueth the bloud clotted in lūps, it profiteth against the stone of ye kidneis, it looseth the belly, it procureth a good stomack, cōforteth the heart, putteth away shaking of the feuer, is healthfull for the head, and comforteth the senses, it remoueth the paynes of the lungs. fol. 75
               Water distilled of Strawberies, amē
                  deth an vnnatural heat, ceseth thirst proceeding of the liuer, or of choler, it cooleth the liuer, looseth the brest, refresheth the hart, purgeth ye bloud helpeth the kings euil, preuaileth against the stone, loynes & kidneys, it cureth blisters in the mouth, it procureth womens Termes, helpeth a broken legge, healeth al foule legs, it cureth filthy wounds, & assuageth swellings of ye face, helpeth the Lepry, purgeth bloud, remoueth spots out of the eies, & comforteth nature, expelleth poisons, asuageth burning humors, and comforteth conception, stayeth warting in the eyes, & cooleth heat in thē, restoreth a dimme sight, it cureth pimples in ye face. fo. 81. 82.
               Water of Betonie distilled, putteth away dropsy, iaundise & agew, cureth ye diseases of ye kidneys, & milt. fo. 196
            
            FINIS TABVLAE.
            
         
      
   