
      
         
            
            
            A contemplation of Mysteries:
contayning the rare effectes and significations
of certayne Comets, and a briefe
rehersall of sundrie Hystoricall examples, as well diuine,
as prophane, verie fruitfull to be reade in this our age: with
matter delectable both for the Sayler, and Husbandman,
yea and all traueylers by Sea and lande, in
knowing aforehande, howe daungerous a
tempest will succeede, by the sight of
the clowd coming ouer the head,
and other matters fruitful to
be read as shal appere in
the Table next after
the Preface.
            Gathered and englished,
by Thomas Hyll.
            
            ¶Imprinted at London by Henry Denham.
            
               
               
                  TH Aetatis svae 42
                  portrait of Thomas Hill
               
            
            Virescit vulnere veritas.
         
         
            
            To his singuler friend mayster Henrie
Fynche Marchant, Thomas Hyll wisheth
health and felicitie.
            
               IF among friendes, there needes great
and ample giftes, then will not my
pouertie furnishe your expectation.
Large giftes I haue none, the greatest
I am able to shewe, is good will, the
which is gift great ynough, among
right friendes. Therefore forasmuch
as I haue alwayes counted you, as one of my dearest
friendes, and you likewise haue accepted mee among
your friendly fraternitie (I thanke you therefore) I trust
this my remembraunce, shall be a sufficient token and
pledge of my good will. It is not long since I for want
of better furniture, offred you the like token, the which
was of you so gently receyued, as I am not able to tell
well, whether I were more sorie I had no better gift to
gratifie you withall, or wheather I more marueyled at
your curtesie (in so well esteeming) so small a thing, If
I had had better at that tyme, better would I haue bestowed,
as nowe I would also, but as you receyued that
simple and rude thing then in good part, at my handes,
of I againe, trust you will doe nowe no lesse, at thys
time, renuing that friendship, which vnequally of person,
had almost seperated and losed, in so doing, I can
but wishe you well, the which prayer as I am bounde
I will alwayes bestow vpon you. Thus in few wordes
I ende, committing you to God, who graunt you long
health, and prosperitie in this life.
            
               Yours most bounden
Thomas Hill.
            
         
         
            
            The Preface to the gentle
Reader.
            Thought it good (gentle Reader) to admonishe
I thee in two or three lynes, what mine intent & meaning is, in
renuing againe of this little Treatise: for although an indifferent
reader may iudge therof, yet all mens natures not being
a like to auoyde the cauils of busie heades, and the byting speaches
of Zoylus broode, I am aduised to interpret mine owne meaning:
My purpose according to my duetie is to doe good, nature bindeth,
my countrie chalengeth, & euery good man according to his talent
& power ought to fulfil the same. God thretneth: the deuine to such
as will heare, cryeth repentaunce: to such as can not away wyth
that kinde of speache, but desireth sweeter and more delectable
geare, the Player with his stage matters, by an other kinde of more
pleasant meanes admonisheth, and by a plaine demonstration putteth
euery man in minde of his vocation. I professing no diuinitie,
nor yet acquainted with playing inuention, haue by an other meanes
(if it were possible) put thee in remembraunce of thy duetie to
Godward: we see Gods mercifulnesse, hee seldome punisheth but
sendeth before his messengers, tokens and wonders to forewarne
vs, if we were not dulheades, we might perceyue the same, but if we
had grace, we woulde indeuour our selues to amendment.
            Before God destroyed his owne Citie Ierusalem, he caused to
appeare in the element wonderfull and terrible visions. Before the
imperiall seate of Constantine was translated, signes and tokens
were seene in the ayre. God (as wee maye reade in Cronicles) seldome
or neuer made alterations in kingdomes, but he before sent
in Ambassage, his threatning Creatures. To seeke for olde and forraine
examples we neede not, seeing we haue ynough of late dayes
at home, freshe in our memories, as first he by burning his owne
house, brought a present terrour into the mindes of many, and forced
them to call on his name, and generally foreshewed, that as he
spared not that place, wherein his name was dayly called on, no
more would he spare the people, that despised his lawes and ordinaunces
(and soone after) it came so to passe, for when the warnin
                  •
               
woould not be taken, he punished more seuerely: hee sent a gre
                  •
               
mortalitie, and sweeped or tooke away a great number.
            God is iust and mercifull, for iust he is in punishing, and mercifull
in forgiuing. The continual bearing of monsters, the troublesome

Elements, these last two Summers, the vnseasonable weather:
and last of all, the late straunge and wonderfull inun
                  •
               ations, doe
threaten Gods iustice, in punishing the offenders, and his clemencie
and mercie, by fauouring vs so gently. God notwithstanding, that
he threatned Niniuie, by the mouth of his Prophete, yet did hee
mercifully forgiue them, vpon their repentance. God poure out hys
spirite vpon vs, and giue vs his grace to acknowledge and bewaile
our offences, so shall we be spared with Niniuie, and the Lorde will
turne away all his threatnings, into forgiuenesse. It is high time we
repent: God threatneth, we are in daunger, compassed on euery side,
all things are readie, nothing wanteth but Gods permission.
            I haue bene somewhat longer (gentle Reader) than at the beginning
I promised or purposed: yet take this (for breuitie sake)
but for an enteraunce, of a great deale more, that might
aptly be here vttered: the rest vntouched, I commit
to thy iudgement and vnderstanding. Thus
resting, I craue none other than your
friendly report, in furthering
this Treatise.
            Vale feliciter.
         
         
            
            The Table.
            
               THe sundrie definitions, effects, and significations
of Comets. Fol. 1
               The explication or plaine declaration
of the definition. 1
               Of the cōtinuance, & motiōs of Comets. 2
               The place where Cometes often ingendreth.
2
               How some interprete the motion of Comets.
3
               The ende, effect, and significations of Comets.
3
               Sundrie examples of Comets. 5
               Other prodigious tokens. 7
               Of the maruellous nature of Welles, Riuers,
Lakes, and waters. &c. 15
               Of certaine fierie impressions, and first of
the same, named of most men the foolish
fire. 21
               The cause of Castor and Pollux, and where
these ingendred. 24
               Of the flying Dragon in the ayre, what
the same is. 25
               Of the fire cleauing and hanging on the
partes of men, and beastes. 26
               What is to be thought of the flame or fire,
which cleaueth to the heares of the head
and to the heares of beastes. 27
               
                  
Of the feareful gaping, and deepe opening
of the Elements. The definitions. 28
               A difference betweene the gaping, and
deepe opening. 29
               What the efficient cause is. 29
               What the matter and forme is. 29
               What the ende of the gapings be. 30
               How many rainebowes may be seene togither
at one time. 31
               Whereof many Rainebowes proceede. 31
               That three Rainebowes maye appeare at
one time. 32
               In what time of the yeare, Rainebowes for
the more part are caused. 32
               Are not the Rainebowes caused through
the beames of the other starres. 33
               Of the windes. 34
               Certaine properties of the windes. 34
               Certaine obseruations of the windes. 37
               Of the impressions, named Parelia, and
Paraeselinae. The definitions. 48
               The similitude. 42
               The ende and effect of these. 42
               Certaine examples of these. 43
               Of thunder what the same is. 45
               The kindes of thunder. 46
               What the finall cause of the thunder. 48
               
                  
What the coulours of the clowdes warne
and foreshew in the thunders. 48
               Certaine foreknowledges of thunder. 50
               Of that lightning named Fulgur, what the
same is, and of the others. 52
               Of the fearefull and violent lightning. 54
               What the lightning Dart is. 60
               The manner of the ingendring of the
Stone. 60
               Of the maruellous force, nature, and miracles
of the lightnings. 61
               What an Earthquake is. 65
               How manye kindes of Earthquakes there
are. 66
               What the ruine is. 66
               What the Gaping is. 66
               What the Pulsation is. 67
               What the fourth kinde is. 67
               What the materiall cause is. 68
               What the formall cause is. 69
               Which the obiect or place is of the Earthquake.
70
               How the ingendring is, or of the maner of
the ingendring of Earthquakes. 71
               What the finall causes are. 72
               What the effects are. 74
               Which the signes be of an earthquake. 74
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶A briefe Catologue of
rare wonders, and fearefull
sightes, seene aswell on earth,
as in the element.
            
               The sundrie definitions, effects, and
significations of Comets.
               
                  A Comet, after the opinion
of Albertus, is
an earthlye grosse vapour,
whose partes much
gather to it, ascending
from the lowest parte of
heat, vnto the vpper part
of the same: where, ye fire that toucheth the
holownesse, there shed forth and burning, so
that it often sheweth long, & sheddeth out.
               2. A Comet is a hote and drie matter,
fatte, discous, and earthly, whose partes be
thicke, drawne vp by vertue of the celestiall
bodies, vnto the vpper regiō of the aire,
where through the nearenesse of the fire,
and might of the substaunce set on fire, and
caried circularely with the motion of the
vpper region of the aire, which drawne by
that motion, is so caried about.
               
                  
3. A Comet, after the opinion of Leopoldus,
is an earthly vapour, hauing grosse
partes mightily thickning togither, ascending
by vertue of starres, vnto the vpper
parte of heate, where being kindled, and caried
circularely with the aire: signifieth the
alteration of kingdomes, and other great
matters in this worlde.
               4. A Comet is an earthly exhalation,
hote and drie, fatte and clammie, with the
partes thicke gathered, by vertue of the
starres, and drawne from the bowels of the
earth by little and little, and perticularlye
vnto the vpper region of the aire, where,
nighest the fire, through the disposition and
multitute of the matter is dilated, & being
kindled burneth, & wyth a long tract shedde
forth, is circularly moued, after the condition
and maner of a starre, vnder which,
it is gathered, or vnder the circulare motion
of the vpper region of the aire.
            
            
               The explication or plaine declaration
of the definition.
               THis larger definition and description,
contayneth the causes and maner of the
increasing of the Comet, and the same sufficient

clearly: for it must nedes insue, that
the substaunce of a Comet, to be an earthly
and viscous exhalatiō, or otherwise it would
soone be wasted, of the burning colour: and
the space of time is most short, in which a
Comet is séene, as not continuing aboue
seuen dayes: yet a Comet appeareth, and
is séene manye tymes for. 40. dayes togither,
or somewhat longer, vntill all the
substance of it in the burning, be in the end
consumed, being also drawne with this circulare
motion most swift. Although Plinie
witnesseth, that Comets haue beene séene,
which were as immooueable in the place.
            
            
               Of the continuance, and motions
of Comets.
               
                  CArdanus writeth, that the longest time
of them (except by miracle) doth scarcely
exceede six moneths, so that (for the most
part) the substance of a Comet, is spent by
the thirtie day, or sooner: but neuer ending
before the seuenth day. The motion of a
Comet, is thrée maner of wayes: the one
from the Cast, into the West: the seconde
from the West, into the East: and the
thirde diuers, as from the West into the

South, or from the North into the West:
the excéeding greatnesse, and most spéedie
increase of them is marueylous, in that appearing
at the first, but a foote brode, doe after
a fewe dayes, occupie a fourth part of
the Zodiacke.
            
            
               The place where a Comet often
ingendreth.
               A Comet (after the minde of Cardanus)
is oftner engendred in the North, and
especiallye (in that part of heauen) named
the Milkie way, from the Tropickes without:
yet are they gathered and caused, somtimes
vnder the Equinoctiall, & somtimes
nighe the Winter Tropicke, and else
where: but oftner (as I haue sayde) about
the North, in which part I obserued (sayth
Cardanus) thrée Comets in thrée seuerall
yeres. In the night, after the Euening, are
Comets apparantly séene: yet not the like
in the day, except by a mightie meanes and
occasion. It is manifest, that many Comets
may be séene togither: as in the age
of Carolus Martellus, in the month of Ianuarie,
were two Comets séene within
fourtéene dayes togither, of which the one

went before the Sunne, and the other folowed
him, with the 
                     •
                  ayles looking and stretched
toward the North: and this hapned
in the yeare of mans redemption, seuen hū
                  dred
twentie and sixe. Two other Comets
appeared togither, in the yeare of mannes
health, 1337. which not in a short time, in
that as companions they ended togither after
two monthes complete. And to the learned
it is well knowne, that if they happen
with an Eclips, then through the vertues
doubled, they produce much more, and
daungers long continuing.
            
            
               How some interprete the motion
of Comets.
               THere be some (sayth Cardanus) which
thus write of Comets: that if they
tende toward the South, such signifie raine
to insue: if vnto the North, then drought to
follow, if vnto the East, then the pestilence,
and other mightie daungers: if vnto the
West, then the best or a happie yeare, and
temperate. And the like Porphirius (that
worthie Philosopher) wrote, but as I suppose
deceyued in this, séeing a Comet procéeding
against the order of the signes, doth

signifie the mutation of lawes: for yt cause,
the Comet which tendeth from the East
into the West, signifieth the alteration of
lawes, in that it is caried agaynst the order
of the signes: so that when it may signifie
the same alone, it happeneth that a temperate
yeare followeth, yet doth it not signifie
the temperament of the yeare. The kinds
and sundrie formes of Comets, maye you
learne in my booke of the Myrrour of time,
with other profitable matters.
            
            
               The ende, effect, and significations
of Comets.
               THe ende of Cometes, is to prepare
drought, the Pestilence, hunger, battels,
the alteration of kingdomes, and common
weales, and the traditions of men. Also
windes, earthquakes, dearth, land
                     •
                  louds,
and great heate to follow. The sayde Comets
portende, both many other harmes,
and that mightie to men.
               2 A Comet is the note of a great drougth
in that a meane heate cannot resolue such 
                     •
                  
matter out of the earth, and draine th
                     •
                  
same vp.
               3 The second effect of a Comet is barrennesse

of the earth, hunger, and the
dearth of vittayles, in that the earth is caused
barren through much drougth, and lack
of moysture, for drougth is as the stepmother
vnto all fruites, and corne of the earth
                     •
                  
but moysture is the apt mother vnto all
fruites, and crescent things on the earth.
So that such a mightie heat, doth excéedinglye
drie vp the earth, and consumeth the
moysture in plantes, and trées, through
which, they decay, and heare no yéelde, no
                     •
                  
                  store
of fruite. Or thus.
               A Comet doth cause harrennesse of the
earth, in that vnto a Comet, a great and
much exhalation is required, by whose eleuation
from the earth, the fatnesse of the
earth is so drawne vp, which thus eleuated,
the earth after becommeth harren of yéeld,
and the moysture with which the earth
ought to be battened, is then through the ouermuch
drougth vtterly depriued. For
whiche cause, a Comet is the fore note of
hunger, and dearth in the same Realme:
which it specially beholdeth or stretcheth
the tayle towardes, and from whence it gathered
and tooke his substance.
               4 Comets doe portend the murraine of

beastes, in that the ayre ensuing is infected
and euill disposed, through the hote, grosse,
and clowdy exhalations: which when beasts
draw thereof, are then intoxicated and infected,
and so die. Also for that the time then
is excéeding hote, and the radicall moysture
is on such wise drawne vp by the hote aire,
from the bodies of men and beastes, in whō
the naturall moysture is placed, as in the
proper seate: of the same beastes, and other
liuing creatures die: for which cause, it is
the minde and councell of the learned Phisitions:
to vse in the same time, moyst and
colde meates, wherby the radicall moysture
may so be increased and preserued.
               5 Comets mooue battels and seditions,
and alter Emperies, and kingdomes: for
that in the time of a Comet, are many exhalations
in the ayre, hote & drie, which doe
drie men, and kindle heat in them, by which
they are lightly prouoked to yre: after which
yre ensueth variance, next of the same followeth
battell, and after battell succéedeth
the translation or alteration of gouernements,
when as the Emperie ensueth the
conquerour.
               6 Comets do portend the death of princes,

kings, gouernors, & other Magistrates
of a cōmon weale: in that these leade a more
daintie life, and féede on finer meates continuallye,
through which they sooner be infected.
The death besides of princes, and
heade gouernors, through the difference of
many, is of worthier report and fame, and
for yt cause more obserued. To these I adde,
that the Choloricke persons are then vehementer
mooued, through which, the perturbations
or troubles of mind ensue, that procure
seditions and battels, after which procéede
oftentimes the slaughter of many, and
death of princes: for that these many tymes
be present in battailes, and are lightly prouoked
to yre, by which the battell ensueth
the fiercer: and on such wise, many come
to their death. Macrobius left in writing,
that the death of Constantine, was indicated
by a Bushie starre, of an excéeding bignesse,
that appeared in the yeare after
Christes birth. 304.
            
            
               Sundrie examples of Comets.
               THat singuler Philosopher Augustinus
Niphus writeth, that after the appearing
of a Comet, in the yeare 1506. there

followed within two yeares, such a mightie
drougth in Lumbardie, that from Ianuary
vnto the moneth of Nouember, there fell no
raine at all, in that Countrie.
               In the yeare of our Lorde. 1165. appeared
a mightie Comet or blasing starre in
Scotland, reaching & burning out with two
most long beames or tayles: after which,
(within .xiiij. dayes) Malcolmus the fourth
king by name of the Scottes, dyed a mayden,
as the Chronicle reporteth.
               In the yeare of our Lorde. 1214. in the
moneth of March, appeared two fearefull
Comets in Scotland, the one going before
the Sunne, and the other following him:
after which (the same yeare) when as that
most happie and good king William had
reigned. 49. yeares, he then dyed an olde
man.
               In the yeare, 1268. there appeared a
Comet of a maruellous bignesse about the
noonestéede, which was séene for manye
dayes togither in Scotlande. And in the
yeare of our Lorde. 1271. after: and in the
ix. day of Ianuarie, there arose such a cruell
winde, and mightie tempest withall, and
hayle stones of such a bignesse, that through

the same many houses in Scotlande were
throwne down, & burned with fire, through
the windes which kindled after the same,
that they there kept in their houses, for the
vse of fire: that the whole Country in a maner,
was wasted by the fire.
               In the yeare of our Lord. 1538, and in the
eightéene day of Ianuarie: there appeared
a Comet after the setting of the Sunne,
which was placed in the signe Pisces, and
the tayle looking or stretching towarde the
East, after which, died immediately the
Duke of Saronie.
               In the yeare of our Lorde. 1539. and
the sixt daye of the moneth of Maye, appeared
a Comet in the signe Taurus, not
farre from the head of the Dragon, which
indured burning, for thrée wéekes in a maner:
after which died Isabell of Portugall,
the wife of Charles the fift Emperor, in the
trauaile of childe.
               In that yeare died George Duke of Saronie,
of an olde and crude rupture: before
whose death, as some write, there appeared
thrée Comets, after the appearaunce of
which, died the Duke of Cleaue, the bishop
of Trident, and diuers other noble persons

and Capitaines.
               In the yeare. 1540. began a great coniunction
of Saturne and Mars, which hapned
in Cancer: after which followed a
marueilous drougth, aboue many sommers
before, so that hay, corne, and all kinde of
pulses, became very scarce.
               And this drougth folowed rather (as some
write) after the apperaunce of a Comet the
same yeare, and great Eclips of the Sunne
which happened the seuenth day of Aprill,
whose beginning was before the Sunne rising,
and endured in this Eclips two whole
houres, after the Sunne was risen: vppon
which followed at Prage (a noble Citie in
the kingdome of Boheme) that the Castell
with the Cathedrall Church, were burned
with fire: and many fearefull fiers hapned
often, in sundrie places, as the same had
bene by a diuine punishment from heauen.
And a Commotion hapned the same yeare,
among the Citizens of Gaunt, which
Charles the fift Emperour stayed by hys
wisedome.
               Many examples more of Comets, might
here be vttered, which for breuitie in so smal
a treatise omitted, and the rather, for that I

haue at large written of them, and other
weightie matters right necessarye, in my
booke to come forth, named the Myrrour of
tyme.
            
            
               Other prodigious tokens.
               IN the yeare. 1542. were many straunge
children, and monstruous beastes séene:
and in that yeare it rayned bloud at Sassen
burge in Germanie. And in Phriseland
that yeare, arose a certaine Prophet, named
George Dauid, declaring himselfe to bée
Gods nere kinsman, and one that coulde
counterfaite the speach of beasts, and birds,
affirming also heauen to be empty, and many
other blasphemies he vttered besides.
               In the yeare of our Lorde. 1545. and in
the seuenth day of August, about .xi. of the
clock in the morning, happened such a fearfull
tempest at Machlin, as the like was
neuer heard of: for a mightie thunder came,
which shooke the earth, in such maner, that
the people of that Citie, thought Doomes
day at hande, or ruine of the Citie present:
In that after the same was heard, a horrible
cracke in the cloudes, and a darcke lightning,
very sore stinking of Brimstone hapned,

which so feared them, that no
                     ••
                  e knew
                     ••
                  
what to thinke or doe, nor what succéeded of
the same (saue onely such, which the tempest
had striken) vntill the brute and noyse ra
                     •
                  
in the Citie, that the lightning had smitte
                     ••
                  
the Sandgate, in which lay aboue .viij. hundreth
Barrelles of Gunpowder, whose sodaine
bursting forth, caused such a mightie
confusion in the Citie, that no man euer
sawe the like destruction in that Countrie:
for the Sandgate was blowne vp, at the
turning of a hande, into very small partes:
and not onely the foundation of the same sorent,
but the stones of the walles fast by, likewise
blowne vp, and scattered abrode: yea,
the pittes, & welles with water there about,
through the mightie heate of the powder set
on fire, were sodenly dryed vp. And on the
next morrow folowing, vewing the harmes
about the Citie, there were found about the
compasse of the scattering of the Tower, of
dead bodyes, vnto the number of thrée hundred:
and halfe a hundred grieuously wounded.
Besides these, a womā minding at that
instaunt, to that the leafe wyndowes of hir
Hall or Parlour, for the great feare of the
tempest, had hir head pittifully smitten off

And in a certaine Inne, were at that time,
a certaine companye playing at Cardes,
which altogither were founde stricken in
péeces, and all the other parsons of the house
pyttifully dead, except the good wyfe, which
went at that instaunt, to drawe drinke for
them, in a déepe seller, who by that meanes
was preserued. And many other grieuous
sightes happened in that fearefull tempest.
To conclude, the Citie was maruellouslye
spoyled thorow out, and no Church in that
Citie, but grieuously shaken with this tempest,
yea whole stréetes subuerted.
               In the yeare of our Lorde. 1547. at Heluetia
in Germany, were séene in the ayre,
two hostes of men of warre, and two mightie
Lyons gréeuously and terribly fighting
togither so long, vntill it séemed that the one
byt of the others head quite. And in ye twelfe
day of Aprill, the Sunne appeared at after
noone, for thrée dayes togyther, lyke a fyrie
Globe, in such manner, that the Starres,
were then séene: after which, folowed a grieuous
battle, betwéene Charles the fift
Emperour, and the Duke of Saxonie, betwéene
Mulberge, and Wyteberge: at
the ende of which battell, Iohn Frederick
                  
Electour, became prisoner vnto the Emperour.
               At that tyme also was séene in another
place, in a cleare day, a whyte Crosse,
with a rodde by it, in the skie.
               In the yeare of our Lorde. 1548. and in
the tenth day of Februarie, was séene in
Saxonie (a countrie of Germanie) a fyre
from heauen, that fell on certaine cities.
               Also two Hostes of men of warre, were
séene in Saxonie in the ayre, running and
skirmishing togyther, and dyuers other
straunge sightes besides, were séene in the
ayre, in that yeare.
               In the yeare of our Lorde. 1551. and in
the .xiij. day of Ianuary, arose a mightie
tempest in sundry places of Germanie, with
many showers of rayne, lightnings, and
thunders, in so much that the men of that
countrie, thought Domes day at hande, yea
to be present.
               And in the .xxviij. daye of Ianuary, at
Lysebone, in the chiefe citie of Portugall,
appeared a bloudie rodde, and sundrie fearefull
fyres séene in the aire, and rayned there
bloud, after which followed such a fearefull
earthquake, that about two hundred houses

were grieuously shaken & throwne downe,
through the fall of which, about a thousand
persons were lamentably slayne.
               And in the .xxi. day of March, at Magdeburge
in Germanie, about seauen of the
clocke in the morning, were seauen Raynebowes,
and thrée Sunnes séene: and in the
euening (the same day) thrée Moones, of
which the first, and perfiter Moone, was
séene towardes the citie of Magdeburge:
but the second as bloudie, towardes Pago
Desdorf: and the thirde shyned bloudie,
towardes the newe citie (so named) in Germanie.
               And in the .xxj. day of Aprill, appeared agayne
at Magdeburge, thrée Sunnes, and
thrée Rainebowes: after which, by the commaundement
of Charles the fift Emperor,
was this citie besieged, by the Duke of Saxonie,
and Albert of Brandenburge, for
fiftene Moneths: and at the length a peace
concluded, by wicked conditions. For after
the peace stablished, certayne of the gouernours
and Capitaines drewe togither a battle
against Charles Emperour, vpon that
tytle, for the defence of the Germayne
libertie.
               
                  
In the yeare of our Lorde. 1553. was
heard a wofull crye, saying woe, woe, twise
togither: there was heard also the sounde of
Belles, and the noyse of Trumpets: and
the same tyme there happened at Duringia,
that the trées, & herbes, sweate bloud,
and fearefull noyses heard besides, sundrie
nightes: after which Mauricius Duke of
Saxonie, fought in battle with Albert of
Brandenburge, at which season Mauricius
smitten with the pellet of a Gunne, dyed the
thirde day after the battle.
               In the yere of our Lord. 1554. and in the
first day of Februarie, in the Citie of Cathalane
in Fraunce, and after the great
goodly shewe and muster of souldiours, by
the commaundement of the French king:
there appéered a maruellous sight, about the
Moone, like vnto a great fyre, arysing from
the East part, and stretching, or declyning
toward the west: and the Moone shewed like
to a most great fyrebrande: and this fyre in
the ayre, burned with a great noyse and often
casting forth flames, and sparkes of fire,
in the lyke maner as a hote burning yroi
                     •
                  
                  barre,
beaten on an handueale by a Smith.
               The .xxvj. day of May, it rayned bloude,

not farre from the towne of Dunckelspull
in Germanie.
               And there were séene thrée faire Rainebowes,
and so many Sunnes, and Moones,
and two bloudie crosses.
               In another place also were séene sixe, & the
sunne then appéering feareful in the rising,
as one daye gréene of colour, another day
blackish or swart in colour, ye third morning
red, and at the setting bloudy: & in other places
apéered black round bodies, both reddish
and firie of colour, as they were beating the
sunne, and séemed fighting with him: and it
rayned besides bloud, in many places.
               In the .xj. day of Iune, fiue Myles from
Noriberge in Germanie, was séene in the
sunne, a bloudie rodde, and many companies
of horsemen dashing togither in the
ayre: which so contynued for two howres,
that it caused men greatly to feare, that
Domes day was at hand: after which died
the same yere, Frederick Duke of Saxonie:
& after the same, was a notable towne
in Germanie pittifully wasted by fyre.
               In the yeare of our Lorde. 1555. were
séene in the citie of Duringia, thrée sunnes,
the tenth day of February, in the same Duringia,
                  
was a gaping open of the earth,
out of which came a mightie stinck, which
verie much molested the lookers on, wyth
the beating paines of the head: yet certaine
further examining the place, obserued and
sawe wythin that great clift, straunge
formes in the night, and many great matters
besides heard.
               At Luneberge, was séene this straunge
sight in the ayre, a great company of Souldiars:
at the right hande of which company,
stoode by an Aungell holding a fyrie sworde
in his hande: and a childe was there in presence
among ye people by a sodaine meanes,
who did earnestly exhort euery one, to harty
repentance: affirming Gods iudgement at
hand, and to be the day of yre, and the day of
calamitie & misery, and that the same to be a
verie great and bitter daye: when he had
thus exhorted the people, he vanished sodainly
awaye, and out of sight: so that no man
after, could tell where he became.
               In this yeare hapned at Duringia, the
harde and daungerous birth of a woman
who had a sore trauaile in the birth of hir
childe: for after long trauayles, the chyld
                     •
                  
brast forth with a great crack and noyse

and deade borne: after which issued great
plentie of fyre, which so harmed the yongling
in the neather partes, that blisters arose
on the skinne, so bigge swollen, as an Egge
in sight, and hir owne face harmed with the
fyre: that fyre besides issuing forth of hir body,
infected the proper place, with a Brimstony
stinck.
               In the Dukedome of Brunswike, was a
marueylous and straunge sight, marked of
many there, which was on this wise. A certaine
husbandman, which accustomed daylie
to go vnto the wood (to fetch wood home)
and drawing néere to the accustomed place
of the wood (at a certaine time) sawe a farre
off, a great companie of horsemen, which
séemed to come ryding in great haste towarde
the village. This seing, the husbandman
returned for the great feare, hastily
backward againe: and being come home so
amased, was demaunded the cause of hys
hastie returning, who answered, that there
were certaine companies of horsemen néere
the towne approched: but from whence they
came, or whether they would, he could not
say: therfore greatly to be doubted (said he)
that these newe guestes will set vpon vs in

the night time. Which tale so amazed the
elders of the towne, that for the great feare,
they tooke councell togither, what was best
to doe in the matter: after the well debating
on the fearefull newes, they issued altogither
out of the towne, to knowe and vnderstande
further the intent of these newe
guestes, what they were, from whence they
came, and whether they purposed to go: and
being thus come forth togither out of the
towne, founde and sawe a like company of
horsemen (as the husbande man had before
reported) drawing towards them, which
séemed to their sight, to be in number foure
hundred horsemen, ryding and comming
towardes them in due order: after which,
they sawe the fore frunt turned, and readie
prest to fight, and the other company comming
ryding a farre off, addressed in like order:
which companies thus preparing forwarde
to come togither, and standing yet
in a readinesse to fight: two black men (to
their sight) alighted from their horses, which
séemed to be Captaines: and eche appéered
valyauntly to encourage his companye to
fight: they thus boldened to fight, behelde
one the other, as readie prest, and in a readinesse:

after which, the two Capitaynes
againe lept on horseback. Whiles these two
companies yet stoode in a readinesse, a marueylous
darknesse hastily came in the place,
that it séemed farre in the night: by which
these husbandmen perceyued, (y• this sight
of the horsemen) was none other, then a deuillish
illusion, or méere falsehood of spirites.
               In the bownds of Polonia were séene a
marueylous company of Dogs, barcking,
and fighting togither, insomuch that manye
were torne in that broyle to péeces. After
which folowed, great warres, and slaughter:
betwéene them of Polonia, and the
Muscouites.
               
               In Duringia, being a bright day, there
appéered in the ayre, a bright and glittering
sworde, much like to a Fauchine or Turkie
blade: directing the point toward the South,
and the edge toward the East.
               And in Cleuelande, fell so great aboundance
of fyre from heauen into the Rhene,
that the Riuer began to swell, as though it
had boyled.
               In the yeare of our Lorde. 1557. and in
the ninth daye of March: there were séene
thrée sunnes, and a verie faire Rainebow.
               
                  
In the .xvij. daye of March, there fell
fyre from heauen: and in an other place, a
fyrie Globe was séene: it rayned also bloud,
and lumpes of bloud, vnto the bignesse of
ones hande, dropped from heauen, vnto
the sight of many: and in all the drops were
séene, like to mens faces. And on saint Laurence
daye, the Sunne appeared wholy
bloudy: after which, ye French king fought a
great battaile, wt Philip king of Spaine, and
after that, S. Quintins takē by king Philip.
               In the yeare of our Lorde. 1558. appeared
a Comete verie fearefull, which continued
burning manye wéekes: after which,
was séene a straunge sight, fearefull to beholde.
For in the .xxj. day of August, the day
being cleare and caulme weather, and sufficient
temperate, two houres before noone,
and a quarter: the Sunne very cleare shyning,
was then séene inclosed about, with a
great circle, which appéered of many colours,
like to the Rainebow, and continued
in like condition, for foure howers, and a
halfe, vnto the great feare, and amazement
of all such, which regarded the same sight:
for it is written, that such straunge sightes,
haue in times past béene séene, which alwayes

were foreshewers of fearefull daungers
at hande: as appéered by the same,
which Plutarche writeth, that such a fearefull
sight foreshewed the death of the mightie
Cesar, and the great scarcitie and dearth
of all fruites of the earth, that insued the
same yere: and euen the like hapned, when
Octauius abode at Rome, that the Sunne
was compassed with suche a cyrcle, after
which often commosions and tumults, & the
lamentable harmes of lyghtnings ensued.
               Such a Rainebow also appéered timely
in the morning about the Sunne, in the sixt
Calendes of February, & in the yere of our
Lorde. 1074. after which folowed the great
conspiracie of Princes, against Henry the
fourth of ye name, Emperor of ye Germains.
               In the yeare of our Lorde. 1107. a lyke
cyrcle about the Sunne was séene: after
which insued, the great dissention among
christian Princes.
               In the yere also of our Lord. 1157. on the
thirde Calendes of Iune, about noone, such
a straunge shew was séene: after which, the
euersion or destruction of many cities, & the
scarcitie of fruites of the earth, through the
great distemperance of the ayre insued.
               
                  
Many cities also were pittifully burned in
Suetia, after the appearance of such a sight,
hapning in the yeare of our Lord. 1322.
               In the yere of our Sauiour Christ. 1387.
such a cyrcle about the Sunne, foreshewed
battayles, hunger, fyres, and pittifull landfloodes.
               A like cyrcle to Halo appéered, before the
battayle with the Turks, in the yere. 1532.
by which is manifest, that such sightes are
foreshewers of euils to come.
               In the yeare of our Lorde. 1559. with the
great tempest risen at Fryburge, certaine
fyrie Globes fell out of the clowds not farre
from the Citie, & much or often lightnings
with thunder, which lamentably burnt the
grasse, hops, herbes, and leaues of trées:
the tempest increased, a hande was séene
stretched in the aire, for an hower in a maner,
which at length by drawing and folding
the fingers togither (in grinding it
selfe) was turned into powder, which powder
falling to the earth, vanished away.
               In the yeare. 1560. waters brake in, and
ouer ranne much grounde, in sundrie places,
to the great hurt and losses of manye
men, in that their closes and Medowes

were much harmed, with the clamminesse
of the waters bursting in. The same yeare
dyed that singular, learned, and godly
man (worthy memorie) Philip Melanchtone,
who lefte behinde hym these comfortable
verses, that he made a little before
the agonie of death, which he still repeated,
vntill life left him.
                     Cur mortem metuā: mors non est, mortis imago est.
                     Sed merito vitor Christe benigne tuo.
                     Vermis adhuc spiro moriturus forte sub horam
                     Mors etenim certa est, funeris hora later.
                     Ergo Gnate Dei iam me tibi porrigo totum,
                     Viuam seu moriar, sanguine viuo tuo.
                  
               
               In the yeare of mans redemption. 1561.
manye Gunnes through Germanie were
séene in the ayre, shooting of pellets into the
Sunne.
               In the .xvij. daye of December, fower
sunnes were séene in the East, casting forth
gréene
roddes on euerie side, to the great
feare and amazement of the beholders.
               Heauen séemed to burne, & a fyrie Globe
shyned from the North part, with a mighty
light in heauen.
               In the kingdome of Naples, were fiue
Castels, and a Byshoprick suncke with an

Earthquake, and a water nauigable vanished
the whole, in such maner, that no
monument or part at all is left to be séene:
yea a whole citie so sunck into the earth,
that no perseuerance of it at all remayning
at this day.
               From the .xvj. vnto the .xviij. day of Nouember,
the riuer Tyber cast vp a mighty
number of dead fishes.
               In the yeare of our Lorde. 1562. Heauen
séemed to burne, to the sight of much
people, in many places of Germany. And a
celestiall fyrehrande stretched from the
North into the South, shyned by night in
heauen. A mightie company of armed men
or souldiours, were séene in the ayre, which
as some affirme, séemed in the ayre to shed
downe much bloude from heauen. And the
Sunne in the Moneth of Aprill, séene marueylous
bloudy, as well at the rysing, as at
the setting, for thrée dayes togither. The
ymage also of our Redéemer crucified, was
séene sprinckled all ouer with bloud, in the
Moneth of Aprill.
               Whilst the mightie Emperour Ferdinandus
kept his royall Court at Prage, the
chiefe citie in Bohemia, it hapned that

Peason were miraculously chaunged into
stones, after this manner. A certaine
husbandman, had brought certaine sackes
of Peason to the citie, to be solde: to whom
a Citizen for the penurie of victuals came,
and required him to sell better cheape, then
he had accustomed to doe: who that was a
cruell and couetous man, prayed to God,
that his Peason rather might be chaunged
into stones, then he woulde sell them one
mite better cheape: incontinent after the
Citizen departing from him, the Peason
were al miraculously chaunged into stones:
a marueylous spectacle in déede of Gods
wrath and due punishment, for his canckred
and wicked stomack.
               To conclude, we may by these fearefull,
wonderous, and straunge sightes, as well
on earth, as in the ayre, learne that God by
them doth marueylously foreshewe, his blessed
will, and condigne punishment, for the
sinnes of the people: and that in such sort to
declare, the calamities to come vpon vs: by
shewing aforehande, such straunge sightes,
and fearefull threatnings in the ayre: vnto
the admonishment of vs, for the correcting
of sinne, if by these and such lyke, we wyll

be warned at all.
            
            
               Of the maruellous nature of Welles, Riuers,
Lakes, and waters: to which the
Phisitions denie, a reason to
be assigned.
               DIuers are the natures, and miracles of
Welles, Ryuers, Lakes, and waters:
the cause of which, is eyther hid wholy from
vs, or in search verie harde to be vnderstanded:
as by Examples here vnder, shall plainer
appéere.
               1. First there is a swéete running ryuer
in the Countrie of Italie: which by his propertie,
causeth the Oxen drinking thereof,
to become through whyte of heare, all the
body ouer. Propert. lib. 3.
               2. In Boetia, there is a ryuer named
Melas, being of such a propertie, that shéepe
drinking of ye water of that ryuer, chaunge
and beare after black woole.
               3. Seneca wryteth of a Well, of such a
propertie, that what person drinketh thereof,
the heare of the head shall after become
yealow of colour.
               4. In Libia there is a Well, which at
the rysing, and setting of the Sunne, is

founde hote: but at noone this Well, is tried
most colde, and at midnight verie hote.
               5. Seneca wryteth of certayne Welles,
being of straunge properties: of which the
one and first, is a Well of such a propertie,
that who drinketh of the same, doth dye
through the mightie poysoning thereof.
               The other is a Well of such a propertie,
that throwing péeces of woode into the
same Well, they after were turned into
stones.
               He wryteth of an other Well, being
of such a propertie, that what persons drink
of the water of the same, shall after become
starke mad.
               An other Well there is, of suche a propertie,
that what parsons drinke thereof,
it giueth them memorie.
               He witnesseth also of an other Well,
of such a condition, that by drinking therof,
it procureth forgetfulnesse.
               6. There is another Well of such a nature,
that what persons drinke thereof, become
soone after frantick.
               7. An other Well there is, of a maruelous
propertie, that what persons drinke of
the water, it sodainely moueth and stirreth

forward, the lust of the body: of which condition,
the Well of Salmacis in Caria, is
misreported to be: the causes of which are
the Herbes, Stones, and Mynes, by which
these passe: in which such a hid propertie procured,
of so marueylous effects, consisteth.
               8. In Egypt, there is a Well of such a
propertie, that quencheth light fyrebrands
in the same (as reporteth Augustus) they
forthwith are put forth: and those quenched,
are by the water of the same well kindled.
               9. With the black Moores (named Garamantes)
is a Well of suche condition,
which in the daye time is knowne to bée so
colde, that no person can drinke therof: and
in the night time, it is founde so hot, that no
creature is able to beare or abide the heat o
                     •
                  
the same.
               10. In a certaine learned worke of Cos
                     •
                  mographye,
is reported, that in the Countrie
of Sicilia, was in time past a Well of
such a nature: of which when Théeues o
                     •
                  
robbers had dronke, they immediatly became
blinde.
               11 In Idumea a region in Siria, ioy
                     •
                  ning
to Egypt, was a Well in tyme past
                     •
                  
of such a propertie, that would for thrée Moneths

togither appeare troubled, other thrée
Moneths founde bloudie, other thrée Moneths
séene gréene, and other thrée Moneths
knowne and tryed cléere.
               10. There was a Well knowne, of such
condition, that for sixe howres the same was
found full of water, and running ouer, and
other sixe howres séene quite empty and dry:
the cause of which (as Seneca wytnesseth)
is the proportion of the vapour eleuating the
waters: and the ebbing and flowing also of
the Sea neare by.
               11. In the hill named Anthracius, is a
Well reported to be, which is noted of
such a propertie: that when ye same is found
full of water to the brim, that then it pronounceth
a firtill yere to insue: but when
the same Well is séene verie lowe, and in a
maner emptie of water, then foloweth a
dearth the same yeare.
               12 In Hungarie, is a certaine little riuer
or brooke affirmed to be, which is noted
of such a propertie, that who casteth yron
into the same, it will in short tyme after be
chaunged into Copper.
               13. Seneca affirmeth, that such a propertie
to be in certaine ryuers, which alter

flockes of shéepe by drinking thereof, within
a short time, in causing those which before
bare a black woole, to possesse a whyte, and
that those which came thither with a whyte
woole, departed after with a black woole on
their backes.
               14. Theophrastus reporteth, that in
Macedonia to be a ryuer of such condition,
vnto which, those which be minded to haue
their shéepe beare a white woole, bring them
to that ryuer, which by that reason, the
longer the shéepe drinke thereof, none otherwise,
than as they were infected, are
they after chaunged.
               15. Capadocia is a aryuer of such a propertie,
that what beastes drinke sundrie
times of the water, the heares of their skirt,
become wholy whyte.
               16. In Archadia (as Vitruuius reporteth)
is a water named Nonacris, which
is founde on the hilles, sweating or distilling
most colde humours out of the rocke
stone, this water gathered, is named also
Stygis hydor, which (as by experience the
same is founde) neyther a Siluer nor Copper,
nor yron vessell can retayne the same,
but that this leaketh and soketh through it,

so that for his straunge qualitie it is founde
by triall, that none other vessell will retaine
or kéepe the same water, sauing the hoofe of
a Mule.
               17. In the Countrie of Sclauonie, is
a Well knowne to be of such a propertie,
that clothes spreade ouer the Well (being
as some report most colde) are burned.
               18. In the Iland named Andro, and in
the temple of Liberi patris, is a Well of
such a propertie, that out of the same in the
Nonis of Ianuary, runneth water lyke to
Wine in taste.
               19. In the hill named Berosus Taurorum,
be thrée Welles of such condition,
which are without remedie, and without
paine of deadly griefe.
               20. Isydore affirmeth in his .xiij. Booke,
that in Italie is the Well of Cycero, being
of such a propertie, that it healeth the
clefts and chaps, or other hurts of the eyes.
               21. In the Iland named Chio, is there
a Well of such condition, that the persons
drinking of the water of the same, become
soone after, dull of memorie. And the Well
of Circus, is noted to be of such a propertie,
that such drinking thereof, are after bereft

of the desire, of the veneriall act, as certaine
wryte.
               22. In Aethiopia there is a Well red,
the propertie of which, is, that who drinketh
of the same, shall soone after become
madde.
               23. In Archadia there is a Well named
Lechnus, the propertie of which is knowne
to be, that what person o
                     •
                   woman with
childe shall drinke of the same, shall not after
be delyuered before hir tyme.
               24. In the Countrie of Sicilia, are two
Welles, of which the one by propertie doth
make fruitfull, the barraine: and the other
causeth the fruitfull barraine: and these by
sundry times drinking of eyther.
               25. In the Iland named Sardinia, are
hote Welles of that propertie, which perfitely
helpe the eyes: yet doe those trie out
Théeues, in that their faces be bewrayed,
through a blindnesse, caused by them.
               26. It is manifest (sayth Seneca) in his
booke of the properties of things: that common
Welles there be, of such propertie,
which chaunge péeces of woode into a ston
                     •
                  
substaunce: and of such stones (by report
                     •
                  
are the best whetstones made.
               
                  
27. In the ryuer of the Countrye of
Thrace, and in the Lake Velino, it is reported,
that wood throwne into eyther, is
soone after couered with a stonie barck.
               28. Plynie wryteth, that in the ryuer of
Silarus, being a ryuer of Lucania, not only
the braunches of trées, but the leaues
also throwne into it, are chaunged into
stones: but otherwise, is the water wholesome
to be drunke.
               29. In the Iland named Pontus, there is
a riuer that watereth the fertill groundes;
in which the shéepe féeding, doe yéelde and
féede the people there, with a black milke.
               30. In Aethiopia is a Lake, in which
bodyes rubbed ouer with it, shine as they
were done with Oyle.
               31. Of Clitorio (being a Lake in Italie)
is such a propertie knowne, that what
persons drinke of the water of the Lake,
abhorre wine after, by report.
               32. In Cappadocia (as reporteth Vitruuius)
there is a Lake, into which, if
part of a réede shall be put, and the next day
taken forth, shall be founde so harde as a
stone, but the other part remayning without
the water of the Lake, contynuing in

his proper estate and condition.
               33. Seneca in his seauenth booke wryteth,
that there be certaine Lakes, of such
condition, which are able to beare vp men,
not skilfull in swymming.
               34. In Syria also is there a standing water,
into which if Tyles be throwne, they
doe not sinke, but rather swim aboue, although
they be heauier.
               35. The Rhene Belgas, deuideth it selfe
from the Germaines, and marueylous is
the same, which is reported to be wrytten of
this ryuer: for they affirme (of the due
proofe made) that the Infants of the French
women (named Celtoe) dwelling fast by
this ryuer, throwne into it, if so be those
yonglings were vnlawfully gotten, thys
ryuer then would swalowe and let them
sincke, as a due reuengement, for the polluting
of the chaste bed: but such Infantes in
wedlock gotten, and by lawfull order, thys
bare to shore in safetie, to the wonder of the
beholders: This is reported to be written,
in a certaine Epistle of Politianus, vnto
Iacobe Cardynall.
               36. There is a ryuer in Seythia, running
from a great Maryse: which bringeth

forth certaine huskes, greater than anye
common kernell, out of which doe byrdes
with foure féete issue or he hatched, which
increasing and waxing strong, doe flie about
vntill the after noone: for after the
sunne declyning lowe into the West, these
byrdes then Waxe leane and féeble, and after
the Sunne setting, are they all dead, so
that these by due proofe are knowne, not to
lyue aboue a day.
               37. The ryuer Matronas Celtas, deuydeth
it selfe from that riuer Belgas: which
for the straunge propertie, greatly to be
wondred at, in that ye common sort affirme,
that this riuer to be as a destinie, or mighty
hazarde of lyfe to manye, for so much thys
ryuer daylie purchaseth to it some pray, as
hath bene noted of a long tyme, by those
dwelling fast by.
               38. In the Mountaynes of Modena in
Lumbardie, in a place named Mount Zibbius,
is there a Well, out of which runneth
a lyuely and singuler water, in thys
doe men (at this day) gather a mightie quantitie
of Oyle, which is knowne of many to
be of a miraculous vertue, in that the same
worketh so maruailous effects on mans bodye,

as in healing al aches, the most griefes
and diseases of the body: and in the healing
also of woundes and sores, not inferiour to
the artificiall Baulme: this of most men
named the true Oyle of Peter.
               39. In the Countrie of Burgony, there
is a certaine burning Lake: in which if
a flaming or burning fyrebrande be quenched,
the same immediately goeth out, or is
quenched, through the moysture consisting
in it: and a fyrebrand readie quenched, dipped
in this, doth immediatly kindle & burne,
through the fierie Brimstonie heate, consisting
also in it, which is found hote, and dry,
in the fourth degrée.
               40. There be certaine waters knowne
at this day, which haue the taste of Wine:
in that they runne by some swéete iuyce in
the earth. As by a like in Paphlagonia, is
reported to be a Well of a wynie taste:
which causeth the persons drinking of the
water, to become soone after dronke. The
cause of which dronkennesse is, that the
same containeth much of the spirites, of the
Brimstonie passages, which on such wise
fill the braine of the creatures with sumes▪
And a like to this is reported, that the ryue
                     •
                  
                  
                  Lincestius, to haue waters comming to
it of such a propertie, that they make persons
dronke, euen like Wine.
               41. In the Countrie of Boëmia, is a
Well of sharpe tast, neare that Citie which
they name Bilen, the water of which (the
inhabiters thereabout) vse in the morning,
in the stéede of burning Wyne, or Aqua
vitae.
               
               42. Aristotle also wryteth, that in the
Countrie of Sicilia, to be a soower Well,
which the poore people vse, in the stéede of
Vinigar: as others wytnesse, of the same.
               43. In Scythia also some report, that
there to be a bitter Well, the water of
which running into the ryuer, not farre
distaunte, causeth it to taste bitter.
               44. Certaine Welles and riuers there
be, excéeding hote, especiallye those which
issue and runne out, by Brimstonie veynes
of the earth, and other hote places: the waters
of which, are much pierceing and drying,
by reason of the propertie: through
which these profite, vnto the drying vp of
corrupt and rotten humours, in diseased bodies.
And such hote or bathwaters, are at
certaine times dronke: that they may supply

euacuations and clensings of the body,
and reduce it vnto a suit temperatnesse.
            
            
               Of certaine fyerie impressions, and first
of the same, named of most men,
the foolish fyre.
               THe light going before, and folowing after
men in the ayre, especially in the
night, doe later wryters report to be the foolishe
fyre, in that the same often appéereth
to saylers, and men traueyling by lande,
as eyther going before, or following them,
and maketh a man a foole, by seducing him.
This light also is named Helena, when it
(as one Candle) is séene or appeareth alone:
which besids is reported to be the fyrebrand
and pestilence of Saylers: For as Helena
brought destruction on Asia and Greece,
euen so hath it bene obserued, that when
this light hath bene séene alone, to haue caused
great daunger to saylers. Yet such fyres
oftentimes, are but fantasticall sightes, and
méere illusions of spirites, as the Author
prooueth, by sundry reasons.
               The double light or fyre, appearing lyke
two burning Candels, named Castor and
Pollux: did the auncient perswade and beléeue,
that these promised good luck and a

                  
happie iourney to the Saylers, when they
appéered togither. And these appeare after
the kinde of a fyre, cleauing to the top of the
Maste, or on the ends of the Crosse yarde.
And the people in auncient tyme thought
and accounted these for Gods, if two of them
togither, or one alone were séene, of which
like, mention is made in the last Chapiter
of the Actes of the Apostles. The foolishe
fyre, or burning Candell, is an exhalation
eleuated vnto the lowest region of the aire,
and by the heat there kindled, which whilst

it after séeketh to ascend vpward, it is in the
meane time depressed, through the colde of
the middle region, and appeareth as it were
skipping or dauncing, séeking then to fall to
lower places: so that of this, it appeareth
folowing on waters. In great tempestes
also, this eyther cleaueth to the Sayles, or
goeth before, or foloweth the ship.
               And this is not named the foolishe fyre, of
the burning onely, but for the longer continuing,
going before, and folowing any person
in the ayre. For those two Candels or
lightes, are often tymes séene to go before,
or to follow men, walking or ryding, especially
in the night, and such trauayling on
the Sea, not without some terrour or feare.
               The foolishe fyre is ingendred of a vapour
conglutinated or compact togither in hys
partes, which then are kindled: so that not
of the clowde méeting it, but of ye vehement
beating or smyting togyther of the partes
in themselues. And these two Castor and
Pollux be ingendred in the lowest region of
the ayre, of a fatter fume, vnctuous and inflammable:
which through the coldnesse of
the night ayre, is so dryuen togither & thickned.
The place where the foolishe fyre, doth

appéere: is knowne to be oftner (by the report
of wryters) in hote places, and Countries.
Yet some agrée that this light, is oftner
séene in moyst places, and regions. In
that out of Marishe, and fumous places, or
out of a clammy grounde, the thick and fat
exhalation is eleuated, being soone kindled:
and according to the proportion of the heat,
doth it ascende eyther more or lesse.
               Or thus, out of a clammye earth, as in
Churchyardes, Kitchines and low valleys,
the thicke and fatte substaunce is eleuated,
which may soone be kindled: and according
to the proportion of the heate, doth this eyther
more or lesse ascende.
               The substaunce is kindled, through the
concourse of two contrarie qualities, which
contende in themselues: for the vapour is
hote, and the night ayre colde.
               The reason why this light or fyre, doth often
beguile men, is for that men suppose the
same to go before them ryding, or walking
on foote: and that it appéereth but a Myle or
two distaunte from the walkers on foote:
which when the walkers seing, the nighnesse
of the light or fyre, and directing their
iourney towardes it, not regarding their

                  
proper waye, doe manye tymes, by going
out of their way, fall into dytches, waters,
or déepe pittes, to their great hazard of lyfe:
doe perswade and affirme themselues, to be
seduced and led out of their way, by the wylie
craft and subtiltie of the Deuill.
               The reason also why this light, doth both
folow, and flie from men, is through the motion
of the ayre, which by the walking or
running is forced. So that the faster the
man runneth towarde it, so much the faster
both ye same impression flie from him: but if

he runneth from it, then doth it follow him:
in that the ayre moued, doth force the same
substaunce. An Hystoricall example of this
Meteorū, may a man read in Plutarchus,
which he affirmeth in the life of Lysander.
               
            
            
               The cause of Castor and Pollux,
and where these engendred.
               THese two Castor and Pollux, appéers
like a double fyre, in forme of two burning
Candels, caused of the exhalation, or
fatter vapour and vnctuous, raysed vnto the
lowest region of the ayre in the night, which
contending with the night colde, is so kindled,
that cleaueth sometimes to the crosse
yardes of shippēs, and continuing so long
burning, through the thicknesse and fatnesse
of it, vntill the substaunce shall be spent.
And by a peculiar and vayne superstition,
the people in auncient time, supposed and
ascribed Castor and Pollux, to be the brethren
of Helena: in that when the Saylers
and Maryners had obserued these sitting on
both the crosse yardes, they supposed and hoped
that a more happie course and fortunate
successe of the ship to insue, through the help
(as they thought) of the two brethren,
which they beléeued to delyuer them from

perill, and hazard of perishing, and for the
same accompted them among the number
of the Gods. So that these two appearing
togither, were euermore foreshewers of a
safe and prosperous course of the ship: in
that by the comming of them, they supposed
that other threatning impression appéering
alone (named Helena) to be driuen awaye.
And for the same, they assigned that
power to Castor and Pollux: and named
them, the Gods of the Sea.
               For that impression appéering alone, is
knowne to threaten euermore daunger: in
that the exhalation as yet compact, can not
immediatly be scattered and spent, whereof
through the long tariance in sight, and thick
substaunce of burning, is the great hazarde
of perishing at hande.
               But the two lights or candels appéering,
doe contrariwise signifie, in that these declare
that the thicke substaunce to be in a
maner spent, and the tempest which began
to aryse broken and quyeted, or brought
caulme. So that after the appéeraunce of
them, no daunger at all remayneth, but a
quiet or caulme Sea rather to ensue.
               To conclude, the solitarie lights doe note

matter to abound in the ayre, of which the
tempests are ingendred. For when ye thick
substaunce of the exhalations, and cause
of the vntemperatnesse is in a maner spent,
then caulmnesse of the Sea insueth. But
where the exhalation is ouermuch compact,
which immediatly is not scattered, through
the long continuance, and the grosse substaunce
of burning, there doth it declare a
perillous tempest. Wherof Seneca writeth
that when in a great tempest, Starres or
lightes appeared, as they were cleauing to
the Sayle, the Maryners in ieopardie,
thought and affirmed themselues then to be
holpen, by the power of Castor & Pollux.
But the cause of a better hope is, it appéereth
euen then that the tempest to be broken,
and the winds to cease.
            
            
               Of the flying Dragon in the ayre,
what the same is.
               THe flying Dragon, is when a fume kinled
appéereth bended, and is in the middle
wrythed like the belly of a Dragon: but
in the fore part for the narrownesse, it representeth
the figure of the neck, from
whence the sparkes are breathed or forced

                  
forth with the same breathing.
               Or thus, the vapour on such wise kindled
expelled from a cold clowde, is in the middle
bended like the belly of a Dragon, but in the
forepart, is the vapor stretched narrow, & representeth
the figure of the neck, & from it
do sparks as it were by brething issue forth.
               The flying Dragon is ingendred of a
vapour, not vehemently hote, drawne vp,
mightely coagulated, and pressed togither,
and placed betwéene a colde & hote clowde:
Or thus, this great impression of the ayre,

is wrought and caused beneath the middle
region, when the exhalation drawne vp,
vnequall, not vehemently hote, and stronglye
coniealed, the two contrarie clowdes
place betwéene: the one a colde clowde expelling
the vapour, as contrarie to it, from
whence the belly of the Dragon beginneth,
the other a hote clowde receyuing it, and
through the smalenesse, this expresseth the
forme of the neck, and the vttermost or furthest
part, nere the colde clowde, appéereth
as a taile drawne narrow togither. For the
propertie of colde, is to gather or binde hard
and narrow togyther. To conclude, the two
clowdes doe here concurre, as the hote and
cold clowde. For that cause, the exhalation
placed in the middle, inclyneth it selfe vnto
the hote clowde for the plentie of fyre, and
doth in the middle concurre, and is there
bended. For the beginning and ende, are
néere matched or ioyned to the cold clowde.
So that it séemeth in ye beginning to breath
smoke forth, through the nighnesse of the
moyst clowde. The first part séemeth the
grosser or bigger, in that the same is newe
kindled, but the furthest part or ende appeareth
the straighter or smaller, in that the
same is nighe to the quenching out, through

which is this bended.
               And the reason why, at the vanishing of
the Dragon, a smoke is scattered abrode:
is for that the hote and burning clowde, contrarie
to the colde, procureth a smoke, as the
like appéereth in gréene woode burning: or
for that the matter scattered, through the
colde clowde smoketh. Of the Dragon inuented
of the wicked, which they vse in dyuers
maners, to purchase them vnlawfull
gayne: Phisick of the same, doth here vtter
no reason, as that the same is prepared and
made of a vapour and exhalation. For well
knowne it is, yt their Dragon to be wrought
by the pollicie of Deuils, and inchantments
of the wicked, as sundrie examples lamentable,
doe make manifest at this day. As
the like, in the yere. 1532. in manye Countries,
were Dragons crowned, séene flying
by flocks or companies in the ayre, hauing
Swines snowtes: & sometimes were there
séene, foure hundred flying togither in a
companie.
            
            
               Of the fire cleauing and hanging on the
partes of men, and beastes.
               
                  
THis impression for troth is prodigious
without any Phisicke cause expressing
the same, when as the flame or fire compasseth
about anye persons heade. And this
straunge woonder and sight, doth signifie
the royall assaultes of mightie Monarchies,
and kinges, the gouernmentes of the Emperie,
and other matters worthie memory,
of which the Phisicke causes, sufficient can
not be demonstrated. Seing then, such fyers
or lightes are, as they were counterfets
or figures of matters to come: it sufficiently
appeareth, that those not rashely to appeare
or showe, but by Gods holy will and pleasure
sent, that they maye signifie some rare
matter to men.
               This light doth Virgill write of in the
seconde booke of Aeneados, of Ascanius:
which had a like flame burning without
harme, on his heade. Also Liuius in his first
booke, and Valerius Maxi. reporte, of Tullius
Seruius a childe, who sléeping on bedde,
such a flame appeared on his heade, and burned
rounde about the heade without harme,
to the woonder of the beholders: which sight
pronounced after his ripe age, the comming
vnto royall estate.
            
            
               
               What is to be thought of the flame
or fyre, which cleaueth to the
heares of the heade, and
to the heares of
Beastes.
               EXperience witnesseth, that the fyre to
cleaue manye times to the heades and
eares of beastes, and often times also to
the heades, and shoulders of men ryding,
and going on Foote. For the exhalations
dispearsed by the ayre, cleaue to the
heares of horses, and garments of men:
which of the lightnesse doe so ascend, and by
the heate kindled. Also this is often caused
when men and other beastes by a vehemēt
and swift motion wax very hote, that the
sweate fattie and clammye, is sent forth,
which kindled yeldeth this forme. And the
like maner in all places (as afore vttered) as
eyther in moyst and clammie places, and
marishes, in Churchyards, Cloysters, Kitchins,
vnder Galosses, valleys, and other
places, where many deade bodies are laide,
doe such burnings lightes often appeare.
The reason is, in that these places, the earth
continually breatheth forth fatte flumes,

grosse and clammy, which come forth of dead
bodyes: and when the fume doth thus continually
issue forth: then is the same kindled
by the labouring heate or by the smiting togither:
euen as out of two flint stones smitten
togither, fyre is gotten.
               
                  Cardanus in his .14. booke, and .69. Chapter
of the varietie of things reporteth, that
a certaine friende of his, after his comming
home, about an houre past in the night, put
of the cloake that he customably ware, from
whose backe behinde, sprang sparckes scatteringly,
and whiles he remooued, and layde
the cloake downe againe, such sparckles lept
forth, as before. Who at the sight of these,
was stricken with a double feare: and by
good reason, for within fiftéene dayes after,
was he accused of enimies for the detestable
practise of poysoning, and for the same earnestly
layde in wayght, to be slaine.
               To conclude, it appeareth that such fyres
are séene in moyst Kitchins, Sinckes, or
Guttours, and where the Orfall of beastes
killed are throwne: or in such places, most
commonly are woont to be séene. Such fires
cleauing, doe marueylously amase the f
                     •
                  arfull,
Yet not all fires which are séene in the

night, are perfite fiers: in that many haue a
kinde without a substaunce and heate, as
those which are the delusions of the Deuill,
well knowne to be the Prince of the world,
and flyeth about in the ayre.
            
            
               Of the fearefull gaping, and deepe opening
of the Elements.
The definitions.
               THis gaping, or large opening of the aire
is: when heauen, by a sodaine light of
the great exhalation kindeled vnder the
Clowdes, is as it were opened.
               2 The gaping, is when any space of heauen
descendeth, and by a sodaine light of
the great exhalation kindeled vnder the
Clowdes, as if heauen were opened, appeareth
(or that heauen parted a sunder without
crack or noise gapeth) and the same part
séemeth to throwe or cast forth fire, which
sheweth as it were the mightie burning of
some place, to the great terror and feare of
the beholders: this at the appearaunce, pronounceth
drye tempestes to follow.
               3 The gaping, is when fyre, as out of
heauen parted a sunder, séemeth to fall, cast
forth through a thicke clowde.
               
                  
4 The gaping or wide opening, is when
fire out of heauen parted a sunder, séemeth
as it were to fall forth of a holow Caue.
            
            
               A difference betweene the gaping,
and deepe opening.
               MAny Philosophers doe briefely distinguishe
them, on this wise: when the
partyng a sunder in heauen is but small,
then is the same named a déepe opening.
But when the parting in heauen is large,
and the déepenesse of the Clowdes great,
then is the same named a gaping. So that
this Clowde, comming in the middle betwéene,
if it shall be small, then is the same
named the opening: if great, then the same
named the large or wyde gaping.
            
            
               What the efficient cause is.
               THe efficient cause of this gaping is, the
onely beames of the Sunne, and the other
starres: for it hath drawne to the ayre
a light and rare fume, which through his
tenuitie or thinnesse, or for the heate forcing
within the clowde, or for the agitation of
the Clowde néere, is it kindled: euen as the
Gunpowder made of brimstone and Nyter,

that lighlye taketh, and forciblie burneth.
            
            
               What the matter, and forme is.
               THe matter is an exhalation, thinne and
light: which as it is sodainely kindled,
euen so doth it sodainely burne. This fume
doth lightly take fire, and is scattered.
               The formall cause, is that agitation of the
fume in the aire, which kindleth it. Although
this fume maye heate, by the owne accorde:
yet heateth it more when the same flyeth vp
vnto the vpper region of the ayre, where
lightly it is kindled.
               This forme is diuers, according to the
diuersity of the matter and place. For when
the exhalatiō falleth thorow a thick clowde,
the déepenesse in heauen appéereth greater,
and the greater truely, when the middle
partes of the exhalation are thick, and in
the compasse about thin. And lesser it appeareth,
when the thicknesse of the middle
clowdes is not so much.
               Or thus the forme, is an agitation of the
exhalation kindeled, which if it fall thorow
a thicke clowde, the déepenesse in heauen
appéereth the greater. Yea greater,
when the middle partes of the exhalation,

thicke, and in the compasse about shall be
thin: Or otherwise by a thick clowde, the
colour black, the gaping shall appéere purple
or bloudie. As the lyke purple colour is
séene, when the black shall be mixed with a
whyte clowde: Or as the sunne sometimes
at his rysing is séene, or the fyre in a grosse
smoke. Otherwise, the cause of the white
colour, is the clearenesse of the ayre, through
which the light is séene: for when through
a cleare, and not so black a clowde it is fallen,
the light then is named, as a flame
shyning: Of these may you reade more in
Seneca.
               
            
            
               What the ende, of the gapings be.
               
                  PLynie wryteth, that the Gapings to be
foreshewers of mightie perils, not that
as causes go before, but for the same go before,
that these euils may inuade and come,
that is, happen certaine, and for the more
part: as be battels, seditions, and infinite
like calamities. And such rare sights of the
Gapings, and others, often are shewed to
vs, yea without Phisick causes, that these
may moue christian mindes to repentance.
Yet doe many Physically denote at the appearaunce,

drie tempests to insue: And this
is worthie to be noted, that the Astrologians
pronounce battels to arise and come out of
the same place, where this gaping is séene.
Certaine examples of lyke effect, hapned in
our time: as first in the yere. 1529. and in the
ninth day of Ianuary, betwéene the hower
of nine, & ten of the night, a mighty Gaping
was séene throughe Germany, reaching
from the East into the North, vnto ye Sommer
setting in the West. After which, in
the same yere, insued that violent breaking
in of the Turkes into Germany.
               And the Nystoriographers haue noted the
same, that in the time of Tiberius Caesar,
a mightie Gaping was séene: after which
such a fyre fell to the earth, when Phili
                     •
                  
king of Macedonie brought Greece in subiection.
               
                  Virgill doth account this large Gaping
                     •
                  
to be among the number of the feareful, to
                     •
                  kens:
in that the death of the valiant Tur
                        •
                     nus,
slayne by Aeneas, was by the same
foreshewed. The Commentatour vpon th
                     •
                  
second booke of Plynie wryteth, that an other
fearefull Gaping was séene in the yer
                     •
                  
1536. and in the sixtene day of December

betwéene sixe and seauen of the clock in the
night, stretching from the North into the
Winter West setting: after which, within
a short time ensued but a small lightning,
with thunder: so that little harme, succéeded
at that time. The Author sawe a terrible
Gaping in the East, in the yere .1565. and
in the .26. daye of Nöuember, after fiue of
the clock in the morning.
            
            
               How many Rainebowes may be sene
togither at one time.
               
                  ARistotle, whom Plynie followeth, supposeth
that thrée Rainebowes can hardlye
be caused, nor more then thrée at anye
time, bicause the one is euermore darcker
than the other, in suche manner that the
thirde reflection is caused the weakest, that
it cannot attaine or reach vnto the Sunne.
But experience reproueth both Aristotle
and Plynie, in that thrée Rainebowes may
well appéere or be séene togither: yea more
sometimes in this our age haue bene séene,
but such accounted for woonders, by which
God sheweth to men matters to come, as
maye rightly be gessed. And that the same
may be, Vitellio also witnesseth: although

he may denie any more Rainebowes than
two (in speaking Physicallie) that may be
séene, differing in the standing of the colours.
That is, although thrée Rainebowes
shall sometimes appeare, yet more differ
not in the standing of the coulours, than
two, or two onely haue the extreme colours
transposed, in such maner that the vttermost
of the inner Rainebow, and the innermost
of the outwarder Rainebow, is of a
red colour. And contrariwise, the innermost
of the inner, and the vttermost of the
outwarder, is of a purple colour, the gréene
colour alwayes possessing his proper place,
that is, the middle.
            
            
               Whereof many Rainebowes
proceede.
               THey are caused of the refraction or breaking
againe of the Sunne beames, from
the clowde made bright and couloured by
the first, that is, the inner Rainebow into
the néerer clowde. And the beames conioyned
with the beames, from the Sunne into
the same place falling, doe so imprint or
forme newe colours of the Rainebow, in
the same maner as the colours are caused

in the inner Rainebow. So that this is the
cause, why of the outwarder Rainebow,
the innermost colour is red, in that the same
is nighest to the sight: and for the same
cause, that light is sent or appeareth to our
eye the clearer. The other colours are caused
by a light imprinted or formed in the déeper
partes of the Clowde, and so much the
more is it mixed of the shadowes, and waterie
darknesse. For which cause these doe
a little decline vnto a blacknesse.
            
            
               That three Rainbowes may appeare
at one time.
               THe first Rainebow is caused, through
the refraction of the sunne beames, and

                     •
                  his is brightest of all the others.
               2 The seconde Rainebow, is the ymage

                     •
                  nely of the first, for which cause also it is

                     •
                  he weaker: in that the same is caused tho
                  
                     •
                  ow
the refraction of the beames of the first
Rainebow. So that the colours of thys
Rainebow appeare in the opposite, or order

                     ••
                  ght against, vnto the colours of the first

                     •
                  ainebow.
               3 The third Rainebow is the figure and

                     •
                  mage of the second, and this can scarcely

be séene, in that the same is caused through
the refraction of the second Rainebow. So
that the colours of this Rainebow doe appeare
in the opposite order vnto the colours
of the second Rainebow, and in the lyke order
by which the colours of the first Rainebow
are séene, for the aboue sayde reason.
               Thus in breuitie, thrée Rainebowes may
appéere at one time, in that the clowde may
be so thicke, that the reflection of beames
may the larger stretch forth it selfe.
            
            
               In what time of the yeare, Rainebow 
                     〈◊〉
                  
for the more part are caused.
               
                  PLynie reporteth in his second booke, an
                     •
                  
59. Chapiter, that in the Sommer on th
                     •
                  
South part they are not séene, after th
                     •
                  
Equinoctiall haruest, at anye hower. I
                     •
                  
the haruest and Winter, are they especiall
                     •
                  
engendred vnder the East and West part
                     •
                  
through the abounding or mightie substanc
                     •
                  
of the rayne, which the Sunne from ou
                     •
                  
highest noonestéede descending, occupyin
                     •
                  
then the Sowtherly halfe of the Zodiak
                     •
                  
runneth lower, wherby it cannot consu
                     ••
                  
by the proper heate. Contrariwise, in th
                     •
                  
Sommer are the seldome séene, when as

is of lesser substance, then that which may
be scattered by the heate of the Sunne, and
the Sunne also at that time ascendeth vnto
the highest ouer our heads: for which cause
the Rainebowe in the Southquarter cannot
be séene, as aboue vttered.
            
            
               Are not the Rainebowes caused through
the beames of the other starres.
               OF the Moone we haue said, that through
hir beames, especiallye of the full, a
Rainebow may be caused. And euen lyke
in our remembraunce or tyme, as in the
yeare of Christ .1523. a night Rainebowe
was séene. After which incontinent folowed
a conspiracie of the rusticall sort in
Alsatia against the Magistrates. In the
yere folowing, a commotion of the rusticall
sort, in the Dukedome of the noble Prince
of Wirterbergensis: An other night Rainbow
was séene in the yere .1524. (in which
yere) folowed sone after, a most raging and

                     •
                  ruell sedition, which grieuously afflicted
and spoyled manye partes of Germany:
And in the yeare .37. about the ninth houre,

                     •
                  n Paulme Sunday at night, being the

                     •
                  ext day before the full of the Moone, a like

night Rainebowe was obserued and séene
of manye. That the Rainebowes are not
ingendred, through the beames of the other
starres: may apeare, in that such a distance
there is of the starres from the earth, that
no impression of light can be brought to this
dewie vapour. Or thus, their beames
through the greatest or furthest distaunce be
weaker, then that they maye imprint his
light with the small bodyes of the dewie
vapour.
               Here note, that by the beames of the
Moone, especially at the full, a Rainebow
                     •
                  
may and is wont to be caused, hauing like
colours in a maner (as the Sunnes) sauin
                     •
                  
that the night Rainebow draweth néere
                     •
                  
vnto a whitenesse, as with intensed colours
                     •
                  
bicause the darkenesse of the night increa
                     •
                  seth
the darkenesse of the clowde, throug
                     •
                  
which the increased light appéereth the wh
                     ••
                  ter,
euen as a fyre or light that is furthe
                     •
                  
séene in the night tyme, than in the da
                     •
                  
So that of this Moones Rainebow, is o
                     •
                  
onely colour, as the whyte, not vnlyke 
                     〈◊〉
                  
mylke, when as the clowde of the nig
                     ••
                  
colde may be ioyned togither, heaped a
                     •
                  
thickned more, than that the Moones lig
                     ••
                  
                  
can pierce: for which cause, a whytenesse
appeareth on the hyghest playnnesse of the
same.
            
            
               Of the windes.
               THe winde is an exhalation hote and dry,
moued thwartly or laterally about the
earth, which for the grauitie of the exhalation
can not be caried upwarde, it therefore
falleth downewarde, & is ouerthwartly
caried. Or the winde is an agitation of
a drie vapour, drawne vp into the ayre, by
the vertue of the Sunne beames. Or the
winde is a thwart agitation of the ayre,
through a hote and drie exhalation, which
drawne vp by the vertue of the starres, is
sent backe and downewarde, through the
colde of the middle region, ordeyned by na
                  
                     •
                  ure,
that through the same motion the ayre
may be dryuen, and cleane or pure purged

                     •
                  n the breathing: the corne also by it rype
                  
                     •
                  ed,
and the Arte besides of sayling exer
                  
                     •
                  ised
amongst men. The matter or sub
                  
                     •
                  taunce
of the windes, is a hote and dry ex
                  
                     •
                  alation,
grosse and earthly, forced downe
                  
                     •
                  arde
through the coldnesse of the middle

                     •
                  egion of the ayre, whose note is, in that

the winde dryeth.
            
            
               Certaine properties of the windes.
               THe cause why any beast, at the South
winde blowing, lesser hungereth: is for
that the heate then openeth the powers of
the skinne, that the inner hote spirite maye
breath forth and be dissolued. Whereof digestion
and naturall strength is caused the
weaker, and by it bodies filled with a superfluous
earthly moysture. And ye cause why
the Southwinde, is woont to be vehementer
in the night time, than in the daye: is
for that the exhalation of thys wynde is so
hote, that through the coldnesse of the night,
it can not be depressed. So that by the proper
heate drawne vp, it ryseth and rageth
the vehementer. But in ye day time through
the Sunnes heate thinned, and sometimes
spent: whereof with such a force, as in the
night it can not blowe. The Haruest and
Spring, are the aptest tymes of the yeare
for the wyndes, seing in those partes of the
yeare, manye exhalations are drawne vp,
which when of the Sunne beames they can
not be spent, through his absence, they then
gyue matter to the winds. But in the Sommer

and Winter, doe the windes lesser
blow: For in the Sommer time, the exhalations
are burned by the Sunnes heate,
and in the Winter tyme, the powers of the
earth, are shut so close or hard togither, thorowe
the intensed colde, that no matter can
breath forth. And this worthie to be noted
and marueyled at, that at the blowing of
the North winde, Welles and deepe pittes
of water, sende vp more fumes, then at the
blowing of the South winde. The cause
why the Northerly windes and Southerly
doe oftner blowe, but the Easterly and
Westerly sildomer: is for that the exhalations
drawne vp by the Sunne, and flying
the heate of the Sunne, fall vnto the sides.
Or otherwise, that in these places they
finde a space, and are not consumed or spent
by the heate of the Sunne, which is caused
in the East and Weast, which places the
Sunne occupyeth twise in the daye, and
consumeth there the vapours. After when
the Sunne departeth into the Northerly
signes, he is then higher, than that he can
let or hinder the ascending of the exhalations.
But when he departeth into the
Southerly signes, through his néerenesse

vnto the earth, the beames then stretch
thwarte, and through this thwartnesse,
they be so weake, that they can not waste
or spende the exhalations. The cause why
the windes at the beginning arise softer,
and blow weaker, is for that (as we haue
afore taught) of the causes of the thwarte
course of the windes. Aristotle vttereth
the cause, of the circulare motion of the
ayre. For the ayre togither with the swift
motion of heauen, is drawen about. So
that it is manifest, that all thinges to bée
moued togither, which be in it. Seing the
exhalation is hote and dry, and through his
lightnesse drawne vpwarde, and by the
cold of the middle region (so letting) depressed,
it can not of this, discende downe right.
For thys through his lightnesse, alwayes
ascendeth. And caried by a thwart maner,
that it can not of the same, descende downe
right. For which cause, it must néedes insue,
that the winds are caried by a thwart
course. The cause of the vehemencie of the
windes, is that the breath or winde forced,
through the fortitude of the colde, sendeth
forth the exhalation. For how mightier the
same depresseth the exhalation ascending,

so much the stronger doth the same mooue
forewarde the ayre. The windes also are
caused the vehementer, through the multitude
of the exhalation ascending, which
with the same descending, is matched or
ioyned. For on such wise, the strengthes
are increased: and of the same, it muste
néedes force the ayre the mightier. The
cause why in the great heate, and extreme
colde, little winde bloweth: is for that in
the same Sea soone the exhalation (the foode
of the winds) is then spent by the Sunne:
but in this the earth shut with the colde,
can not then breath forth fumes. Or playner
to wryte, the intensed or mightie heate
of the Summer, burneth and wasteth the
vapour or exhalation drawne vp, before it
may giue or yéelde, matter for the windes.
And in the time of the cold winter, through
the contrarie cause: the windes lesse blow.
For the extreame colde of the winter, shutteth
the poores of the earth, that nothing
can then breath forth: the cause that winds
cease after showers of raine, is for that before
the raine, the powers of the earth are
opened, out of which, the matter of the
windes issueth, which of the raine, especially

of the more aboundaunt showers, are
then shut togither & stopped, that nothing
may more breath forth, wherof the winde
must néedes cease. The cause that after the
blowing of the North winde, the other
windes ceasse: is for that the same winde
is colde and drye, which then shutteth the
powers of the earth, and letteth the breathing
forth, except in the spring tyme. For
in the same time, through the order of nature,
and the Sunne comming then vnto
vs, the earth opening it selfe, subdueth the
matter for the more part, with the Northerly
winds. And why the windes be oftner
colde, is for that the windes, although
they be ingendred and procéede of a hote
and drie vapour: yet doe they breath colde.
The same hapneth or is caused through the
farre motion of the ayre, by colde places:
euen as by the mouth, the winde or hote
breath, farre of moued or extended, cooleth.
Why the West winde blowing, the Dogs
then euill hunt: is for that it especially confoundeth
the ayre, and of all the windes
it is the most contynuall or longest lasting,
and toucheth especially the earth.
            
            
               
               Certaine obseruations of
the windes.
               MOst marueylous is the highest God,
which alone made all thinges, both in
heauen and earth, and in the vse of the
winds, he would in many maners that the
testimonies of his prouidence to be known
to vs. For when the earth néedeth watering,
it onely not vseth and needeth raine;
but the windes to helpe: so that the winde
ariseth, by which the clowdes are gathered,
that showers may shed, and be sprinckled
on the earth, and the earth sufficiently
fed. Further that the strengths of the earth
quayle not through the raynie superfluousnesse,
it needeth with the drying, the Sunne
beames, and wyndes agréeable, which taketh
vp the vnprofitable moysture, that the
same may be dried vp, & that like a spunge
(the earth) may soke, drinke in, and digest
the raine.
               2. It much auayleth the Phisition to cō
                  sider
and foreknowe the approching tempestes
and windes, the natures and workings
of them, agréeable vnto eche places,
that he may hereof foresee the sicknesses

or disseases publikely kylling in haste,
how by Arte he may eyther let and remoue
them, or if he can not stay them by his skil,
then maye he 
                     •
                  éeke an apt waye and order
for the curing of such sicknesses. Of which
matter, maye you reade a like instruction,
vttered of Hypocrates, in the tyme of the
pestilence.
               3. A rednesse about the Sunne & Moone,
is a note of windes to insue.
               4. Where in the Sommer time, lightnings
and thunder happen, there a strong
winde shortly after bloweth.
               5. In the Haruest and Winter, lightnings
doe cease winds: and how mightier
the lightnings and thunder are, so much
the more doe they cease the windes.
               6. Any dreaming of byrdes, the nexte
day winde to follow, as some report.
               7. In the Wynter, windes about the
the morning blow
                     •
                   but in the Sommer, about
the Euening. In the winter, from
the East part, but in the Sommer, from
the West.
               8. Those temporall North windes in
the Sommer, when they shal blow a long
tyme togither, and the Haruest is windie,

doe declare a caulme Winter to insue.
               9. If the Haruest be caulme, the Winter
folowing shall be windie.
               10. The South winde bloweth, when
Virgiliae aryse, that is in the Moneth of
May.
               11. The North winde bloweth, at the
rysing of Orion, which is, the day folowing,
after the Dogge starre risen.
               12. The South west winde bloweth in
the Moneth of February, when that named
Fidicula, beginneth to set, and it is
confirmed by the rysing of Cinguli Orionis:
for after this the earth openeth, and
beginneth to sende vp plants.
               13. When the Moone is ioyned to Iupiter,
as the Astrologians affirme, newe
winds are caused: Euen so the Moone running
in Cancer, procureth windes. When
the Moone commeth vnto Iupiter in Cancer,
you shall sée windes to arise without
doubt.
               14. The Sunne in Capricorno, the
Moone in eyther Scorpio, Capricorno,
                  Tauro or Virgine, doe cause most colde
windes. The same doth the Sunne moue
in Aquarius, when Saturne shall be right

against, & that the Moone beholdeth eyther
of these. Saturne also retrograde in an
earthly signe, seaseth windes. The selfe
same, causeth Mars.
               
               15. Windes are wont to blowe for the
more part, at the morning and euening:
But at noone, for the greater heate of the
Sunne, the winds then cease. And lyke at
midnight are extinguished, through the extreme
coldnesse.
               16. When the windes begin from the
morning to blow, then doe the windes longer
continue.
               17. The South winde not beginning,
but leauing or ceasing, bringeth a showre.
For when out of a hote place the wynde
bloweth, the selfe same ayre at the winde
beginning, is yet hote.
               18. One and the selfe same winde may
cause contrarie effectes, as both chiefe and
weake, and by it selfe one, and an other by
accidence. Euen the like, the East winde
from the beginning is drie, but the ending
of it is waterie. The North winde by it
selfe cooleth: yet by accidence, may it heat▪
               
               19. All mightie windes coole and drie,
and procure or cause fayre weather: but th
                     •
                  
                  
weake windes heate and moystine, and ingender
rayne.
               20. The longer contynuing and stronger
windes are caused, which begin from
the daye, than those which beginne in the
night.
               21. When the North wynde blowing,
moueth many clowds, signifieth a drought
to folow, or great heate.
               22. The Easterly windes be drie, thorow
the combustion of ye vapours wrought
by the sunne: for which cause, they produce
and cause a drougth.
               23. The Westerly windes doe moystine,
through the grosse vapours, left behinde
of the Sunne in the night time.
               24. Raine hastily comming, is foreknowne
by a great clowde, arysing from
that part of the worlde, from which the
windes arise or come. And howe much the
thicker and greater the clowde shall be, so
much the sooner and certayner shall it gyue
the testimony of a boysterous raine soone after
to follow.
               25. The South winde when it bloweth
fiercely or sturdilye, and the North winde
after beginneth to blowe, is a note of a most

great tempest, especially on the Sea.
               26. Lightnings with a Northerly wind,
doe signifie raine to folow.
               27. Thunder with an Easterly or Westerly
winde, declare raine, or a mightie
tempest to follow.
               28. A Northerly yeare (after the minde
of the auncient obseruers) is farre better
then a Southerly.
               29. It is good and profitable, to take a
purgation, at the blowing of the South,
and East winde. For then are the members
soluble and lose, and giue place to medicine:
but the North winde blowing, doth
then mightily stop, and let the working of a
purgation.
               30. The auncient in times past, haue obserued
the first night of Ianuary, which i
                     •
                  
the same were cleare wythout rayne, and
caulme without winde, promised a fruitfull
and prosperous yere to follow. If with
an Easterly winde, then was the yeare to
come, daungerous to cattle. If wyth a
Westerly winde, then was the yere folowing
deadly to kings. If with a Southerlye
winde, the people dyed that yere folowing.
If with a Northerly winde, the yeare to

come was knowne barraine, with the scarcitie
of victuals.
            
            
               Of the impressions, named Parelia,
and Paraeselinae. The definitions.
               
                  PArelius is a thick impression in a clowde,
caused at the one side of the Sunne, thorowe
the refraction of the Sunne beames,
which then representeth the sunnes ymage.
               2. Parelius is a dewie clowdie, thicke,
whole, placed vnto the one side of the sunne,
and representing his similitude and figure.
For the clowde nere to the Sunne, and turned
into water, in which the Sunne by the
broken beame for the dewe thicknesse, and
his wholenesse, frameth then a similitude,
euen the lyke in a cleare ayre, as the same
in a polished Glasse: which ymage thus appearing
at the one side, named Parelius.
               
               3. Parelius is an ymage and figure of
the Sunne, expressed in a dewie clowde and
bright, when the subtill moysture betwéene
our sight and the Sunne concurreth, into
one bodye of a round equall clowde, and the
like fashyoned, standing right afore the
sunne, from which the sunne beames are

broken open, as from a Glasse vnto the eye:
So that these then frame and cause a lyke
figure to the sunne.
               4. Parelius is an ymage of the sunne,
placed by the side in an equal clowde, eyther
of the East or West, which is ye cause, why
many sunnes sometimes are séene: which
truely are caused when a thicker clowde
shalbe drawne vnto ye one side of the sunne,
in which the Sunne beames broken open,
doe leaue the kinde & forme of a true lyght.
So that the first figure is, a representation
of the perfite and true sunne. But the seconde
and thirde is, through the breaking open
of the sunne beames, placed in ye clowde
on the one side.
               5. Parelius is (as affirmed Seneca) a
rounde clowde and bright, and lyke to the
sunne.
               6. Parelia are named to be those, when
manye Sunnes are séene to shyne in the
clowds, vnder ye East or West: & Parelius
is then caused, when a clowde of y• one side
of the Sunne, shall be placed eyther of the
East, or West, especially equall, and a like
thicke, which as a Glasse receaueth and expresseth
the ymage or fygure of the sunne.

For we sée both in the water, and in a thicker
ayre, and in other bodyes, which consist
with a light vpper face, and equall, that
the matters placed by a iust proportion, to
be expressed vnto them, as in a Glasse.
               7. Paraselinae be ymages of the Moone,
caused by ye refractiō of the Moones beames,
in a moyst clowde néere to a light, & equally
thick, in which the bodye of the first or true
Moone, is the lyke séene, as any other body

                     •
                  n a Glasse.
               8. Paraselinai are named many Moones,

                     •
                  f which onely one is true, the others be

                     •
                  ut figures and ymages of the Moone, cau
                  
                     •
                  ed
by the refraction of the Moones beames

                     •
                  n the clowde. For these reflexions are one
                  
                     •
                  y
caused of the effectuous beame, lyke as is

                     〈◊〉
                   the Sunne or Moone.
               The efficient cause is the celestiall vertue,

                     •
                  nd starrie propertie, that is, the Sunnes

                     •
                  nd Moones beames, drawing vp and pre
                  
                     •
                  aring
a matter, vnto such a figure, that re
                  
                     ••
                  esented
the forme and ymage of the sunne

                     •
                  nd Moone. The materiall cause is a thicke

                     •
                  owde, equall and regulare, which is pla
                  
                     ••
                  d
by a thwarte maner of the sunne, so that

                     •
                  yther aboue, nor beneath him, nor right

before him it standeth, but placed at the one
side. And this matter thicke and waterie,
that the refraction may be caused the better,
and this regulare also, that it may the more
giue and shewe an vniforme ymage of the
sunne. And waterie, that the Sunne may
the commodiouser be represented, euen as
the like is caused in water. So that ye clowde
prudently is placed on the one side, and not
vnder the Sunne, nor right against: for if
right against, then woulde the same be a
Rainebow: if vnder the sunne, then would
Halo be caused. And this for the more part
is caused, in the East or West, through the
disposition of the clowde.
               The formall cause, is the refraction of the
sunne beames in the clowde, being at the
one side, which altogyther as a Glasse receyueth
the sunnes beame, and the colour
which then is in the sunne, it causeth euen
the like to appéere, as when of a light ayre,
through his thicknesse, the sight is broken.
For the beames falling vnto ye same clowde
thus fashioned, and of the same broken vnto
the sight, especiallye in that clowde not
being ouer thicke, thinne or blacke, doe expresse
the ymage of the sunne.
               
                  
To conclude, when a dewie clowde, or
vapourous, is in anye part pierced, then
are the Sunne beames gathered in that
hole, and by the refraction shed vnto the
sight: so that such a brightnesse appéereth,
as if the sunne it selfe where séene. For thys
Parelius is, as the ymage of the sunne, appearing
in a great looking Glasse. And hereof
it is, that manye sunnes sometimes are
sayde to appeare togither, as two or thrée.
So that the first is the figure of the sunne it
selfe; the second and third consisteth through
the breaking of the sunne beames, in the
clowde placed on the one side: by which,
thrée sunnes or more, are oftentimes séene.
As the like by experience was obserued, that
the king of Polelande sawe togyther sixe
sunnes, after which folowed, that Fraunces
the French king was taken prisoner for
the tyme.
            
            
               The similitude.
               AS the drie exhalation, and that vehemently
hote, in pierting the vpper region
of the kindled starre, doth represent a

                     •
                  orme and sphericall figure, through the farlesse:
euen so a strong and mightie vapour

flying into the highest of the middle ayre, giueth
the forme of the sunne, and causeth a
circle to appéere.
            
            
               The ende and effect of these.
               THe finall cause Phisick, or the materiall
effect of Pareliorum, is the foreshewing,
signifying, and pronouncing of
rayne to come, abounding of a moyst matter.
For they signifie that the ayre to contayne
much matter or substaunce of showers,
especially if Parelia shall be placed
in the South region of heauen. For the
greatest clowds hereof waxe ouercharged,
in that the South ayre is better and sooner
chaunged into water, than the North ayre.
               But to the Diuines or Theologically,
these many tymes por
                     •
                  ende and foreshewe
feareful and straunge matters, so that they
be often in doubt, what will follow, except
anye by hap woulde make a coniecture of
them. For as all celestiall impressions in a
maner, haue a certaine hid or secret signification
in nature, which is not materiall
euen so doe Parelij alwayes portende som
                     •
                  
singuler will and effect deuine, to be looked
for: so that many sunnes are sildome séene

but that eyther conspiracies be attempted,
or the alteration of kingdomes, or some new
matters laboured about the subuersion, and
dispos
                     •
                  ng in religion.
               To conclude, the cause of these is so secret
and diuine, that the great conspiracies of
Monarchies, the dissentions of Kings and
Princes, and the fearefull vprores and commotions
of other Empyries, ciuill battels,
and other lamentable matters to men, are
wreshewed by such impressions.
            
            
               Certaine examples of these.
               IN the yeare of our Lorde. 1157. in the
Moneth of September, were thrée sunnes
togyther séene, the skie then being verie
cléere, and within a fewe dayes after of the
same moneth, thrée Moones were séene, and
in that moone also possessing ye middle place,
a whyte crosse was séene. After which a
great discorde folowed among the Cardynals,
in the election of their highe Byshop,
and a lyke controuersie among the Princes
electours, in the election of the Emperour
of Rome.
               In the reigne of Henry the seconde king
of Englande, and in the Calends of October,

for thrée howres almost, were séene thrée
circles about the Sunne, after which, vanished
awaye, two sunnes séemed to appeere.
After this sight insued a discorde, betweene
the king and the Archebishop of Caunterburie.
And Frederick Emperour besseged
Mylayne, for seauen yeres almost, and in
the ende sacked and spoyled the Citie lamentably.
               In the yere. 1169. thrée sunnes were séene
in the West, in the Nonis of September,
and after two houres, two of them vanished,
the same which possessed the middle,
did set alone in the Weste, and in the lyke
maner, ye next yere folowing, thrée Moones
appeared.
               In the yere. 1314. before the ciuill battle
of Lewys of Bauare, and Frederick of
Austrige, which contended and fought for
the Empyrie, thrée 
                     •
                  unnes were séene in
heauen, and a discention also of the electours▪
and other attempts folowed.
               In the yere of our Lord. 1469. at Rome
were thrée sunnes séene, after which an vprore
of the Citizens folowed. And the sam
                     •
                  
yeare a battle fought in Italie, Frannce
                     •
                  
Duke of Mylayne dyed, and for the segni
                     •
                  
                  ritie

many contended by great conspiracies.
               In the yeare. 1492. after the middle of
December, in Polelande were thrée sunnes
séene at noone: after which Vladislaus king
of Hungarie, ouercame Maximilian: and
Casimirus king of Polelande, left his lyfe
or dyed thys yeare: before whose death a
Comete went, which appéered for two Moneths
togither after the sunne setting.
               In the yeare. 1514. in the tenth day of Ianuarye,
and seauentéene of March, thrée
sunnes were séene in heauen, of which the
middle was greatest, and in the eleuenth of
Ianuary and seauentéenth of March, thrée
Moones were like séene: in the same yeare
the Sweueland men stirred an vprore, agaynst
the Duke of Wirtenbergensis,
which much vexed hym. And aboue. 40.
thousande Moscouites, were slayne of the
Polanes, by the ryuer Boristhenes.
               
               In the yeare of our Lorde. 1523. at Tigurie
in Helueria, in the sixt Nonas of
May, thrée sunnes were séene togyther, and
sundrie circles séene togither in heauen: after
which in the same yeare, folowed a reformation
of Churches, with the casting
forth of Idols, instituted and stablyshed

at Tigurie. In Holland the same yeare, a
great commotion attempted.
               In the yere. 1525. before the death of Lewes
king of Hungarie, in Hungarie were
séene thrée sunnes, which without doubt signified,
y• thrée kings should contende for the
Emperie, as Ferdinandus, Duke Iohn of
Saxonie, and the great Lurke.
               In the yeare. 1527. in Sweueland, thrée
sunnes, and sundrie celestiall circles were
séene.
               In the yere. 1528. and in the seauentéene
day of Iune, at Tigurie manye sunnes
were séene, and about them thrée circles: in
the next yere folowing, a cruel battle fought
within the Countrie of Heluetia.
               
               In the yere. 1532. and in the eleuenth day
of Aprill, in the seconde houre of the daye,
thrée perfite sunnes and bright, with two
Rainebowes, were séene to many.
               In the yere of our Lorde. 1551. about the
Calends of Aprill, in the famous Vniuersitie
of Witebergensis, thrée Sunnes wyth
sundrie celestiall circles were séene. And in
the same yeare, in the. 28. day of February
thrée sunnes with diuers circles were séen
                     •
                  
at Antwarpe.
               
                  
In the yeare of our Lorde. 1553. on the
Saterday before Palme Sunday, in the
morning betweene seauen and eyght, thrée
sunnes appeared, of which the middle shyned
the brighter, and the other two of eyther
side, red and bloudie. These being set,
and in the night tyme, thrée Moones were
séene.
               In the yeare. 1554. in Bauaria, and in
the borders of the same Countrie, in the
Moneth of March, sundrie maner Sunnes
were séene, with certaine celestiall circles.
At Ingolstadie in Germany, in the sixt day
of March, two Sunnes with a Rainebow,
betwéene eyght and nine in the forenoone.
At Norenberge, in the 23. day of March,
about one at after noone, both Sunnes and
Arckes appeared togither included wyth
christalline circles, for thrée houres togither,
with a beame into a iust length extensed.
               In the yere. 1555. the tenth day of Februarie,
thrée Sunnes were séene, in the yeare
1556. in the thirde Caldends of August,
nere Basill, the firmament being cléere,
thrée Sunnes were séene togither. In the
same yeare, in the sixt daye of December,
the singuler learned of the Vniuersitie of

                  Witebergensis, obserued thrée sunnes in
the Firmament.
               In the yere. 1567. on saint Steuens day,
in the tenth houre before noone at Francoforde
were thrée sunnes verie bright séene,
for an houre and a halfe: of which the one
towarde the East, the other towarde the
West placed, and a celestiall Bowe in the
top of heauen, that turned againe the backe
to the thrée sunnes. And in the same yeare
were séene againe thrée sunnes, in the fourth
daye of Maye, about the seauenth houre at
euening.
            
            
               Of thunder, what the 
                     •
                  ame is.
               THunder is a fearefull noyse in a thicke
clowde, which is forced by an exhalation
hote and drie, included wythin a clowde,
which with a rumbling séeking issue forth,
brasteth out b
                     •
                   great violence, and on eche
side beateth and shaketh the clowde. Plynie
reporteth, that it is a noyse caused through
the quarter of the compact fyre breaking
out of the clowde. Or it may thus be defined,
that the thunder is a noyse caused in
the clowdes, through the dryuing and smyting
of the exhalation vnto the sides of the

clowde. Albertus wryteth, that it is the
crack and noyse of a drie vapour, issuing
forth of a moyst clowde. Seneca in his second
booke, of naturall questions, thus defineth
thunder: it is a spirite or breath (sayth
he) running in the clowdes that causeth the
thunder: and after it hath contended wyth
the resistant matter brasteth out, which in
that running awaye kindleth the fyre. And
the variety of the noyses or rumbling of the
thunder: is caused of the same: that the
clowdes be vnequall, and that they haue as
it were certayne hollow places, and are no
where whole togither.
            
            
               The kindes of thunder.
               THe thunder is, after two maner or
wayes: For the thunder is eyther vehement
or great: or else weake or small.
               The thunder weake or small, is when an
exhalation runneth forth in the clowde
                     •
                   and
is driuen from side to side without rupture
and breaking of the clowde. And this is, after
thrée wayes, as crashing, whistling, and
blowing.
               1. The same crashing, or making a noyse
like to the rubbing of a coarde, is caused

through the smyting of clowds, which euen
then are chaunged into water: and it is like
to the noyse, which is heard, in the quenching
of a hote burning yron in colde water.
               2. The same whistling is, when the exhalation
is not yet kindled, nor forted forth,
and that the clowdes in thicknesse are not a
like equall: so that in diuers partes of them,
especially in the thinner, doth the exhalation
brast forth. Of which, this whisteling
thunder is the like noyse, as is of the winds
blowing stronglye through narrow holes:
where the vapour not yet forced forwarde
by dyuers partes of the clowde, breaketh in
the ende through the thinner.
               3. The blowing thunder is, when the
clowde is so weake, that it can not keepe the
exhalation kindled. So that before the vapour
is kindled, the same issueth forth without
anye vehement noyse, euen lyke the
noyse that the Smithes Bellowes cause or
make.
               The vehement or great thunder is, when
the exhalation strongly and vehemently cutteth
or breaketh the clowde, through which
a fearefull noyse is caused, euen like to the
tearing of a broade cloth. And this is, fower

maner of wayes: as eyther it is rumbling,
eyther breaking or tearing a sunder, eyther
violent, or cracking.
               1. The same rumbling or making a hydeous
noyse is, when the vapour or exhalation
shaketh the clowde with a certain rumbling,
but medleth not togither. The thunder
also is a sounding which maketh a noise▪
lyke to the humming of many men talking
in a Cloyster or such like vaulted place: as
when the vapour doth so much smite the
sides of the clowde, but not cleaueth, and
that flame then appeareth, as it were thorow
a clothe torne a sunder.
               2. The thunder cutting is the same,
which first smiteth it, but after cutteth out
the clowde, which noyse immediatly sheweth
the thwart lightning brasting forth.
The violent thunder is the same, which by
one inforcement cleaueth the clowde.
               3. The thunder cracking or shaking is,
when the exhalation kindled, deuydeth the
clowde, of which certayne partes issue.
This kinde of thunder maketh the lyke
noyse, as the cracking of wet woode, burning
in the fyre. For it is a vapour kindled
and dry, which in the issuing breaketh a sunder

the clowde, euen like as air Egge layed
on coales that brasteth.
               The efficient cause of the thunder, is the
sunne working with the other hote starres,
as the Astrologians report. For when the
Sunne, Iupiter, Mars, and Mercurie, are
placed in hote signes, and fete places, especially
when Iupiter is ioyned to Mars, by
any condition of beames, are woont to cause
thunder, and to prepare the matter of them.
               The matter of the thunder is a compounde
vapour, or an exhalation very hote
and drie, conioyned with a moyst vapour.
This matter is drawne up by the heate of
the sunne, vnto the middle region of the
ayre, where it chaungeth into a moyste
clowde, or is togyther eleuated wyth a
moyst vapour, as affirmeth Aristotle, by
which compa
                     •
                  ed and thrust togither, in the
ende brasteth forth. A question might here
be moued, how it hapneth, that thunder is
sometimes heard in the ayre, and no clowds
appearing. The aunswere is, that the same
hap
                     •
                  eth, when the exhalation is beaten
back
                     ••
                   by the middle region of the ayre, and
kind
                     ••
                  d, for so much it cleaueth then the aire
méeting it, and breaketh open the same,

through which it causeth a little or low noise
of thunder: euen like the noyse that are
heard sometimes in the ayre, after the maner
of armed horsemen swift ryding.
            
            
               What the finall cause of the
thunder.
               THe finall causes and effects of the thunder,
are well wayed and knowne in that
the ayre first by the thunder is purged, and
the euill vapours consumed, yea the pestilence
and other contagiousnesse often clensed
and put away.
               In the seconde, for that the thunders doe
often bring showres with them, through
which the earth plentifully yéeldeth.
               In the thirde, the almightie God thundereth
in the clowdes, to the ende that men
may be procured vnto a due reuerence and
feare towardes him: and they abashed, and
warned of the deuine yre, may heartily repent
them, as it is written in the .104.
Psalme: at the voyce of the thunder shall
the people be afrayde.
               In the fourth, that the wicked, obstinàte,
and impenitent, which euen like Gyaunts
wage battle against heauen, maye be destroyed

eyther with lightning, Thunder,
Hayle, and such darts of God, as the Historie
mencioneth of the people in Egipt, vnto
the Mount Synay.
               
            
            
               What the colours of the clowdes
warne and foreshew in
the thunders.
               THe clowde in the thunder being whyte,
is little or nothing to be feared. For it
signifieth the exhalation to be weake, and
the great abundance of vapours.
               2 The clowde in the thunder being very
blacke, pressing the vapour strongly togyther
through his thicknesse, sendeth a noyse
lightly forth very feareful: especially when
the inner fume copious and thicker, can not
be broken or deuided a sunder, wythout a
great inforcement.
               3. The clowde from black waxing red,
or being red, procureth a mightier cracke
and noyse, than the black clowde. For thys
is verie thick, and hath or contayneth much
of the fyrie vapour.
               4. The clowde with a blackish rednesse
waxing gréene, or appearing gréene, is the
most perillous of all, and verie much to be

feared, if the same consisteth or abydeth directly
ouer any Citte or house. This clowde
for the rednesse, hath many fyrie vapours:
For the blacknesse, an aboundant vapour
thickned togither: For the gréenenesse, the
mightie aboundance of water. Of these, a
mightie and fearefull rumbling, is to be looked
for in the ayre.
               5. The same clowde, often sheddeth and
sendeth downe mightie hayle, and prodigious
stories in the lightnings, not wythout
most grieuous losse and destruction, both of
men, beasts, Cities, and other matters.
               The cause why before, and after the thunder,
mightie or stormy windes arise, is forhat
the hotter and drier part of the exhala
                  
                     ••
                  n
pressed togither of the colde clowde compassing
about, which through his drynesse

                     •
                  iercing the clowde, and issuing forth, doth

                     •
                  ooue the ayre, and causeth the winde. So

                     •
                  hat after the clowde broken, and the vapour
driuen or sent forth in the ayre: expe
                  
                     ••
                  ence
teacheth, that the windes by a great

                     ••
                  forcement to be mooued or driuen for
                  
                     •
                  arde.
               The cause why the verie often thunde
                  
                     ••
                  gs,
threaten the Pestilence most grieuous,

and murrayne to beastes, and the corruption
also to crescent things which we
féede vpon: is for that the corrupt vapours,
grosse and clammy, drawne vp with the
vapour and exhalation, corrupting the lowest
region of the ayre, are shed againe, and
infect the ayre.
               
                  Cardanus writeth, that those thundrings
be daungerous, which contynue about an
houre, and they foreshew to that region in
which they happen, battailes, and seditions
for the more part, and a most great desolation
to come.
               The daylie experience instructeth vs, that
through the thunder vehemently rumbling,
and the lightning: both Wyne, and Beere
sellars are greatly harmed. For ye Wines
lose their colour, and naturall tast, through
the fyrie heate, and vertue pierceing, and
burning. The Béere, or Ale, also through
the mightie noyse, and violent motion, purchaseth
an egernesse: by which it is caused
lesse apt to be drunke. And although the
Sommer heate be the especiall cause, that
drinkes, and liquors sowre or be eager: ye
the thunder and lightning, procure a sodaine
alteration, yea in the Winter Moneths,

when the heate by little and little
causeth the same. The drinkes and Wines
layde in a déepe seller vaulted, receyue lesser
harme of the thunder, than those layde
a highe in a bourded seller. The Vinters
vse plates of yron with salt, or with Flintstones,
or with the braunches of the Bay
or Walnut trée, and put them on the vessels:
when the béere or Ale hath lost the naturall
taste, or waxeth sowre, you maye
help eche with Phisick and swéete smelling
things, & purchase the proper taste of these,
as with the roote of the Flower de Luce,
the Ginger, the Nutmegge, the Cloues,
the Bay berries, and the drie leaues of the
same, the Calamus odoratus, the Organy,
the Béetes. &c. The Wines sowred, and
hauing lost the naturall colour, through the
mightie noyse of the thunder, may be recouered
both of the colour and proper tast:
if 
                     •
                  o be the Wines shifted into other vessels
being well washed, and this decoction, that
is, of the Bay leaues, the Myrtill tree, the
Fennell, the Iuniper berries, and Orminium,
infused before for a tyme in the vessels,
and after the drying, the Wines ponred
in.
            
            
               
               Certaine foreknowledges
of thunder.
               THe prognosticatings of tempestes, are
not onely pleasaunt to be knowne, but
right profitable to be learned: as well of
husbandmen, as of those trauelling by sea
and lande. Of which, onely certayne generall
of Thunders, shall here briefely be
vttered, that may rightly be applyed.
               1. The Sunne in the morning, or at
Euening in the Sommer tyme, and vnto
these (the haruest beginning, and the spring
quite gone) with an accustomed heate shyning:
séene also in a hollow and bigge or
verie thick clowde, threatneth great thunder
to follow.
               2. The shootings in the night, out of the
foure quarters of the world (a black clowde
arysing out of the South) wastingly running,
doe eyther foreshew thunder & lightnings
to followe, or a mightie comming of
windes verie tempestious blowing in that
region, and these according to the season of
the yere.
               3. If a boysterous whirle winde, vehemently
blowing, hapneth eyther in the

Sommer, the spring, or haruest, that shall
lift or take vp strawes, dust, & other things
by a sodaine, and the element spred or couered
with black clowdes: doth portend thunder,
and showres of raine to be at hande.
               4. If the Sommer and hote dayes, and
those which went before them of the spring,
and the haruest dayes that folow, waxe and
be hote aboue the season of the yeare: and a
Rainebow sheweth it selfe at the Weste (in
the going downe of the Sunne) pronosticateth
fearefull thunder, & lightnings greatly
to be doubted.
               5. The morning thunder, and in the
Winter time, doth pronounce winde and
showers of raine: but the noone tyme thunders,
especially foreshew great showers.
               6. Thunderings moued and heard in
the last houre of the daye (as at Euening)
doe eyther demonstrate a mightie tempest
of the Sea, or the celestiall yre.
               7. In the Sommer, if it lesse thundreth,
than lightneth, signifieth raine to insue.
               8. The Sommer thundrings, hapning
at noone, and at Euening, is a note of raine
to folow.
               9. If mightily thundring, it then rayneth

not, yet doth it shewe raine comming
for the more part: and this hapneth according
to the condition of the ayre, and season
of the yeare.
               10. Plynie affirmeth, that if it shal thunder,
when Hennes doe sit, that the Egges
to perishe: but this generally, doe women
(of experience) denie.
               11. Hermes, an obseruer of celestiall
matters wryteth: that the thunders of Ianuarie,
to promise mightie windes, and the
aboundaunce of corne. The thundring in
February, threatneth the death of manye,
and especially of the riche. The thundring
in the Moneth of March, portendeth mightie
windes, firtylitie, and populare battels.
The thunders of Aprill, promise a good and
ioyous yere. The thundering in May, thretneth
famine and scarcitie. The thunders of
Iune, signifie a fruitfull yéelde, and the
plentie of victuals. The thunders of Iuly,
promise a plentifull increase of victuals, but
the scarcitie of fruites. The thundring in
August, portendeth a prosperous estate of
the common welth, but many diseases and
sicknesses. The thunders of September,
signifieth firtilitie, but the death of the Nobilitie.

The thundring in October, pronounceth
mightie windes, with the scarcitie of
fruites and victuals. The thunders of Nouember,
promise the large increase of corne,
and ioy to men. The thunders of December,
declare the aboundance of victuals, and
agréement of the people. The learned Beda
wryteth, that if thunder be first heard,
comming out of the East quarter, the same
foresheweth before the yere go about or be
ended, the great effusion of bloud.
               That if thunder first heard out of the
West quarter, then mortalitie, and a grieuous
plague to insue.
               That if thunder be first heard out of the
South quarter, threatneth the death of many
by shipwrack.
               That if thunder be first heard out of the
North quarter, doth then portend the death
of wicked persons, and the ouerthrowe of
many.
               Other obseruations of the auncient, that
may be vsed of any that will, without superstition,
as touching the thunder, may a
man further reade, in my booke of the Myrrour
of time.
            
            
               
               Of that lightning named Fulgur
what the same is, and of
the others.
               IT is an exhalation kindled through the often
agitation, like to towe, by which the
matter séeketh issue, which yet to the earth
falleth not: or the same is, when the onely
fyre sheweth: So that the same is caused,
when the clowde is thinne, and yéeldeth to
the breaking forth of the fyre without noyse.
The lyke is that named Fulgetrum, sauing
that it sheweth weaker, and of lesser light:
although many name the Fulgetrum, to be
the often repeatings togither of the fyre,
which the lyke are vsuall in Haruest. That
flashing much lyke a glistring light, is the
same which out of the kindled exhalation aryseth,
which by the sides of the clowde is
forced and driuen forth. Or it is the sodaine
appearance through time, of the subtill vapour
and kindled, running along by the
ayre, which is discerned, before the thunder
be heard: and no marueyle, in that the light
is farre swifter than the noyse, and the sight
alwayes goeth before the hearing, as by a
like in the cutting of timber: yet after nature,

is the light the later. For the exhalation
hote and drie, is caried into the middle
region of the ayre, and before it higher assendeth,
of the vapour togither eleuated,
and forced into a thick clowde, is the same
compassed and included: and when it can
delate it selfe no more, through the waterie
and colde clowde, it then wandreth about
the whole clowde, and séeketh issue
forth, which when it findeth not, as disdayning
breaketh then the clowde, through
which violent breaking forth, is that noyse
caused, which we name the thunder: and
togither with that motion, in which it wandred
by the clowde, and claue the clowde, is
the same kindled: and when this sparseth
the flame as it were abroad in the ayre, then
is it named Fulgur. The difference betwéene
the thunder and broade lightning is,
that the thunder is the selfe same noyse in
the ayre, which the vapour causeth running
in the clowde, and séeking issue forth: But
the broade lightning is the selfe same fyerie
brightnesse, which aryseth of the vapour issued
and kindled. For when it contended
through the resistaunce, and brake forth,
that flying away kindled the fyre. The flashing

lightning properly is none other, than
a brightnesse of the exhalation kindled, and
breaking forth of the clowde, which shyneth
abroade in the ayre. But that named Fulgetrum,
is a lesser lightning, and darcker
flame in the aire. So that the same is named
Fulmen or the perillousser lightning, when
the whole exhalation kindled is sent downewarde.
But that weaker lightning named
Fulgur, is when the brightnesse onely of
that exhalation kindled, shyneth in the aire.
Thus Seneca reporteth, in the first booke of
naturall questions. That the clowdes
meanely smyting togyther, cause the weake
lightnings: but the clowdes smyting togyther
by a greater force, cause the violent
lightnings. The diuersitie of colours in the
lightning, procéedeth of the diuersitie of
matter, in that one whiles whyte and cléere,
an other whyles yealow and darke, and other
whiles red, and fumous or darke it appeareth:
euen as the dyuers colours, that
are discerned in the clowdes. The whyte
and cléere lightning, procéedeth of the subtill
and thinne vapour: or of a thinne exhalation,
in a clowde ouer waterie, whereof
it sustaineth not a vehement heate and burning.

Hereof the bodyes, which this toucheth,
doth it little or nothing burne, so that
more by beame, than by the fyre, doth it
harme. This sometymes is profitable to
fruites, and a little to the leaues of Trées,
if it hapneth in an apt place, and time. The
darcke yealow lightning, procéedeth of a
thinne and somewhat clammye fume, in
which the flame is shyning, and portendeth
a vehement heate and perillous fyre, if the
same especially be sent downewarde. The
red lightning is caused, through a thicke
clowde, and the exhalation well fermented
or mixed togither, which brasteth forth with
a terrible noyse in the swelling ayre. The
grosser vapour of this hardly kindled, procureth
a verie daungerous flame, which
euen through the middle of the raine forceth
and worketh his fearefull properties. This
lightning many times, setteth cities on fire,
and burneth euen into the earth, water not
preuayling or able to resist it (such is the
mightie force of this celestiall fyre) that so
violently and grieuously destroyeth. The
fumous and somewhat black lightning, procéedeth
of a verie earthly and obscure, yet a
matter mightily burning, whose clowde, in

that it containeth very much of the viscous
moysture, is woont to fabricate or forme a
black or yronnie stone, which in ye shot sent
forth, burneth hastilye mightie bodyes of
trées, and sundrie other most solide matters,
without shewe or signe left behinde: yea,
these and other matters this cleaueth, destroyeth,
and vtterly wasteth. The lightnings
in the night, are playner and more
apparant, then in the day time, through the
Sunnes presence, by whose beames and
light aboue the earth, euen great lightnings
are hidden in the ayre to be séene. Here note,
that many persons are often made blynde,
or euer after molested with a dimnesse of
sight, which doe looke but with winking eies
on the lightnings: much more daungerous
thought, to looke on it with open eyes. The
fishes, and any maner cattle, smitten with
the mightier lightning, is daungerous to
eate, in that the fleshe and meate of such
are infected with a venimous qualitye, as
by triall hath bene obserued.
            
            
               Of the fearefull and violent
lightning.
               
                  
THis that the Phisitions properly name
lightning, is a common name, which is
referred and applied vnto euery exhalation,
which burning brasteth forth of the clowds.
So that the lightning is referred vnto the
same exhalation, which thickned and gathered
rounde in the middle of the clowde, smyteth
or beateth the clowde by a longer space,
and through the motion kindled, it at the
last cleaueth & breaketh through the clowde,
and is sent violently to the earth. For the
fyre forced of the clowde, is cast to the
earth: euen as the motion caused, in the
burning of gréene wood. For that cause is
this rightly named lightning, when the fire
sent forth of the clowdes, is caried euen vnto
the earth, and eyther doth it burne, eyther
breake, or hurt somewhat on the earth.
The flashing light, and the lightning, doe
not differ in the substance, but rather in the
forme and maner: for the flashing light is a
fyre lightlier kindled, which sparsed vnder
the clowdes, higher shyneth in the aire. But
the lightning is that exhalation, which when
the same is sent forth of the clowde, falleth
to the earth. The engendring of the lightning,
thus appeareth: that when the vapour

driuen or moued in ye clowde is kindled
and brasteth out of the moyst clowde,
then moystened agayne and gathered togyther,
as it were into a certain Masse, which
stirred and moued agayne is so hardened,
euen as clay dryed and hardned by the heate
of fyre. This Masse on thys wise baked and
hardned, is named the lightning. So that
the same is ingendred of a thicke vapour,
dry and viscouse, which is gathered rounde
togyther of the colde vapours, and breaking
forth by great force and noyse, and
discending euen to the earth, cleaueth, ouerthroweth,
windeth about, scattereth into
manye partes, yea destroyeth and consumeth
by diuers meanes, bodyes there found
hard and solyde, through the motion, light,
and blast. Howe many kindes of lightning
there are, can hardly be vttered, in that the
nature of the lightning is so dyuers and
marueylous, through which a sufficient
reason of the same can scarcely be giuen.
Yet marueylous are the workes of lightnings,
if a man well consider them: and
nothing to be doubted at, but that a secret
and diuine power consisteth in them. Also
certaine it is, that the lightnings not to

procéede or come by hap, nor onely caused
through the motion of the matter, in that
these sometimes are caused and sent downe
by the almightie God gouerning, nor such
can be applyed vnto natural causes, in that
they often foreshew some euill, and cal men
to repentaunce. Yet is their studie to be
commended, which (after the possibilitie of
mans nature) haue diligently sought out,
the causes of these matters. To be briefe,
Aristotle, Plynie, Seneca, and others, doe
make thrée differences of lightnings, and
these, according to the diuersitie of the matter
and effect, vnto which al the other kinds
may be referred and reduced. For the one
kinde is cutting a sunder, an other making
swartishe, and the thirde burning: or there
is one astonishing or causing stiffe, an other
blacke burning or fumous, and an other
cléere or flaming.
               1. The lightnings cutting, are those:
which doe not burne, but doe pierce and
part in sunder things resisting, through the
qualitie of the matter, of which consist, the
great drowte and plentie of windes and
spirites, which they violently take wyth
them. For these breake and part into small

péeces the obiect matter, before that it can
be burned of the lightning. In that the vapour
is swifter then the lightning. Otherwise
is the same named astonishing, not
burning, but pierceing and parting into
small péeces. For such is the purenesse and
thinnesse of the flame, that it maye pierce
through most straight places, and for the
mightie sturdinesse of the matter, maye
especially part into peeces. For the spirite or
drie vapour is carted forth of the clowde,
with a most swift motion, and thus entred
into bodies full of poores and penetrable, it
parteth them in péeces. So that this kinde
of lyghtning, is named the astonishing
lightning, throughe the colde expelled by
heat: for that it consisteth of the mightiest
vertues, and is of a marueylous nature,
and by a most swifte motion also doth the
spirite or drie vapour consume all thinges.
This burneth man inwarde, and consumeth
the bodie to ashes, without harming
the garments, it slayeth the yongling in the
wombe, without harme to the mother, it
consumeth money, the purses remayning
whole, it melteth the sworde the sheath being
whole, it harmeth the hande the gloue

not perished, and the vessell broken, it so astonisheth
the wine, that for thrée dayes after,
the wine sheddeth or runneth not forth.
For the matter of this lightning, is verie
subtill, and lightly pierceing the thing striken:
so that it burneth those matters which
resist it, as stones, yron, and such like. Here
note an example, of one Martia an honorable
woman of Rome, who being with child,
had the yongling striken and kylled of the
lightning in hir wombe, and she abode without
harme: and if the hystories be true, she
escaped after without harme. Eutropius
reporteth, that a marueylous kinde of lightning,
hapned on the birth day of Cicero,
which was on this wise: a certayne Mayden
of Rome iourneying into Apulia, was
smitten by the way with the stroke of lightning,
all the garments shifted from hir body
without cutting a sunder, and both the
Tyre and knittings on the breast, legges,
and féete consumed, the Bracelets, Kings,
and other ornamentes molten, so that shée
lay naked on the grounde, the body not harmed.
And the horse with the same slayne, lay
bare, hauing neyther brydle, saddle, nor no
furnyture on hym. &c.
               
                  
2. The lightning making swartishe, is
the same which burneth not, but for the paucytie
and thinnesse of matter onely maketh
swartishe or darke browne the resistaunt
matters, euen like the smoked partes couloured
of fyre, that can not burne. Otherwise
is the same named blackishe to smoke:
in that all thinges which this smyteth both
wythin and without, it maketh blackishe,
euen like soote of a small time made, and leaueth
behinde a shew & note of a fyrie smoke,
and for the ouermuch subtilnesse and thynnesse,
it flyeth out and pierceth, before that
it can burne the resistaunt matter. As may
euidently appéere by the vines, trées, corne,
and herbes, blasted with this lightning.
               3. The lightning burning, is the same
which hauing much of the earthly matter,
when it is sent downe, striketh and entreth
into the thinner bodyes, and smyting into
solyde bodyes forthwith dissolueth, destroyeth
and wasteth, whose force for troth is to
be marueyled at. Otherwise is the same reported
to be cléere and flaming. This lightning
is diuersly caused: For the matter otherwise
of the lightning, hath verie much
of the earthly and viscous matter. For

which cause it burneth the resistaunt matters,
especially if of the same substaunce,
which may be burned, they consist, and imprinteth
or sheweth the notes of burning:
yet the matter sometimes of the lightning,
consisteth of the vapours, verie subtill and
impure. Hereof the bodyes thinne and hauing
poores, this entereth without any note
or shewe of hurte, and corrupteth the inner
members: and the solyde bodyes resisting,
doth it part into péeces, & consumeth them.
So that this slayeth a man, or anye lyuing
beast, wythout any wounde appearing, or
note of hurt. And this also melteth the golde
or siluer in mens purses, the purses remayning
vnperished. Albertus magnus applyeth
vnto the lightnings of this kinde, the
depriuing of sight, and the swelling of the
face. For so much as we often sée men beholding
the lightnings become blynde: yea
and the face by that meanes so swollen, that
a man can hardly knowe after the person.
The same is caused through the thinnesse,
and porositie of our skinne and eyes, which
lightly receiue the subtil vapour, so that this
corrupteth the radicall moysture of the face,
and swelleth the face, and dryeth also the radicall

moysture of the eyes, through which
dryed, blindnesse of necessitie must insue.
               In what time of the yere, the lightnings
oftner happen, is here vttered: For the
sightnings in Winter sildome appeare to
vs, and the reason (as Plynie reporteth) is
in that the materiall cause is not so copious,
as in other times the same is woont to be:
for in the Winter tyme the exhalation is
onely moyst and colde, which gathered into
the clowdes, receyueth a verie hote force,
and although the same shall not be perceyued,
yet is it sodainely extinguished through
the force of the colde. Further, euery vapour
of the earth, is stiffe and verie colde: For
which cause in Scythia, and in the Countries
farther North (it is to be supposed) that
it sildome lightneth. And in Sommer, in the
hotter Countries, fewe lightnings are cau
                     •
                  sed:
for that in the Sommer, the exhalatio
                     •
                  
is onely hote and dry, which in no maner (o
                     •
                  
verie hardly) can be gathered and thickne
                     •
                  
into a clowde. Whereof in Aethiopia, 
                  
                     ••
                  gypt,
and in the Countries vnder the Tr
                     ••
                  pick
of Cancer, for the excéeding heat, ligh
                     ••
                  ning
doe sildome happen. But with vs i
                     •
                  
the Sommer time, dwelling Northward
                     •
                  
                  
lightnings are oftner caused, in that the
heate of sommer is not so great, that it can
consume all the matter or substaunce of the
clowdes. Euen so in the meane seasons of
the yere, as in the spring time, and haruest,
lightnings are oftner caused: in that the
constitution of these seasons, ministreth to
the ayre much matter, as wel dry, as moyst.
               The cause why man or beast is so slayne,
that no token of the hurt or wounde appeareth:
is for that the force and subtilnesse of
the kindled vapour, by which at a 
                     〈◊〉
                  
pierceth through the skinne, and penetrable
fleshe, through out porouse, and blasteth the
vitall members with a pestilent poyson, and
wyth the venymous qualitie and vertue
(which all lightnings are named to haue) it
slayeth. The same may verie well be applyed
vnto the foote hurt, and the shooe not perished,
and to the sap of trées corrupted, the
trée remayning whole, without any corruption
of the woode.
               The cause why money is so molten with
the lightning, the purse or money bagge remayning
whole, and the sworde in like maner,
the sheath abyding vnperished: is for
that these bodies are porouse, which lightly

yéelde to the mighty spirite, and subtill lightning
vapour, in which if such a mighty force
of striking be, through the great violence,
it then parteth into small péeces the resistaunt
and harde bodyes: if such a force of
burning, it then melteth. Such is the violence
of this, that it throweth downe pinnacles
of stone, yea Towers most stronglye
wrought, and other buyldings, mightie
stones also it parteth in péeces, & such matters
which haue anye resistaunce and hardnesse
in them, this ouerthroweth.
               The cause why lightnings often smyte
most highe places, as stéeples, towers, and
among trées, the high Oke in especiall, and
highe Mountaynes: is for that such which
be the higher, are the more open to iniuries
of the clowdes in the ayre, and by the course
running here and there, these bodies in the
waye resisting, happen to be striken and
spoyled. And euerye agent mightier worketh
néere hand, then that which by a great
space is distaunt. The other cause deuine is,
in that euill spirits dwelling in the ayre, doe
often stirre vp and cause (through Gods suffraunce)
cruell tempestes, and spoyle lyke
places, by Gods due vengeaunce.
               
                  
The cause why nettes lying in the water,
may be burned of the lightning: is for that
the flame of the same, hath much of the
Brimstonie and viscous matter, so that
fallen into water it may burne, the same hauing
attayned the due matter. And the same
doe our Artificers proue in Gunpowder, of
which the whole Arte insueth the celestiall
lightnings. And the lyke in a maner, may
a man sée in lyme, which through the powring
vpon of water, waxeth hote and is
kindled.
               The cause why the lightning cutteth or
parteth a vessell in péeces, or is burnt with
the lightning, the Wyne remayning whole
togither for a certaine space, as if the same
were coagulated: is through the lightning,
which hath verye much of the Brimstonie
substance and viscositie in it, which by piercing
into the whole substance of the Wine
is sparsed: hereof through the heate, what
soeuer is fast holding, is forced and sent into
the furthest extending of the Wine, & both
dryed and boyled agayne, through the fyrie
spirite of the lightning, that worketh a certaine
skinne, which stayeth the Wine from
running forth, for a certaine time, and the

same as it were with a skinne compassed about
retayneth. So that these miraculously
are caused by one inforcement, and as it
were in a moment. The same iudgement,
may be vttered of the others lyke.
            
            
               What the lightning Dart is.
               THe same is the stone of the lightning, as
the later wryters report, which sometimes
in wedge forine, sometimes rounde,
and sometimes in piller forme, falleth with
a mightie force into the earth, and both cleaueth,
scattreth, destroyeth, and burneth the
resistaunt bodyes and matters.
            
            
               The manner of the ingendring
of the Stone.
               THe vapour of the lightning is drye, and
sometimes somewhat clammy, of a certayne
Metallyne matter, earthly and thick,
which through the much motion and diuers
agitation falling into a moyst clowde, is
conglutynated (euen like meale tempered
with water, and baked) and in the ende
hardned into a solyde yronnie, or stonnie
Masse, euen lyke potters clay, baked into a
stone.
               
                  
This exhalation aswell flashing forth of
the clowdes, as the lightning, consisting for
the more part in a gréene or black clowde
bigge swollen, with a certayne clammye
matter, gathered rounde through the colde
moysture shed about of the clowde, and a
most sharpe heate folowing, procured of the
Sunne and starres, also through the motion
and colde expelled, is the same hardned into
a solyde and stonie bodye, in the lyke order
as the baked Tyles, which framed before of
moyst and soft clay, are after through dryed
and baked harde as a stone of the burning
fyre, in the proper Tyle fornace. And the
same Darte of the lightning is sharpned at
the neather ende, in that the moysture mixed
with the dryeth, searching to issue tendeth
downewarde, and of the same is there formed
sharpe, but the dry substaunce is in the
vpper part gathered and framed rounde, as
the thicker in forme. And this darte oftentimes
in the lightnings, worketh heauy and
lamentable haps on the earth. The thinges
which sildome or neuer, are striken wyth
lightning, be the Egle, the Bay trée, and
Seale, insomuch that a Garland of the Bay
trée worne, defendeth the person from lightning,

as the auncient report. The Sellers,
vaultes, or the verie déepe places vnder the
earth, are thought to auayle against the
lightning. In that the auncient affirme, that
the lightnings enter not aboue fiue foote into
the earth. Of this (Augustus Caesar) as
Hystories report, when a tempest of thunder,
and lightning hapned, he then hasted
into a déepe vault vnder the earth. Here
note, that no lightning is wyth out fyre.
For fyrie it is named, in that the same imprinteth
and sheweth manifest signes of fire
in the burning, scorching, & making swart.
Also a venymous beast striken with the
lightning, they saye to lose the poyson, or to
be purged of the poyson: but the lightning
stryking a beast not venymous, poysoneth
the same, and this hapneth, in that of the
same doing, dyuers effectes are sometimes
caused, by reason of the matter otherwise
disposed. Euen as it appeareth of a certaine
winde, putting out one Candell, and kindling
or lightning an other.
            
            
               Of the marueylous force, nature,
and miracles, of the
lightnings.
               
                  
THe lightning receaueth and hath a dyuers
nature and effect, in that it cutteth,
cleaueth, burneth, and s
                     •
                  ayeth beastes
with the touching, it sometymes hapning
venymous, burneth the hard, and pierceth
the thinke bodyes, if it shall be without burning,
it ingendreth a violent and tempestious
winde, in which storme, trées are winded
about, houses and other strong buyldings
throwne downe, and the Sea mightilye
tossed.
               2. Certayne is the same, by the report o
                     •
                  
wryters, that euery thing to be shaken and
blasted: before the lightning smyte it, and
that no person to be touched, which eyther
afore shall sée the lightning, or heare the
thunder.
               3. When a beast waking is striken with
the lightning, being dead hath the eyes fast
shut, but striken sléeping, hath the eyes open:
and lying on the ground, is turned by
it of the other side.
               4. The lightning consumeth the sword
or meate knife in the sheath, without harme
of the sheath. It melteth the money in the
purse, as afore vttred: it perisheth the foote,
without harme of the shooe. In that it entreth

the same, being full of poores, without
resistaunce: but about solyde and resisting
bodyes, it longer stayeth in consuming
them. It sometimes like hurteth the bones,
without spot appearing on the fleshe, in that
through the weake resistaunce and spéedie
pierceing of the fyre, the fleshe is not harmed
of it: as maye appeare of the hande,
spéedily thrust in and handling the burning
flame.
               5. The lightning sometimes parteth asunder
trées, as if those were clouen with a
wedge, without burning, and sometimes
staineth and blacketh by the touching, without
burning, and sometimes burneth both
houses and barnes: the cause of the first, is
the vehemencie of the stroke: the cause of
the second is the thinnesse, and weakenesse
of the exhalation: the cause of the thirde, is
the thicknesse of the matter of the exhalation,
for that the fyre in the substaunce more
thick, doth stronger burne: euen as it may
appéere in the yron red hote: but in the matter
lesser or not so thicke, it lesser burneth, as
may appeare in the Towe.
               6. The lightning poysoneth beasts striken,
euen like the bit of a Serpent, and mad

Dogge: in that the matter of ye same lightning,
is Brimstonie and venimous.
               7. The same is to be marueyled at,
which Seneca reporteth, as that wine vessels
to be burned with the lightning (as afore
vttered) the wine remayning whole,
and not shedding: the wine the whiles, not
contayned in any bodye. Also the lightning
doth so intoxicate the Wine striken, that
the drinkers of it eyther die, or become franticke
and madde.
               The same is caused, through the infectiue
nature of the lightning: and the reason of
the astonishing of the Wine, is the hastie
alteration, by which the whole clammynesse
of the Wine, is drawne forth into the
outward vpper face, where, like a thin skin
about retayneth the Wine, that the same
shed or runne not abroade, for thrée dayes.
               8. The lightning striking a person sléeping,
doth open the eyes of the sléeper: but
of ye person then waking or awake, it shutteth
the eyes. The cause of which is, in that
the lightning causeth the sléeper to awake,
but the person awake, it astonisheth in such
maner, that he shall sooner dye, then that
he can open the eyes againe for the tyme, as

the auncient report.
               9. The person stricken and touched with
the lightning, doth after turne the head and
face towarde the stroke, from whence the
lightning came. The cause of this, doth
Albertus Magnus here shewe: in that the
force of the stroke comming, conuerteth or
tourneth the striken bodyes towarde the
stroke, and naturall is the same to euerye
creature, to turne it selfe toward the harme
sodaynely comming, in holding the face towarde
it.
               10. The lightning sometimes harmeth
the yongling in the mothers wombe, the
mother remayning vnharmed: the cause of
which is the tendernesse of the yongling, and
strength of the mother: as by a lyke example
afore vttered, of the noble woman Martia
of Rome.
               11. A dead Serpent stricken wyth lightning
becommeth full of wormes, which otherwise
hapneth not to it aliue. The cause
is, in that through the lightning it is purged
of the proper poyson, which also is of an other
nature, than the lightning, so that the
same then hindereth not the procreation of
wormes.
               
                  
12. The lightning sometymes burneth
and consumeth the garments on the bodye,
yea the shooes on the féete, manye tymes it
onely burneth the heares on the head, without
harme of the body, which is caused thorow
the weakenesse of the exhalation: But
this sometymes killeth a man, without any
hurt or marke appearing, or anye signe of
burning. The same caused through the subtilnesse
of the exhalation, which if the same
shall be grosse, leaueth a note of the burning.
               13. Such which long looke vp at the lightning,
and hold their faces against the lightning,
are eyther caused blynde, or swollen
in the face, or procured leprous. The same
hapneth thorowe the fyre receyued by the
poores of the countenaunce and eyes, which
like swelleth the face, and dryeth vp the christaline
humour, that is cause of the blindnesse.
               14. The places of such which are striken
and burnt with the lightnings, are caused
colder than the other partes of the body:
eyther for that the greater heate, draweth away
with it the lesser, or else in that by the
great violence, the vitall heate is so extinguished
quite in those places, by report.
               
                  
15. Such bodyes striken with the lightning,
haue or possesse after a Brimstonie sauour:
in that the matter of the lightning is
Brimstonie, as the Philosopher Niphus
reporteth.
               16. This Niphus vttreth that the lightning
spéedier burneth solyde and harde bodyes,
than the soft: as the same of skill
knowne, and many tymes obserued.
               17. The thunderbolt sent forth with the
lightning, neuer déeper runneth or entreth
into the earth than fiue foote, after the opinion
of sundrie obseruers.
               18. In the yeare. 1553. in the Month of
Iuly, in a towne of Germany named Smelunicensis,
whyle the people before dinner
were at deuine seruice, a mightie light
sodaynedly shyned, and a lightning in the
same killed two persons, and about thirtie
other persons with his force and vehemencie
of the exhalation, threwe to the earth,
which yet through the goodnesse of God, contrarie
to mans iudgement and estimation,
were yet preserued aliue: of which also certaine
had their garmentes burnt, yet their
bodyes vnharmed, by a myracle of God.
               19. The Romaynes in times past, diuined

and iudged of the lightnings: which if
those came from the left part or side of heauen,
and returned into the same agayne,
they pronounced those to be happy and prosperous.
For on such wise Anchyses (after
the Romayne maner) prognosticated good
luck, if the lightning hapned on the left side.
And Cicero in his second booke de Diuinatione,
reporteth the same to be good luck in
al matters traueyled about, if the lightning
shall happen on the left side. But ye Gréekes
and Barbarians, iudged the lightninges
prosperous, that came on the right side. The
Baye trée is sildome harmed with the lightning:
which rather of practise, than by
reason alowed: for so much as it hath thys
repulsiue vertue of the lightning through
the inner cause, or of heauen. Of which
Tiberius Caesar was woont, in the tempest
of lightning, to weare on his head a Garlād
of Bayes, supposing hymselfe to be defended
thereby.
               20. In the yeare. 1551. at Crutzburge
a Citie in Germany, a certaine honest man,
hauing his house stricken with lightning,
sitting then at table eating, perished wyth
his Dogge, lying flat at his féete: but an Infant

sitting or being néere to the father, nothing
at all harmed. The mother of Hieronymus
Fracastorius, going with chylde
with him, dyed with the stroke of lightning
the Infant remayning vnharmed: which
wonderfully foreshewed by it, the singular
fame of that childe to come.
            
            
               What an Earthquake is.
               AN Earthquake, is a passion or affection
of the earth, a breaking forth or trembling,
a smyting or agitation, when an exhalation
is included in the bowels of the
same, séeking a violent issuing forth: in the
which, this so smyteth & shaketh the earth.
And of the same smiting, is the Earthquake
named. Or it is a certaine working, by
which the earth is moued, caused especially
of winde or drie vapours, inclosed within
the hollownesse of the earth, and through the
heate of the sunne, and other starres heated
and enforced, by which motion and enforcement,
this so shaketh, that oftentymes
houses, yea whole Cities, and townes, are
throwne downe, and suncke with the same,
that the sinnes of men may be punished, and
others called vnto repentaunce.
            
            
               
               How many kindes of Earthquakes
there are.
               OF the earthquake, whether the same
maye happen or no (I beleue no man
doubteth) seing Hystories report so manye
examples: and experience of late yeares,
hath made the same knowne sufficiently to
vs. The kindes (to come to the matter) are
knowne to be fower principally, which are
vttered of Plynie in his second Booke, and
82. Chapiter. Some report more, and some
vtter fewer kindes, which through the dyuersitie,
the plentie or paucytie of the exhalations,
and force of the qualities aryse
and are caused. The first kinde is named
the falling or shaking downe, the seconde
the gaping open, the thirde the trembling,
beating or shaking, the fourth the
casting vp.
            
            
               What the ruine is.
               THe ruine, falling, or shaking downe, is
when much and great store of drye vapour
or winde, applying and dryuing by
great force into one place, forceth it selfe,
and turneth the same sodainly vpsydowne,
except the motion spéedily runneth on the other

side, which fallen, no more harme insueth.
With thys was Smyrna the most noble
Citie of the lesser Asia shaken & throwne
downe, as appeareth in the Apocalipse, in
the first and second Chapiter. And the sonne
of God commaunded the Church of Smyrna
to wryte this notable comfort: Retayne
fayth, and beleeue stedfastlye vnto death, and
I shall giue to thee a crowne of lyfe. Seneca
nameth it an inclynation, in that the earth
leaneth to one side, like a ship. For as a ship
leaning vnto one side, is drowned through
the mightie waight in it, vnlesse the same
waight spéedilye be turned vnto the other
side, through which the ship is so restored, &
recouered as it were. Euen so with ye great
plenty of spirites or winde, it applyeth and
driueth vnto one side of the earth, doth in a
maner ouerthrowe the same, vnlesse the
contrarie part restoreth the part inclyned.
Reade Liuius lib. 2. tertia Decadis.
               
            
            
               What the Gaping is.
               THe gaping, is when the earth rendeth
with a large opening, and that a déepe
hollownesse appeareth, and the breath or
winde mighty and vehement, breaking violently

forth, doth on such wise sinke downe,
and swallowe vp Townes, and Cities.
Or thus, this gaping, is a rending or cleauing
of the earth, when the earth sinketh
downe, and swaloweth vp Cities,
houses, townes, and Castels, yea, great
hilles, and mightie rockes, with great ryuers,
and mightie lakes of water, in such
maner, that these are neuer after séene.
Where this swalloweth vp any buildings,
fortresses, or townes, in the places appéere
none other, than large and déepe holes or
goulfes.
            
            
               What the Pulsation is.
               THe Pulsation, is when the earth (as the
same swelling vp) aryseth by force of
the windes, that the buildings (in that time)
leane from one side to the other (as a Ship
on the Sea) and sinketh soone after downe
againe: which Aristotle nameth a beating
or dryuing vp. Otherwise, is the same named
an agitation, shaking, or trembling.
Or this otherwise, when with great violence
the earth is lifted vp, in such maner
that Castels and buyldings through their
shaking, appere ready to fall: and the same

doth immediatly sinke, and settle downe agayne.
Which maner is procured, when
the whole force of the spirits laboureth and
séeketh an issue vpwards: euen as the kindled
Gunpowder, that searcheth way to brast
forth: which at the last finding issue to passe
causeth the earth swelled vp, to fal and settle
agayne in the proper place.
            
            
               What the fourth kinde is.
               THe same is, when a mightie and huge
substance of earth (like to a Mountaine)
is throwne out of the earth: or when anye
part of the earth sincketh déepe downe, thorowe
which eyther floodes, lakes, or riuers,
or else fires brast forth. This kinde doth
Aristotle verie well open, where he vttereth:
that the motion of the earth now caused
in certaine places, doth not cease, before
that winde, which had moued forwarde, to
cast vp the earth on a great heigth aboue
grounde, and lyke a storme of smoke and
ashes issued forth: which like lately hapned
by the Sea Heraclea, and before néere the
Iland Hiera, which is one of them, which
at this day they name Aeolias. For in this,
a part of the earth swelled and rose vp with

a noyse, into the kinde of a light hill: which
at the last breaking a sunder, much winde
issued, that sent vp fyre and ashes. This also
procureth the ouerflowings of the Sea,
when the bottome of the same is raysed and
swollen vp, through which, manye Ilandes
appeare, that were neuer seene before. The
learned Aristotle reporteth, that the Countrie
Egypt in time past, was a great Goulfe
of the Sea, which through an Earthquake
(as it shoulde séeme) procured to be drye
lande: and remayning in the same maner,
vnto this day: a like reporteth Herodotus.
               
            
            
               What the materiall cause is.
               THe materiall or effectiue cause neare to
the Earthquake, is the exhalation hote
and drie, or the winde, engendred and included
within the caues or dennes of the
earth, which séeking a violent issue, at hys
naturall places, breaketh forth of the earth,
and causeth in this maner, a violent shaking
of the earth. And that the earth of hys
proper nature is drie, and prepareth vapours
and exhalations, the same in a maner
at this day, séemeth a maruell to fewe of
any knowledge. For the same is sufficiently

knowne, that it is caused by accidence. Yet
further, the true cause of the earthquake or
trembling of the earth, is the winde or drie
vapour, grosse and earthly, included of
the earth, and otherwise sent in, or there
ingendred: so that manifest it is that such
spirites or winde to be ingendred in the
earth. For well knowne is this, that the
earth of it selfe is drye, but the same moystened
with daylie showers of rayne, and
the poores shut harde togither, that the exhalation
ingendred or conceyued brasteth not
forth: and salt or sea waters cause the like,
in that these through the saltnesse close or
shut the poores of the earth, with which the
same is on euerye side compassed, and in a
maner swimmeth or runneth ouer it: and
after with the beames of the sunne heating,
doth ingender a great aboundance of exhalations,
which not so much breaketh vp into
the ayre, but that within it selfe often retayneth
drye spirites or vapours, both grosse
and earthly, which cause the Earthquake.
This sentence of Plynie of the materiall
cause, doe the Philosophers affirme and
prooue, that the same through the gathering
of the spirites is ingendred, and Aristotle
                  
in these coniectures, proueth by a lyke reason,
that the Earthquake may so be caused.
               The first reason is taken of mans body,
in which windy spirites, when in it they are
included, are woont to cause a trembling or
shaking, where the venting forth could not
be caused.
               A second reason he gathereth and taketh
of the condition of a quyet or caulme ayre
and season, when as the tyme is cléere, and
a great stilnesse in the night, and at Noone.
Here or at that time, the spirites included in
the earth, can not breath forth.
               A thirde reason, through the plentye of
matter, which caused greater in the spring
and haruest, than in the other quarters or
partes of the yere. Of which, in those tymes
for the more part, are Earthquakes caused.
               A fourth reason he vttreth of experience,
for so much as the same by vse is found, that
the agitation not to cease, vntill the whole
force of spirites shall haue breathed forth.
               The fift and last of the precedent sounde:
for the earth causeth a roring or sounde, thorowe
the windie spirite met: before the
same be smytten & resisted. The selfe same
confirmeth the reason of the tyme, and places.

For these are caused a little before the
Sunne rysing, at what tyme the windes
are woont for the more part to arise. In the
Equinoctials also, when the greater force
of vapours consisteth, than in the Solstices,
and through the straight or narrow places,
of the Sea, in which straight places, the
winde is included: is wont there to be violenter,
and séeking the caues or hollow places,
doth so smite and shake the earth.
            
            
               What the formall cause is.
               THe formall cause, is the agitation and
smyting of the earth: for the drie vapours
and windes there included by hys
vertue, are lifted or forced vp, séeking issue
forth, but when this is no where open, thorowe
the passages of the earth stopped, are
driuen and sent back warde, with no meane
force, through which stryuing the earth in
the ende is smitten and shaked. For by the
ouermuch heate or colde, is the issue of vapours
procured, of which the smyting is
caused. A sure & an euident note of this, are
the windes in mans bodye included. For
those shake euen the whole body, when by
force at the last they breake forth: and the

lyke is caused in the belching and refting,
and in all other agitations of the bodye: of
what condition soeuer they be. So that the
same, which procureth the winde aboue the
earth, and in the clowds thunder: the same
causeth a trembling or shaking in the passages
of the earth.
            
            
               Which the obiect or place is of
the Earthquake.
               THe great Earthquakes are caused in the
Sea coastes, where many exhalations
may be included. For the Sea entreth into
the earth as it were by certayne pypes, and
holloweth the same, where after the spirites
or windes are ingendred, which when they
contende to issue forth, are repelled or driuen
back of the Sea floodes, and are on such
wise hid againe in the bowels of the earth,
which after increased, nor with those séeketh
issue, doe then smite against the sides
of the earth.
               
                  Aristotle reporteth, that the most mightie
Earthquakes to be there caused, where
the Sea daylie floweth, or the Countrie is
spungeous, or the same aboundeth wyth
hollow places, caues and déepe dennes. For

which cause, he affirmeth that such tremblings
to happen oftner about Hellespontus,
                  Achaia, Sicilia, and Euboea, through
the Sea running neare by, which as by certaine
pypes entreth into these places, and
through his coldenesse dryueth inwarde the
exhalations. The Countrie of Hollande,
and other hollow places, through the multitude
of caues, and inwarde holes, rightlye
named Holeland, which both the same,
and others like, are subiect to this euill.
               In places farre from the Sea, are fewer
Earthquakes caused: in that ye earth there,
is not so hollowed, and the Sea causeth not
clifts, nor beating or shaking with the great
floods of waters, yet the sounder and faster
any grounde of the earth is, so much the
more harmed at the shaking: for so much
it mightier shutteth in the exhalations, and
compelleth an inforcement in the cause.
               The Ilands, and the valleys, are sildome
molested with the Earthquake: for so much
as the partes of the earth in themselfe are
pressed togither, and are but a little porouse,
so that these cannot enter in.
               An earthquake is sildome caused in moyst
places, for so much as the moysture hindreth

or letteth the exhalation to come vnto
strength, of which, the Philosopher reporteth,
that in the floodes of the Sea Pontus,
a lesse Earthquake to be caused: for so much
as the huge sea about, cooleth the exhalations
and on such wise letteth them.
               In the sandie and grauily places, as are
the places Northerly, farre sildomer is an
Earthquake caused, yea scarcely any Earthquake
at all caused in those places: for so
much as the same grounde is a thinner
earth, and lesser solyde, nor so thicke compact,
and that the fumes ascend by little and
little, without force.
            
            
               How the ingendring is, or of the
maner of the ingendring
of Earthquakes.
               THe Earthquake is caused when the exhalations
and vapours included in the
caues, and hollowe places or passages of
the earth contende togither, and by his
nature séeke on highe to breake forth:
but through the earth close stopped, not finding
way by force shake the same, and cause
it to tremble, and in the ende breake forth:
so that the earth oftentimes causeth eyther a

gaping, or déepe caue, or goulfe, or the same
throwne vp on heigth after the maner of a
hill or Mountayne: of which great Mountayne
                     •
                  
happen to be suncke and swallowed
vp in a Goulfe: as sundrie lyke we reade in
the Hystories: yea great waters and ryuers
drunke vp, and the course of waters
chaunged, and lande floodes caused in the
mayne lande. Or thus, the earth contayneth
in it selfe a much exhalation, which it
heating conceaueth, through the fierie efficacie
and vertue of the Sunne, the Planets,
and fixed starres. This spirite, for that
the same is subtill, is most apt to be inforced.
So that when by it this drie spirite runneth,
included within the earth, séeking issue,
is so by his force lifted vp, and driuen
from one hollownesse into another. Of
which this when for the solyde nature of the
earth, and stopped passages of the earth, can
not issue or passe forth, procureth lightly and
soone a trembling in it selfe caused through
the beating and driuing back: so that retayned,
this strongly moueth and shaketh the
earth, or séeking his waye, and the spirite
driuen by a narrow body of the earth, laboreth
with a most strong contention. For into

the proper and naturall place this contendeth
to flie, which through the mightie stopping
letted of the compact earth, is the same
driuen backe into the earth: which at the
length laboureth to issue, causing the same
to tremble: and casteth vp the earth▪ (in the
breaking forth) like to a hill, vntil it be issued:
yea this sometimes cleaueth the same, and
openeth it in the issuing forth at two sides.
Aristotle vttereth other notes, for after the
earth beaten vp, he reporteth that great
windes to breath and flie vp, and that fyre
and ashes to be cast forth. So that water
not to be the special cause of the earthquake:
for the water should otherwise be still, if the
same were not blowne and driuen. Nor such
a swiftnesse or hastinesse of the trembling
coulde be caused, if so much could be procured
in the waters swelling, and that the
earth could very often breake. But it often
breaketh not in the tremblings & shakings
of the earth. Yet doth this pronounce the
great plentie of vapours included in the
caues of the earth, driuen like windes by
their force, and agitation sparsed by certain
places, which when the same is caused, it
instructeth that those places to tremble, thorowe

the might of the vapours forced. For
it is manifest, that the earth to be full of vapours,
& the thundring or rumbling which
is heard in the shaking of the earth, is a
note of the flying vapours. And for so much
as the vapours open the passages of the
earth, a water sometimes is shed out of the
earth: of which, no such plentie consisteth,
or is in the great Mountaynes, that might
like smite them.
               Howe so great a heape of earth, of so
thinne and light a body as the winde, may
be cast vp, doth the Philosopher Aristotle
here vtter by a similitude, as in our bodies
spirites included, are cause of the tremblings
or shakings and beating of the pulses:
euen so hapneth in the same earth,
when a great force of the vapours gathered,
mooue and shake it wyth their force.
            
            
               What the finall causes are.
               THe finall cause of an Earthquake, is the
signification verie sad & heauie, of matters
and haps to come, as of battels, landfloodes,
mutation of Emperies, the dearth
of victuals. &c. For the Earthquakes alwayes
pronounce great calamities, as

                  Plynie witnesseth, where he reporteth, that
the Citie of Rome neuer trembled, but that
the same was a foreshewe of some happe to
come or insue: so that the Romanes curiously
obserued the Earthquakes: as ye same
is manifest, in their Hystories. Of the
earthquake Cardanus reporteth, that the
earth to be cleaued through a vapoure, and
not to be doubted, but that the same to prognosticate
great sedicions. Yea the great
earthquakes denounce eyther a Battayle,
or the Plague, or a Tirannicall oppression:
these also cause a dearth of corne, and famine.
Yet the earthquakes somtimes threaten
no other euils, than the ouerthow (of
proper Cities and Townes) and destruction
or mortalitie of those persons, which dwell in
them. These hitherto Cardanus.
               
               The holy Scriptures vtter the same, that
in these motions the Lorde God exerciseth,
and sheweth his most seuere ire, punishing
with these the peoples sinnes, by a iust iudgment,
vnlesse they spéedily repent. For it is
written in the seconde booke of Kinges, and
xxij. Chapter, that the ire of God was mooued,
and the earth trembled: for so much
as the Lorde God was angrie with them.

Euen so before the Turckes tooke Gréece,
for thrée, whole dayes togither, the Earthquake
shooke the borders néere, bounding,
and many buildings fell downe. Before
the Peloponesian Battayle, the countrie of
Laconia was so fearefully shaken with an
Earthquake, that whole townes fell, and
much people destroyed, and ouerwhelmed
in the fall of them. Eutropius writeth, that
in the next yeare after the death of Paule
the Apostle, Laodicoea and Colossa were
suncke with an Earthquake, in which example
both a punishment of the wicked
was séene, which contemned Paules doctrine,
and a signyfication of calamities to
come on Asia bordering néere by, and of the
crueltie, which Domitianus exercysed in
the same part of the worlde, when he compelled.
S. Iohn the Apostle to liue in exile.
The like hapned an Earthquake before the
death of Theodosius the second, which endured
for sixe monethes, and shooke Constantinople,
and many other places of Asia.
The earth gaping, manye Townes were
suncke. The Sca one where flying the gaping
suncke and running an other waye
on the earth, ouerwhelmed & drowned many

townes. These later yeares, were lyke
examples seéne in Germanie, after which
lamentable alterations insued in the Romaine
Empire.
            
            
               What the effects are.
               THese are most lamentable, that through
an Earthquake both the sincking and
ouerthrow of howses and Cities are caused,
as in the time of Tiberius Coesare hapned,
where in one night twelue Cities fell with
an earthquake. Also perticuler lande floods.
For in this agitation of the earth, doth much
water sometimes breake forth, when the exhalation
being déepe is driuen foorth by a
great force: for in that motion is the earth
oftentimes dylated, and oftentimes Ilands
Cities, and mightie mountaynes, by a
mightie gaping suncke and swalowed: and
a Region (through the shaking of an Earthquake)
be spoyled. Forsomuche as Ilandes
Countries, and Hilles, are driuen vp, and
caused to appeare, through an earthquake.
Yea a gréeuous pestilence, many times ensueth
an Earthquake. For so muche as
fumes, and venimous vapors, putrified in
the bowels of the earth, doe infect the ayre

with their rottennesse. And this putrified
exhalaion, they name Memphitis, that is,
a putried vapour.
            
            
               Which the signes be of an earthquake.
               THe first note, the learned vtter of the
Eclipsis, for the region or countrie, vnto
which the shadow of the Eclips of the lights
(as of the Sunne and Moone) is conuerted
or extendeth, is woonte for the more parte,
to be subiect to the harme of the earthquake
& the same the certayner, if the Eclipse happen
in the tayle of the Dragon: which howe
muche the greater, and generaller the same
shall be, so muche the mightier shall the
shaking of the earthquake be: but howe
much the smaller, so much the weaker. &c.
               2 The second note, doth the Sunne offer
and shewe: when for certaine dayes, the
Sunne shineth dimme and darcke, without
any clowde couering him: and a meruellous
calmenesse, with a couldenesse in the morning:
and after the Sunne setting (the element
being cléere) a thinne clowde is stretched
narrowe and a longe by the ayre: hath
béene obserued, that an earthquake often to
followe.
               
                  
3 The thirde, a firie clowde, expressing
the kinde and forme of a burning piller in
the ayre, yeldeth a most true and sure note
(as Calistines the Philsopher reporteth) of
an Earthquake to ensue.
               4 In the fourth, the water in déepe pits
and welles, before an Earthquake, is without
a manifest cause troubled, and infected
with a saltie sauour, or with some other vngratefull
smell and taste not naturall, and
this through the pestilent exhalations, which
long within the earth, haue beene inclosed,
and begin somewhat to be sent abroade, as
vttered first Pherecides, the instructer of
the wise Pythagoras, of whom the learned
Plinie mentioneth in his second booke, and
79. Chapter. And the like Cicero, in hys
fift booke de Diuinatione.
               
               5 In the fift a marueylous quietnesse and
stilnesse of the windes silent in the region of
of the earth, subiect to the motion and earthquake,
shutte in and inclosed for certayne
Monethes afore, as the same obserued by
the auncient.
               6 In the sixt, by the seas and waues surging,
a note may be gathered and learned,
which the saylers perceyue vndoubted to

insue, when as the sea rageth and beateth
without mightie windes procuring the like
swelling. And the partes and things within
shippes like shake, as buildings on the earth
and with a noyse hard vnder the earth, that
foreshewe that motion or the earthquake.
               7 In the seuenth, a thinne clowde after
the maner of a strake or line, very small towarde
the setting in the West, long and
white, is séene (for the more part) to go before
an agitation or trembling of the earth,
by which note Anaximander confirmed
sometymes to the Lacedemonians for truth
their predictions of these matters.
               8 In the eight, that Birdes, with many
foure footed beastes leaue or forsake the apt
places redy to ye shaking of the earth, séeking
and abiding in newe places, by which these
may so defende them, from the iniurie nere
hande, and this so well proued and knowne
by obseruations, as witnessed in the bookes
of the auncient.
               9 In the ninth, the earth neuer trembleth
or no earthquake is caused, but when the sea
is calme and still, and the ayre so maruellous
still that the Foules flying haue not
breath nor ayre to beare them in their flight,

nor neuer haue, but after windes breathed
forth of hollowe vaynes and Ca
                     •
                  es of the
earth, included before in the same.
               10 In the tenth, a fearefull roring, thundring,
and hideous sounde like to the crie of
men, and a noyse sometimes like to the clittring
of harnest men heard in the earth before
the earthquake commeth. But it sometimes
hapneth, that this great roring or
thundring is heard in the earth, & no earthquake
at all ensueth, as when the winde
without beating and trembling of the earth
findeth issue to passe.
               11 In the eleuenth, that the Sunne is
séene of many, for certaine dayes before, very
mistie and dimme of light, as though hée
lost his light, or appéered as he were bloudie:
which dymnes or lyke sight to our eyes is
caused, through lacke of the wind to dissolue
and purge this thick and grosse ayre, which
at that tyme is inclosed within the bowels
of the earth.
               12 To these may be added a twelfth note,
which is the appearing of a Comet or blasing
starre, a tyme before. In these if many
notes concurre, the signification is the more
certaine. For none of these notes alone is to

be considered and taken, that the same may
bée sufficient vnto the signifying or foreshewing
of an earthquake.
               Let this suffise (gentle reader) as touching
the marueylous force, and miracles of
the lightnings, with the other wonderfull
apparitions in the ayre, concluding that
these are vttered, part for mans instruction
and comfort, and part as warnings, to all
christians for the amendment of lyfe, by the
fearefull examples manifested in this treatise,
not wythout the singular prouidence of
God, in the forewarning vs in such maner,
of the manye daungers hanging ouer our
heades, in these perillous dayes. Thus my
intent brought to an ende, in most brie
                     ••
                  
maner, I ende this treatise.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   