
      
         
            
            
            THE
Spirituall Fishing.
A SERMON
Preached in Cambridge by that
Reuerend and Iudicious Diuine,
Mr SAMVEL HIERON.
Printed by the true Copie written with his
owne hands a little before his deceaſe.
            LVKE 5. Verſ. 10.
The laſt words of the Verſe.
            Henceforth thou ſhalt catch Men.
            
            AT LONDON
Printed by IOHN BEALE, for widow Helme, and
are to bee ſold at her ſhop vnder St 
               Dunſtans
Church in Fleet-ſtreet. 1618.
         
         
            
            
            ¶To the VVorthy,
Religious, and Vertuous Lady, the
Lady MARGARET YELVERTON,
Wife to the much honoured, Sir
HENRY YELVERTON Knight,
the Kings Atturney Generall,
continuance of all happineſſe.
            
               Madam,
            
            
               NO ſooner came this Sermon
vnto my hands, (the Author
whereof for his approued
zeale, worthily deſerued the title
of an eminent Light and Ornament
of our Church) then I vowed the dedication
thereof vnto your Ladiſhip;
Nor may it ſeeme vnworthy your
fauourable acceptance (the principall
aime of my expectance) in regard of

that ſingular testimony which all men
that haue been conuerſant in his
Works, doe giue of the Author, being
ſuch a one as neither affection could
corrupt, nor affectation tranſport; but
of that ſpirit, as he was zealous with a
good conſcience, making humility his
path to glory. Jn a word, (Madam)
his former Labours (now reduced into
one Ʋolume) haue been euer countenanced
by ſome choice Patrons:
Nor may this (being equall with
most of the reſt) claime leſſe prerogatiue
then the reſt. Thus wiſhing you
that benefit for which it was intended,
to the glory of God, whereto it is directed,
J rest,
            
               Your Ladiſhips
reſpectiuely,
J. B.
            
         
         
            
            To the Chriſtian Reader▪
            
            
               CHriſtian & curteous Reader, being moued
by ſuch who had intereſt in bringing
to light this Sermon, that I would prefix
ſome ſmall Epiſtle, I would not hang
backe from performing ſo ſmall a kindneſſe.
And two conſiderations eſpecially ſwaied mee
to write a fewe lines in this kinde. The firſt whereof is
the Authors great deſerts towards the Church of God;
great in teaching, great in writing. Many a man there
is, who hauing learnedly, iudiciouſly, and plainly taught
the truth of God, hauing taken heed to the Miniſterie
which hee receiued in the Lord, to fulfill it, and that
in preaching alone; not withſtanding he hath left his
memoriall bleſſed upon earth, euen in that regard and
naked reſpect. But if there bee one man of a great
companie, who as he taught religiouſly and powerfully
in his life, ſo beſides in his life he did write to the comfortable
edification of the Church, and yea alſo left after
his death other things to be publiſhed for the behoofe
of Gods Saints, without queſtion ſuch a worthy may
well haue double honour put vpon him. Many ſuch
deſeruing inſtruments, hath God raiſed vp in our
Church exceeding both for mouth, and penne: among
the laſt of which, the Author of this Sermon need not to

be ranked.Pro. 31. 31. 
               His workes praiſe him in the gates as Salomon
ſpeaketh of the vertuous Womans deeds. The ſecond
and third, nay the fift and ſixt editions of certaine
Treatiſes written by him, though in a dumb, neuertheleſſe
with a mouing rhetorick, ſpeake effectually to his
commandation. In the ſecond place, that did not a little
encourage me, that this Sermon (if much affection haue
not dazled ſome eies) may well bee eſteemed amongſt
one of the cheife he did deliuer. It was preached in a
famous Vniuerſitie, in a moſt learned, & ful auditory,
it was heard with attention (his godly voice, & ſanctified
geſture enliuening the hearers:) afterwards it was
ſpoken of with reuerence and affection; as both hearing
it, and hearing of it, I can truely auouch, it was his
farewell Sermon to his Mother Vniuerſitie, although
not (I ſupoſe) in the Authors intent, yet in the euent:
the Lord often directing matters▪ otherwiſe then for
the preſent wee dreame of. Receiue therefore Chriſtian
Reader this Sermon, ſound for edification, ſweete for
application, ſhewing Miniſters thier duty, ſhewing people
theirs, and therefore not vnwelcome to ad good either
teachers, or learners. Thus wiſhing thee all bleſſing
from God in this and all other like furtherances of
thy deuotion, I recommend thee to the Lords mercie,
beſeeching him for Chriſt his ſake, to fulfil euery honeſt
deſire of thy heart.
            
               
                  Thine in our common Sauiour,
E. C.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE
Spirituall Fishing.
Text,
LVKE 5. ver. 10. The laſt words of that verſe,
Henceforth thou ſhalt catch men.
            
            
               WHereas heere our Sauiour
tranſlates this
phraſe of Fiſhing, or
catching, from an ordinary
and inferiour
courſe, vnto a more
heauenly and ſpirituall
buſineſſe, euen to
the winning of ſoules;
it giues very direct occaſion
to handle theſe things.
            Firſt, The ſtate of the world, which is as the Sea.
            Secondly, the ſtate of the Church, which is as
a Ship or Boate in the Sea.
            Thirdly, the ſtate of men by nature, who be

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
as Fiſhes ranging after their owne diſpoſition, vncaught.
            Fourthly, the ſtate of Miniſters, who bee as
Fiſhers.
            Fiftly, the ſtate of the Goſpell preached, which
is the hooke, or baite, or net to take ſoules.
            Theſe things are not ſtrained or forced, but
ariſe out of the place directly. For ſith Peter and
the reſt muſt change their courſe, and fall to a
new kind of Fiſhing; what is the Sea which
they muſt lanch out into, but the World? what
is the Boate, but the Church in which they labour,
& to which they ſeek to gather ſoules? what
is the booty they muſt ſeeke for, but the ſonnes
of men? and what are they but ſo many Fiſhers?
or what is their net, but the Goſpell, the word
of Saluation which they Preach? Of euery of
theſe I will ſpeake ſomething, and that briefly.
            That the ſtate of the World, is as the Sea, it
is plaine by theſe places; Before the throne there
was a Sea of glaſſe like vnto Chryſtall (Reu. 4. 6.), In that
day the Lord with his ſore and great and mighty
ſword ſhall ſlay the Dragon that is in the Sea (I▪ 27. 1.):
And the ſtate of the World is as the Sea in a fourfold
reſpect;The State of this World compared to the Sea in 4. reſpects. firſt, becauſe of the generall vnſtableneſſe
of the things thereof. The vnſedledneſſe
of that vaſt creature the Sea is well knowne. It is
in continuall motion (it cannot reſt
               Iſai. 57. 20. it) ebbes
 and flowes perpetually: ſometimes (at a Springtyde)
it ſwels to that bigneſſe, that the bankes

cannot containe it; ſometimes againe, it falles
backe ſo low, that a man muſt goe farre from the
banke before hee can come neere it. It is (vnder
God) chiefly gouerned by the Moone, then the
which there is no one thing more ſubiect vnto
change, it being neuer beheld two nights together
in one proportion. Thus is the World, whether
wee looke vpon the generall ſtates of Kingdomes,
or the perſonall eſtates of particular
men, either for their goods or for their bodies,
wee ſee nothing but a continuall alteration:
Crownes are tranſlated from head to head, and
Scepters paſſe from one hand to another; fenced
Cities are made heapes, and walled Townes become
as the plowed fields: they which were once
faſtened as a nayle in a ſure place, and hauing
ſet their neſts on hie, dreamed of nothing but perpetuities
for them & theirs, are ſuddenly throwne
out of all, and rolled and turned like a ball (Iſ. 22. 18:). The
great houſes are ſmitten with breaches (Àm. 6. 11.) & the wide
dwellings and large chambers, ſieled with cedar, and
painted with vermilion (Ier. 22. 14.), are in a moment left without
an inhabitant (Iſ. 5. 9.). Haman is to day the ſecond
in the Kingdome, but ſtript of all, is hanged vp to
morrow (Heſt. 7. 10.). This yeare is Ieruſalem the Princeſſe
among the Prouinces, but the next yeare made tributarie
(Lam. 1. 1.); her nobles which did erewhile put on
ſcarlet, do now embrace the dung
               Lam 4. 5.. Now doth Nebuchadnezzar
walke in his royall palace of Babel, priding
himſelfe in his outward ſtate; but while the

word was in the Kings mouth, a voice came downe
from Heauen, ſaying, O King Nebuchadnezzar, to
thee bee it ſpoken, thy Kingdome is departed from
thee,
               Dan. 4. 26. &c. 
               &c.: Yeſterday Iobs cattell went out by
their thouſands, he had both ſonnes and daughters
to doe him honour, and ſeruants at his command:
to day heere is not a hoofe to bee ſeene
in his ground, not a childe to call him bleſſed, not
a ladde left to attend him. This is the vncertainty
of this ebbing and flowing World, the faſhion of
it goeth away
               1. Cor. 7. 31.
            
                2. Becauſe of the tumultuouſneſſe of it: who
is ignorant of the ſtormes and grieuous tempeſts
which are at Sea? There eſpecially men ſee the
workes of the Lord and his wonders in the deepe:
For he commandeth and raiſeth the ſtormy winde, and
it lifteth vp the waues thereof
               Pſal. 107. 24. 25.. The World is a fit
patterne heereof, in reſpect of the continuall ſtirs
and troubles that are in it: Nation againſt Nation
by warres, man againſt man by diuers kindes
of contentions, of euery one that liues therein is
the ſaying of Iob verified, Man that is borne of a
woman is full of trouble
               Chap 14. 1., Man is borne vnto trauaile,
as the ſparks fly vpward
               Chap. 5. 7.. It was the puniſhment
which God layed vpon him, that in ſorrow
hee ſhould eate his bread all the daies of his life
               Gen. 3. 17.: and
albeit ſome haue a more calme paſſage then ſome
others haue, or like Ionas
               Chap. 1. 5. 
               can lye and ſleepe, when
others are toſſed with the ſtorme, yet none can
liue without ſome vexation; he is not alwaies caried

with full ſayles to the end of his deſires.
            3. The world reſembles the Sea by the oppreſſion 
that is in it. At Sea the leſſer fiſhes are a prey
to the great ones; and in the World, the rich and
mightie ſwallow vp the pooreAm. 8. 4.: one man bites
and deuoures anotherCal. 5. 15.; Manaſſeth, Ephraim; Ephraim,
Manaſſeth
               Iſ. 9. 21.. To this pertaines that of the
Prophet, That men are made as the fiſhes of the
Sea
               Hab. 1. 14.
            
            4. In reſpect of the ſway the Diuell beares in 
it. Obſerue what is in the Pſame, The Sea is great
and wide, there is that Leuiathan whom the Lord hath
made to play therein
               Pſal. 104. 26. Now looke how this monſter
domineeres in the Sea, ſo doth Sathan heere
in the World: therefore he is called the God of
this World
               2. Cor. 44., and ſaid to worke in the children of diſobedience
               Epheſ. 2. 2.: And to iuſtifie this compariſon, as
the World is called the Sea, ſo is the Diuell Leuiathan
               Iſ 27. 1..
Thus we ſee how the World is compared
to the Sea: The ſtate of the Sea is vncertaine, ſo is
the World; it is tempeſtuous, ſo is the World
full of tumult: In it the great fiſhes deuoure the
leſſe, ſo in the World the poore and weake are a
ſpoile to the mightie: Leuiathan takes his pleaſure
in the Sea, ſo doth Sathan rule and beare
ſway in the World.
            To preſſe forward the counſell of S. Iohn,
               
                  
                     Ʋſe.
                
               Loue
not the world neither the things that are in the world
               1. Epiſt. 2. 25
            
            The Doctrine now deliuered, affoords a
ſtrong reaſon to enforce it: For where there is ſo

much vncertaintie, ſo much confuſion and trouble,
ſuch oppreſſion and cruelty, where the Diuell
beareth ſuch exceeding ſway; what is there to be
found worth delighting in? A man imagines
himſelfe ſure in reſpect of his outward eſtate; at
an inſtant comes as it were a waue and waſheth away
all: he promiſeth peace and quietneſſe to
himſelfe; ſuddenly ariſeth a ſtorme, and puts him
to a trouble which he thought not of: much adoe
ſhall he haue to eſcape the hands of the oppreſſor,
be he as he will; nay, the better and holyer
he is, ſo much the more that great Leuiathan
that olde ſerpent hath him in continuall chaſe.
Marke and conſider, oh ye men of the earth, all
whoſe ſtriuing and plotting and plodding is for
the world; conſider what it is vpon which you
dote and with which you are enamoured ſo exceedingly;
it is euen a very Sea of vncertainties
and bottomeleſſe Ocean of confuſed vexation,
the very hold & kingdome of the diuell. We hunt
after it, but where is our aſſurance when we haue
got it? or what haue we procured to our ſelues,
but vanitie and vexation of ſpirit? The further we
wade into it, the further are we from the Lord:
for the amitie of the World is the enmitie of God
               Iam. 4. 4., and
the more buſineſſe we haue in it, in the greater
hazard we are to be drowned in perdition & deſtruction
               1. Tim. 6. 9..
Happy were it for vs if the meditation of
this point touching the proportion which is betwixt
the World and Sea, were able to vnglue and

vntwiſt our affections, which are ſo neerely tyed
vnto it, and to ſtirre vs vp like paſſengers by Sea
to long for the Hauen, and to ſtriue for that eternall
reſt, a kingdome not of vncertaintie, but
which cannot be ſhaken; a place not of trouble,
but where ſhall be no more death, neither ſorrow, neither
crying, neither ſhall be any more paine
               Reu. 21. 4.. There
the prince of darkeneſſe cannot endanger; for the
Lamb is the light of it
               ver. 23., and God himſelfe ſhall be
all in all to thoſe that dwell therein1. Cor. 15. 28.. This is the
Vſe.
            THe next thing is touching the Church: The
ſtate thereof in the World is like the ſtate of a Ship
or Boate vpon the Sea;
               The ſtate of the Church in this world, compared to a ſhip or boat vpon the Sea. And that eſpecially in this
reſpect: Becauſe it is ſubiect to continuall toſſings.
            Of Trauailers by Sea it is ſaid, that they are
toſſed too and fro, and ſtagger like drunken men,
and all their cunning is gonePſal. 107 27. Not vnlike to
this is the ſtate and condition of Gods Church.
It fareth with it, as with the Ship Ionas was in;
There was a mightie tempeſt in the Sea, ſo that
the Ship was like to be brokenChap. 1. 4.: or which the Diſciples
were in; There aroſe a great tempeſt in the
Sea, ſo that the Ship was couered with wauesMat. 8. 24..
Such was the ſtate of the Church of old, the members
whereof complained, how the waters had almoſt
drowned them, and the ſtreame had gone ouer
their ſoule
               Pſal. 124. 4.. And Dauid as a man experienced in

ſuch ſtormes, cryeth out to GodPſal. 69. 1., Saue me, for the
waters are entred, euen to my ſoule: and deliuer and
take mee out of the great waters
               Pſal. 144 7.. And as it was
with the Ship in which Paul was ſo exceedingly
hazarded, that they ſaw neither Sunne nor Starres in
many daies
               Act. 27. 20.: ſo the Church of God, is often driuen
into that extremitie, that it is for a time, euen
depriued of all ordinary comfort, and ſeemes to
bee without all hope of any more refreſhing.
Hence are theſe complaints of the Church, O God
why haſt thou put vs away for euer? Why is thy
wrath kindled againſt the ſheepe of thy paſture?
thinke vpon thy congregation &c.
               Pſal. 74. 1 2.; and wilt thou be
angry with vs for euer? and wilt thou prolong thy
wrath from one generation to another? wilt thou not
turne againe &c.
               Pſal. 85. 5. 6. Thus Dauid as a trauailer in
this Ship, cryed out, Will the Lord abſent himſelfe
for euer? and will he no more ſhew fauour
               Pſal 77. 7.? And
Heman the Ezrahite; Lord why doſt thou reiect my
ſoule, and hideſt thy face from me
               Pſal. 88. 14.? It is a law
that cannot be broken, that the choſen of God
muſt thorow many afflictions enter into the kingdome
of God
               Act. 14. 22.; God hath ſo appointed for his owne
glory.
            
                Firſt, the troubles of his Church and the afflictions
of his people, do make his power and mercy
to be knowne; euen as the skill of a Pilot, is moſt
to be ſeene in a ſtorme: My power is made perfect
through weakeneſſe
               1. Cor. 12. 9.. The Lord bringeth matters
to an exigent, and ſuffereth them to come to the

very brinke of hazard, that ſo his might and
goodneſſe in the deliuery of his ſeruants may be
the more apparent. When the Church of Iſrael
was in a wonderfull ſtrait, the Sea before them,
the mountaines on both ſides, the enemyes at
their heeles, Now (ſayth God) I will get me honour
vpon Pharaoh, and vpon all his hoſt: the Egyptians
alſo ſhall know that I am the Lord
               Exod. 14. 4..
            2. For their good: firſt, It makes them to
looke vpward with the greater feruency. Dauid
ſayth of ordinary paſſengers by Sea, that when
they mount vp to the heauen, and deſcend to the deepe,
ſo that their ſoule melteth for trouble &c, then they
cry vnto the Lord in their trouble &c.
               Pſal. 107. 28.. The Mariners
with Ionas when the ſtorme was vp, downe
were they vpon their knees, and euery man cryed
vnto his God
               Ioans 1. 5.. And ſo the ſwelling waues of afflictions,
do not quench but kindle the deuotion
of Gods ſeruants▪ 
               In their affliction they will ſeeke
me diligently
               Hoſea 5. 15.. Secondly, it makes them long ſo
much the more for the Hauen (where they would
be.) Note Paules dayly dying, and the continuall
troubles which he was expoſed vnto, made him
long to be diſſoluedPhil. 1. 23., and to be as glad when his
time of departing was at hand2. Tim. 4 6., as the poore
weather-beaten Mariner is to ſee the land. Thirdly,
it makes the deliuerance when it comes to be
the more eſteemedPſal. 107. 30., When they are quieted they
are glad, and double welcome is that refreſhing
which comes at the very pinch of neceſſity. The

               redeeming of Dauids life from the graue, the rayſing
him vp from the very mouth of the pit, made
him to vow with himſelfe neuer to forget
               Pſa. 103. 2. 4.
            
            This ſerues to adm̄oniſh all that feare God,
                  Vſe 1.
               
what they muſt make prouiſion for, if they will
be ſaued. By their profeſſion, they are entred into
the Church of God, not as into a Garden of
pleaſure, where they may aduenture to ſay euery
one to his ſoule, Soule, liue at eaſe, eate, drinke, and
take thy pastime
               Luke 12. 19.; but as into a Ship, a houſe of
continuall motion, where though there may be
calmeneſſe for a time, the Sun ſhining out, the
winds layd, and the Sea ſmooth, yet it is wiſedome
to be in continuall expectation of a ſtorme.
God hath not called vs vnto caſe and quiet, but
to the croſſe. Many things are to be endured betwixt
our ſetting out here, and our arriuall at the
Land of Promiſe. Many ſtormes to bee gone
through, many rocks and ſands to be aduentured
by, many Pirats ſeeking the ſpoyle of our ſoules
to be grapled with, before the hauen of Reſt can
be entred into. The ignorance, or the inconſideration
of this point hath deceiued many. They
may thus fitly be ſhadowed out. Some freſh trauailer
ſtanding vpon the ſhore in a faire day, and
beholding the Ships in their beautie lye readie
rigged and trimmed in the Harbor, thinks it a
gallant thing to goe to Sea, and will need aduenture;
but being out a league or two, and feeling by
the rocking of the Ship his ſtomacke begin to

worke and grow ſicke, and his ſoule euen to abhorre
all manner of meat; or otherwiſe a ſtorme
to ariſe, the wind and the water as it were conſpiring
the ouerthrow of the veſſell, and euery ſea
carrying in it the face of death; forthwith repents
his folly, and makes vowes, that if he can once recouer
the ſhore, he will bid an eternall farewell
vnto all ſuch voyages. Thus, there be who in the
calme dayes of peace, when Religion is not ouerclowded
by the times, that will needs ioyne
themſelues to the number of Gods people, they
will be as earneſt and forward as the beſt. But
when a tempeſt begins to appeare, and the Sea to
grow rougher then at the firſt entry, the times alter,
trouble is rayſed, and many croſſe winds of
much oppoſition and gainſaying begin to blow,
they are weary of their courſe, and will needs be
ſet aſhore againe, reſoluing neuer to thruſt themſelues
into any more aduentures. How needfull
then is it that Chriſtians ſhould often remember,
how by Chriſts ſpeech here, the Church is neceſſarily
reſembled to a Ship? enter not into it, to be
a guide or a paſſenger, a Miniſter, or a profeſſor,
vnleſſe thou reſolutely make prouiſion for a
ſtorme. Till the end of the voyage there is no reſt
to be looked for: wherein notwithſtanding this
may be for a comfort, that this Ship (the Church
of God) hath a priuiledge which none hath elſe,
no not the greateſt Gallioun or Argoſy vnder
heauen; It may be toſſed, but can neuer be drowned,

               Though the waters of the ſea rage and bee
troubled, and the mountaines ſhake at the ſurges thereof;
God is in the midſt of it, therefore ſhall it not be moued,
God ſhall help it very early
               Pſal. 46▪ 3. 5.. It is as the Arke
of Noah, which (becauſe God had ſhut it vpon
Noah) therefore it was borne vp euen amidſt the
wauesGen. 7. 16. 17; or as the Boate in which Chriſt wasMat. 8. 24. 26,
which was welneere couered with waters, yet at
an inſtant, by the command of him which is the
Lord of the Sea, there followed a gracious calme.
Chriſt is the Pilot, and (as was ſayd of Paul) God
hath giuen to him all that ſayle with him
               Act. 27. 24., and he will
giue them eternall life, and they ſhall neuer periſh
               Iohn 10. 18..
            The ſecond vſe ſerues to teach vs (becauſe the
Church of God is as a Ship in this ſea of the
world) the neceſſity of furniſhing our ſelues with
ſuch things as appertaine to this ſpirituall voyage:
                  
                     Ʋſe 2
not to inſiſt vpon many, two things eſpecially
muſt be looked too. Firſt, That we be diligent in
obſeruing the direction appointed by God, for
the true guidance of our courſe. The Sea-men
haue their Card and their Compaſſe, they haue
the Sun and Stars, and the motions of heauen to
direct them. That which our courſe muſt be guided
by is the word of God; it is like the pillar that
went before the hoſt of Iſrael according to the
mouing or ſtanding whereof they ordered all
their iourneyes. Hither may be referred that of
Peter
               2. Epiſt. 1. 19., We haue a moſt ſure word of the Prophets, to
which ye do well that ye take heed, as vnto a light that

ſhineth in a darke place. It is an alluſion to a Seacourſe:
when the Admirall hangs out a Lanterne,
and all that come behind ſteere to that. We
cannot wander if we be led by this light: It is that
good Spirit which Dauid prayed to be led by vnto
the land of righteouſneſſe
               Pſal. 143. 10.. What other Load-ſtar
of cuſtome, or opinion or faſhion of the times
men attend vpon, they muſt needs run vpon the
rocks and make ſhipwrack of the faith. Secondly,
That we take with vs the knowledge and faith of
Gods promiſes. It is called the Anchor, Hebr. 6. 19.
This is our ſtay, in the day of tempeſt; I know
whom I haue belieued
               2. Tim. 1. 12.: ſuch an one cannot be moued,
for his heart is fixed, and belieueth in the Lord
               Pſal. 112. 7..
The promiſes being either not knowne or not
applied, the ſoule is toſſed without reſt, and muſt
needs be ouerwhelmed with deſpaire. This Anchor
being tyed to the ſoule by the ſtrong cable of
a li
                  •
               ely faith, giues comfort vnto it in the greateſt
ſtorme.
            THE third thing is concerning the ſtate of
men.The ſtate of mē by nature compared to fiſhes in the Sea, ranging after their owne diſpoſi iō
                  ▪t vncaught. Doctrine.
                The fiſh to be catched out of this Sea,
and to be brought into this Ship, are men, Thou
ſha't catch men from hence-forth. From whence this
is gathered:
            
               That we are all by nature in the ſtate of condemnation.
This is cleere out of this place. By this fiſhing,
or catching (the very ſubſtance of the Miniſters
office) is meant, a bringing of men into the

way of life. Now then, in as much as we are all by
nature vncaught (otherwiſe why ſhould Chriſt
ſend out his Apoſtles to take vs?) it followeth,
that we are all by nature without grace, euen in
the very gulfe and iawes of eternall woe. This is
eaſily prooued by the Scriptures; All fleſh hath corrupted
his way vpon the earth
               Geneſ. 6. 12.. The Lord looked downe
from heauen vpon the children of men, to ſee if there
were anie that would understand and ſeeke God. All
are gone out of the way: they are all corrupt, there is
none that doth good, no not onePſal 14. 2. 3.. All we like ſheepe
haue gone astray: we haue turned euery one to his owne
way
               Iſa. 53. 6.: By nature the children of wrath aſwel as others
               Epheſ. 2. 3.;
without Christ, and were aliens from the Common-wealth
of Iſrael, and were ſtrangers from the Couenant
of Promiſe, and had no hope, and were without
God in the world
               Verſe 12.: Vnwiſe, diſobedient, deceiued, ſeruing
the lusts &c.
               Titus 3. 3. 
               Destruction and calamitie are in
our waies
               Rom. 3. 16..
            And well in this are we compared vnto the
fiſh: For as the fiſhes skippe and play and take
their pleaſure in the ſea, and are vnwillingly taken
in the net, and labour to get out, and being in the
boate, would faine, if they could, leape backe into
the ſea; ſo naturally wee take pleaſure in our ſinfull
wayes. It is a pastime for a foole to do wickedly
               Prou 10 23..
The net of the Goſpell muſt encloſe vs; of our
ſelues we abhor it, and to the death will not come
within the compaſſe of it; and being entangled,
we deſire ſtill to be looſed, and to returne againe

vnto our wonted courſe. This is the verie true
ſtate of vs all. We neither are in the ſtate of grace
by nature, neither doe we deſire it. We be plunged
into a ſea of miſerie, and in our owne diſpoſition
we would neuer forſake it.
            It were well for vs, if we could learne by this to
ſee our ſelues what we be, and what we would euer
be, if we were leſt to the ſwinge of our owne
affections. Nature hath (as it were) ſpawned vs
forth into this worldly ſea: and as it ſelfe lieth in
wickedneſſe
               1 Iohn 5 19, ſo do we drinke iniquitie like water
               Iob 15. 16..
It is ſweete vnto vs in our mouth, and we hide it vnder
the tongue, we ſauour it, and will not forſake it, but
keepe it cloſe in the mouth
               Iob 20. 12. 13. We neither know the
meanes of our ſaluation, nor affect it when it is offered.
Either the Scripture is falſe, or this is true.
How happy were we if this could humble vs! it
would make vs afrayd of following our owne
thoughts, or of being led by the ſway of our owne
hearts. Our not knowing the miſerie of our owne
eſtate, is the cauſe of all the ſecuritie, of all the profaneneſſe,
of all the boldneſſe in ſinne, of all the
contempt of Gods word which is in the world at
this day. This place among others, is as a glaſſe to
ſhew vs what wee are; ſtrangers from ſaluation,
and as farre from anie inclination to it as a fiſh is
from a will and deſire to be caught.
            THe fourth thing is of the ſtate of the Miniſter.The ſtate of miniſters, who be as Fiſhers.
Heere are two things: Firſt, the ſtate of the

Miniſterie: Secondly, the labour, buſineſſe and
worke of the Miniſterie. Of the firſt thus we ſee:
            
               That it is no ſuperfluous or needeleſſe function,
               
                  Doctrine 1. 
               but a
calling of great neceſsitie for the winning and ſauing of
mens ſoules. This is cuident out of this place. The
Lord intending the conuerſion of ſome, and being
able diuers waies to accompliſh his purpoſe in
that behalfe, yet hath thought it good to ſingle
out this meanes among all the reſt, euen by man
to catch man, and by his miniſterie to bring ſoules
into his Kingdome. This is that which the Apoſtles,
ſaith, Ephe. 4. 11. 12. He gaue ſome to be Apoſtles,
and ſome Prophets, and ſome Euangeliſts, and ſome Paſtors
and Teachers, for the repairing of the Saints, for
the worke of the Ministery. The Saints which belong
to the election of grace, being ſcattered vp
on the earth here and there, his pleaſure is by Paul
and Timothie to gather them together vnto himſelfe.
They be the Lords Labourers to bring in his
Harueſt
               Matt. 9. 38., his Workemen to aduance his building
               1 Cor. 3. 9.,
his Shepheards to take heed vnto his flocke
               Acts 20. 28., the Stars
in his right hand to giue light vnto his Church
               Reuel. 1. 20..
There being thouſands of ſoules to be ſaued in
Iurie, the Lord will haue them to be brought in
by Peters miniſterieActs 2. 41.: Philip muſt be ſent to catch
the Samaritans and the Eunuch
               Acts 8.. In Corinthus
there was a great draught (I haue much people in this
Citie:) therefore there Paul muſt goe to workeActs 18. 10..
Heere is the neceſſitie of the calling.
            To reproue their prophane and wretched opinion,
                  Vſe
               
               
who thinke, that among all the profeſſions
which are at this day in the world, that of the Miniſterie may
beſt be ſpared. It is ſtrongly thought
by many, that it were no danger or preiudice to
mens ſoules, though there were no Miniſter at all
to inſtruct them. O ſay ſome, what neede they
trouble themſelues? Euerie man muſt anſwer for
his owne ſoule; and if we do not as we ſhould, we
ſhall beare the blame.
            Thus they would ſhift off all dependance vpon
the ordinance of God, and lay an imputation
of ſuperfluitie vpon that calling, by which it is the
pleaſure of God to ſaue thoſe that beleeue. This
one place is ſufficient to ſtop their mouth; For I
may truly auouch it out of the words heere, that
(ordinarily) there is no more hope of a mans ſaluation
without an able and induſtrious Miniſter,
then there is that the fiſh in the Sea will of it ſelfe
come aſhoare, and offer it ſelfe vnto vs without
the labour of ſome, to go out into the deep with
boates and nets to bring them in. Henceforth thou
ſhalt catch men.
            
            Secondly, thus:
                  Doctrine 2.. 
               That the calling of the Miniſter
is noidle calling, but a calling of labour, a calling of
much buſineſſe and of great employment.
            
            The Miniſters are fiſhers, whether that be
not a profeſſion of much labour, iudge you. To
make the thing it ſelfe manifeſt, this is worthie to
be obſerued; That the moſt names giuen in the
Scripture to men of this calling, doe betoken labour;

               Seers
               1. Sam. 9. 9., Watchmen
               Ezech. 3. 17., Embaſſadours
               2 Cor. 5. 20., Labourers
               Matth. 9. 38.,
Diſpoſers
               1. Cor. 4. 1., Husbandmen
               Mar. 12. 2., Seedeſ men
               1. Cor. 3. 9.,
Shepheards
               Iohn 10. 2., Cryers
               Lu. 3. 4.. There is no title giuen
them, but implieth action, yea and induſtry very
great. It is a worthie worke
               1. Tim. 3. 1., their Maintenance
is with that condition1. Theſ 5. 13 1. Cor. 9. 14.; otherwiſe no title, no
name nor ſhew can free them from ContemptMatth. 5. 13.
            It meeteth with two euills in Miniſters; firſt,
the idleneſſe which hath ouertaken ſome that are
called to this buſie profeſſion; They are ſuch as
the Prophet reproueth,
                  
                     Ʋſe 1.
                
               Watchmen that are blinde,
that haue no knowledge, that are dumbe dogges and
cannot barke: that lie and ſleepe and delight in ſleeping
               Iſa. 56. 10..
I take no pleaſure in laying open the nakedneſſe
of men of mine owne coate: yet God forbid
that I ſhould vſe my tongue to the licking of
their ſores, which prooue the very bane of Gods
Church, and doe make it lie like the field of the
ſluggard, or as the garden of the idler. Secondly,
the ſpirit of greedineſſe which (is to be feared)
is in many. They can neuer haue enough &c.
               Iſa. 56. 11.. They
goe out to catch, yet not ſoules to God, but preferments
to themſelues, and are ſtill fiſhing for
aduauncement. They haue not learned that of
the Apoſtle: I ſeeke not yours, but you
               2. Cor. 12 14; It is
not your fauour which I doe affect, it is not your
wealth which I ſeeke for, it is your ſaluation which
I endeuour. This is the honour of a mans miniſterie,
the glorie and crowne of his calling.
            It ouerthroweth the common fancie of the
                  Vſe 2.
               
people, who account the Miniſters calling to be
an idle and a lazie calling; we get our liuings eaſily
in the conceit of ſome, and it is no ſinne nor
pitty (in their vnderſtanding) to defraud vs; and
how vſuall is it in the mouthes of many, to ſay,
Wee muſt labour for them? I confeſſe, that as
ſome vſe it, it is a calling of exceſſiue idleneſſe, if
they be ſuch as feede themſelues, and feede not
the flockes
               Ezech. 34. 1, ſuch as take away the key of Knowledge
               Lu. 11. 52.;
but conſider it in it owne nature, and as it ought
to be performed, we ſhall finde it to be a ſeruice
of greater buſineſſe. Let Peter, or anie ſucceſſour
of Peter buſie himſelfe (as he muſt) ſometimes
in preparing, ſometimes in mending, ſometimes
in caſting abroad, ſometimes in drawing in
his net; no man ſhall haue any iuſt cauſe to twit
him with idleneſſe, or to ſay, That becauſe he
is a Miniſter, therefore he hath an eaſie occupation.
            THe laſt thing is, That the nette in which men
muſt be taken,
               
                  Doctrine.
                
               is the preaching of the Goſpell.
            
            Chriſt heere acquainting them generally with
his purpoſe how to employ them,The ſtate of the Goſpell preached, cō
                  pared to a hooke, baite, or net, to catch mens oules. after changed
the phraſe when it came to the poynt of execution;
and he which now ſpake of fiſhing; told
them afterwards of preaching, Matth. 10. chapter
verſe 7. of Teaching the nations
               Matt. 28. 19., of Declaring the
Goſpell to euerie creature
               Mar. 16. 15., of Feeding his ſheepe
               Iohn 21. 15.:
and Chriſt himſelfe compareth the Goſpell to

netMatt. 13. 47.. The compariſon agreeth fitly after this maner:
            The preaching of the Goſpell is like to a net;
firſt, in the generall driſt and vſe: the vſe of a net
is to take fiſh: the drift of preaching is to bring in
ſoules. Secondly, in the ordering of it: It is not
the net lapped vp together that bringeth in the
draught, but haled out at length and ſpread forth
that encloſeth the fiſh: It is the opening and vnfolding
of the Goſpell, the ſtretching it out by
preaching which doth encompaſſe ſoules. There
may a fiſh or two hang in the net being let downe
on a heape, but that is a chaunce, and is no wiſe
aduenturing. The word read, and ſo brought in
(as it were) in groſſe, may (by the mercy of God)
take ſome; but we haue no warrant from hence to
make a rule generall. Againe, it is neede that the
nette be ſtrong, otherwiſe the greater kinde will
breake through, and make all the labour and
charge to be in vaine; ſo it is meete that the Doctrine
be well ſtrengthened out of the word of
God, that it be well prooued, that it be well preſſed
and applyed, that the conſciences of the hearers
may be conuicted, and that they may ſee it
is God, and not man with whom they haue to do.
For a man ſhall meete with many froward and
wilfull and violent natures, that will not be held
in, but when they feele themſelues within the net
will cry, Let vs breake thier bands, and cast their
cords from vs
               Pſal. 2. 3.; ſo that euen a kinde of violence

may be vſed to keep them from deſtruction. Thirdly,
in the ſucceſſe of it. Many a draught the poore
Fiſherman makes and taketh nothing, yet he leaueth
not off: many a time is the net of preaching
ſhot forth, and yet none conuerted thereby: ſo it
pleaſeth God to exerciſe the patience of his ſeruants;
yet ſtill the worke muſt be followed, and
the Lords leiſure muſt be waited for. Often doth
the net incloſe many, which yet after breake away;
and many are at firſt drawne in by the power of
the Goſpell, which yet afterwards ſlide backe and
returne againe to their old profaneneſſe. There is
much brought in in the Net, which yet is good
for nothing when it is got: There come in frogs,
and weeds, and a great deale of traſh, which in the
end is caſt away, though for the loue of the fiſh
there were no little paines in drawing it in: ſo, as it
is ſhewed Matth. 13. 47. &c. many hypocrites and
reprobates are gathered into the outward ſocietie
of the Church by preaching, and ſo are let alone
like weedes vntill the day of harueſt, Matth. 13. 30.
Thus as our calling is to be fiſhers, ſo our Net is
preaching.
            It ſhewes plainely,
                  Vſe.
                that all the enemies and aduerſaries
of preaching, are enemies to the good
and ſaluation of mens ſoules. This is the Net, and
without this I will not feare to ſay, that ſurely
men ſhall periſh in their ſinnes. The diuell that
great hunter after ſoules, laboureth by his inſtruments,
euen with the very ſpirit of his helliſh policie,

to diſgrace this courſe, to ſuppreſſe it, to put
it downe, to draw men from affecting it. He knoweth
it to be the meanes to abridge his kingdome,
he feareth the pulling of ſome ſoule or other out
of his clutches at euery Sermon. Let vs not ſuffer
our ſelues to be coſined by his wiles. Let me that
am a Miniſter remember the Seruice I am called
to, euen to catch men, to win ſoules, let me be euer
plying this buſineſſe; and you (Beloued) when
the Lords Net is caſt in among you, run not from
it, grudge not at it, preſſe and ſtriue to be brought
within the compaſſe of it, otherwiſe you ſhall continue
within the ſea of this world ſtill, and ſhall neuer
be ſaued. Fiſhes doe die if they be taken; wee
can not eſcape eternall death if we be not caught.
The hooke may be ſharpe, but the baite is ſweet,
and it will ſeeme a yoake to our nature, to be knit
vp (as in a Net) and to be reſtrained from our
owne wonted carnall liberty; but let vs
looke to the end, which is the ſaluation
of our ſoules.
(*⁎*)
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   