
      
         
            
            
            THE
NOBLENESSE
of the Aſſe.
            A worke rare, learned, and excellent.
By A. B.
            
            
            LONDON
Printed by Thomas Creede, and are to be ſold by
William Barley, at his ſhop in Gratious
ſtreete. 1595.
         
         
            
            
            The Nobleneſſe of the
Aſſe.
            Attabaliba of Peru, to the Aſſe-fauouring
Readers.
            
               ALbeit amongſt all the kinds of vnreaſonable
creatures, which are
incloſed within the Moones great
concaue, thoſe appertaining to the
earth, are euer reputed more perfect,
then the other that ſwimme
or flie, and therefore conſequently
are to be reckoned more Noble. Neuertheleſſe,
there is no one man knowne, that determinately
hath cenſured, what one creature among thoſe of
earthly kinde, is to beheld moſt perfect and noble
beyond all the other. Yet diuerſe kindes haue bene
continually at warre amongſt themſelues,Beaſts contend, that man might iudge of their worthineſſe. making
choiſe of ſome before the reſt, by their commendable
behauiour: and haue ſhowne the ſame to man,
to the end he might pronounce the doubtfull ſentence.
            
               
Herehence grew the reaſon, that men of iudgement
made election of fiue kinds only,Fiue kindes of beaſts made choyſe of. which they
haue oppoſed againſt all the other: and thoſe are
the Dogge, the Horſſe, the Lyon, the Ape, and the
Elephant.
            
            But becauſe humane iudgements are wont ordinarily
to bee diuerſe and variable, euen as their
thoughts and opinions are of ſelfeſame nature: ſo
by proofe we find, ſome to perticularize his fauour
one way, and other ſome (among theſe fiue kinds)
to praiſe as himſelfe pleaſeth, which in their ſeueral
writings is eaſily diſcerned. And as I haue oftentimes
read them, ſo haue they raiſed no mean meruaile
in my minde, why no one is found amongſt
the number of ſo many auncient writers that hath
looked into the Aſſes kinde, finding him to be the
moſt compleat, perfect, and the very Nobleſt beaſt,
among all the reſt that nature euer gaue life vnto
in this world.
            And albeit among our moderne men,VVriters of the Aſſe. 
               Iulio Camillo,
Pietro Meſsia, one called Academico Peregrino,
& Rao in one of his letters, with another that made
but a digreſsion, haue written ſomewhat, declaring
diuerſe conſiderable qualities of the Aſſe: yet perhaps
the ſame hath bene ſo ſuccinctly, or rather vnſkilfully
performed, as they haue rather depriued
then rendered ſuch perfection, as makes him worthie
the direct ſentence, to bee the moſt Noble, aamong
all the kindes of beaſts vnreaſonable, whatſoeuer.
            
               
But the worſt is, that the foreſaid writers haue
ſhewen,The fault of the former writers. I will not ſay little iudgement, but indeed
farre leſſe conſcience, being ſo ouer impudently
bold, in ſeruing their turnes with authorities of holie
ſcripture, to recount the Aſſes qualities: becauſe
the meaning therof neither ſhould or ought be applied
to Aſſe-fauouring ieſtes, which makes them
the more worthie ſeuere puniſhment, for inconſiderately
haue they giuen to words of the olde and
new Teſtament, other expoſitions then ſhould ſo
be made of them.
            Concerning what I intend to ſay,The Authors purpoſe in his proceeding. I meane to
draw my prooues from ſence, reaſon, authoritie, as
alſo examples of men ſkilfull and learned: to the
end, that this age of ours may be throughly perſuaded
in the trueth of the matter I vndertake, not to
leaue buried in blinde obliuion, thoſe admirable
qualities, which makes this beaſt, not onely more
perfect and Noble then the other, but the very perfecteſt
and Nobleſt of all other.
            And that I ſtand fearleſſe of murmuring toongs,The Authors proteſtation to the captious.
cutting taunts, firſt and foremoſt I proteſt to thee,
who (with aſcancing lookes) make profeſsion of
prying into other mens workes: that in the whole
ſubiect of the matter, they ſhall find nothing to inueigh
againſt, except after they haue peece-meale
turnd it ouer, they chaunce to light on ſome error in
the Orthographie. Then ere they offer to teare this
my Aſſe-defending imprefe, I would let them vnderſtand,
that I mooued to write it by a ſtrong perſwaſion,

that the fortune hereof would be faire,
good & conformable, to their Aſſe-fauouring proceeding.
            If they accept it,The Authors reaſon, why his booke is not to be miſliked. as reaſon requires they ſhould,
deſpight of all malicious enuie, themſelues ſhall
ſoone perceiue, that mine intent is good & honeſt;
whence may enſue this concluſion, that this work
of mine, notwithſtanding how earnestly ſoeuer it is
written on the Aſſes behalfe, deſerues to be commended:
either becauſe (as I haue ſaid) it is honeſt
and good, or for the deſire I haue it ſhould prooue
no otherwiſe. But what anſwere ſhall I make the
fooliſh, or to backbiting maligners: when (being
caught within their Griffen-like talents) they labour
to make an Anatomie of me?
            In ſooth I know not what other anſwer I ſhould
make to fooles,How fooles and maligners are to be anſwered. then only not to regard them: becauſe
(in reaſon) they cannot well blame another
bodies actions, till firſt they know how to rule and
manage their owne. To the maligners I ſay, that in
vſing me ſo hardly, it is the eaſier diſcerned how
they can detract, and ſpeake of others as of themſelues.
But if I light into the hands of wiſe & good
men; I ſhall be aſſured, that they not knowing how
to ſpeake euil, will neuer ſay of me otherwiſe then
well.
            Heereto I may likewiſe adde,The differēce betweene fooles and wiſe men. that if by lawe a
paine were appointed, that ſuch as would not read
this Aſſe-maintaining treatiſe of mine, ſhould likewiſe
be hindered from walking abroad, they might

account it hard. But each one being at libertie to
reade or leaue it, they may likewiſe in reaſon ſpare
me this freedom, of giuing or withholding it from
the print.
            Then ſuch as pleaſe to reade,Read that wil, & leaue that will. let them reade, and
ſuch as will not, let them leaue it. But this I may
well ſay to ſuch as read it, and yet receiue not that
taſte and Aſſe-delighting pleaſure they expected,
that mens vnderſtandings are diuers, and therefore
poſsibly it may be, that they differ farre from ſuch,
who doubtleſſe ſhall finde therein a ſauour of ſome
ſweetneſſe. They that but beginning to read, finde
neither words or ſence fitting their humour: they
may ſoone reſolue on no further loſſe of time, but ſo
giue ouer, and proceed no further.
            Yet admit they go on, and read it out to the end,
the blame notwithſtanding will bee theirs, who
made it after mine owne minde, and not to anſwere
theirs.A reaſonable admonition of the Author Yea, their ſhame will be the greater, when
they ſhall detect the worke, that hath no ſence but
what defendes the Aſſe. And more agreeing is it
with reaſon, that they ſhould rather checke themſelues:
ſeeing without any taſte of delight, they
were ſo ſimple to proceed in reading this Aſſes progreſſe,
a poſſeſsion whereof they may (perhaps) find
in themſelues, a long while after.
            Nor would I (learned Readers) that any of you
ſhould enter into conceit, that I had ſo much of the
Aſſe in mee, as made mee bring to light this Nobilitie
of the Aſſe, otherwiſe then to purge ſome

ſhort pleaſure of this world.The Authors cenſure of himſelfe. For I am aſſured, that
it will be thought a moſt fooliſh fopperie, a proud
folly, or rather the verie proudeſt foolerie in the
world: by reaſon the world hath bin ſo many thouſand
yeares, without knowledge of the Aſſes Nobleneſſe,
and happily it might haue continued ſo
ſtill to the end, had not I vndertooke this Aſſe-propagating
labour: to make knowne the Aſſe in his
kind (as I haue ſaid) to be the moſt Noble, not only
of the before named fiue ſorts of fiue footed beaſts,
but of other beſide, that euer were produced by
our mother nature. Which I doubt not to accompliſh,
albeit I haue gathered into this currant diſcourſe,
the properties, vertues, graces, excellencies
and naturall gifts, of thoſe beaſts whereof the
former fiue ſeuerall kindes haue made mention. To
the end, that they contending to be equall with the
Aſſe, it may generally appeare to them that by reaſon
and truth wil be perſwaded, the ſentence ought
be pronounced on the Noble Aſſes behalfe.
            In whoſe company I leaue ye (moſt kind Aſſe-fauouring
Readers) offering my ſelfe readie & prepared
to all your ſeruices.
            
               From Peru, 
                  at the time
appointed.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Nobleneſſe of the
Aſſe.
            The firſt part.
            
               Of the Dogge. 1.
               
                  WE will begin then with the Dogge,
whoſe excellence (in ſooth) is ſuch, as
he hath reaſon to contend for perfection
and Nobleneſſe, with which ſoeuer
you will name of thoſe other beaſts. If
at large I would ſpeake of the nature
and powerfull quallities of this beaſt,
euen but ſo much as is found written
in hiſtories of him: my labour would riſe to a mightie volume.
But to impaire no part of his honor, nor ſelecting
any perticuler quallitie of his, more then I do of the other
beaſts which follow: I referre both you and my ſelf therin,
to ſuch as haue moſt copiouſly written of him.
               And euen ſo might I likewiſe do of the Aſſe, ſtood it not
now on me to recount, not all I ſay (for that is impoſſible)
but many of his qualities, which former writers haue let
ſlip vnder ſilence.
               Firſt of all then,The gifts and quallities naturall in a Dogge. the Dogge only among beaſts knoweth
his maiſter, and by means meruellous inough, diſtinguiſheth
him from any other. He ioyeth and delighteth by

his preſence; hée beares his maiſter company; hée goeth
before as a ſpie, and finding any ambuiſh, by barking
hée diſcouers and manifeſteth the ſame, daring to fight
with his maiſters enemy. Many haue bene ſo preſerued
by the aide of a Dogge. Hée is the onely dilligent
kéeper of things, that by his maiſter are committed to his
truſt.
               Théeues hauing ſlaine a man, his Dogge was founde
kéeping his dead bodie, leſt he ſhould be deuoured by birds
or wilde beaſts.
               
                  Sabinus being impriſoned with all his ſeruants,The effectuall loue of a Dog
                        •
                     e. for Neros
cauſe, the ſonne to Germanicus, hauing his Dog with
him,A place in Rome, from whence condemned men were throwne he could not be expeld the priſon, nor from his bodie,
when he was throwne forth from the Genioniae ſcalae,
but laie by howling and crying wondrouſly, when bread
was giuen him, he brought it to the mouth of his dead
maiſter. Laſtly, when the bodie was caſt into the riuer of
Tyber, he leapt immediately after it, and oppoſing his
ſtrength againſt the waight thereof, laboured to kéepe it aboue
the water: a great number of people being then preſent
to behold the wonderfull loue of this poore beaſt.
               The Dogge knoweth his houſhold ſoundes of voyces:The naturall inſtinct and gifts of a dog.
he remembreth his name: call him, and he turneth
to the place and perſon. He is not forgetfull of the way,
how ſhort or long ſoeuer it be. He is eaſily gouerned: he
knoweth home friendes from ſtraungers. Moſte wiſe
is hee in finding out his game, to rowſe him from his
place, or where he lies hidden: he purſues him, and hath a
wonderfull ſent.
               The boldneſſe of this he beaſt is ſuch, that feare cannot
boudge againſt the furie of the wildeſt creature, be he far
greater or brauer then himſelfe: but eſpecially if his maiſter
be in place to cheare him on, prouoke him, and call him
by his name.
               
                  
Many other things might be ſaid for proofe of his nobleneſſe,
but I referre the Reader to the writings of both
our auncient and moderne hiſtorians.
            
            
               Of the Horſſe. 2.
               NOw beholde the Horſſe,The beautie, greatneſſe, and ſtrength of the horſe. who will not be out gone
(in perfections and Nobleneſſe) by the Dogge: firſt
the greatneſſe of his bodie, the beautie thereof, beſides
his ſtrength, wherewith not only hée ouercommeth the
Dogge, but a great many other valiantly beaſtes beſides.
               In Horſſes is great and proude boldneſſe,The Horſſe by war ſhewes himſelfe magnaim
                        •…
                     us. and hereof
they ſéeme to participate in better ſorte (eſpecially
ſtrength) then is conuenient for their nature. Bucephalus,
the Horſſe to Alexander the great, when he was royally
furniſhed, he would neuer ſuffer himſelfe to be ridden
by any.
               This Horſſe being brought to the winning of Thebes,
                  The horſes of Alexander and Caeſar.
would not permit that Alexander ſhould mount himſelfe
on any other horſſe.
               The like is read of Iulius Caeſars moſt beautifull horſe,
who would not ſuffer any to come on his backe, but his
owne maiſter.
               Horſſes are very eaſie to be maiſtred,Horſes ea
                        •
                     ly 
                        〈…〉
                      bold in war. and ſoone enſtructed.
At the ſound of Drumme and Trumpet, he ſtirres
and leapes, being forward of himſelfe to runne into the
battaile.
               The kindneſſe of a Horſſe toward his maiſter,The 
                        〈…〉
                     . hath
béene founde excéeding great: for we reade that ſome
of them haue wept themſelues to death, as Virgill
                  
noteth of Aethon, the Horſſe to Pallas, Euanders ſonne, he
wept excéedingly, while they did the funerall exſequies of
his maiſter.
               
                  Nicomedes King of Bithinia, being dead, as Plinie reporteth,
his Horſe neuer afterward would touch haye or
corne, but ſterued himſelfe to death.
               The Horſſe of Antiochus ſéeing his maiſter dead, would
not ſuffer Centauretus of Galatia to ſit quietly on his back,
but threw himſelfe downe from an high rocke, and ſo deſtroyed
both his ryder and himſelfe.
               Nor can it be denied,A Horſſe ſeemeth to haue baſhfulneſſe. but that Horſes are baſhfull and
modeſt. A horſe hiding his eyes, and perceiuing himſelfe
to be conioyned with his Dame, caſt himſelfe afterward
from an high place, and there died ſo: this was knowne
to happen in the territories of Reate in Vmbria.
               
               How many graue hiſtories are founde to diſcourſe of
horſes? Some, that in a conflict, hath caught in his mouth
an arme, before it could fal to the ground and hath brought
the ſame vnto his maiſter.
               Many other effectuall things concerning Horſes, might
be ſpoken of, which I omit in regard of the cauſe before alledged:
here is inough in reaſon, to giue him the firſt place
of Nobleneſſe, if the Lyon take it not from him.
            
            
               Of the Lyon. 3.
               THe Lion ſtriues to aſpire aboue the Horſe:Temperance in the Lyon. for among
other vertues, Temperance is attributed to him. He
drinketh but ſildome times; he taketh not his ſuſtenance
euery day. When he findes himſelfe well fed, thrée dayes
togither he abſtaineth from meate: which likewiſe were
conuenient for a man that were modeſt and temperately
giuen.
               The Lyon only (amongſt other wilde beaſts) ſheweth
moſt ſign of clemencie,The Lyon is pittifull by nature. toward humble & ſubmiſſiue actiōs.
               
                  
A woman that through a Forreſt eſcaped from priſon,
and from ſeruitude in Affrica, to returne home into her
owne country, met with a Lyon, whom ſhe perſwaded her
ſelfe would féede on her in ſteed of other meate.The Lyons mildneſſe to a woman. But ſhe
ſhewing humble behauiour, falling on her knées to the
ground, folding her armes croſſe-wiſe, and ye teares trickling
from her eyes, ſo aſſwaged & pacified his ſtearnneſſe,
that vntoucht he ſuffered her to part from him.
               Being purſued by violence of Dogges and hunteſmen,
in deſpight of them he abideth boldly in the field, that they
may looke on him: but when they begin to menace the
woods, then he makes away with ſwifteſt courſe.
               When he is hurt,The Lyons nature toward his ſmiter or wounder. he well obſerueth the man that did
it, and with infinite vexation goes to ſéeke his launcer or
ſmiter: and becauſe he hath but wounded him, he ſmites
him to the ground, but wil not kill him.
               In the Lyon is no ſuſpition or deceit,The Lion ioyeth to be beloued & regarded. his lookes are not
trecherous or ſhameleſſe, and in like manner he loueth to
be regarded.
               What friendſhip or kindneſſe he hath receiued, he preſerueth,
and is thankfull for any benefit whatſoeuer.
               
                  Andronicus a ſeruaunt, being fled into the deſarts of
Affrica,
                  The gratitude of a Lyon to his benefactor hauing there cured a Lyons foote, which he held
vp to him, as requiring helpe: continued thrée yéeres with
the ſame Lyon in his Caue, liuing all that while on the
fleſh of ſuch wilde beaſts, as the Lyon brought him. When
this kinde of life was irkeſome to him, he departed thence,
being afterward (in proceſſe of time) taken, and brought
backe to his maiſter: when in a publike ſpectacle, he was
deliuered to be deuoured of wilde beaſts, of which company,
the ſame Lyon with whom Andronicus had liued (being
taken before, and brought to Rome) was one.
               Immediately the Lyon knew Andronicus, and in all
baſte ran vnto him, no otherwiſe, but euen as one friend
would do to another, that had long time deſired his louing

company: which mooued Caeſar (then preſent) to enquire
further thereof, when being ſatiſfied, he freed him from the
puniſhment: and at the peoples entreatie, the Lyon was
giuen to Andronicus, who got much mony afterward by
him in Rome.
               
               Beſide all this,The Lyon is liberall by nature. the Lyon is liberall, leauing part of his
praie to other beaſts that follow him. And therefore he is
called the king of all beaſtes terreſtriall. Theſe and ſuch
like are his qualities, whereby it appeareth, that the Lion
goes beyond the other in perfection and nobilitie.
            
            
               Of the Ape. 4.
               THe Ape comes,The Ape like to man. and would precéed the Lyon, by reaſon
of his ſimilitude to a humane bodie: his eyes, eyebrowes,
forehead, mouth, téeth, breſt & pappes, which
other beaſtes haue not in that place: His armes turning
toward him, his hands with fingers, the middlemoſt wherof
is longeſt; his nayles diſtinctly placed, and his inward
parts reſembling them of man.
               The Ape hath a quicke apprehenſion & tractable,The Ape eaſily apprehendeth and imitateth. wherby
he vnderſtandeth what he is commaunded, and verie
gently performeth the ſame.
               He wil imitate the Shoomaker, not only in ſhooing
himſelfe, but in exerciſing the ſame beſide.
               Many other humane actions he hath beſide, as eating,
putting the meate to his mouth with his hand, making
himſelfe clean from filth and noyſomeneſſe, euen no otherwiſe
then as a man doth.
               It is read of ſome Apes, that they haue playd ye théeues.
Their yoong which are engendred in their owne abiding,The nature of the Ape.
they bring abroad, ioying that other ſhall take them and
nouriſh them: as vnderſtanding what pleaſure they will
conceiue in their ioying, which behauiour is farre from all
other kinde of beaſts.
               
                  
And laſt of all, the Ape (in many other things) ſhewes
himſelfe to be the moſt perfect, next to man, and more néer
to humane nature, then any beaſt elſe whatſoeuer: ſo conſequently,
moſt worthy to beare the palme of greateſt perfection
and nobleneſſe.
            
            
               Of the Elephant. 5.
               YEt the Elephant would ſléepe before the Ape, and as
he is bigger of bodie then the other, ſo he pretendeth
to be of farre greater Nobleneſſe and perfection. For
great matters are read and regiſtred of this beaſt, whereof,
one is, a certain nature verie neare to humane ſence.
               He reuerenceth the Starres, the Moone and the Sun.
In the fields of Mauritania, there is a certain Riuer, wherto
(at euery new Moone) the Elephant goeth to purifie
himſelfe verie ſolemnely: and bathing in the water, after
he hath ſaluted or honoured the Moone, he returneth back
to the Forreſt.
               His apprehenſion is meruailous, for if he eſpie the
print of a mans foote, preſently he feareth to be entrapped.
Then ſtaying himſelfe, very héedfully he turnes about,
ſnoring, and very angerly heated.
               So ſoone as he ſees the footing, he markes how the ſteps
follow one another, going on, till he come to the verie laſt
of all: and hauing compaſſed each part of ye ſquare or walk,
then he prepareth to fight againſt man his enemie.
               Elephants are of great capacitie, for they haue this order
in their trauelling, that if any yoong ones be amongſt
them, they put them foremoſt, that they following, the other
may pace the more gently.
               They go alwaies in heards togither, and the eldeſt is
the guide next him, the other that ſeconds him in yeares.
               At the paſſage of any water, they put the yoongeſt foremoſt,
leſt their huge bodies going before, ſhould cauſe ſuch

a ſtrong water fall from them, as the yo
                     •
                  nger comming
behinde, might eaſily be drowned thereby.
               There were certaine Elephants tranſported in a ſhip
of Puteoli, and being enforced to come forth, they were affraid
of the ſpaciouſneſſe of the Bridge, and therefore went
backward, to be guile their owne conceit of the Bridges
length.
               Wee reade of an Elephant that learned the Gréeke
Charracters, and with his truncke or ſnoute wrote
Greeke Letters: as Aubus Gellius witneſſing, ſaith;
I my ſelfe haue written this, and dedicate it to the Celtique
ſpoyles.
               
               To breake an Armie, or make ſport, is a thing common:
hee hath ſounde memorie, and ſo is recorded of his
name.
               Were he not a beaſt, who could deny the Elephant to
be the picture of clemencie. For Plinie writeth, that if hée
méete a man alone in any deſart place, wandring out of his
way, hee will goe before him, and ſo well guide his way,
as he will defend him from all other beaſts.
               Let them be publikely among women, they know no
adulterie, nor euer was woman hurt among them, as they
haue bene among other, eſpecially men.
               They are much ſubiect to amourous paſſione. In Egipt,
an Elephant loued a yoong mayden, that ſolde chaplets of
flowers. Another likewiſe loued a yoong man in Ptolomies
Armie. And another, a yoong damoſell, that was a
Perfumer.
               The ſubſtance of their loue is made manifeſt, by delighting
in the preſence of the partie beloued: their faire
pleaſing ſhewes, and playing on their breſt with ſuch mony
as people giues them.
               Theſe things with many more, the Gréeke and Latin
Hiſtorians haue written of them: ſo that now I might
conclude, the Elephant (of all ſpéedieſt beaſts) to be the

moſt Noble and perfect, his quallities being ſo nears in
neighbourhood to humane nature: but that the Aſſe now
preſenteth himſelfe.
            
            
               Of the Aſſe. 6.
               
               BVt behold the Aſſe approaching, who commeth Garlanded
with glorie, and with a palme, in ſigne of victorie,
obtained by his Nobleneſſe and perfections. Wherein
he hath very much outgone the Dogge, the Horſſe, the Lyon,
the Ape, the Elephant, and whatſoeuer other beaſt ye
can deuiſe to name, not onely by his head, and the other
partes of his bodie, but in excellencie of minde,

which (to ſpeake truth) is plainly manifeſted, and is much
more honorable then the bodie, that but ſerues and obeyes
in the emperie of the minde.
               Simplicitie is ſo naturally propper and giuen to the
Aſſe,The Aſſe eateth of all things without making any differēce. as in one or other kinde of meate, he contends not, or
makes any difference at all. Let him come into a Gardain,
ſooner falles he to feeding on bryers and thiſtles, then on
good lettice, or other rootes.
               In life (beyond all other beaſts in the world) is he moſt
ſparing,The Aſſe moſt ſparing in life. ſuffiſing himſelfe with any little foode. And ſo long
time will he endure hunger and thirſt, as it is thought he
rather eateth to liue, then liueth to eate.
               To his other noble qualities, this of patience may well
be adioyned, patiently enduring all kinde of labor; without
any alteration, without chaunge of place, without kicking
againſt, or making ſigne of any diſlike at all. At continuall
ſtrokes, he ſtandeth ſtedfaſtly, he weigheth not the
woundes that comes by ſterne ſtripes, or the gréeuous
blowes that teares his fleſh to the bares bones: but willingly
applieth himſelfe alwaies to his maiſters ſeruice.
               He refuſeth no burthen,The Aſſe refuſeth no load, and is good in all parts. he goes whither hee is ſent,
without any contradiction. He lifts not his foote againſt
any one, he bytes not, he is no fugitiue, nor maliciouſly affected.
He doth all things in good ſort, and to his liking that
hath cauſe to imploy him. If ſtrokes bee giuen him, he
cares not for them: and as our moderns Poeth ſingeth;

                     Thou would'ſt (perhaps) he ſhould become thy foe,The Aſſe cares for no beating.
                     
                     And to that end dooſt beat him many times:
                     He cares nor for himſelfe, much leſſe thy blowe.
                  
               
               He ioyeth in peace, and takes ſuch déepe delight therein,The Aſſe a louer of peace.
as ye can finde no one beaſt with whom he would willingly
meddle. For we ſée he ſtands peaceably conuerſing
with them, yea, ſo kindly and louingly, as all beaſts are accounted

brutiſh to him, in regard of carnall brotherhood,
notwithſtanding they are of ſo many diuers kindes. He
will not defend his owne part of prouender layde before
him, as we ſée all other beaſts do, nor offers he to exclude
any, that puts head with him in the maunger, not only is
he content curteouſly to let him haue part, but to expreſſe
more greatneſſe of mind, many times he withdrawes him
ſelfe, moſt liberally leauing all the foode to other, though
himſelfe were oppreſſed with neuer ſo great hunger.
               Nor néedes his maiſter prouide varietie of meate for
him, becauſe

                     Poore chaffe and water are his bread and wine,
                     Laie on his back what heauie load thou wilt,
                     Yet mourne and euen is his ſeruice thine.
                  
               
               Not only in eating (as we haue ſaid) is he modeſt,The Aſſe is moderate in drinking▪
                   being
contented with allowance of ſimpleſt meat: but
likewiſe he is moſt manerly in drinking, which was very
well noted by our Poet, when he ſaid;

                     He doth not as the Horſſe, vnciuillie
                     Duck in his head to drinke: ſcant will he touch
                     The water, ſo is he vſde to modeſtie.
                  
               
               
                  Columella affirmeth,The Aſſe addicted to many lab
                        •••…
                     . that there is no beaſt, whereof a
men hath more need, then of the Aſſe. He breakes the earth
with the plough, draweth great burthens for the mill, the
bakehouſe, and carrieth corne from place to place, ſo that
his labour is beyond all other. There is no Towne, no
houſe, and laſtly no place, that can imploy a more neceſſary
beaſt then the Aſſe is.
               Commodiouſly with necke,No beaſt ſo neceſſary as the Aſſe. ſhoulders, and all his whole
bodie, can he draw, beare, and carry vp & downe, all kindes
of graine, and all things neceſſary for the vſe of man: ſo is

there no other beaſt that can do it, or is ſo apt for it.
               The Horſſe, Mule, and Oxe, are apt to draw and beare
great lading: yet enter they not the houſe, or if they be
brought in, it is forcibly by ſtripes, or ſuch like prouoking.
But the Aſſe, verie mildely, or rather familiarly,
yea, at a nod or becke only, goes euery where at his maiſters
pleaſure. Into by-places, lodgings, halles, chambers,
vp the ſtaires into Grayneries, carrying thither all things
beſéeming each place: aſcending and deſcending very perfectly,
being not troubled with the impediment of hornes,
as the Oxe is, nor headſtrong, or vntoward to driue, as the
Horſſe and Mule are.
               His maiſter is not moleſted with thought or griefe, to
make his prouiſion for all the yeare, as ye ſée what care is
had for all other beaſts: becauſe (as hath bene alreadie declared)
he giues himſelfe tr all ſorts of meates.
               By the way as he goes (although he be loaden) hée
takes his féeding, and let him come into what place ſoeuer,
he will catch a bit, if commodiouſly he may. When it
ſo falles out, that he happens to ſtand two or three dayes
without meate, he is not therefore offended with his maiſter,
nor makes any murmure there at by his voyce. Hée
makes no ſigne of chuſing his meate, by any kinde of teſture;
as the horſſe doth by often neighing and ſtamping
with his féet, if prouender be not brought him at time conuenient.
But the Aſſe, whether he féede or faſt, ſtill goes
to beare his ordinary burthens.
               
                  And yet he is ſo curteous and diuine,
                  That, as the auncient prouerbe ſpeakes of him,
                  Water he drinkes himſelfe, for other carries wine.
               
               We know that all kindes of beaſts were created by
God, for the ſeruice of man: but what beaſt can ye finde,

wherewith man may more be ſerued, then the Aſſe? He,
beſide all the commodities whereof alreadie we haue ſpoken,
yet neceſſary for man: ſuffer the bridle to be put in
his mouth, carries the ſaddle, and endures all other kinde
of harneſſe for horſemanſhip, greatly reioycing therein;
whereby our Poet procéeding in his praiſe, ſaith:

                     His trappings are inough for him each day,
                     Oft with his ſaddle doth he feaſt himſelfe,
                     And ſeemes a Tully, if ſo ſpeake we may.
                  
               
               When hée is on the way adorned with his maiſter on
his backe, not a little doth he delight him with his ſwéete
trot, and ſo paceth lightly on, without any wearineſſe to
his ryder.
               Mooued (as I imagined) by theſe and other his honourable
quallities, nature our moſt louing mother giue him
a priuiledge, whereof he only might vaunt aboue all other
creatures in the world. And this it is, that he is neuer moleſted
with any of this hated ſmall vermine, which we call
Lice: and this very elegantly was noted by our Poet Praelibato,
when of his gifts and praiſes, thus he ſung.
               
                  One other gift this beaſt hath as his owne,
                  Wherewith the reſt could not be furniſhed:
                  On man himſelfe the ſame was not beſtowne,
                  To wit: on him is ne're engendred
                  The hatefull vermine that doth teare the ſkin,
                  And to the bode doth make his paſſage in.
               
               An other priuiledge is ſollumne to himſelfe, and nature
moſt bounteouſly hath beſtowed it on him: which is
(as Plinie faithfully reporteth) that the hearbe vulgarely
called Ferula, ſodeinly killeth all other beaſts that eates
thereof, except the Aſſe, who thereon 
                     •
                  eedes boldly, without
any dread of harme.
               
                  
Beſide this, he hath no gall within him, as by Anatomie
hard euidently appeared: a proofe ſufficient inough,
without calling Ariſtotle to witneſſe, who confeſſeth the
ſame in his fourth booke of the parts of beaſts.
               Therefore it is not to be meruailed at, that ſo brotherlike
he goeth with all beaſts, and trauelleth with man ſo
quietly: which likewiſe was regarded by the ſame Poet,
when he ſaid:

                     The Aſſe doth neuer harme, nor vſe deceit,
                     As do the Foxe and Wolfe, of rauenous minde:
                     Who ſtill for ſpoyle lye all the yeare in wait,
                     He boldly braues not any other kinde.
                     To ſuch as rydes him, he procures content,
                     And is a foe to warre or brabblement.
                  
               
               Such as delight themſelues in ryding on the Aſſe, ſéem
to haue no common or vulgare iudgement, becauſe they
make choyſe of the very nobleſt beaſt, that euer was produced
by nature. Wherfore it is not to be thought ſtrange,
why our Poet exhorteth to ryde on him, ſaying:

                     Who would not go on foote, and yet deſires
                     An ambling Haqueney, or fine paced lennet:
                     Ryde he the Aſſe, that neuer failes or tires.
                  
               
               Afterward, to honor the Aſſe the more, thus he procéedeth.
               
                  A good regard (by nature) hath the Aſſe,
                  In Alexandria when to ryde they pleaſe,
                  They vſe none elſe, nor in the Eaſt like caſe:
                  But we that neuer can our mindes appeaſe,
                  But we that neuer can our mindes appeaſe,
                  With what our country yeelds by natures grace,
                  Seeke Dolphins on the lulles, Woolues in the ſeas.
               
               
                  
The ſame Poet, to confirme how pleaſing the delight
of ryding on the Aſſe is, declares in a fewe verſes, a little
merrie ſtorie, in this maner.
               
                  A Penſiue man I met vpon the way,
                  Ryding no faſter then his Aſſe would goe:
                  His ſadneſſe grew thereby as ſome did ſay.
                  One ryding faſter yet in ſcorne would know
                  His cauſe of griefe: whereon poore man (quoth he)
                  Ryde faſter, and this fit will ſoone be gon:
                  Wherewith he turned, angry as might be,
                  Saying: My friend, leaue me, and ryde thou on.
                  I am to iourney as beſt liketh me,
                  This pace ſo ſweet, and pleaſing to my minde:
                  Is my delight; when gallopping like thee,
                  Such pleaſure and content I ſhould not finde.
               
               That the Aſſe is a beaſt, as apt to be taught as the Elephant,
and goes very farre beyond him, though daily experience
ſhewes vs much, yet ſhall it not be offenſiue for
me to recount an Aſſe-fauouring hiſtorie, which maiſter
Iohn Lyon, a moſt diligent and faithfull Coſmographer
of Affrica, noteth in the eight part of his great volumme,
where deſcribing what notable things are found in Affrica,
he diſcourſeth on matters concerning the great Cittie
of Cayro, and (among other) ſpeaketh thus as followeth.
               Hither were brought many pleaſant ieſtes, eſpecially
ſuch as teach Cammels, Aſſes and Dogges to daunce, a
ſight very pleaſing to behold, chiefly in the Aſſe: for at a
certaine time, one of theſe Ieſters, when his Aſſe had danced
a while, ſpeaking to him, ſaid in this maner:
               The Soldane meanes to erect a goodly building, wherfore
he ſhall néede to imploy all the Aſſes in Cayro, for carriage
of lime, ſtone, and other neceſſary things. At theſe
words, the Aſſe ſodeinly fell to the grounde, turning his

héeles vp toward heauen, his belly ſwollen, and his eyes
cloſed, euen in ſuch ſort as if he had bene dead. Then fell
the man to many lamentable circumſtances, how he had
loſt his Aſſe, and entreated the by ſtanders, that they wold
helpe to requite him with another, and therefore to make
ſome gathering among them: yet they ſaide, they did not
imagine his Aſſe to be dead, albeit he ſtirred not, but knew
his counterfeit drift was, to get himſelfe ſome money and
prouender for his beaſt. Then they turned to the Aſſe, bidding
him to ariſe: but he ſtirred not, although they laboured
him with many ſtripes, and could not get to riſe by all
their endeuour: then the man purſuing his former practiſe,
ſaid to the ſtanders by;
               Gentlemen, I giue ye all to vnderſtand, how the Soldane
hath cauſed to be publiſhed by ſound of Trompet, that
to morrow all the people in Cayro muſt goe forth to ſée his
tryumph: commaunding all the faire gentlewomen in
the Cittie, to be mounted on goodly Aſſes, afterward, the
beaſts ſhall eate good barley, and drinke the pure water
of Nylus. No ſooner had the Ieſter ſpoken theſe words,
but the Aſſe leapt vp on his féet, and brauely ſhewed ſigns
of excéeding contentment: whereon the Ieſter thus began
againe.
               I heare it for credible, that a certaine peazant of the
Countrey where I was borne, hath euen now made a requeſt
to me, that this faire Aſſe of mine, might ſerue his
foule ill fauoured wife to ryde on. The Aſſe, at theſe ſpéeches,
(as if he had humane vnderſtanding) laid downe his
cares flat, and beganne to goe about halting, feyning as if
he had bene ſtarke lame. Then ſaid the Ieſter; doth yoong
and faire women pleaſe thée? Heereat the Aſſe merely
lifted vp his head, euen as if he had replied, that they
did.
               His maiſter procéeding ſaid; Here are many both yoong
and faire: ſhewe me which of them beſt liketh thée. The

Aſſe running to make ſearch, where diuers women ſtood
to behold him, and making choyſe of the verie faireſt and
moſt honourable, to her he went, and touched her with his
head. Then all the ſtanders by cried with a loude voyce:
Behold the Ladie of the Aſſe, as making a merie ieſt of
the matter. And the man mounting on his Aſſe, rode to
ſhewe his quallities elſe where.
               But what greater example of an Aſſes inſtruction can
we alleadge, then that which Ammonius Alexandrinus, a
Philoſopher of no meane eſtéeme, affirmeth? to wit, that
he had an Aſſe was his ſcholler, and came ordinarily to
hear his readings. This meruell moued our Poet to ſing:

                     There was an Aſſe once ſo ingenious,
                     As moſt attentiuely he heard the skill:
                     Of that praiſe-worthie man Ammonius.
                  
               
               But whither wander I, to gather matter of his praiſe
in this print? when it might ſuffiſe me only to ſpeake of
him, that which followeth in our Poets Canto, that is:

                     In ſooth I thinke that who ſo giues his minde,
                     T'obſerue his ieſtures, by good proofe ſhall ſee:
                     To Mathematique skill he is enclinde,
                     Becauſe without reach of Aſtrologie:
                     Aboue the reſt he doth the ſpring deſcrie,
                     For alwaies by his voyce the ſame is told,
                     When as he feedes, and delueth with his foote:
                     Or to the earth holds downe his head, be bold,
                     Raine doth enſue, to bide is no boote.
                  
               
               How wiſe and well aduiſed (beſide all this) the Aſſe
appeares to be, I think there is not any man in the world
but remembers & knows it wel inough: becauſe he wil neuer
return any way, where he hath once ſtumbled or falne.

And although he may be enforced thereto by his maiſters
ſtripes, yet he hath a very reſpectiue care of his ſtepping
his foote in the former place of offence: as with great wit
our Poet noteth the ſame, ſaying;

                     Oh that the Aſſe were but ſo happie bleſt,
                     To haue a tongue (as men haue) to diſcloſe
                     How much his thoughts with vertues are poſſeſt,
                     Then would his deeds reueale what hidden goes.
                     For in what place ſo ere he haps to fall,
                     Heel'e nere returne to hurt himſelfe withall.
                  
               
               We cannot deny, but that the Aſſe ſerueth as a ſpectacle,
and moſt ſinguler example of patience, becauſe it is
a vſuall thing for fathers, mothers, and ſuch like, ſimply to
aduiſe their children or friendes, that in affaires of this
world, they ſhould ſéeme to haue the backe of an Aſſe: meaning,
that it behoues them (in all things) to arme themſelues
with patience.
               Should we ſpare to ſpeake of his conſtancie, wherwith
how much he is endued, the Aſſe which was ſo diſpleaſed
with them of Padua, doth very well declare. For they hauing
drawne into the Cittie, the water of * Bacchiglione,
where firſt of all the Aſſe vſed ordinarily to drinke: ſo outragiouſly
did he ſhew himſelfe offended at this water mingling,
as it is impoſſible euer after to make him drinke of
that water. And herehence grew the Prouerbe: All Padua
had not the power to make the Aſſe drinke, by reaſon
he perſeuered moſt conſtantly in his honourable reſolution.
In regard whereof, if we would giue him that due,
which we owe as a debt.
               
                  A hood we ſhould prouide the Aſſe by right,
                  As to a perſon that ſo well deſerues it:
                  Shapte like the birds that ſingeth ſtill by night.
               
               
                  
But to kéep nothing from him that is reputed of worth,
yet hold him ſtill in eſtéeme, and render him ſuch honour
as is conuenient for him: let it ſuffiſe vs, before we offer
in ought to deſpiſe him, that firſt we call to memorie, that
through contemning and reprouing the Aſſe, ſome notable
daunger hath enſued: yea, matter of death.
               Who knowes not what happened to great King Mydas,
becauſe he offered wrong to the Aſſe? Let them looke
on his picture, and they ſhall ſée his eares ſhaped like to
the Aſſes. And therefore very wiſely our Poet wrote of
him, ſaying.
               
                  King Mydas that the Aſſe ſo iniured,
                  To his owne ſhame by Bacchus was reproou'd:
                  And had ſuch chaſtiſement as he deſerued.
               
               But let vs ſpeake of ſome, who by the meanes of ſuch
wrongs offered, haue brought themſelues to the extréemeſt
point of death.
               There are now certaine yeares paſt, ſince I being in
Zara, a citie of Sclauonia, I ſawe one led to the gallowes
to be executed, whoſe name was Iiacomo Schiffalaſino,
who being firſt brought to priſon among other malefactors,
and by the diſcréet Iudge appointed to the torture, becauſe
he ſhould confeſſe wherein they had offended, (he not
hauing any detection wherewith to charge them, or that
was ſufficient to touch them as they ſhould be.) But firſt
he beganne to conſider on the ſirname of Schiffalaſino, and
approuing that ſir-name for a ſufficient detection, terrified
him thereby ſo ſtrictly, and in ſuch ſort, as the poore man
confeſſed the faults, which both he and his companions had
committed. Whereupon, he cauſed him with the reſt, to
be hanged by the neckes, and (as the common prouerbe is)
ſent them to ſhake their héeles againſt the winde.
               If this example may not be thought ſufficient, let vs

then call to mind the death of Philemon the Philoſopher,
who tooke offence at one of his Aſſes, that in token of a ſingular
or magnificent minde, put forth himſelfe to eate of
preſerued figges, which were ſerued in to the Table for
his maiſter. Hereat he fell into ſuch extremitie of laughter
or deriſion, that there ſodeinly he died; as our Poet verie
excellently ſinging, affirmeth,

                     Philemon when his Aſſe he had eſpied,
                     To eate of Figges prepared for his table:
                     Such was his laughter, that therein he died.
                  
               
               But if contrariwiſe we would conſider, what good and
happie ſucceſſe hath enſued, ſuch encounters wherein the
Aſſe hath receiued no iniurie, we might the more eaſily
reſolue to honor and hold them in ſuch eſtéeme, as fortunate
diuining auguries haue deſerued to be. And whoſoeuer
hath made diligent obſeruation of them, ſhall finde
they haue ſaued the liues of many, yea in doubtfull battailes
and moſt bloodie fights, they ſhewed before hand aſſured
victorie.
               What ſaued the life of great Caius Marius, who had
bene Conſull ſix times, but only an Aſſe? whoſe ieſtures
be diligently obſeruing, when by the Minturnes he was
committed priſoner to Fauuias houſe: where he noted how
ſwiftly he ruſht out of doore, and ranne to drinke at the néereſt
fountaine.
               He then aduiſing on this progreſſe of the Aſſe, ſayd:
That the Goddes had ſent this beaſt before hand, to ſignifie,
that by his ſodeine running to the 
                     •
                  ountaine, he ſhould
receiue thereby moſt certaine augurie, that there was no
other meane left for him to eſcape with life, then by water.
Whereupon, (hauing gotten forth of the aforeſaid priſon)
he went and imbarqued himſelfe at the next port, and
fled into Affrica, where he ſaued himſelfe.
               
                  Vincentio Cartari, in his booke of Images of the auncient
Gods, ſaith, that the Ambraciotti and Sicioni, people
of Greece, being in warre togither, an ambuſh was laide

in a wood, to intrap them that were to iſſue forth of the Citie.
At the ſame time it happened, that a man driuing his
Aſſe toward the Citie, with certaine lading on his backe,
his beaſt (by chance) ſented a ſhée Aſſe going before, which
made him follow after, braying ſo loud as poſſibly he could.
And pacing on faſter then his maiſter would willingly he
ſhould, both the Aſſes (at length) began to bray togither,
each beaſt anſwering the other, falling and riſing with
their voyces, in ſuch ſtraunge and confuſed noyſe, that the
Sicioni (terrified with the murmure) were glad to be gone
from where they laie hid, and ſo betooke themſelues to
flight. The Ambraciotti being aduertiſed thereof, purſued
and ouerthrew them.
               Afterward they made a goodly Aſſe of mettall, which
they ſent to be offred at Delphos, in the Temple of Apollo,
for a memorie of their good fortune by the Aſſe: and
which they perſwaded themſelues had not elſe happened
to them, but only by that ſingular beaſt.
               
                  Higinus the Hiſtorian, recordeth, that when the Goddes
Bacchus and Vulcan fought with the Giants, they entred
the battaile mounted on Aſſes.
               We read likewiſe in Hedorotus, the father of the Grecian
hiſtorie, that Darius going to warre againſt the Scithians,
led with him a great nomber of Aſſes, that only by
their noyſe and braying, made all the enemies horſes take
them to their héeles. Afterwards the Scithians comming
to aſſault Perſia, their horſes were againe ſo affrighted
with the dreadfull voyce of Aſſes, as they fled, and could not
be enforced to abide.
               Our Poet, by theſe and ſuch like effects, being earneſtly
ſollicited, very elegantly ſingeth in this maner.
               
                  Forced to flight by his commaunding crie,
                  A mightie Armie did the Aſſe diſmay:
                  By Scithians brought to warre, yet glad to flie.
               
               Beholde then, whether wee haue good cauſe or no, to
holde the Aſſe in all eſtimation: yet in theſe vnthankfull

dayes of ours, we ſée him folde for a moſt baſe, or rather a
vile price: albeit in elder ages he was of dearer value then
euer was any other beaſt in the world.
               
                  Marcus Varro rehearſeth, that in his time an Aſſe was
ſolde for ſeuentie Seſtertiaes: which according to Budeus
and other Computiſts, amounteth to the ſumme of a thouſand
and fiue hundred crownes. Moreouer he addeth hereto,
that he ſawe foure Aſies rated at foure hundred Seſtertiaes.
               
               
                  Plinie teſtifieth, that an Aſſe was ſold for a very great
number of Crownes, albeit the certaine ſumme I doo not
now readily remember, but any one may reade it truly ſet
downe, in the ſeuenth booke of his naturall hiſtorie.
               
                  Lampridius telleth vs, that Heliogabalus the Emperour,
when he would beſtow a magnificent gift on the people
of Rome, vſed to giue them certaine Aſſes: meaning,
that a ſpeciall and rare eſtimation conſiſted therein, becauſe
indéed it was the gift of an Emperour.
               
                  Marcus Polus, in the firſt booke of his voyage to the
great Cane of Cathaia, the eleuenth Chapter, where he
ſpeaketh of the Perſian kingdome, ſaith; In this kingdome
are there likewiſe Aſſes, the very faireſt and greateſt
that are in the world, which are wont to be ſooner ſold
then horſes. And the reaſon is, becauſe they eate leſſe, and
beare greater burthens: beſide, they diſpatch more myles
in a day, then the Horſes or Mules are able to do, nor can
they endure ſo much labour as the Aſſes will.
               Wherefore the Merchants of thoſe parts going from
one Prouince to another, paſſe through great deſarts and
ſandie places, where growes 
                     〈◊〉
                   hearbes or graſſe at all:
and by reaſon of the great diſtance of wells and ſwéete water,
they make their dayes iourney the longer, wherefore
the more gladly they vſe theſe Aſſes, becauſe they are ſwifter,
runne better, and ſerues them with very ſmall expences.
They vſe Camells like wiſe, who beare great lading,

and are not chargeable: but yet they are not ſo ſwift as
their Aſſes.
               But let vs admit that the Aſſe had not theſe vertues,
nor that there were founde in him any of the quallities
whereon we haue diſcourſed: yet can we not deny, but he
hath one only gift, which in Nobilitie & perfection, makes
him alone to ſurpaſſe any other kinde of beaſt whatſoeuer
(I meane thoſe vnreaſonable) that euer nature brought
foorth. For the neuer meant to produce the kindes of he or
ſhée Mules, whereas the Aſſe is the only cauſe they are
engendred, and maintains them in the world, to the great
commoditie of man, as daily experience ſufficiently teſtifies.
Wherefore our Poet thus ſings thereof.
               
                  The Aſſe was reckoned by his great deſerts
                  Moſt honorable, and who him moleſted:
                  According to their faults were puniſhed.
               
               But becauſe I would drawe to an ende, I conclude,
that of his honorable qualities, worthie all commendation,
I haue not as yet declared the leaſt particuler: by reaſon
they are ſuch and ſo great, that whoſoeuer would collect
them all togither, may as eaſily conuey all the water
of the ſea into a little glaſſe, or contend with a thing that
of it ſelfe is infinite.
               Yet will I not ſo giue ouer, but adioyne to the ende of
this firſt part, that which our Part firmely beléeued of the
Aſſe, when he ſaid,

                     In learned Schooles, for wiſedome might he read,
                     But infinite I know therewith diſpence:
                     And do that office in his excellence.
                  
               
               In concluſion, for whatſoeuer either hath bene or may
be ſaid, the nature of the Aſſe is good, pleaſing, humble and

curteous: which foure rare quallities, are farre contrary
to the theft, pride, vnrulineſſe and villany of other beaſts.
            
            The end of the firſt part.
         
         
            The Nobleneſſe of the
Aſſe.
            The ſecond part.
            ALl the matters wherof we haue ſpoken in the former
part, to ſhewe the perfection and Nobleneſſe of the
Aſſe, I may ſafely affirme to be of little or no auaile at all,
or profitable in ought to humane kinde: conſidering what
benefit is to be receiued by his excrements, as alſo from
the members of his bodie, after he is dead.
            But to the end that all men (of what condition ſoeuer)
may perceiue I ſpeake nothing but the truth, I am determined
in this ſecond part, to make choyſe of other matters
then is before. Beginning with his fleſh, which when the
Aſſe is yoong, is very ſauourie and delicate, and may compare
with all other ſorts of fleſh whatſoeuer.
            And though it be not in vſe, as the fleſh of the Calfe,
Kidde, or ſuch like: queſtionleſſe the reaſon may be, that
nature, the moſt wiſe preſeruer of all kindes of beaſtes,

hath prouided that man ſhall not be drawen with any deſire
to eate thereof, but firſt hath rather choſen to put into
our mindes, that ſuch as heare the meaning of ſuch fleſh,
are wont to make a ſcornfull looke thereat. And this may
be to the end, that if perhaps men ſhould taſte therof, they
would become ſo coueting thereafter, as deſpiſing al other
kindes of fleſh, they would giue themſelues only to féede
on the Aſſe, whereby ſodeinly might enſue the deſtruction
of the Aſſes kinde: and ſo they ſhould become of ſuch deare
value, as they were in the times wherof alreadie we haue
ſpoken, as Marcus Varro ſawe them ſolde, and Plinie reporteth.
            Herehence doubtleſſe would ariſe this hurt, that poore
men, who maintaine themſelues and family by the helpe
of an Aſſe onely, ſhould not be able to buy any, not hauing
the meanes to laie out ſo great a ſumme of mony.
            That this kinde of fleſh in ſwéetneſſe excell all other,
the noble men in the kingdome of Scotland are ſo perſwaded:
for I haue heard of a Scottiſh Gentleman, who in
Sciences hath made ſo great profit, as the principall ſtudents
in all Italy haue not a little admired him, when he
heard that ſuch a miſerable ſlaughter of Aſſes was made
in Mantua. The aforeſaid Gentleman affirmed to me,
that no banquet in Scotland was reputed of any value,
where the fleſh of a young Aſſe was not to be had.
            In the good and memorable time of Pius Quartus, began
they not to make a vſuall ſeruice therof, both in feaſts
and banquets of greateſt importance? And if the rounde
table of the mightie Lord of T. called Triclinium, could
ſpeake, hardly would be credited the quantitie of Aſſes
fleſh, which in thoſe times was eaten thereon.
            And did not Mecenates vſe Aſſes fleſh, as a foode moſt
delicate?
            We read at a certaine time, in the Citie of Samaria,
               
an Aſſes head was ſold for foure ſcore pence. And they that
ſo bought them, 
                  •
               ed thereon with ſuch ſweetneſſe and delight,
as if they had eaten the very daintieſt meate, that
could be bought for a greater price.
            
               Plutarche rehearſeth, that in a certaine warre King
Artaxerxes made, an Aſſes head was likewiſe ſold in his
Campe for ſeuentie Drachmaes.
            But leaue we the Aſſes head in ſo great eſtéeme to be
eaten, as alſo the fleſh wherein the bones thereof are cloſed:
and ſpeake we of the laſt and chiefe benefite, which
we receiue by the head of the Aſſe, when it is cut off, and
the fleſh parted from it.
            What merueilous properties and vertue is included
in the ſaid Aſſes head, the poore huſbandman wel knows,
and great proofe is made thereof in many places of Italy,
as alſo diuers other territories beyond the mountaines.
            Hence enſues it, that in the other partes of the lande
about Breſcia, we ſée in many places, the heades of Aſſes
fixed on the ridge of walls and buildings: which in opinion
of the vulgare was, becauſe Goblins and dancing Fairies
that runne in courſes, haue bene ſéene to plaie vp and
downe vpon them.
            The Lapidaries ſay, that there is a ſtone in the Aſſes
necke, called the Aſſe ſtone, which by the opinion of Magitians,
hath no ſmall vertue: and perhaps it may be the
ſame ſtone, which Albertus Magnus calleth the ſtone Aſia.
            
            
               Dioſcorides writes, that the liuer of an Aſſe eaten faſting,
helpes them that are afflicted with the falling ſickneſſe.
The ſelfeſame power and vertue (ſaith he) hath the
Aſſes hoofe beaten into powder, and drunk in white wine.
            The dung of an Aſſe, wrapped in a linnen cloth, and
layd on his head that hath much blood abounding in his
noſe, doth withdraw it, and makes it perfectly ſound, as al
Authors that haue written in Phiſicke do affirme.
            
               
               Plinie ſaith, that the drinking of an Aſſes milke, is the
chiefeſt remedie to helpe them that haue receiued poyſon.
Hereto we may ioyne, that it is a preſent remedie for the
ſwelling of the ioynts, as alſo it cures the gout.
            Beſides this, he addeth, that the ſame milke mingled
with a quantitie of honie, is a moſt admirable helpe for
them troubled with the Diſſenteria, eſpecially if it bee
drunke faſting.
            Finally, the vniuerſall Academie of Phiſitians doe
herein agrée, that the drinking of an Aſſes milke, cureth
many and ſundry infirmities, whereof my ſkill ſerues me
not to make report.
            But well I know, and thereof am able to yéeld a moſt
certaine teſtimony, that to an eſpeciall friend of mine, who
not long ſince was greatly gréeued with the ſtone, report
was made of the vertue of this milke, wherof he drinking
as the very lateſt remedie of hope, not only receiued the
moſt ſingular benefit of recouerie from the point of death,
which he ſawe him vnlikely to eſcape; but likewiſe attained
his former health and good diſpoſition.
            
               Suetonius Tranquillus reports, that Poppea wife to
Nero, euery morning vſed to waſh all her bodie with Aſſes
milke: only to cheriſh and maintaine health, beautie
and ſoftneſſe, as alſo to make the bodie amiable and delicate.
For this purpoſe ſhe had fiue hundreth Aſſes continually
kept, and ſuch eſpecially as very lately before had
foled their yoong: which vſe, from that time to this preſent
day, hath bene obſerued by many of our greateſt Matrons,
and among all the reſt, by Ione that was the Quéen of Naples.
            
            But to ſpeak ſome what concerning the vertue of this
beaſts ſkinne, do we not reade, that if it be taken and vſed
as a mantle, to wrappe about a childe while he is in the
Cradle, that it cauſeth the vertue of courage and boldneſſe
in ſuch ſort, as when he comes to yeares, he ſhall neuer

know the man to be affraide of?
            See we not likewiſe by daily experience, that ſuch as
ſléepe vppon an Aſſes ſkinne, or vſe it vppon them as
a couering, ſhalbe frée from vermine or Lice about them?
            Hereof procéeds it, that maiſters, maiſters mates, mariners,
captaines and ſuch like, as ſerue eiſher in ſhippes
or gallies, haue ordinarily theſe ſkinnes about them.
            The forenamed vertue, quallitie and gift, conſidered
by our Poet, altogither enforced him to ſing in this
maner.
            
               I will not ſtand to tell the long diſcourſe.
               Of Dioſcorides, Plinie, and the reſt:
               Whoſe skill in phiſicke ſprang from ſoundeſt ſence,
               Vrgde them to write great matters of this beaſt,
               Concerning medicine all of ſoueraigne might,
               Which for good cauſe I ſpare here to recite.
            
            Yet will I not forbeare to rehearſe, that if we haue
ſuch conſideration, as ought be vſed about matter of great
profit, we ſhall receiue ſome by this ſkinne, when it is laboured
and made wih holes in many places, that it may
ſerue as Siue or Searſe, wherewith commodiouſly we
take vp corne, or whatſoeuer kind of pulſe beſide, to clenſe
it from the duſt and other matter of annoyance: we ſhall
then be enforced to confeſſe, that without the benefite of
this ſkin, very hardly could we deale in ſuch buſineſſe.
            Hereto let vs adioyne another commoditie, which we
receiue by this ſkinne in the ſharpe aſſaults of warre, ſéeing
thereof is made the Drums and Tamburines, with
other ſuch like inſtruments fit for the vſe of warre: which
being to ſuch proportion as they ſhould be, and ſmitten on
(as men are inſtructed in the manner how) they deliuer
ſuch an apt ſound, as awakes and cheares the minde of a

man, although he were neuer ſo cowardly or timorous,
prouoking him to the battaile, making him withall, fierce
and couragious, bee the aſſault neuer ſo hotte and perillous.
            What ſhall wee then ſay of the Aſſes bones? Is it
not a thing eſpecially to be noted, that the marrow being
taken foorth, ſuch a kinde of Flute is of them, as yéeldes a
very ſweete and pleaſing harmonie?
            This was the cauſe which moued the Ambaſſadour of
the great Duke of Moſcouia, that went to Rome the laſt
yeare, to demaund whereof thoſe inſtruments that wee
call Cornets, which in honour of him (among other muſicall
inſtruments) were ſounded when he entred his lodging,
which the noble Gouernour of Verona had prouided
for him. And being anſwered that they were of wood,
couered with this beaſtes ſkinne, he meruailed greatly
thereat. And albeit he graunted, that they gaue a moſte
pleaſing melodie, yet hée ſaide, they were not comparable
to them made of Aſſes bones in his owne Countrey.
            Then may we ſafely (on the Aſſes behalfe) affirme with
our Poet.
            Aliue and dead, in fleſh and bone he ſoundes.
            I am reſolued then to reade no further in what I haue
ſpoken of, concerning the quallitie, vertue and properties
of the Aſſe, and of his bones: becauſe if I would, it were
conuenient for me (according to our Poets opinion) principally
to recount.
            
               How Sampſon with the Iawe bone of an Aſſe,
               Vanquiſht the Philiſtines: And from one tooth,
               A mightie ſtreame of water foorth did paſſe.
            
            Then at this Cantōs end let vs cōclude this point, only

we muſt néeds except, what may not wel be ſhadowed with
ſilence, becauſe it is little leſſe then miraculous, and is rehearſed
by Apuleius, in his booke of Country matters. If
any man bitten by a Scorpion, doth ſodeinly mount vppon
an Aſſe, ſitting with his face toward the Aſſes taile, all the
venome of the Scorpion which the man hath receiued, ſhal
part from him, and enter into the Aſſes bodie whereupon
he rydes, and the Aſſe ſhal preſently be ſéene ſwolne, changed,
and complaining, as if he had bene bitten by the Scorpion:
ſo that the man ſhalbe ſoundly recouered from any
peril of the poyſon. The proofe heereof, the before named
Author affirmeth, that by himſelfe it hath very often and
many times bene ſéene. If men then receiue ſuch a benefit
by the Aſſe, he that ſhould conceale it from being knowne,
I leaue to the iudgement of the Aſſe-fauouring Reader.
            Likewiſe let him be ſo cenſured, that ſpares to ſpeake,
what Plinie rehearſeth in his ſecond booke and twentieth
Chapter, that of the corruption in the Aſſes carcaſſe, is engendered
the blacke Flie called a béetle: which Flie, as is
ſaid in the thirtieth booke and ſecond Chapter, the people
of Egypt worſhipped as a God, perſwading themſelues,
that it was the very image of the Sun. And this was, becauſe
all the Béetles (as Elianus writes, and Snydas likewiſe
confirmeth) are male-kinde, and haue no female among
them: in this maner then is their engendring continued.
            The ſéed of the Oxe, Horſe, or dung of the Aſſe, ſpilt or
ſpred on the ground, which afterward they turne togither
with their féete, making therof the faſhion of a bed, and ſo
lye thereon, and circle it for twentie eight dayes togither,
when it receiueth forcible heate at the time for them to
take life, and thus appeares new engendred Béetles theron,
which are like to the Sun, becauſe he likewiſe ſpreads
on the earth his vertue ſeminall. Thus by his continuall
courſe are they encreaſed, flying vp toward heauen and the

heate of his beames, and as the Mooue reneweth euerie
moneth, ſo doth this kinde of Béetle ſtil renew.
            Now let vs ſpeake a little of the vertue which naturally
appertaineth to the hoofe of the Aſſe, according to Plinie,
when it is boyled in Aſſes milke, and applied to weak
ſighted eyes, it helpes them greatly, taking all offence
whatſoeuer from them, and cleares the ſight moſt miraculouſly.
            
               Plutarche writeth, in the life of Alexander the great,
that the poyſon giuen him to drinke, was an excéeding cold
water, gathered from a certaine Rocke in the Countrey
of Nouaria, which cannot be kept but in an Aſſes hoofe: for
all other things are not able to hold it, but wil breake by
reaſon of the extreame coldneſſe.
            Such then, and ſo many are the ſtupendious actions,
notable graces, and ſupernaturall gifts or quallities of the
Aſſe, which can neuer be ſufficiently commended: as therfore
he deſerueth to haue the chiefe place, amongſt all brutiſh
beaſts liuing on the earth. By iuſt equitie whereof,
our Poet being intirely moued, thus ſingeth.
            
               If I would ſing his due deſerued praiſe,
               This, not another leafe would me ſuffiſe:
               To name the vertues that him ſignifies.
               And giues to him the palme of following daies.
            
            Hence is it, that wee néede make no great meruaile,
why the auncient Aſtrologers, mooued by his ſo many natural
perfections, Nobleneſſe and excellencie, doo honour
him in heauen with the name of two ſtarres, placed in the
ſigne of Cancer, called Aſinelle, and in an other place they
ſet downe thrée, named Praeſepe Aſinelli, the Aſſes maunger.
            Nor can I but declare (as ſuccéeding in this place) the
great and diligent regard, which euermore the auncient

magnificent Lords had, to make (as one would ſay) the
Aſſes name immortall, perſwaded, mooued, and prouoked
thereto, by his ſo many rare and excellent qualities, in aboundant
ſort beſtowed on him by nature, and ſpeciall benignitie
of celeſtiall fauour.
            To the end I may then with ſome gratitude of mind,
leaue ſuch a memorie to poſteritie, as ſhall make the Aſſes
name to be perpetuall: note how theſe things following
haue bene entitled, and honoured with the name of the
Aſſe.
            
               1. Cities.
               2. Caſtles.
               3. Boroughes.
               4. Villages,
               5. Iſlands.
               6. Seas.
               7. Ports.
               8. Mountaines.
               9. Riuers.
               10. Bridges.
               11. Stréetes.
               12. High waies.
               13. Vallies.
               14. Towers.
               15. Fountaines.
               16. Sepulchers.
               17. Bookes.
               18. Lawes.
               19. Frutes.
               20. Feaſtes.
               21. Games.
               22. Oathes.
               23. Proper names.
               24. Families.
               25. Prouerbes.
            
            And to the end this which I haue ſaid may appearantly
bee knowne, binding my ſelfe willingly to the Aſſes
name, it wil be hard for me to gather, and conſort in this
place two named things, for each of the fiue and twentie
before declared: that only beare memorie of the Aſſe, and
ſo ſhall do for euer.
            Nor ſhall I néed to collect any more then two of each,
though for euery one I could ſet downe ten at the leaſt:
becauſe I am loth to be troubleſome to my ſelfe, as alſo
fearefull to hinder any from imitating the ſteppes of ſuch
Aſſe-friends.
            
               
1 One of the moſt principall Cities in Perſia, not farre
off from the great Citie of Selencia, is called in the Perſian
tongue Zaucamora, which in our language, is as much
to ſay, as the Aſſes Citie.
            2 In Peloponeſus, or Morea, if we wil ſo call it, néere
to the ſea that lieth toward the Weſt, is the Citie named
Aſinari.
            
            1 In Calabria, at the Marqueſate of Oluito, there is a
Caſtle called, Caſtello del gl'Aſini.
            
            2 In Friuli, about ten myles diſtant from Aſola, is an
other, tearmed Caſtello Aſinino.
            
            1 In the territorie of Placentia, is a village named
Villa diſcontral Asino.
            
            2 Neare to Rome, as ye go toward Braciano, is a Village
that hight Asina bella.
            
            1 In the territorie of Siena, is a Borough called Asina
luuga.
            
            2 On the way as we ryde from Bologna to Florence,
betwéene Loiano and Pietramala, we come to a Borough
tearmed Scarcalasino.
            
            1 Aſinetta, is an Iſland at the mouth of the red ſea,
not much diſtant from the land on the Eaſt ſide, where
ſtands the ſtrong Citie of Aden.
            
            2 In the Eupine ſea, called Mare Maiore, on the North
part, neare to Palus Meotides, there is a little Iſlande,
which aboundeth with ſwéete water, and it is called Iſola
Asinina.
            
            1 Olaius Magnus, a moſt diligent writer of the North
parts, affirmeth, that the ſea which from Norway we ſaile
by, to the Prouince of Lapponia called Schiuziroffi, in our
language is tearmed Mare Asinone.
            
            2 The great ſpacious 
                  〈◊〉
                which from the Realme of
Ireland, paſſeth on to Iſeland▪
                of the Countrey people is
called Mare Aſineſco.
            
            1 In the Aegean ſea, neare to the Caſtle which vulgarely

is called Dardanelli, on the ſide of Aſia; is to be
ſéene a moſt faire Port, though not ouer bigge, and it is
named Porto Aſinino.
            
            2 In the Iſle of Cyprus, before we arriue at the hauen
of Famogoſta, a Port is found, which is not very ſure,
for yéelding ſhelter from the colde Northeaſt winde, it is
called Porto Aſinetto.
            
            1 Ten myles of from Florence, may ye diſcerne the
mountain Aſinaro, where the obſeruant Fryers of a Monaſterie
builded on the top of the mountaine, daily ſerue
God.
            2 On the part where Abrutium is ſeated in Italy, is
Mount Aſinello, on the top whereof is a Church dedicated
to S. Euſtatius.
            
            1 Neare the water Treuio, by Abrucium, is a little
Riuer named the Riuer of Aſino.
            
            2 In the territories of Raguſa, or Epidaurus, within
ſixe myles diſtance of the Cittie, runneth the Riuer Aſineſco,
which is a nauigable water, and hath a defenceable
Port at the Sea mouth.
            1 Among the ruines of Aquileia, which was deſtroyed
by Attyla, is to be ſéene part of a moſt ſumptuous Bridge,
at the head whereof, ſtands a huge Aſſe of very pure marble,
which with her Dugges ſéedes two yoong Aſſes, and
this Bridge is yet called Pont' Aſinone. On the other part
of the ſame Bridge now ruined, as the eldeſt men of the
Countrey auouch, was another goodly Aſſe made like the
former, the reliques whereof are yet to be there ſéene on
the ground.
            2 In Cicilia, neare to the Citie of Catauea, within two
myles, there paſſeth an indifferent great Riuer, ouer
which is a goodly Bridge of wood, whereon foure Cartes
may eaſily méete togither, and it is named Pous Aſini.
            
            1 The large ſtréete, whereby we paſſe along from the
Market place, vnto the Cathedral Church of S. Mauritus,
               
in the Cittie of Lypara, is called Aſineſca ſtréete.
            2 In the auncient Cittie of Perugia, there is a ſtréete
which direct to the Monaſterie of Couented Fryers of S.
Fraunces, and it is tearmed the Paradiſe of the Aſini.
            
            1 In Friuli, on certaine high downe bearing hilles,
where the auncient familie of the Gordes of Sauorgnani
haue their iuriſdiction, is a way that leadeth to a certaine
Caſtle of theirs, named, Here fell I with mine Aſſe. Which
words are there engrauen in very hard ſtones, that ſo faire
a memorie of the Aſſe might not be forgotten.
            2 In Apulia is a great way of tenne large myles, by
which they paſſe from the great Tower, till they come to
Mount Iargano, it is called Longaſina.
            
            1 There is a vale by the way, as ye goe along from
Fabriano to Cammerino, neare to the ſhipping place of the
auncient Varrani, now Lordes of the ſaid Cittie, and it is
named the vale of Aſini.
            
            2 Neare to the parts of Heluetia, among the Cantons
where Zurich is named, ye haue a valley called Aſinari.
            
            1 At the Citie of Bologna, there is a Tower which
for height contendeth with the ſtarres, called the Tower
of the Aſinelli.
            
            2 A Tower of leſſer height is to be ſéene in the Prouince
of Baſilicata, otherwiſe called Lucania, without the
walles of the Citie of Venafro, on the Weſt ſide, and it is
tearmed the Tower Aſino.
            
            1 A Fountaine plentifully abounding with water,
is to be ſéene on the confines, betwéene Pipeono and the
Caſtle of Souino, it is nominated, Fountaine Aſini.
            
            2 Paſſing the Riuer Pauara, and leauing the corner
of the way, whereby we goe to Modoua, there turning on
the left hand, and within a quarter of a myle onwarde,
ſtandes a Fountaine beautified with engrauen ſtone, yet
paſſing vnder a goodly vault by thrée great pipes of mettall,
wel neare rotten and defaced; out of them comes great

aboundance of water, and it is called Fountaine Aſinara.
            
            Hauing ſo lately mentioned the Citie of Modeua, I
call to minde a memorie concerning the Aſſe, which the
ſaid Citie long time kept among other things, with good
regard. And it was a milking paile, wherin a citizens Aſſe
of Bologna had drunke: for it happened, that about matter
of the confines, warres enſued betwéene them of Bologna
and Modeua. They of this part, at one time among other,
made a tumultuous inuaſion on the territories of Bologna,
and finding ſome encounter which they looked not
for, by reaſon of their vnorderly proceeding: they were enforced
to returne, yet they ſought for ſome bootie in the
ſtable of Bolognian Cittizen, from whence the maiſter
thereof had but lately before taken foorth his Aſſe, and for
feare eſcaped away thereon. There found they the milking
paile, wherin the Aſſe before ſpoken on had drunke, which
they tooke away with them, and mounting it on the point
of a Launce, after the maner of carrying ſome great Trophée,
they returned there with to the Cittie, all the people
of Modeua running to gaze theron, as at a moſt rich ſpoyle
gotten by conqueſt of warre: which by them long time after
was kept as an eſpeciall example: as we reade in
the booke called the Annales of Lombardie.
            
            But nowe returne wee to the other memories of
the Aſſe.
            1 At the Cittie of Vercellis, in the Church of Saint
Lazarus, is to bee ſéene a goodly auncient Sepulcher of
Marble, on the couerture whereof, is verie linely carued
an Aſſe lying along verie formally, euen as the figures
of men are ſhaped vppon Toombes. And there
are certaine letters engrauen at the féete of the ſaid Aſſe:
but nothing can be made of any ſillable, by reaſon they are
ſo defaced by antiquitie.
            Here I confeſſe, and that for ſome reuerence, which
dutifully I beare to the Aſſe, not to haue founde any other

Sepulcher, carrying remembrance of the Aſſe, but only
this one: albeit I haue ſpared no labour, in reading ouer
bookes ſufficient, beſide all other poſſible dilligence imployed.
            1 Apuleius wrote a booke intituled, the golden Aſſe.
            2 Plautus compoſed a Comedie, called Aſinaria.
            
            I could neuer know what booke that was, which gaue
matter to our Poet thus to ſing.
            
               Now do I call to minde a new rare praiſe,
               Worthie ſo many Dukes and Emperours,
               Which in the Aſſes booke is found alwaies.
            
            Wherefore I am now content to proſecute the ſearch
therof no further, in hope another time to vnderſtand more
of it.
            1 Bartolus, the famous Lawier, in L. 1. F. de ſup. L.
leg. ſpeaketh of a lawe, which willeth, that the Teſtator
making a bond of his mooueables to a ſtraunger, and letting
paſſing his ſetled good to his kindred, that rightfully
ſhould as heires ſuccéed: this lawe limitteth and appointteth,
that his Aſſe (if he happened to haue any) is not comprehended
among the mooueables. But as a good, ſtable
and ſetled, without any other implication, the ſame Aſſe
ſhall remain to his kindred y• do inherit the goods ſeated.
            And this lawe (for this purpoſe) do I account ſufficient,
becauſe I am loth to trouble myſelfe, in ſearching huge
lawe Libraries for any other: for my labour therin would
excéed the Aſſes.
            1 No ſort of frutes are found, but beare name of ſome
beaſte, or of a man, as the Apple of Appius, the Prune
Maximillian, of Maximillianus: and that of the Aſſe, which
is the ſort of Prunes, named great, good, faire and yelow,
being rightly tearmed the Prune Aſinare.
            
            2 There is a kind of Cucumber, which much auaileth

for medicine, and it is called Cucumber Aſini.
            
            2 Nouius Marcellus recordeth, that the Romanes of
old would celebrate the feaſt of the gardein God, whereat
the huſbands children only ſhould be preſent, each one outbrauing
other vpon his Aſſe, and ſo ryding on this beaſt,
thrée times they would circle the temple about. Afterward
they ſhould caſt lottes, and his Aſſe to whome the lot fell,
muſt haue his throte cut; with whoſe blood each filling a
little glaſſe viall, they would ſtriue to maiſter one another
by throwing the ſame in the face of ſtatue, which repreſented
the God of the gardein.
            2 Herodotus a moſt auncient writer reports, that
the Gréekes were wont yearly to celebrate the feaſt Aſinaria:
in memorie of that notable victorie, which the Athenian
had againſt the Perſians, neare to the Riuer Aſinone.
            
            1 Among all the paſtimes, wherein moſt and leaſt
delighted concerning table play, was the game called
Scarralaſino, to wit, vnlead the Aſſe: whereat, by imitation
of the Aſſe, who ſuffers himſelfe to be ridden by all perſons
indifferently, all the ſtanders by may play, and eaſily
learne it without any labour.
            2 Schoole-children were went to put ſome heauie
thing on their head, and binde an arme behinde being firſt
hood winckled; then would the reſt runne about him thus
vſed, ſinging.
            
               Vnload the Aſſe, and if he feele not,
               Looke to his ſtanding, that he reele not.
            
            1 Diodorus Siculus declareth, that at ſuch time as the
Iſle of Scicile was gouerned by tyrants, there was a ſtatute,
that a woman offending in adultrie ſhould frée her
ſelfe, ſwearing ſhe had not committed adulterie, being
brought before the head of an Aſſe, which for this purpoſe

was kept in the temple dedicated to God Bacchus.
            
            2 There was an vſe among the Gentiles, that they (in
ieſt) willing to giue an oath to children, they would faſten
a lampe at their garment, with a haubercher after the faſhion
of a long triangle, and holding thereby, ſay, Sweare
here vpon this eare of the Aſſe.
            Here it remaines to ſpeake of them, that of olde haue
bene named by the Aſſe, and of families likewiſe, which
haue called themſelues of the Aſſe. But becauſe they are
infinit, and all the ſkinnes in the land of Madiam cannot
containe them: I intend only to name two, as hitherto of
the reſt I haue done, leauing the endleſſe number of the
other, to them that liſt imploy their paines about ſuch a
buſineſſe.
            But yet among ſo many, I muſt not forget that famous
nauall victory, which the auncient Perſians brought
with them out of Egypt: and Noacles a moſte excellent
Painter in thoſe dayes, deſirous to remember the ſame
by his Arte, painted an Aſſe, drinking at the Riuer Nilus,
in deſpight of the Crocadile: which being ouercome
in power, and thus ſubiected, ſtoode patiently to ſee him
drinke, as Plinie reporteth.
            1 Then not to let paſſe in ſilence, the names of men
called Aſſe, as their proper names, I may firſt alleadge the
name of Asinius Gallus, who was ſonne to Scipio Affricanus.
            
            And who deſires to know an infinite number of men,
both Senators & of other diſcents, which by proper name
were called Asini, let him reade Ciceros Epiſtles to Atticus,
where he ſhall finde an endleſſe beadrole.
            2 Here may I wel inſert the name of a famous man,
a moderne Cittizen of Florence, of the auncient family of
the Asini: to wit, maiſter Asino, whome the Hiſtorie of
Florence faithfully reports, to reforme and correct the ſtatutes

of the merchaunts, for which his Aſſe-gloring name
will for euer be renowmed in that Citie.
            
               Pindarus, and Macrobius, in the fift booke of his Saturnalles
affirmeth, that the famous Gréeke, which made
the Horſſe of wood, by meanes whereof the Grecians
got the Citie of Troy, was called Aſinon: whereas Virgill
naming him Sinon, we may ſafely auouth, that the
good Poet, who fauoured the Troyan part, from whence
the Romanes had their originall, was procured to alter
the name of the aforeſaid Aſinon: euen no otherwiſe then
the Grecians did, when by publike decrée he was cenſured
with baniſhment, that ſhould ſpeake of his name, who
to get himſelfe fame, ſet on fire the Temple of Diana at
Epheſus. And ſo to conquere with obliuion ſuch a famous
Aſinon, whoſe praiſe well deſerues to liue for euer: they
haue taken away his names firſt letter, and in ſtéed of Aſinon,
call him Sinon.
            
            1 We haue alreadie declared, that in Florence liues
the noble Familie of the Aſini.
            
            2 In Piſa likewiſe is there another, and in Bologna
that of the Aſinelli, where alſo is ſtil celebrate the famous
Tower, which the noble Aſinelli in elder times erected.
But to what end trouble I my wittes in this maner, ſeeking
by the light of an Aſſe-friending lanthorn, for names,
ſirnames, and families? ſéeing our Poet himſelfe thus ſingeth.
            
               If I ſhould ſpeake more matter of import,
               By grounded reaſon I might ſafely ſay,
               The Aſſe in men that are of learnedſt ſort,
               Seemes to haue priuiledge and greateſt ſway.
               Tis too well knowen, wherefore I ſilent ſit,
               As hauing thereof neither ſpoke or writ.
            
            
               
Beſide all this, I doo not meruaile a little, ſéeing ſuch
an infinit company of fooles, who being honoured with the
excelling name of Aſſe, will yet runne he adiong to brabble
and quarrell, when ſetling to their weapons, they
will flaſh and cut they care not with whom. All which happeneth,
by reaſon it is no common vſe, to apply the name
of ſo Noble a beaſt to man: who notwithſtanding cares
not for the ignomie, to bee tearmed after other wicked
beaſtes more vnbeſéeming, as to be called Beare, Lyon,
Dogge, and ſuch like.
            This was the cauſe, that our Poet mooued by a thouſand
reaſons, ſaith;

                  Nor know I wherefore choller doth ſo daunt,
                  A man when he is tearmed by the Aſſes name:
                  Whereof (me thinkes) much rather he ſhould vaunt.
               
            
            Now procéed we to ſpeake of the Aſſes Prouerbes.
            1 When a man will not repeate his wordes againe,
he vſeth to ſay, It is May no more, or May is paſt: ſo things
are auoyded from twiſe ſpeaking. The meaning here of
may be this, becauſe the firſt moneth that Aſſes doo make
knowne to the worlde, their louing nature to each other,
they ſend foorth their goodly, ſwéet, and continual brayings,
whereof they forme a melodious and proportionable kinde
of muſicke. Nor thinke I that any of our immoderne Muſitians
can deny, but that their ſong is full of exceeding
pleaſure to be heard: becauſe therein is to bee diſcerned,
both concord, diſcord, ſinging the meane, the beginning
to ſing in large compaſſe, then following on, to riſe and
fall, the halfe note, whole note, muſicke of fiue voyces,
firme ſinging by foure voyces, thrée togither,

or one voyce and a halfe. Then their variable contrarietie
amongſt them, when one deliuers foorth a long tenor
or a ſhort, the pauſing for time, breathing in meaſure, breaking
the minim, halfe minim, or verie leaſt moment of
time. Laſt of all, to heare muſicke of fiue or ſixe voyces,
chaunged to ſo many of Aſſes, is amongſt them to heare a
ſong of world without end.
            Hence is it, that a man being ſo attentiue to heare this
kinde of Aſſe muſicke, cannot liſten or lende his eare to
what elſe is ſaid to him, and therefore it is lawfull, by perticular
priulledge of the ſaid May moneth, to repeate the
words to ſuch, as without offence would learne them by
heart: nor ſhall it be taken ſo vnmanerly done, as it were
in any of the other moneths.
            2 When Apuleius ſawe himſelfe tranſformed into an
Aſſe, he reſolued to ſhewe his maiſter, by the effects of all
his perſonage, the great loue he bare him. So after the
maner of the houſe Dogge, kéeping his hinder féete on the
ground, and riſing vp with his former, he ſo clambred vpon
his maiſter, as but a while before he had ſéene the litle
Dogge doo. And albeit his kinde Aſſehith intent he diſcloſed
to his maiſter, yet ſuch maner of ſalutation in him
was not taken in good part. Hereof then it comes, that
when a man ſuſpects or miſdéemes of an others familiaritie,
he vſeth to ſay, He plaies the Aſſes paſtime with me.
            
            So was it went to be ſaid; What the Aſſe giues in,
ſuch he receiues. But becauſe this Prouerbe is euidently
of it ſelfe, as if it were Omne agens repatitur in agendo: I
will beſtow no more paines in declaring it, nor yet of this
which followes.
            
               What Aſſe or Hart will be ſo bold,
               To leape a pit ere he it behold?
            
            
               
Nor likewiſe of this, to wit.
            Who waſheth an Aſſe head, looſeth his ſope.
            Nor will I ſtand trifeling the time, to know whence
many words are deriued, which in regard of their excellencie,
are breathed foorth but by a letter, or as we ſay in latine.
            Quaestio de vmbra Aſini.
            
               Aſinus ad liram, and ſuch like. This I ſay were no otherwiſe,
then as one meaning to walke hande in hande
with a Phiſitian, ſhould ſodeinly breake his head: inough
is well.
            Now concerning the aforeſaid qualities and memorie
of the Aſſe, it is no great meruaile, that the auncient wiſe
men ſhould make ſuch a great account of the Aſſe, which in
like manner hath often made me to admire, conſidering,
that with all they could procure, to make the ſaid beaſtes
name immortall, by ſo many denominations as we haue
ſéene: neuertheleſſe, there is not founde any Commonwealth,
any Emperour or Prince, that cared to beare this
ſigne of the Aſſe, not painting him in their Scutchions, as
their proper Armes, not vſing him as an impreſe. The
reaſon hereof may be, that in prouing his déeds, they haue
left him to vs, who being of the Chriſtian name, ſhould
likewiſe ſhewe the ſame by déedes to the worlde: bearing
him for our proper Armes, becauſe we know the ſimplicitie,
méekneſſe, and other pleaſing qualities, wherewith
we haue ſéene the Aſſe to be richly endued.
            Wherefore thoſe auncient Common-weales, thoſe
Emperours and other Princes barbarous or Gentiles,

which builded their gouernement vppon rapine, vyelence,
deceipt, fraude, and all other tyrannicall behauiour,
would haue their iron cuſtomes diſcerned, by the
Armes and impreſes of terrible, bloodie, and moſt cruell
beaſts.
            Heereof grewe it, that the moſte proude people of
Rome, tooke the Eagle for their Enſign and Armes, which
is a bird moſt rauenous and deuouring. But in reaſon
they ſhould rather haue made choyſe of the Gooſe, remembring
they preſerued their Countrey, libertie, and proper
liues: when the ſouldiers awaked by their noyſe, by the
means of the Géeſe; defended the Capital from the French
mens aſſault.
            But notwithſtanding all this, the Gooſe was reputed
a bird too ſimple for them & too vigilant: euen like eſtéeme
would they haue made of the Aſſe, if by his braying they
had receiued the ſelfeſame benefit.
            The people of Phrigia had for their Armes, the wilde
Bore, a moſt pernicious beaſt.
            They of Thrace had a fleſhleſſe carkaſſe, or the image
of death as wee may tearme it, for the extreameſt of all
things terrible.
            The Gothes beare a Feare, a moſt irefull beaſt.
            The Alani that aſſaulted and ſacked Spaine, had the
Marten, a very fraudfull beaſt.
            The French heare the Lyon, a moſt proud beaſt.
            The Lumbardes ſerued themſelues with the Enſigne
of the Toade, a thing which both aliue and dead is poyſonous.
            The Cimbrians, that were ouercome by Caius Marius,
they tooke the Bull, a beaſt hardly tamed.
            
               
The Saxons made choyſe of the Horſſe, a goodly
beaſt.
            The Hebrewes beare the Scorpion in their Enſigne,
that carries his poyſon hidden ſecretly in his
tayle.
            The Caithagenians had the Crocadile for their impreſe,
a fraudelent beaſt and moſt deceitfull.
            
               Attila, who cauſed himſelfe to be ſirnamed, the ſcourge
of God, had in his banner the Hawke, a fowle that liues
by rapine.
            
               Antigonus, King of Soria, gaue the Eagle, that ſtrictly
held in her tallents a fierce Dragon.
            And laſt of all, not Common-weales onely and great
Princes, ſerue themſelues with theſe beaſtes, fierce, brutiſh,
and venemous, but likewiſe families, and houſes of
priuate Gentlemen, yea, of ſimple Citizens, place in their
Scutchione the ſelfeſame ſignalles. Whereas if they had
chaunged ſuch cuſtomes, and embraced the true Chriſtian
faith, I am perſwaded it would likewiſe will in them,
to chaunge ſuch Armes and impreſes: and in ſtéed of thoſe
moſt rauenous deuourers, to place in their Banners
ſimple and houſholde beaſtes, ſhewing thereby to the
world Chriſtian ſimplicitie, friendlineſſe and loue, as by
the Gooſe, the Lambe, the Turtle Dooue, and ſuch like
harmeleſſe things.
            But beyond theſe, they ſhould ſhewe themſelues poſſeſſed
of all good and honourable cuſtome, if they would
take the Aſſe for their propper Armes, as that Noble
ſocietie of the Cittie of Vicenza hath done, who euer
hath helde in eſtéeme, and vniuerſally vſed the Enſigne
of the noble Aſſe, whiche was taken from the

               Paduans in a controuerſie, and had long time bene hanged
vpon the gallowes: becauſe the ſaid Communitie of Vicenza
knew not ſo ſoone, that the people of Padua had hanged
vp the Aſſe, which they had ſent to couenaunt with
them, to giue them diuerſe burthens of entrailes, which
cloathed ouer and filled with hogges fleſh cut into ſmall
pieces, we call a Saulſage, which by the Aſſes voyce was
oft times ſpecified in them. But when Vicenzians had effectually
executed the ſame, the Saulſage was imparted
to the people of Padua, and the Aſſe taken downe from the
gallowes immediately: from whence enſued this ſong of
children, which euen vntil this day the youth of Padua vſe
to ſing, on the hanging of the ſaid Aſſe, to wit:

                  Hangd, and vnhangd,
                  All for the piece of Saulſage.
               
            
            In a certaine part of Arcadia, the name whereof I doo
not well remember, is yearly preſerued a memorie of the
Aſſe, well worthie truly to be rehearſed in this my Aſſe-defending
diſcourſe.
            Thus then it is, vppon one certaine determinate day,
an infinite number of the people runne on heapes to the
market place, where from the toppe of a very high Tower,
he or they that is appointed for the office, make an Aſſe
to deſcend downe ſo queintly vpon certaine ropes, two artificiall
wingges being faſtened to his ſhoulders, that in
diſcent he ſéemeth to flie: and the multitude are wont to
ſay after they haue dyned; Come, let vs goe into the market
place, and ſée the Aſſe flie. Nor will I ſpare to ſay, that
ſome who holde a reuerend memorie of the Aſſe, gladly
could affoord, that the foreſaid Countrey was Empole in
Tuſcane: then I thinke they would imagine the better of

mine Aſſe diſcourſe.
            Here I purpoſed to end my booke concerning the Aſſe,
had I not ſodeinly called to memorie, a matter worthie of
great conſideration, and to be preſerued in minde euen
to the end, for the compleate Nobleneſſe, excellencie and
perfection of the Aſſe.
            In the time of the Gentiles, there was a man borne
blinde by nature, euen at the laſt ſteppe of his age, and the
very finall moment of his life time. Among certaine circumſtances
offered to him, he was demaunded, what eſpeciall
thing more then any other he would deſire to ſée, if
Ioue, to whoſe reuerence he ſubmitted himſelfe, woulde
graunt, that he ſhould ſée that one thing and no more. To
which demaund, without ſtaying for any other premeditation,
he anſwered, an Aſſe. Which reply vrged in them
all an excéeding laughter, whereat the blinde man meruailing;
ſaid; Brethren, make not a ieſt of what I deſire,
becauſe I imagine, that if any of you were in my caſe, you
ſcant would haue the like deſire. For ſince I came into
this world (which now fulfilles a great number of yéeres)
ther neuer paſſed one day, but that many hundred of times
I haue heard and knowne that beaſt to bee named, and
they applied him to all things whatſoeuer, that paſſed in
ſpéech or could be named.
            Forbeare to ſay, Beware the Aſſe, Make roome for the
Aſſe; we may well let theſe paſſe, becauſe I haue likewiſe
heard ſaid, Beware the Horſſe, beware the Mule, beware
the Oxe, and ſuch like. But here reſts the point, for common
hearing this beaſt to be compared, to the likeneſſe of
mans bodie, to the vertue and vices of his minde; beſide,
giuing him many and ſundry preheminences and prerogatiues,
well worthie of no light conſideration. And to ſpeak
of ſome partes of reſemblance to the bodie, there neuer
paſſeth day or houre, but ye ſhall heare a thouſand times

ſaid: Such a one is an Aſſe.
            
               He hath the face of an Aſſe.
               The heart of an Aſſe.
               The muſicke of an Aſſe.
               The voyce of an Aſſe.
               The place of an Aſſe.
               The parts of an Aſſe.
               The head of an Aſſe.
               The eares of an Aſſe.
               The mouth of an Aſſe.
               The backe of an Aſſe.
               And fleſht like an Aſſe.
            
            Now as concerning morall vertues, fewe houres doo
paſſe, but I heare, Such a one? Why, he is

                  As wiſe as an Aſſe.
                  As ſtrong as an Aſſe.
                  As modeſt as an Aſſe.
                  As ingenious as an Aſſe.
                  As diſcréet as an Aſſe.
                  As curteous as an Aſſe.
               
            
            With other ſuch like vertues. Now for vices, to wit.
Such a one is,

                  As vicious as an Aſſe.
                  As beaſtly as an Aſſe.
                  As thankleſſe as an Aſſe.
                  As vnciuill as an Aſſe.
               
            
            But when ſhall ye heare for any one reſpect, a beaſte,

thus compared to a man, in regarde of ſuch and ſo many
quallities, but that in the reſt is ſéene quite contrary. Nor
can they elſe remaine in one ſubiect, no more then in fire
can be both heate and colde: but for proofe that they are
euident in the Aſſe, and neuer can or ſhall be in any other,
note what followes. Oft haue I heard, Such a one is,
As

                  Faire as an Aſſe.
                  Wiſe as an Aſſe.
                  Brutiſh as an Aſſe.
                  Fooliſh as an Aſſe.
                  Gentle as an Aſſe.
                  Groſſe witted as an Aſſe.
                  Learned as an Aſſe.
                  Ignorant as an Aſſe.
                  Simple as an Aſſe.
                  Good as an Aſſe.
                  Sad as an Aſſe.
                  Merie as an Aſſe.
                  Melancholly as an Aſſe.
                  Sléepie as an Aſſe.
                  Watchfull as an Aſſe.
                  Hard as an Aſſe.
                  Tender as an Aſſe.
                  Weary as an Aſſe.
                  Reſte like an Aſſe.
                  Snorts like an Aſſe.
                  Quiet as an Aſſe.
                  Gallant as an Aſſe.
                  Théeuiſh as an Aſſe.
                  Braue as an Aſſe.
                  Cleanly as an Aſſe.
                  Shameleſſe as an Aſſe.
                  Manerly as an Aſſe.
                  
                     
Rude as an Aſſe.
                  Pleaſing as an Aſſe.
                  Obſtinate as an Aſſe.
               
            
            With other ſuch like contradictions, as (my mind being
troubled) I cannot now remember, but grow almoſt
weary in this my Aſſe-labour: yet mée thinkes I heare
ſome abſolutely ſay;

                  Oh that magnificent Aſſe.
                  That ſolemne Aſſe.
                  That gentle Aſſe.
                  That daintie Aſſe.
               
            
            Then ruſheth in another, ſaying;

                  Thou vſeſt me like an Aſſe.
                  Thou wrangleſt like an Aſſe.
                  Thou laugheſt like an Aſſe.
                  Thou perſwadeſt like an Aſſe.
                  Thou ſweate
                        ••
                      like an Aſſe.
                  Thou ſtinkeſt like an Aſſe.
                  Thou art as amorous as an Aſſe.
                  Thou art as vnnurt
                        ••
                     de as an Aſſe.
                  Thou eateſt like an Aſſe.
                  And fileſt like an Aſſe.
               
            
            In theſe and many other things, the Aſſe claimeth a
generall kindred.
            Among ſchollers in the Schoole making their arguments,
I haue heard them ſay; Homo eſt Aſinus, Brunellus
eſt Aſinus, ergo tues Aſinus. With ſo many diuers precheminences,
prerogatiues, vertues, viced, contrarieties and
denominations of the Aſſe, haue I ſo often heard, that my
minde hath bene encited with moſt earneſt deſire, to ſée

(ere I had ſéene) what beaſt this renowmed and famous
Aſſe was.
            Now then ſéeming to haue ſpoken ſufficiently, I perſwade
my ſelfe, that any man but meanely enſtructed in
Sciences ſpeculatiue, may in concluſion giue the ſentence
in fauour of the Aſſe: declaring him for the nobleſt of all
kindes of beaſts whatſoeuer remaining on the earth, excelling
the Dogge, Horſe, Ape, Lyon, or Elephant.
            And as a knitting vp of my Aſſe-defending Treatiſe,
I commend my ſelfe to their conſideration, whom daily I
ſée to vſe ſuch Aſſe-like behauiour, that in all their actions
(I thinke) they intend to imitate the Aſſe. I would haue
them reſolue vpon inſtituting a company, which might be
tearmed the ſocietie or fellowwip of the Aſſe: and each of
them ſhould weare a tablet about his necke, whereon the
image of the Aſſe ſhuld be engrauen, to the end they might
the more apparently be knowne thereby.
            So taking my leaue both of you and the Aſſe, with this
one moſt honoured memorie of all concerning him; Remember
the Sauiour of the world, that in all his life time
had but one dayes tryumph, when hee refuſing all other
beaſts beſide, made choyſe onely of the Aſſe, and rode theron
in greateſt maieſtie to Ieruſalem, yet néedes will our
Poet with theſe verſes knit vp this Treatiſe.
            
               If for ſome worthie Impreſe I ſhould goe
               Into the field mongſt ſouldiers of one minde:
               Bearing the Aſſe in Enſigne for their ſhowe,
               Hung but the tayle as feather for the winde:
               The ſkinne as Armour both behinde and fore,
               
                  Rhodomontes Serpents ſcales could do no more.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
            
            LONDON
Printed by Tho. Creede,
and are to be ſold by William Barley, at his ſhop
in Gratious ſtreete. 1595.
            
         
      
   