
      
         
            
            
            BEING A TRVE CHRONICLE HISTORIE OF THE VNTIMEly death of ſuch vnfortunate Princes and men of Note, as haue happened ſince the firſt entrance of BRVTE into this Iland, vntill this our latter Age,
            
            WHEREVNTO IS ADDED THE FAMOVS LIFE AND DEATH OF QVEENE ELIZABETH, with a declaration of all the Warres, Battles and Sea-fights, wherein at large is deſcribed the Battell of 88. with the particular ſeruice of all ſuch Ships, and men of note in that action.
            Contre fortune nulne peut.
            
               AT LONDON, Imprinted by F. K. for William Aſpley, and are to beſold at his ſhop in Pauls Churchyard at the Signe of the Parrot. 1619.
         
         
            
            
            
               
                  Loue and liue.
               
            
            
               TO THE NOBILITIE AND ALL OTHER IN OFFICE, GOD GRANT ENcreaſe of wiſdome, with all things neceſſarie for preſeruation of their eſtates. Amen.
               
            
            
               AMongſt the wiſe (right Honorable) whoſe ſentences (for the moſt part) tend either to teach the attaining of vertue or eſchewing of vice, Plotinus 
               Plotinus. that wonderful and excellent Philoſopher hath theſe words: The property of Temperance is to couet nothing which may be repented: not to exceed the bands of meaſure, and to keepe Deſire vnder the yoke of Reaſon. Which ſaying if it were ſo well knowne, as it is needfull; ſo well embraced, as is wiſhed; or ſo ſurely fixed in mind, as it is printed in his works: then certes many Chriſtians might by the inſtruction of an Ethnicke Philoſopher, ſhun great and dangerous perils. For to couet without conſideration, to paſſe the meaſure of his degree,

and to let will run at randon, is the only deſtruction of all eſtates. Elſe how were it poſſible, ſo many learned, politicke, wiſe, renowned, valiant, and victorious perſonages, might euer haue come to ſuch vtter decay? For example, we haue Alexander the Great, Caeſar, Pompey, Cyrus, Hannibal, &c. All which (by deſire of glorie) felt the reward of their immoderate and inſatiable Quintus Curtius. luſts: for if Alexander had bin content with Macedonie, or not been puft vp with pride after his triumphes, he had neuer been ſo miſerablie poiſoned. If Caeſar and Pompey had been ſatisfied with their victories, and had not fell to ciuill diſſenſion, the one had not been ſlaine in the Senate with daggers, nor the other abroad, by their friends procurement. If Cyrus had bin pleaſed 
                  
                     
                        •
                     ustinus 
                        ••
                     b. 1. with all Perſia, & Media, and not thirſted for blood, he had neuer come to ſo infortunate a fal. So if Hannibal had not ſo much delighted in glory of warfare, his coūtry had neither fel in ruine, Plutarchus. 
                     •
                  iuius. Colybius. nor he bin miſerably forced to poyſon himſelfe. But you will ſay, deſire of fame, glorie, renowne, and immortalitie (to which all men well nigh by nature are inclined, eſpecially thoſe which excell or haue any ſingular gift of fortune or the bodie) moued them to ſuch dangerous, great,

and hardy enterpriſes, which muſt needs be confeſſed as an infallible veritie: and therefore I ſurely deeme thoſe Princes aboue ſpecified (conſidering their fortunes, fame, and exploits) had neuer come to ſuch end, but for want of temperance. And now ſith there are three other Cardinal vertues which are requiſit in him that ſhould be in authoritie: that is to ſay, Prudence, Iuſtice, and Fortitude, which ſo wonderfully adorne and beautifie all eſtates (If Temperance be with them adioyned, that they moue the very enemies with admiration to praiſe them) ſome peraduenture (as affection leads) will commend one, ſome another: as Aristotle the Prince of Philoſophers names Prudence, the mother of vertues, but Cicero 
               Aristot. Cicero. Prudence. defines her the knowledge of things which ought to be deſired and followed, and alſo of them which ought to be fled and eſchewed; yet you ſhall finde that for want of Temperance, ſome which were counted very wiſe, fell into wonderfull reproch and infamie. But Iuſtice that incomparable vertue, (as the ancient Ciuilians define her) is a perpetual and conſtant wil which giueth to euery man his right, yet if ſhee be not conſtant, which is the gift of Fortitude; nor equal in diſcerning right from wrong, wherein is Prudence;

nor vſe proportion in iudgement and ſentence, which pertaineth to Temperance: ſhe can neuer be called equitie or iuſtice, but fraud, deceit, iniuſtice and iniurie. And, to ſpeak of Fortitude, which Cicero defineth, a conſiderate vndertaking Fortitude. Cicero. of perils, and enduring of labours; if he whom we ſuppoſe ſtout, valiant, and of good courage, want Prudence, Iuſtice, or Temperance, he is not counted wiſe, righteous and conſtant, but ſottiſh, rude and deſperate. For Temperance (ſaith Cicero) is of reaſon in luſt and other euill Cicero. Temperance. aſſaults of the mind, a ſure and moderate dominion and rule. This noble vertue is diuided into three parts, that is, Continencie, Clemencie, and Modeſty, which well obſerued and kept (if grace be to them adioyned) it is impoſſible for him that is endued with the aboue named vertues euer to fall into the infortunate ſnares of calamitie, or misfortune. But Ambition, which is immoderate deſire of honor, rule, dominion, and ſuperiority, (the very deſtruction of nobilitie and common weales, as among the Romans; Sylla, Marius, Carbo, Cinna, Catiline, Pompey and Caeſar, are witneſſes) hath brought great decay to our countrey, and countrey-men. But I haue heere (Right Honorable) in this booke only reproued folly

in thoſe which are heedleſſe: Iniury in extortioners, raſhneſſe in venterers, treacherie in traytours, riot in rebels, and exceſſe in ſuch as ſuppreſſe not vnruly affections. Now I truſt you will ſo thinke of it (although the ſtile deſerue not like commendation) as you thought of the other part. Which if you ſhall, I doubt not but it may pleaſure ſome; if not, yet giue occaſion to others which can do better, either to amend theſe, or to publiſh their owne. And thus wiſhing your Prudence to diſcerne what is meet for your callings, Iuſtice in the adminiſtration of your functions, Fortitude in the defence of your Countrey, and Temperance in moderation of all your affections, with encreaſe of honors, and euerlaſting felicity: I bid you in Chriſt Ieſus farewell.
            
               At Winceham the 7. day of December. 1586.
               
               Your most humble in the Lord, IOHN HIGINS.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE READER.
            
               TO acquaint you in briefe with what is done in this impreſsion: know that the verſe is in proportion by meaſure, and in ſymphonie or rithmos, in diuers places amended; the ſtorie in ſome places falſe and corrupted, made historically true; the tragedies wrongly inſerted, diſpoſed in their proper places, according to iuſt computation of time; thoſe neuer before collected in one volume, publiſhed in this impreſsion: for the forme and frame of the whole hiſtorie I did intend to haue reduced it into the ſame order, which I haue obſerued in my Additions; but preuented by other occaſions, I haue thus digeſted it. The tragedies from the time of Brute to the Conqueſt I haue left, with dependencie vpon that Induction written by M. Higins: Thoſe from the Conqueſt to this our laſt age, that is, to the fall of the Lord Cromwell, excellently well penned by M. Drayton, hath reference to that golden Preface called M. Sackuils Induction. After theſe I haue placed my Additions, the falles of ſuch Princes as were before omitted, and my Poem or Hymne of the late dead Queene of famous memorie. In all which I require no other gratification for my paines, but a gentle cenſure of my imperfections.
         
         
            
            THE CONTENTS of the booke.
            
               
                  HOw King Albanact the yongeſt ſonne of Brutus, and firſt King of Albanie (now called Scotland) was ſlaine by King Humber. Pag. 1.
               2 How Humber the King of Huns minding to conquer Britain, was drowned in the arme of ſea now called Humber. 18.
               3 How King Locrinus the eldeſt ſon of Brutus liued viciouſly, and was ſlaine in battell by his wife Queene Guendoline. 22.
               4 How Queene Elstride the Concubine of King Locrinus, was miſerablie drowned by Queene Guendoline. 27.
               5 How the Ladie Sabrine daughter of King Locrinus and Elſtride, was drowned by Queene Guendoline. 38.
               6 How King Madan for his euill life was ſlaine by wolues. 44.
               7 How King Malin was ſlaine by his brother King Mempricius. 47.
               8 How King Mempricius giuen all to luſt, was deuoured by wolues. 50.
               9 How King Bladud taking on him to flie, fell vpon the Temple of Apollo, and brake his necke. 53.
               10 How Queene Cordila in deſpaire ſlew her ſelfe. 59.
               11 How King Morgan of Albany was ſlaine at Glamorgan in Wales. 69.
               12 How King Iago died of the Lethargie. 72.
               13 How King Forrex was ſlaine by his brother King Porrex. 74.
               14 How King Porrex which ſlew his brother, was ſlaine by his owne mother and her maidens. 78.
               
                  15 How King Pinnar was ſlaine in battell by Mulmucius Donwallo. 80.
               16 How King Stater was ſlaine in battell by Mulmucius Donwallo. 82.
               17 How King Rudacke of Wales was ſlaine in battell by Mulmucius Donwallo. 83.
               18 How the noble King Brennus after many triumphant victories, at the ſiege of Delphos in Greece ſlew himſelfe. 86.
               19 How King Kimarus was deuoured by wilde beaſts. 103.
               20 How King Morindus was deuoured by a monſter. 106.
               21 How King Emerianus for his tyrannie was depoſed. 110.
               22 How King Cherinnus giuen to drunkenneſſe, raigned but one yeare. 111.
               23 How King Varianus gaue himſelf to ye luſts of ye fleſh. 112.
               24 How the worthie Britaine Duke Nennius encountred with Iulius Caeſar, and was vnfortunately ſlaine. 114.
               25 How the Lord Irenglas coſin to King Caſſibellane, was ſlaine by the Lord Elenine coſin to Androgeus Earle of London. 123.
               26 How Caius Iulius Caeſar, which firſt made this Realme tributorie to the Romans, was ſlaine in the Senate houſe. 129.
               27 How Claudius Tiberius Nero Emperour of Rome, was poiſoned by Caius Caligula. 139.
               28 How Caius Caeſar Caligula Emperour of Rome, was ſlaine by Cherea and others. 145.
               29 How Guiderius King of Britaine, the elder ſonne of Cimbaline, was ſlaine in battell by a Roman. 146.
               30 How Lelius Hamo the Romane Captaine was ſlaine after the ſlaughter of Guiderius. 148.
               31 How Claudius Tiberius Druſus Emperour of Rome, was poiſoned by his wife Agrippina. 149.
               32 How the Emperour Domitius Nero liued wickedly and tyrannouſly, and in the end miſerablie ſlew himſelfe. 152.
               33 How Sergius Galba the Emperour of Rome (giuen to ſlaughter, ambition, & gluttony) was ſlaine by the ſouldiers. 155.
               34 How the vicious Siluius Otho Emperour of Rome, ſlew himſelfe. 157.
               35 How Aulus Vitellius Emperour of Rome, came to an vnfortunate end. 159.
               
                  36 How Londricus the Pict was ſlaine by King Marius of Britaine. 161.
               37 How Seuerus the Emperour of Rome and Gouernour of Britaine was ſlaine at Yorke, fighting againſt the Picts. 163.
               38 How Fulgentius a Scythian or Pict, was ſlaine at the ſiege of Yorke. 167.
               39 How Geta the yonger ſonne of the Emperour Seuerus once Gouernour of Britaine, was ſlaine in his mothers armes, by his brother Anthonie Emperour of Rome. 170.
               40 How Aurelius Antonius Baſſianus Caracalla Emperour of Rome, was ſlaine by one of his owne ſeruants. 174.
               41 How Carraſſus a Husbandmans ſon, and after King of Britaine, was ſlaine in battell by Alectus a Romane. 185.
               42 How Queene Helena of Britaine maried Constantius the Emperour, and much aduanced the Chriſtian faith through the whole world. 289.
               43 How 
                     Ʋortiger deſtroyed the yong King Constantine, and how he obtained the crowne: & how after many miſeries he was miſerablie burnt in his Caſtle by the brethren of Conſtantine. 203.
               44 How Vter Pendragon was inamoured on the wife of Gorolus Duke of Cornewal, whom he ſlew, and after was poyſoned by the Saxons. 213.
               45 How Cadwallader the laſt King of the Britaines, was expelled by the Saxons, went to Rome, and there liued in a religious houſe. 219.
               46 How Sigebert for his wicked life was thruſt from his throne and miſerablie ſlaine by an heardſman. 225.
               47 How Ladie Ebbe did flea her noſe and vpper lip away to ſaue her virginitie. 235.
               48 How King Egelred for his wickednes was diuerſly diſtreſſed by the Danes, and laſtly died for ſorrow. 239.
               49 How King Harrold had continuall warre with the Danes, with the Norway King, with his brother Tostius, and was at laſt ſlaine in battell by William the Conquerour. 245.
            
            
               From the Conquest.
               50 M. Sackuils Induction. 255.
               51 How the two Rogers ſurnamed Mortimers, for their ſundrie vices ended their liues vnfortunately. 271.
               
                  52 The fall of Robert Treſillian Chiefe Iuſtice of England, and other his fellowes, for miſconſtruing the Lawes, and expounding them to ſerue the Princes affections. 276.
               53 How Sir Thomas of Woodstocke Duke of Gloceſter vncle to King Richard the ſecond, was vnlawfully murthered. 281.
               54 How the Lord Mowbrey, promoted by King Richard the ſecond to the ſtate of a Duke, was by him baniſhed the Realme, and after died miſerablie in exile. 287.
               55 How King Richard the ſecond was for his euill gouernance depoſed from his ſeat, and murthered in priſon. 293.
               56 How Owen Glendour ſeduced by falſe propheſies, tooke vpon him to be Prince of Wales, and was by Henrie Prince of England chaſed to the mountaines, where he miſerablie died for lacke of food. 296.
               57 How Henrie Percie Earle of Northumberland, was for his couetous and trayterous attempt put to death at Yorke. 303.
               58 How Richard Plantagenet Earle of Cambridge, intending the Kings deſtruction, was put to death at Southhampton. 307.
               59 How Thomas Montague Earle of Salisburie, in the middeſt of his glory was vnfortunately ſlaine at Oleance with a peece of Ordnance. 309.
               60 How Dame Eleanor Cobham Ducheſſe of Gloceſter, for practiſing of Witchcraft and ſorcerie Suffered open penance, and afterward was baniſhed the Realme into the Ile of Man. 317.
               61 How Humfrey Plantagenet Duke of Gloceſter, Protector of England, during the minoritie of his nephew King Henrie the ſixt, commonly called the good Duke, by practiſe of enemies was brought to confuſion. 327.
               62 How Lord William de la Pole Duke of Suffolke, was worthily baniſhed for abuſing his King, and cauſing the deſtruction of the good Duke Humfrey. 340.
               63 How Iack Cade naming himſelfe Mortimer, trayterouſly rebelling againſt his King, was for his treaſons and cruell doings worthily puniſhed. 345.
               64 The tragedie of Edmund Duke of Somerſet, ſlaine in the firſt battell at S. Albons, in the 32. yeare of Henrie the ſixt. 350.
               65 How Richard Plantagenet Duke of York, was ſlaine through his raſh boldneſſe, and his ſonne the Earle of Rutland for his

lacke of valiancie. 360.
               66 How the Lord Clifford for his ſtrange and abominable crueltie, came to as ſtrange and ſudden a death. 365.
               67 The infamous end of Lord Tiptoft Earle of Worceſter, for cruelly executing his Princes butcherly commandements. 367.
               68 How Sir Richard Neuil Earle of Warwicke, and his brother Iohn, Lord Marqueſſe Montacute, through their too much boldneſſe were ſlaine at Barnet. 371.
               69 How King Henry the ſixt a vertuous Prince, was after many other miſeries cruelly murthered in the Tower of London. 375.
               70 How George Plantagenet third ſon of the Duke of Yorke, was by his brother King Edward wrongfully impriſoned, and by his brother Richard miſerablie murthered. 380.
               71 How King Edward the fourth through his ſurfetting & vntemperate life, ſuddenly died in the midſt of his proſperity. 392.
               72 How Sir Anthonie Wooduile Lord Riuers and Scales, Gouernour of Prince Edward, was with his nephew Lord Richard Grey and other cauſeleſſe impriſoned and cruelly murthered. 394.
               73 How the Lord Haſtings was betraied by truſting too much to his euill counſellour Cateſby, and villanouſly murthered in the Tower of London by Richard Duke of Gloceſter. 411.
               74 The complaint of Henrie Duke of Buckingham. 433.
               75 How Colingborne was cruelly executed for making a Rime. 455.
               76 The wilfull fall of the Black-ſmith, and the fooliſh end of the Lord Audley. 463.
               77 How the valiant Knight Sir Nicholas Burdet, Chiefe Butler of Normandie, was ſlaine at Pontoiſe. 477.
               78 How Shores wife, King Edward the fourths Concubine, was by King Richard deſpoiled of her goods, and forced to do open penance. 494.
               79 How Thomas Woolſey did ariſe vnto great authoritie and gouernment, his maner of life, pompe and dignitie, & how he fell downe into great diſgrace, and was arreſted of high treaſon. 506.
               80 How the Lord Cromwell exalted from meane eſtate, was after by the enuie of the Biſhop of Wincheſter and other his complices brought to vntimely end. 520.
            
            
               
               The Additions.
               81 The life and death of King Arthur. 561.
               82 The life and death of King Edmund Ironſide. 585.
               83 The life and death of Prince Alfred. 603.
               84 The life and death of Godwin Earle of Kent. 617.
               85 The life and death of Robert ſurnamed Curthoſe Duke of Normandie. 631.
               86 The life and death of King Richard the firſt ſurnamed Coeur de Lion. 659.
               87 The life and death of King Iohn. 681.
               88 The life and death of King Edward the ſecond. 703.
               89 The life and death of the two yong Princes, ſonnes to Edward the fourth. 736.
               90 The life and death of King Richard the third. 750.
               91 The Poem annexed called Englands Eliza. 783.
            
            The end of the Contents.
         
         
            
            
               THOMAS NEWTON TO THE Reader, in the behalfe of this booke.
            
               
                  AS when an arming ſword of proofe is made,
               Both ſteele and iron must be tempred well:
               (For iron giues the ſtrength vnto the blade,
               And ſteele, in edge doth cauſe it to excell)
               As each good Blade-ſmith by his Art can tell:
               For, without iron, brittle will it breake,
               And without ſteele, it will be blunt and weake:
            
            
               So bookes, that now their faces dare to ſhow,
               Must mettald be with nature and with skill:
               For nature cauſeth ſtuffe enough to flow,
               And Art the ſame contriues by learned quill
               In order good, and currant method ſtill.
               So that, if Nature frowne, the caſe is hard:
               And if Art want, the matter all is mar'd.
            
            
               The worke, which heere is offred to thy view,
               With both theſe points is full and fitly fraught;
               Set forth by ſundrie of the learned Crew:
               Whoſe ſtately ſtiles haue Phoebus garland caught,
               And Parnaſſe mount their worthy worke haue raught:
               Their words are thundred with ſuch maiestie,
               As fitteth right each matter in degree.
            
            
               Reade it therefore, but reade attentiuely,
               Conſider well the drift whereto it tends:
               Confer the times, perpend the history,
               The parties ſtates, and eke their dolefull ends,
               With odde euents, that diuine iustice ſends.
               For things forepast are preſidents to vs,
               Whereby we may things preſent now diſcuſſe.
            
            
               Certes this world a Stage may well be call'd,
               Whereon is plai'd the part of eu'ry wight:
               Some, now aloft, anon with malice gal'd,
               Are from high ſtate brought into diſmall plight.
               Like counters are they, which ſtand now in ſight
               For thouſand or ten thouſand, and anone
               Remoued, ſtand perhaps for leſſe then one.
            
            
               Thomas Newtonus,
Cestreſhyrius.
            
         
         
            
            THE AVTHORS Induction.
            
               
                  WHen Sommer ſweet, with all her pleaſures paſt,
               And leaues began to leaue the ſhadie tree,
               The winter cold encreaſed on full faſt,
               And time of yeare to ſadnes moued me:
               For moiſtie blaſts not halfe ſo mirthfull be,
               As ſweet Aurora brings in ſpring-time faire,
               Our ioyes they dimme, as winter damps the aire.
            
            
               The nights began to grow to length apace,
               Sir Phoebus to th' Antarctique gan to fare:
               From Libraes lance to th' Crab he tooke his race
               Beneath the line, to lend of light a ſhare.
               For then with vs the daies more darkiſh are,
               More ſhort, cold, moiſt, and ſtormie cloudie clit,
               For ſadnes more then mirths or pleaſures fit.
            
            
               Deuiſing then what bookes were beſt to reade,
               Both for that time, and ſentence graue alſo,
               For conference of friend to ſtand in ſtead:
               When I my faithfull friend was parted fro,
               I gate me ſtraight the Printers ſhops vnto,
               To ſeeke ſome worke of price I ſurely ment,
               That might alone my carefull mind content.
            
            
               Amongſt the reſt, I found a booke ſo ſad,
               As time of yeare or ſadneſſe could require:
               The Mirour nam'd for Magiſtrates he had,
               So finely pen'd, as heare could well deſire:
               Which when I read, ſo ſet my heart on fire,
               Eftſoones it me conſtrain'd to take the paine,
               Not left with once, to reade it once againe.
            
            
               
               And as againe I view'd this worke with heed,
               And marked plaine each partie paint his fall:
               Me thought in mind, I ſaw thoſe men indeed,
               Eke how they came in order Princely all;
               Declaring well, this life is but a thrall,
               Sith thoſe on whom for Fortunes gifts we ſtare,
               Oft ſooneſt ſinke in greateſt ſeas of care.
            
            
               For ſome perdie, were Kings of high eſtate,
               And ſome were Dukes, and came of regall race:
               Some Princes, Lords, and Iudges great that ſate
               In counſell ſtill, decreeing euery caſe:
               Some other Knights that vices did embrace,
               Some Gentlemen, ſome poore exalted hie:
               Yet euery one had plai'd his tragedie.
            
            
               A Mirrour well it might be call'd, a glaſſe
               As cleare as any cryſtall vnder Sun:
               In each reſpect the Tragedies ſo paſſe,
               Their names ſhall liue that ſuch a worke begun.
               For why, with ſuch Decorum is it done,
               That Momus ſpight with more then Argus eies,
               Can neuer watch, to keepe it from the wiſe.
            
            
               Examples there for all eſtates you find,
               For Iudge (I ſay) what iuſtice he ſhould vſe:
               The noble man to beare a noble mind,
               And not himſelfe ambitiouſly abuſe;
               The Gentleman vngentleneſſe refuſe:
               The rich and poore, and eu'ry one may ſee,
               Which way to loue, and liue in due degree.
            
            
               I wiſh them often well to reade it than,
               And marke the cauſes why thoſe Princes fell:
               But let me end my tale that I began.
               When I had read theſe Tragedies full well,
               And paſt the winter euenings long to tell,
               One night at laſt I thought to leaue this vſe,
               To take ſome eaſe before I chang'd my Muſe.
            
            
               
               Wherefore away from reading I me gate,
               My heauie head waxt dull for want of reſt:
               I laid me downe, the night was waxed late,
               For lacke of ſleepe mine eyes were ſore oppreſt:
               Yet fancie ſtill of all their deaths encreaſt,
               Me thought my mind from them I could not take,
               So worthie wights, as cauſed me to wake.
            
            
               At laſt appeared clad in purple blacke
               Sweet Somnus, reſt which comforts each aliue;
               By eaſe of mind, that weares away all wracke,
               That noyſome night from wearie wits doth driue,
               Of labours long the pleaſures we atchieue.
               Whereat I ioy'd, ſith after labours paſt,
               I might enioy ſweet Somnus ſleepe at laſt.
            
            
               But he by whom I thought my ſelfe at reſt,
               Reuiued all my fancies fond before:
               I more deſirous, humblie did requeſt
               Him ſhew th' vnhappie Albion Princes yore:
               For well I wiſt, that he could tell me more,
               Sith vnto diuers, Somnus erſt had told
               What things were done in elder times of old.
            
            
               Then ſtraight he forth his ſeruant Morpheus call'd,
               On Higins heere thou muſt (quoth he) attend;
               The Britaine Peeres to bring (whom Fortune thral'd)
               From Lethean lake, and th' ancient ſhapes them lend;
               That they may ſhew why, how, they tooke their end.
               I wil (quoth Morpheus) ſhew him what they were;
               And ſo me thought I ſaw them ſtraight appeare.
            
            
               One after one, they came in ſtrange attire,
               But ſome with wounds and blood were ſo diſguis'd,
               You ſcarcely could by reaſons aid aſpire,
               To know what warre ſuch ſundrie deaths deuis'd;
               And ſeuerally thoſe Princes were ſurpris'd.
               Of former ſtate, theſe States gaue ample ſhow,
               Which did relate their liues and ouerthrow.
            
            
               
               Of ſome the faces bold and bodies were
               Diſtain'd with woad, and Turkiſh beards they had:
               On th' ouer lips mutchatoes long of haire,
               And wilde they ſeem'd, as men deſpairing mad;
               Their lookes might make a conſtant heart full ſad:
               And yet I could not ſo forſake the view,
               Nor preſence, ere their minds I likewiſe knew.
            
            
               For Morpheus bad them each in order tell
               Their names and liues, their haps and hapleſſe daies,
               And by what meanes from Fortunes wheele they fell,
               Which did them erſt vnto ſuch honors raiſe.
               Wherewith the firſt not making moe delaies,
               A noble Prince broad wounded breſt that bare
               Drew neere, to tell the cauſe of all his care.
            
            
               Which when me thought to ſpeak he might be bold,
               Deepe from his breſt he threw an vnquoth ſound:
               I was amaz'd his geſtures to behold:
               And blood that freſhly trickled from his wound,
               With echo ſo did halfe his words confound,
               That ſcarce a while the ſenſe might plaine appeare:
               At laſt, me thought, he ſpake as you ſhall heare.
            
         
         
            
            Faults eſcaped.
            PAge 555. lin. 17. browes, reade bowes. p. 566. l. 10. left, r. let. p. 579. l. 3. ſh r. ſhore. p. 583. l. 13. ſpeele, r. ſteele. p. eadem l. 15 vaines flow, r. vaines did flow. p. 588. l. 3. nor, r. not. p. 599. l. 28. approth, r. approch, p. 600. l. 11. t'abate, r. to abate p. 629. l. 23. this, r. his. p. 636. l. 5. foe, r. woe. p. 657. l. 16. ſoee, r. loare. p. 671. l 32. with Auſtrian, r. with th' Auſtrian. p. 682. l. 7. let, r. lets. p. 683. l. 37. to obtaine, r. t'obtaine. p. 706. l. 15. I, r. O. p. 728. l. 15. But, r. Blunt, in ſome copies. p. 793. marg. Anno Reg. 51. r. 15. p. 834. l. 13. recoil'd r. recoile. p. 855. l. 30. throne, r. chaire. 866. l. 25. houſe tops, r. houſes tops.
         
      
      
         
            
               
               HOW KING ALBANACT THE YOVNGEST SONNE OF BRVTVS, AND FIRST KING OF Albany (now called Scotland) was ſlaine by king Humber, the yeere before Chriſt, 1085.
               
                  
                     SIth flattering Fortune ſlily could beguile
                  Mee firſt, of Britaine Princes in this land:
                  And yet at firſt on mee did ſweetely ſmile,
                  Behold mee here, that firſt in preſence ſtand.
                  And when thou well my wounded corps haſt ſcand,
                  Then ſhalt thou heare my hap to penne the ſame
                  In ſtories called Albanactae by name.
               
               
                  Lay feare aſide, let nothing thee amaze,
                  Ne haue deſpaire, ne ſcuſe the want of time:
                  Leaue off on mee with fearefull lookes to gaze,
                  Thy pen may ſerue for ſuch a tale as mine.
                  Firſt I will tell thee of my fathers line,
                  Then why he flying from the Latin land
                  Did ſaile the ſeas and found the Briton ſtrand.
               
               
                  And laſt I minde to tell thee of my ſelfe,
                  My life and death, a Tragedy ſo true
                  As may approue your world is all but pelfe,
                  And pleaſures ſweete, whom ſorrowes aye enſue.
                  Hereafter eke in order comes a crue,
                  Which can declare, of worldly pleaſures vaine
                  The price we all haue bought, with pinching paine.
               
               
                  
                  When Troy was ſackt, and brent, and could not ſtand,
                  
                     Aeneas fled from thence, Anchiſes ſonne,
                  And came at length to King Latinus land:
                  He Turnus ſlew, Lauinia eke he wonne.
                  After whoſe death, Aſcanius next his ſonne
                  Was crowned King, and Siluius then his heire,
                  Eſpouſed to a Latine Lady faire.
               
               
                  By her had Siluius ſhortly iſſue eke,
                  A goodly Prince, and Brutus was his name.
                  But what ſhould I of his misfortune ſpeake,
                  For hunting, as he minded ſtrike the game,
                  He ſtrook his father, that beyond it came.
                  The quarrell glaunſt, and through his tender fide:
                  It flew, where through the noble Siluius dide.
               
               
                  Lo thus by chance though princely Brutus ſlew
                  His father Siluius, ſore againſt his will,
                  Which came too ſoone, as he his arrow drew,
                  Though he in chace the game, did mind to kill,
                  Yet was he baniſht from his countrey ſtill,
                  Commanded thither to returne no more,
                  Except he would his life to loſe therefore.
               
               
                  On this, to Greece Lord Brutus tooke his way,
                  Where Troians were, by Grecians, captiues kept:
                  
                     Helenus was by Pirrhus brought away
                  From death of Troians, whom their friends bewept.
                  Yet he in Greece this while no buſines ſlept,
                  But by his facts, and feates obtain'd ſuch fame,
                  Seuen thouſand captiue Troians to him came.
               
               
                  
                     Aſſaracus a noble Grecian eke,
                  Who by his mother came of Troian race,
                  Becauſe he ſaw himſelfe in Greece too weake,
                  Came vnto him to aide him in this caſe,
                  For of his brother he could finde no grace,
                  Which was a Greeke by both his parents ſides.
                  His Caſtles three the Troian Brutus guides.
               
               
                  
                  While he to be their Captaine was content,
                  And as the Troians gathered to his band,
                  Ambaſſage to the Grecian King he ſent,
                  For to entreate they might depart his land.
                  Which when King Pandraſus did vnderſtand,
                  An armie ſtraight he did therefore addreſſe,
                  On purpoſe all the Troians to ſuppreſſe.
               
               
                  So as King Pandraſus at Spartane towne
                  Thought them in deſerts by, to circumuent,
                  The Troians with three thouſand beate them downe,
                  Such fauour loe, them Ladie Fortune lent.
                  By Mars his force, their raies and rancks he rent,
                  And tooke the brother of the Grecian King,
                  With others moe, as captiues home to bring.
               
               
                  The taken towne from which the King was fled,
                  Sir Brutus with ſixe hundred men did man,
                  Ech priſoner was vnto his keeper led
                  To keepe in towne, the noble Troians wan:
                  And into woods the Troiane gate him than
                  Againe with his, he kept him there by night
                  To quaile the Grecians if they came to fight.
               
               
                  The King which cal'd to minde his former foile,
                  His flight, and brother deare by Troians take,
                  The towne he loſt, where Brutus gaue the ſpoile,
                  He thought not ſo the field and fight forſake,
                  But of his men a muſter new to make,
                  And ſo againe for to beſiege the towne
                  In hope reuenge, or winne his loſt renowne.
               
               
                  By night the ambuſh, that his purpoſe knew,
                  Came foorth from woods, whereas they waited by,
                  The Troians all th' vnarmed Grecians ſlew,
                  Went through their campe, none could their force denie,
                  Vnto the tent where Pandraſus did lie,
                  Whereas Lord Brutus tooke their King that night,
                  And ſau'd his life as ſee'md a worthie wight.
               
               
                  
                  "This great exploite ſo wiſely well at chiu'd,
                  "The Troiane victour did a counſaile call,
                  "Wherein might be for their eſtate contriu'd
                  "By counſaile graue, the publike weale of all.
                  "Now tell (quoth he) what ranſome aske we ſhall?
                  "Or what will you for our auaile deuiſe?
                  "To which Mempricius anſwer'd, graue and wiſe.
               
               
                  "I cannot (Brutus) but commend thine act
                  "In this, thou noble Captaine worthy praiſe:
                  "Which deemeſt well, it were an heinous fact,
                  "T'abridge the Grecian king of vitall daies,
                  "And that we ought by clemencie to raiſe
                  "Our fame to skie, not by a ſauage guiſe,
                  "Sith Gods and men both, cruelty deſpiſe.
               
               
                  "The cauſe we fought, was for the freedome all
                  "Of Troians taken, we haue freedome won,
                  "We haue our purpoſe, and their king withall,
                  "To whom of rigour nothing ought be done:
                  "Though he the quarrell with vs firſt begon.
                  "And though we owe the fall of Troyes requite,
                  "Yet let reuenge thereof from gods to light.
               
               
                  "His ſubiects now bewaile their proude pretence,
                  "And weapons laide aſide, for mercy crie:
                  "They all confeſſe their plagues to come from thence,
                  "Where firſt from faith of Gods they ſeem'd to flie.
                  "Their Nobles dare not come the caſe to trie,
                  "But euen for peace, with all their hearts, they ſue,
                  "And meekely grant, whence all their miſchiefes grew.
               
               
                  "The Princeſſe faire, his daughter, who ſurmounts
                  "For vertues rare, for beautie braue, and grace
                  "Both Helen fine, of whom they made accounts,
                  "And all the reſt that come of Grecian race,
                  "She for her father ſues, bewailes his caſe,
                  "Implores, deſires thy grace, and gods aboue,
                  "Whoſe woes may them and thee to mercy moue.
               
               
                  
                  "Some Troians ſay he ſhould depoſed be
                  "From kingdome quite, or elſe be ſlaine he ſhould,
                  "And we heere bide, eke this miſliketh me,
                  "Nay rather while we ſtay keepe him in hold,
                  "Or let him pay a ranſome large of gold,
                  "And hoſtage giue, and homage do of right
                  "To thee, that wonſt the field by Martiall fight.
               
               
                  "For kingdomes ſake a captiue king to kill,
                  "Our names for aye with foule defame would brand;
                  "For vs in Greece to dwell were euen as ill,
                  "The force of Greece we cannot ſtill withſtand.
                  "Let vs therefore both cruelty aband,
                  "And prudent ſeeke both gods and men to pleaſe:
                  "So ſhall we find good lucke at land and ſeas.
               
               
                  "Or ſith the Grecians will thee for to take
                  "The noble Ladie Iunogen to wife,
                  "If thou ſo pleaſe, let him her dowrie make
                  "Of gold, ſhips, ſiluer, corne, for our reliefe,
                  "And other things, which are in Graecia rife.
                  "That we ſo fraught may ſeeke ſome deſert ſhore,
                  "Where thou and thine may raigne for euermore.
               
               
                  This pleaſ'd both Brutus and the Troians all,
                  Who wil'd forthwith that Pandraſus the King
                  Should reuerently be brought into the hall.
                  And preſent when they told him of this thing,
                  So griefe and ſorow great his heart did ſting,
                  He could not ſhew by countenance or cheere
                  That he it lik'd, but ſpake as you ſhall heare.
               
               
                  "Sith that the wrath of gods hath yeelded me,
                  "And eke my brother, captiues to your hands,
                  "I am content to do as pleaſeth yee,
                  "You haue my realme, my life, my goods and lands,
                  "I muſt be needs content as Fortune ſtands.
                  "I giue my daughter, gold, and ſiluer fine,
                  "With what for dowrie elſe you craue is mine.
               
               
                  
                  To make my tale the ſhorter if I may,
                  This truce concluded was immediately:
                  And all things elſe performed by a day,
                  The King reſtor'd that did in priſon lie.
                  The Troians proud of ſpoiles and victorie,
                  Did hoiſe vp ſailes, in two daies and a night
                  Vpon the Ile of Leſtrigons they light.
               
               
                  And leauing of their ſhips at roade, to land
                  They wandring went the countrey for to view:
                  Loe there a deſert citie old they fand,
                  And eke a temple (if report be true)
                  Where Dian dwelt of whom the Troian crew
                  In ſacrifice their captaine counſell gaue
                  For good ſucceſſe, a ſeate and ſoile to craue.
               
               
                  And he no whit miſliking their aduice
                  Went forth, and did before the altar hold
                  In his right hand a cup to ſacrifice,
                  Fild both with wine, and white hinds blood ſcarce cold.
                  And then before her ſtature ſtraight he told
                  Deuoutly all his whole petition there,
                  In ſort (they ſay) as is repeated heere.
               
               
                  O goddeſſe great in groues that putst wilde boares in fearefull feare,
                  And maist go all the compaſſe pathes of euery ayrie ſphere,
                  Eke of th' infernall houſes too, reſolue the earthly rights,
                  And tell what countrey in to dwell thou giu'st vs Troian wights.
                  Aſſigne a certaine ſeate where I ſhall worſhip thee for aye,
                  And where repleat with virgins, I erect thy temples maye.
               
               
                  When nine times he had ſpoken this, and went
                  Foure times the altar round, and ſtaid agen,
                  He powr'd the wine and blood in hand he hent
                  Into the fire. O witleſſe cares of men,
                  Such folly meere, and blindnes great was then.
                  But if religion now bids toies farewell,
                  Embrace that's good, the vice of times I tell.
               
               
                  
                  He laid him then downe by the altars ſide,
                  Vpon the white Hinds skin eſpred therefore:
                  It was the third houre of the night, a tide
                  Of ſweeteſt ſleepe, he gaue himſelfe the more
                  To reſt ſurelie. Then ſeemed him before
                  
                     Diana chaſte, the goddeſſe to appeare,
                  And ſpake to him theſe words that you ſhall heare.
               
               
                  
                     O Brute, farre vnder Phoebus fall, beyond of France that raigne,
                  
                  
                     An Iland in the Ocean is, with ſea tis compast maine,
                  
                  
                     An Iland in the Ocean is, where Giants erst did dwell:
                  
                  
                     But now a deſert place that's fit, will ſerue thy people well.
                  
                  
                     To this direct thy race, for there ſhall be thy ſeat for aye,
                  
                  
                     And to thy ſonnes there ſhall be built another ſtately Troye.
                  
                  
                     Here of thy progenie and ſtocke, ſhall mightie Kings deſcend.
                  
                  
                     And vnto them as ſubiect, all the world ſhall bow and bend.
                  
               
               
                  On this he woke, with ioyfull cheere, and told
                  The viſion all, and oracle it gaue:
                  So it reioyſt their hearts a thouſand fold.
                  To ſhips they got, away the ſhores they draue,
                  And hoyſing ſailes, for happie winds they craue.
                  In thirtie daies their voyage ſo they dight,
                  That on the coaſt of Aphrica they light.
               
               
                  Then to Philaenes altars they attain'd,
                  (For ſo men call two hilles erected are
                  In Tuniſe land) two brethren ground that gain'd
                  For Carthage once, and went tis ſaid too farre,
                  On Cyren ground for bounds, there buried were.
                  Becauſe they would not turne againe, but ſtriue
                  With Cyren men, they buried them aliue.
               
               
                  From thence they ſailed through the middle lake,
                  Betweene Europa faire and Aphrica the drie:
                  With winde at will, the doubtfull race they take,
                  And ſail'd to Tuſcane ſhores, on Europe coaſt that lie.
                  Where at the laſt amongſt the men they did deſcrie
                  Foure baniſht bands of Troians in diſtreſſe
                  To ſaile with them, which did themſelues addreſſe.
               
               
                  
                  Companions of Antenor in his flight.
                  But Corinaeus was their captaine than,
                  For counſell graue a wiſe and worthie wight:
                  In warres the praiſe of valiantneſſe he wan.
                  Lord Brutus liked well this noble man,
                  With him full oft confer of fates he wold,
                  And vnto him the oracles he told.
               
               
                  The Troians ſo in number now increaſt,
                  Set on to ſea and hoyſed ſailes to wind.
                  To Hercules his pillars from the Eaſt
                  They caſt by compaſſe readie way to find:
                  Where through once paſt to Northward race they twind,
                  To Pirene cleeues, tweene Spaine and France the bound,
                  Reioycing neere the promiſt Ile ſo found.
               
               
                  Eke vnto Guyne in France they failed thence,
                  Where at the hauen of Loire they did arriue,
                  To view the countrey was their whole pretence
                  And victuals get, their ſouldiers to reuiue.
                  Eke Corinaeus leſt the Galles ſhould ſtriue,
                  Led forth two hundred of his warlike band,
                  To get prouiſion to the ſhips from land.
               
               
                  But when the King Goffarius heard of this,
                  That Troians were arriued on his ſhore,
                  With Frenchmen and with Guynes their power and his,
                  He came to take the prey they gate before,
                  And when they met, they fought it both full ſore,
                  Till Corinaeus ruſht into their band,
                  And cauſ'd them flie: they durſt no longer ſtand.
               
               
                  Firſt might you there ſeene hearts of Frenchmen broke:
                  Two hundred Troians gaue them all the ſoile
                  At home, with oddes, they durſt not bide the ſtroke,
                  Few Troians beat them in their natiue ſoile,
                  Eke Corinaeus followed in this broile,
                  So faſt vpon his foes before his men,
                  That they return'd and thought to ſpoile him then.
               
               
                  
                  There he alone againſt them all, and they
                  Againſt him one, with all their force did fight.
                  At laſt by chance his ſword was flowne away,
                  By fortune on a battaile axe he light,
                  Which he did driue about him with ſuch might,
                  That ſome their hands, and ſome their armes did leeſe,
                  Some legges, of ſome the head from ſhoulders flees.
               
               
                  As thus amongſt them all he fought with force
                  And fortune great, in danger of his life,
                  Lord Brutus had on him there with remorce,
                  Came with a troupe of men to end the ſtrife.
                  When Frenchmen ſaw the Troians force ſo rife
                  They fled away, vnto their loſſe and paine,
                  In fight and flight nigh all their hoſt was ſlaine.
               
               
                  And in that broile, ſaue Corinaeus, none
                  Did fight ſo fiercely, as did Turnus then,
                  Sir Brutus coſin with his ſword alone
                  Did ſlay that time well nigh ſixe hundred men.
                  They found him dead as they return'd agen,
                  Amongſt the Frenchmen, wounded void of ſence,
                  And bare his noble corps with honour thence.
               
               
                  On this they bode awhile reuenge to yeeld,
                  And to interre the dead, and Turnus ſlaine,
                  They tooke a towne not farre from place of field,
                  And built it ſtrong, to vex the Galles againe.
                  The name they gaue it ſtill doth yet remaine,
                  Sith there they buried Turnus yet men call
                  It Tours, and name the folke Turones all.
               
               
                  Which towne they left at laſt with Troians mand,
                  When as their ſhips were ſtor'd with what they need
                  Aboord, they hoiſe vp ſailes and left the land,
                  By aiding winds they cut the ſeas with ſpeed.
                  At length the ſhining Albion cleeues did ſeed
                  Their gazing eyes, by meanes whereof they fand
                  Out Totnes hauen, and tooke this promiſt land.
               
               
                  
                  The countrey ſeemed pleaſant at the view,
                  And was by few inhabited, as yet,
                  Saue certaine Giants whom they did purſue,
                  Which ſtraight to Caues in Mountaines did them get:
                  So fine were Woods, and Floods, and Fountaines ſet,
                  So cleere the aire, ſo temperate the clime,
                  They neuer ſaw the like before that time.
               
               
                  And then this Ile that Albion had to name,
                  Lord Brutus cauſde it Britaine cal'd to bee,
                  And eke the people Britans of the ſame,
                  As yet in ancient Records is to ſee,
                  To Corinaeus gaue he franke and free
                  The land of Cornwall, for his ſeruice done,
                  And for becauſe from Giants he it wonne.
               
               
                  Then ſith our Troiane flock came firſt from Troy,
                  The Chieftaine thought that dutie did him binde,
                  As Fortune thus had ſau'd him from annoy,
                  The ancient towne againe to call to minde.
                  He built new Troy, them Troian lawes aſſignde,
                  That ſo his race to his eternall fame,
                  Might keepe of Troy the euerlaſting name.
               
               
                  And ſetled there, in perfect peace and reſt,
                  Deuoid of warre, of labour, ſtrife, or paine,
                  Then Iunogen the Queene, his ioyes increaſt,
                  A Prince ſhe bare, and after other twaine.
                  Was neuer King of noble Impes ſo faine,
                  Three ſonnes which had ſo ſhortly here begat,
                  
                     Locrinus, Camber, laſt me Albanact.
                  
               
               
                  Thus hauing wealth, and eke the world at will,
                  Nor wanting ought that might his minde content:
                  T'increaſe his powre with wights of warlike skill
                  Was all his minde, his purpoſe and intent.
                  Whereby if foes, inuaſion after ment,
                  The Britans might not feare of forraine lands,
                  But keepe by fight, poſſeſſions in their hands.
               
               
                  
                  Eke when his people once perceiu'd his minde,
                  (As what the Prince doth often moſt embrace,
                  To that the ſubiects all, are ſtraight inclinde,
                  And reuerence ſtill in ech reſpect his grace)
                  They gat in warre ſuch knowledge in ſhort ſpace,
                  That after they their force to trie begun,
                  They car'd for nought by wit or wight not won.
               
               
                  Thoſe mightie people borne of Giants brood,
                  That did poſſeſſe this Ocean-bounded land,
                  They did ſub due, who oft in battell ſtood
                  Gainſt them in field, vntill by force of hand
                  They were made ſubiect vnto Brutes command.
                  Such boldnes then did in the Briton dwell,
                  That they in deedes of valour did excell.
               
               
                  Whereby the King had cauſe to take delight,
                  And might be bold the leſſe to feare his foes:
                  Surely ech Prince may recke his en'mies ſpight,
                  Thereafter as his force in fight he knoes.
                  "A princely heart the liberall gifts diſcloſe.
                  He gaue to ech ſuch guerdons for their facts,
                  As might them only moue to noble acts.
               
               
                  No labours great his ſubiects then refuſde,
                  No trauels that might like his regall minde:
                  But ech of them ſuch exerciſe well vſde,
                  Wherein was praiſe, or glorie great to finde.
                  And to their liege bare faithfull hearts ſo kinde,
                  That what he wild they all obeyd his heſt,
                  Nought elſe was currant, but the Kings requeſt.
               
               
                  What Prince aliue might more reioyce then he?
                  Had faithfull men, ſo valiant, bold, and ſtout:
                  What pleaſures more on earth could lightly be
                  Then win an Ile, and liue deuoid of doubt?
                  An Ile ſaid I? nay nam'd the world throughout
                  Another world, ſith ſea doth it diuide
                  From all, that wants not all the world beſide.
               
               
                  
                  What ſubiects eke, more happie were then theſe?
                  Had ſuch a King of ſuch a noble heart,
                  And ſuch a land enioyd and liu'd at eaſe,
                  Whereof ech man almoſt might chuſe his part.
                  No feare of foes, vnknowne was treaſons art,
                  No faining friends, no fauning Gnatoes skill,
                  No Thraſoes brags, but bearing ech good will.
               
               
                  But as ech ſummer once receiues an end,
                  And as no State can ſtable ſtand for aye,
                  As courſe of time doth cauſe things bow and bend,
                  As euery pleaſure hath her ending day,
                  As will can neuer paſſe the power of may:
                  Euen ſo my father happie daies that ſpent,
                  Perceiu'd he muſt by ſickneſſe laſt relent.
               
               
                  As doth the ſhipman well foreſee the ſtorme,
                  And knowes what danger lies in Syrtes of ſand:
                  Eke as the husbandman prouides beforne,
                  When he perceiues the winter cold at hand:
                  Euen ſo the wiſe, that courſe of things haue ſcand,
                  Can well the end of ſicknes great preſage,
                  When it is ioyn'd with yeeres of ſtooping age,
               
               
                  His ſonnes and Counſell all aſſembled were,
                  For why he ſent for vs and them with ſpeed.
                  We came in haſt, this newes did cauſe vs feare,
                  Sith ſo he ſent, we thought him ſick indeed.
                  And when we all approcht to him with ſpeed,
                  Too ſoone alas, his Grace right ſick we found,
                  And him ſaluted as our duties bound.
               
               
                  And caſting of his wofull eyes aſide,
                  Not able well to moue his painfull head,
                  As ſilent we with teares his minnde abide,
                  He wild himſelfe be reared in his bed.
                  Which done, with ſight of vs his eyes he fed,
                  Eke pauſing ſo a while for breath he ſtaid,
                  At length to them and vs, thus wiſe he ſaid.
               
               
                  
                  No maruaile ſure, though you here with be ſad
                  (You noble Britaines) for your Brutus ſake.
                  Sith whilom me your captaine ſtout you had,
                  That now my leaue and laſt farwell muſt take,
                  Thus nature willes me once an ende to make,
                  And leaue you here behinde, which after mee
                  Shall die, as me depart before you ſee.
               
               
                  "You wot wherefore I with the Grecians fought,
                  "With dint of ſworde I made their force to flie:
                  
                     "Antenors friends on Tuſcane ſhores I ſought,
                  "And did them not my promiſt land denie.
                  "By Martiall powre I made the Frenchmen flie,
                  "Where you to ſaue, I loſt my faithfull frend
                  "For you; at Tours my Turnus tooke his end.
               
               
                  "I need not now recite what loue I bare,
                  "My friendſhip you, I truſt, haue found ſo well,
                  "That none amongſt you all which preſent are,
                  "With teares doth not record the tale I tell.
                  "Eke whom I found for vertues to excell,
                  "To them I gaue the price thereof, as due
                  "As they deſeru'd, whoſe facts I found ſo true.
               
               
                  "Now muſt I proue, if paines were well beſtow'd,
                  "Or if I ſpent my gratefull gifts in vaine,
                  "Or if theſe great good turnes to you I ow'd,
                  "And might not aske your loyall loues againe.
                  "Which if I wiſt, what tongue could tell my paine?
                  "I meane, if you vngratefull mindes doe beare,
                  "What meaneth death to let me linger here?
               
               
                  "For if you ſhall abuſe your Prince, in this
                  "The gods on you for ſuch an hainous fact,
                  "To take reuenge, be ſure will neuer miſſe.
                  "And then too late you ſhall repent the act,
                  "When all my Realine, and all your wealths are ſackt:
                  "But if you ſhall as you begun, proceed,
                  "Of kingdomes fall, or foes, there is no dreed.
               
               
                  
                  "And to auoid contention that may fall,
                  "Becauſe I wiſh this Realme the Britans ſtill:
                  "Therefore I will declare before you all
                  "Sith you are come, my whole intent and will.
                  "Which if you keepe, and wreſt it not to ill,
                  "There is no doubt but euermore with fame
                  "You ſhall enioy the Britans Realme and name.
               
               
                  "You ſee my ſonnes, that after me muſt raigne,
                  "Whom you or this haue lik'd and counſail'd well.
                  "You know what erſt you wiſht they ſhould refraine,
                  "Which way they might all vices vile expell,
                  "Which way they might in vertues great excell.
                  "Thus if you ſhall, when I am gone inſue,
                  "You ſhall diſcharge the truſt repoſ'd in you.
               
               
                  "Be you their fathers, with your counſell wiſe.
                  "And you my children take them euen as me,
                  "Be you their guides in what you can deuiſe,
                  "And let their good inſtructions teach you three:
                  "Be faithfull all: as brethren ought agree:
                  "For* concord keepes a Realme in ſtable ſtay:
                  "But diſcord brings all kingdomes to decay.
               
               
                  "Record you this: to th' eldeſt ſonne I giue
                  "This middle part of Realme to hold his owne,
                  "And to his heires that after him ſhall liue.
                  "Alſo to Camber, that his part be knowne,
                  "I giue that land that lies welnigh oregrowne
                  "With woods, Northweſt, and mountaines mightie hie,
                  "By South whereof, the Corniſh ſea doth lie.
               
               
                  "And vnto thee my yongeſt ſonne, that art
                  "Mine Albanact, I giue to thee likewiſe
                  "As much to be for thee and thine apart,
                  "As North beyond the arme of ſea there lies,
                  "Of which loe heere a Mappe before your eies.
                  "Loe heere my ſonnes my kingdome all you haue,
                  "For which (remember) nought but this I craue:
               
               
                  
                  "Firſt, that you take theſe fathers graue for me,
                  "Imbrace their counſell euen as it were mine:
                  "Next, that betweene your ſelues you will agree,
                  "And neuer one at others wealth repine.
                  "See that yee bide ſtill bound with friendly line.
                  "And laſt, my ſubiects with ſuch loue retaine,
                  "As long they may your ſubiects eke remaine.
               
               
                  "Now faint, I feele my breath begins to faile,
                  "My time is come, giue each to me your hand,
                  "Farewell, farewell, to mourne will not preuaile,
                  "I ſee with Knife where Atropos doth ſtand.
                  "Farewell my friends, my children and my land,
                  "And farewell all my ſubiects, farewell breath,
                  "Farewell ten thouſand times, and welcome death.
               
               
                  And euen with that he turn'd himſelfe aſide,
                  Vpyeelding gaſping gaue away the ghoſt:
                  Then all with mourning voice his ſeruants cri'd,
                  And all his ſubiects eke, from leaſt to moſt.
                  Lamenting fil'd with wailing plaints each coaſt,
                  And ſo the Britans all as nature bent,
                  Did for their King full dolefully lament.
               
               
                  But what auailes, to ſtriue againſt the tide,
                  Or elſe to driue againſt the ſtreame and winde?
                  What booteth it againſt the Cliues to ride,
                  Or elſe to worke againſt the courſe of kind?
                  Sith Nature hath the end of things aſſign'd,
                  There is no nay, we muſt perforce depart,
                  Gainſt dint of death, there is no eaſe by art.
               
               
                  Thus raign'd that worthie King, that found this land,
                  My father Brutus, of the Troian blood,
                  And thus he died when he full well had man'd
                  This noble Realme with Britans fierce and good.
                  And ſo a while in ſtable ſtate it ſtood,
                  Till we diuided had this Realme in three,
                  And I too ſoone receiu'd my part to mee.
               
               
                  
                  Then ſtraight through all the world gan Fame to flie,
                  A monſter ſwifter none is vnder Sun
                  Encreaſing: as in waters we deſcry
                  The circles ſmall, of nothing that begun,
                  Which at the length vnto ſuch breadth doe come,
                  That of a drop which from the skies doth fall,
                  The circles ſpread, and hide the waters all:
               
               
                  So fame in flight increaſeth more and more:
                  For at the firſt ſhe is not ſcarcely knowne,
                  But by and by ſhe fleetes from ſhore to ſhore,
                  To clouds from th' earth her ſtature ſtraight is growne,
                  There whatſoeuer by her trumpe is blowne,
                  The ſound that both by ſea and land out flies,
                  Rebounds againe, and verberates the skies.
               
               
                  They ſay, the earth that firſt the Giants bred,
                  For anger that the gods did them diſpatch,
                  Brought forth this ſiſter, of thoſe monſters dead,
                  Full light of foote, ſwift wings the winds to catch;
                  Such monſter erſt did nature neuer hatch.
                  As many Plumes ſhe hath from top to toe,
                  So many eyes them vnderwatch, or moe.
               
               
                  And tongues doe ſpeake, ſo many eares doe harke,
                  By night tweene heauen ſhe ſties and earthly ſhade,
                  And ſhrieking, takes no quiet ſleepe by darke
                  On houſes roofes; on towres as keeper made
                  She ſits by day, and Cities threats t'inuade:
                  And as ſhe tels what things ſhe ſees by view,
                  She rather ſhewes that's fained falſe, then true.
               
               
                  She blazde abroad perdy a people ſmall,
                  Late landed here, and found this pleaſant Ile,
                  And how that now it was diuided all,
                  Made tripartite, and might within a while
                  Be won by force, by treaſon, fraud, or guile,
                  Wherefore ſhe moues her friends to make aſſay
                  To win the prize, and beare our pompe away.
               
               
                  
                  A thouſand things beſides, ſhe bruits and tels,
                  And makes the moſt of euery thing ſhee heares,
                  Long time of vs ſhe talkes, and nothing els,
                  Eke what ſhe ſeeth, abroad in haſte ſhe beares,
                  With tatling toies and tickleth ſo their eares,
                  That needs they muſt to flattering fame aſſent,
                  Though afterwards they do therefore lament.
               
               
                  By Eaſt from hence a countrey large doth lye,
                  
                     Hungaria eke of Hunnes it hath to name,
                  And hath Danubius floud on South it bye,
                  Diuiding quite from Austria the ſame.
                  From thence a King was named Humber came:
                  On coaſts of Albany arriued he,
                  In hope to be the King of Britanie.
               
               
                  When by report of ſubiects I did heare
                  How foe-men were arriued on my ſhore,
                  I gathered all my ſouldiers void of feare,
                  And backe the Hunnes by force and might I bore.
                  But in this battell was I hurt ſo ſore,
                  That in the field of deadly wounds I dide,
                  My ſouldiers loſt their noble Prince and guide.
               
               
                  Such was my fate to venture on ſo bold,
                  My raſhneſſe was the cauſe of all my woe:
                  Such is of all our glorie vaine the hold,
                  So ſoone we pompe and pleaſures all forgo,
                  So quickly are we reft our kingdomes fro:
                  And ſuch is all the caſt of Fortunes play,
                  When leaſt we thinke, to cut vs quite away.
               
               
                  I deem'd myſelfe an heauenly happie wight,
                  When once I had my part to raigne within:
                  But ſee the chance what hap did after light,
                  Or I could ſcarce t'inioy my glee begin.
                  This Hunne did ſeeke from me my Realme to win,
                  And had his will: O flattering fortune, fie,
                  What meaneſt thou to make thy ſelfe ſo ſlie?
               
               
                  
                  You worthie warriers by my fall beware,
                  Let wiſdome worke, lay raſhneſſe all apart,
                  When as with enemies you encountred are,
                  You muſt endeuour all your skilfull art
                  By wittie wiles, with force to make your mart.
                  Wit nought auailes late bought with care and coſt,
                  Too late it comes when life and all is loſt.
               
            
            
               HOW HVMBER THE KING OF Hunnes minding to conquer Britaine, was drowned in the arme of ſea now called Humber, about the yeare before Christ, 1085.
               
                  
                     THough yet no forren Princes in this place
                  Haue come to tell their hapleſſe great miſhap,
                  Yet giue me leaue a while to pleade my caſe,
                  And ſhew how I ſlipt out of fortunes lap.
                  Perchance ſome other will eſchew the trap
                  Wherein I fell, and both themſelues beware,
                  And alſo ſeeke the leſſe their countries care.
               
               
                  I am that Humber King of Hunnes, that came
                  To win this Iland, from the Britaines fell:
                  Was drown'd in Humber, where I left my name.
                  A iuſt reward for him that liu'd ſo well
                  At home, and yet thought others to expell
                  Both from their Realme or right: well ſeru'd was I,
                  That by ambition thought to elime ſo hie.
               
               
                  But I muſt blame report, the chiefeſt cauſe
                  Of my decay: beware of raſh report:
                  'Tis wiſdome firſt to take a while a pauſe,
                  Before to dint of dangers you reſort:
                  Leſt when you come in haſte to ſcale the fort,
                  By raſh aſſault ſome engine, ſhaft or fire
                  Diſpatch you quite, or make you ſoone retire.
               
               
                  
                  For vnto me the rumours daily flew,
                  That heere a noble Iland might be won:
                  The King was dead: no warres the people knew,
                  And eke themſelues to ſtriue at home begon,
                  It were (quoth I) a noble act well don
                  To win it then: and therewithall did make
                  Prouiſion good, this famous Ile to take.
               
               
                  A warlike regall campe prouided was,
                  And ſhips, and victuall, for my Hunnes and me,
                  By ſea to Britaine conqueſt for to paſſe,
                  If Gods thereto or heauenly ſtarres agree.
                  At length we came to ſhores of Albany,
                  And there to fight, with Britans, pitch'd our field,
                  In hope to make them flinch, flie, fall, or yeeld.
               
               
                  They met vs, long we fiercely fought it out,
                  And doubtfull was the victours part of twaine:
                  Till with my Hunnes, I ruſht among the rout,
                  And fought till that King Albanact was ſlaine.
                  Then they to yeeld or pardon craue were faine,
                  And I with triumphes great receiu'd the pray,
                  And marched forward, fleſht with ſuch a fray.
               
               
                  I paſt an arme of ſea, that would to God
                  I neuer had bin halfe ſo bold at firſt,
                  I made, to beate my ſelfe withall, a rod,
                  When ſo without their Realme I venture durſt.
                  But marke my tale, thou heard'ſt not yet the worſt:
                  As ſure I thought the reſt to circumuent,
                  By ſpies before, they knew my whole intent.
               
               
                  And or I wiſt, when I was come to land,
                  Not farre from ſhore two Princes were prepar'd
                  Their ſcouts conueyed away my ſhips they fand,
                  And of my ſhipmens fleſh they nothing ſpar'd.
                  To reſcue which, as backe againe I far'd,
                  The armies twaine were at my heeles behinde,
                  So cloſde me in, I wiſt no way to winde.
               
               
                  
                  On th' Eaſt Loerinus with an armie great,
                  By Weſt was Cambre with another band:
                  By North an arme of ſea the ſhores did beat,
                  Which compaſt me and mine within their land,
                  No way to ſcape was there but Water fand,
                  Which I muſt taſte, or elſe the ſword of thoſe
                  Which were to me and mine full deadly foes.
               
               
                  So when I ſaw the beſt of all mine hoſte
                  Beat downe with bats, ſhot, ſlaine, or forſt to ſwim,
                  My ſelfe was faine likewiſe to flie the coaſt,
                  And with the reſt the waters entred in.
                  A ſimple ſhift for Princes to begin.
                  Yet farre I deem'd it better ſo to die
                  Then at my foe-mens feetan abiectlie.
               
               
                  But when I thus had ſwam with hope to ſcape,
                  If I might wend the water waues to paſſe:
                  The Britans that before my ſhips had gate
                  Gan watch me, where amidſt the ſurge I was.
                  Then with my boats they rowde to me (alas)
                  And all they cri'd keep Humber, keepe their King,
                  That to our Prince, we may the traytor bring.
               
               
                  So with my boats beſet, poore Humber I
                  Wiſt no refuge, my wearie armes did ake,
                  My breath was ſhort, I had no power to crie,
                  Or place to ſtand, while I my plaint might make.
                  The water colde made all my ioynts to ſhake,
                  My heart did beat with ſorow, griefe, and paine,
                  And downe my cheeks, ſalt tears they guſht amain.
               
               
                  O muſt thou yeeld, and ſhall thy boats betray
                  Thy ſelfe (quoth I) no mercie Britans haue:
                  O would to God I might eſcape away,
                  I wot not yet if pardon I may craue,
                  Although my deeds deſerue no life to haue.
                  I will, I nill, death, bondage, beaſt am I
                  In waters thus, in forren ſoile to die.
               
               
                  
                  With that I clapt my quauering hands abroad,
                  And held them vp to heauen, and thus I ſaid:
                  O Gods that know the paines that I haue bode,
                  And iuſt reuengement of my raſhnes paid,
                  And of the death of Albanact betraid
                  By me and mine, I yeeld my life therefore
                  Content to die, and neuer greeue yee more.
               
               
                  Then ſtraight not opening of my hands, I bowde
                  My ſelfe, and ſet my head my armes betweene:
                  And downe I ſprang with all the force I could,
                  So duckt, that neither head nor foot were ſeene,
                  And neuer ſaw my foes againe I weene,
                  There was I drown'd: the Britans, to my fame,
                  Yet call that arme of ſea by Humbers name.
               
               
                  Take heed by me, let my preſumption ſerue,
                  And let my folly, fall, and raſhneſſe, be
                  A glaſſe wherein to ſee if thou do ſwerue:
                  Thou mai'ſt thy ſelfe perceiue ſomewhat by me.
                  Let neither truſt, nor treaſon, traine forth ye,
                  But be content with thine eſtate, ſo ſhall
                  No wrath of God, procure thy hapleſſe fall.
               
               
                  If thou be forren, bide within thy ſoile
                  That God hath giuen to thee and thine to hold:
                  If thou oppreſſion meane, beware the foile,
                  Beare not thy ſelfe of thee or thine too bold,
                  Or of the feats thy elders did of old.
                  For God is iuſt, iniuſtice will not thriue:
                  He plagues the proud, preſerues the good aliue.
               
            
            
               
               HOW KING LOCRINVS the eldeſt ſon of Brutus liued vitiouſly, and was ſlaine in battell by his wife, Queene Guendoline, the yeare before Christ, 1064.
               
                  
                     IF euer any noble Prince might rue
                  My hapleſſe deeds of yore, the ſame may I,
                  That would to God it were not farre too true,
                  Or that I iuſtly could my faults denie.
                  * The truth of things the end, or time, doth trie,
                  As well by me is ſeene: my hapleſſe fall
                  Declares whence came my great misfortunes all.
               
               
                  I am Locrinus, ſecond Britaine King,
                  The eldeſt ſonne of him that found this land:
                  Whoſe death, to me my miſchiefes all did bring,
                  And cauſ'd why firſt I tooke my death in hand.
                  He chiefely wil'd me when he gaue this land
                  I ſhould be rul'd, by all his Counſels will,
                  And vſe their iudgements in my dealings ſtill.
               
               
                  But what do I accuſe my fathers heſt,
                  What meane I heere th' unfaultie for to blame?
                  All he commanded euen was for the beſt,
                  Though in effect, of beſt the worſt became.
                  So things oft times well ment, vnfitly frame,
                  So often times the counſell of our frend
                  Apparent good, falles faultie in the end.
               
               
                  For as he wiſht, I vſde his Counſels aide,
                  In each thing that I deem'd was good for me:
                  I neuer ought that they deſir'd, denaide,
                  But did to all their minds and heſts agree.
                  And Corinaeus ſaw my heart ſo 
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
                  By diuers meanes he ſought the match to make,
                  That to my wife I might his daughter take.
               
               
                  
                  So I that wiſt not then what mariage ment,
                  Did ſtraight agree his Guendoline to haue:
                  Yet afterward ſuſpecting his intent,
                  My friends to me this point of counſell gaue,
                  That * whoſo doth of Prince alliance craue,
                  He meanes thereby to worke ſome point of ill,
                  Or elſe to frame the Prince vnto his will.
               
               
                  It may well be he ment no ill at all,
                  But * wiſe men alwaies vſe to dread the worſt.
                  And ſith it was the fountaine of my fall,
                  From whence the ſpring of all my ſorowes burſt,
                  I may well thinke was ſome of vs accurſt.
                  For why, * the end doth alwaies proue the fact:
                  By end we iudge the meaning of the act.
               
               
                  I made no haſte to wed my ſpouſed wife,
                  I wiſt I could (as yet) without her bide:
                  I had not taſted ioyes of trained life,
                  I deem'd them fooles by Cupids dart that dide.
                  I Venus vile and all her feats defide,
                  I liu'd at reſt, and rul'd my land ſo well,
                  That men delighted of my facts to tell.
               
               
                  My brethren eke long weilded well their parts,
                  We fear'd no foes, we thought our ſtate would ſtand:
                  We gaue our ſelues to learned skilfull arts,
                  Wherein we either fruite, or pleaſure fand,
                  And we enioyd too fine a fertile land,
                  That few in earth might with our ſtates compare,
                  We liu'd ſo void of noiſome carke and care.
               
               
                  But ſee the chance: when leaſt we thought of ill,
                  When we eſteem'd our ſtate to be moſt ſure,
                  Then came a flaw to bridle all our will,
                  For ſtrangers farre gan vs to warre procure.
                  And euen when firſt, they put their pranke in vre,
                  On Albaine ſhores my brother there they ſlew,
                  Whoſe death we after made the Hunnes to rue.
               
               
                  
                  When he was dead they hop'd to winne the reſt,
                  And ouer Aby ſtreame with haſt did hie.
                  But I, and eke my brother Camber, dreſt
                  Our armies ſtraight, and came their force to trie.
                  We brake their raies, and forc'd the King to flie
                  Into the arme of ſea they ouer came,
                  Where Humber drownde the waters tooke their name.
               
               
                  We either ſlew, or tooke them captiues all,
                  Amongſt the which (O miſchiefe great to tell!)
                  The Gods to worke mine ouerthrow and fall,
                  Sent Ladies three, whoſe beauties did excell.
                  Of which, becauſe I liked one ſo well,
                  I tooke her ſtraight, nor ſhe did ought denie,
                  But ech thing granted ſo ſhe might not die.
               
               
                  Thus Humber we this hatefull hungrie King,
                  In Humber drencht, and him depriu'd of pride,
                  And of his louely Ladies he did bring
                  He loſt the pray, and all his men beſide,
                  And we the ſpoiles of all his hoſt diuide.
                  But I that thought I had the greateſt ſhare,
                  Had caught the cauſe of all my wofull care.
               
               
                  They cal'd this Ladie, Elstride, whom I tooke,
                  Whoſe beautie braue did ſo my wits confound,
                  That for her ſake my promiſe I forſooke,
                  Whereby I was to Guendoline firſt bound.
                  Me thought no Ladie elſe ſo high renound
                  That might haue cauſde me change my conflate minde,
                  So was I caught by ſnares of Cupid blinde.
               
               
                  Was neuer none before ſo li'kd mine eye,
                  I lou'd her more then I could loue my life:
                  Her abſence ſtill me thought did cauſe me dye,
                  I ſurely ment to take her for my wife.
                  But ſee how beautie breedeth deadly ſtrife,
                  Loe here began my whole confuſion, here
                  Sprang out the ſhaft from whence this wound I beare.
               
               
                  
                  For Corinaeus had no ſooner heard,
                  That I did meane his daughter to forſake,
                  But ſtraight as one that did nought elſe regard,
                  In haſt his voyage towards me did take.
                  Where he declar'd what promiſe I did make,
                  From which he ſaid if once I ſought to ſlide,
                  It would by dint of ſword, and blood, be tride.
               
               
                  But if I would her take, as erſt I ſaid,
                  And not this ſtranger chuſe againſt his minde,
                  His helpe he promiſt at each time, and aide
                  To be ſo readie, as I wiſht to finde.
                  He further ſaid my countrey did me binde,
                  To take ſuch one as all my ſubiects knew,
                  Sith ſtrangers to their foes are ſeldome true.
               
               
                  I waide his words, and thought he wiſht me well,
                  But yet becauſe his ſtock ſhould gaine thereby,
                  I reckt them leſſe: and yet the truth to tell,
                  I durſt not dare my promiſe made denie.
                  For well I wiſt if once it came to trie,
                  It would both weaken all this noble land,
                  And doubtfull be who ſhould haue th' vpper hand.
               
               
                  Thus needes perforce I muſt his daughter take,
                  And muſt leaue off to loue where I delight:
                  I was conſtraind, contented to forſake
                  The forme that moſt did captiuate my ſight.
                  What luck had I on ſuch a lot to light?
                  What ment you Gods that me ſuch fortune gaue,
                  To caſt my minde on her I might not haue?
               
               
                  To ſhort my tale: his Guendoline I tooke,
                  I was content againſt my will: what then?
                  Nor quite for this mine Elstride I forſooke.
                  For why, I wrought by skill of cunning men
                  A Vault along vnder the ground, a den
                  Her companie wherein I vſed ſtill,
                  There we accompliſht our vnhappie will.
               
               
                  
                  There I begat my Sabrine ſillie childe,
                  That virgin ſmall, mine Elſtride bare to me:
                  Thus I my wife full often times beguilde,
                  Which afterward did beare a ſonne to mee,
                  Nam'd Madan: yet we neuer could agree.
                  And he that was the cauſe ſhe was my Bride,
                  The while, her father Corinaeus dide.
               
               
                  Which when I heard, I had my hearts deſire,
                  I crau'd no more, there was my end of griefe:
                  At leaſt I thought to quench Cupidoes fire,
                  And eke to worke my luſting loues reliefe,
                  I ment no more to ſtcale it like a thiefe:
                  But married Elſtride, whom I lou'd as life,
                  And for her ſake I put away my wife.
               
               
                  Likewiſe my Elſtride I as Queene ordain'd,
                  And tooke her as my lawfull wife by right:
                  But Guendoline that ſaw her ſelfe diſdain'd,
                  Straight fled, and mou'd the Corniſh men to fight.
                  To them when ſhe declar'd her piteous plight,
                  In haſt they raiſd an armie, for to be
                  Reuengers of my new made Queene and me.
               
               
                  And I likewiſe an armie did prepare,
                  I thought to quaile their courage all by force:
                  But to my coſt I found too late beware.
                  There is no ſtrength in armour: men, ne horſe
                  Can vaile, if Ioue on wronged take remorce.
                  Sith he on whom the deadly dart doth light,
                  Can neuer ſcape, by ranſome, friend, or flight.
               
               
                  So when our armies met nigh Habrine ſtreame,
                  The trumpets blew and I denide the peace:
                  I minded to expell them all the Realme,
                  Or elſe to make them euer after ceaſe.
                  And they, except I Elſtride would releaſe
                  (They ſaid) and take my Guendoline againe,
                  They would reuenge the wrong or elſe be ſlaine.
               
               
                  
                  On this we met, and valiantly we fought
                  On either ſide, and neither part did yeeld:
                  So equally they fell it was great doubt,
                  Which part ſhould haue the better of the field.
                  But I too bold ruſht in with ſword and ſhield,
                  To breake their raies, ſo haſtie men get ſmart,
                  An arrow came, and ſtroke me to the heart.
               
               
                  Thus was I brought to bale, vnhappie, there,
                  My bodie pierſt that wicked life had led:
                  When I had raigned all out twentie yeare,
                  And had my corps with many pleaſures fed,
                  The earth receiu'd my corps as cold as led.
                  And all my pompe, my princely troupe and traine,
                  On earth no more ſhall ſee their Prince againe.
               
               
                  To all eſtates let this for wedlocke ſerue,
                  Beware of change, it will not hold out long.
                  For * who ſo mindeth from his mate to ſwerue,
                  Shall ſure at length receiue reuenge for wrong,
                  Tis folly fight with God, h'is farre too ſtrong.
                  For though yee colour all with coat of right,
                  No falſe deceit deceiues or dimmes his ſight,
                  He guides the good, and wrekes the wrongs of might.
               
            
            
               HOW QVEENE ELSTRIDE, THE Concubine and ſecond wife of King Locrinus, was miſerablie drowned by Queene Guendoline, the yeere before Chriſt, 1064.
               
                  
                     ANd muſt I needs my ſelfe recite my fall,
                  Poore Princeſſe I? muſt I declare my fate?
                  Muſt I the firſt of Queenes amongſt vs all,
                  Shew how I thrice fell from my princely ſtate?
                  And from the loftie ſeate on which I ſate?
                  If needs I muſt, then well content, I will,
                  Leſt here my place in vaine I ſeeme to fill,
               
               
                  
                  I am that Elstride whom Locrinus lou'd,
                  A Prince his daughter, came from Germanes land.
                  My fame of beautie many Princes mou'd
                  To ſue for grace, and fauour at my hand.
                  Which bruite once blowne abroad in euery land,
                  One Humber King of Hunnes with all his traine,
                  To come to me a ſuiter, was full faine.
               
               
                  What need I tell the gifts to me he gaue,
                  Or ſhew his ſuite, or promiſe he me plight,
                  Sith well you know a Prince need nothing craue,
                  May nigh command each thing as twere his right?
                  For * as the fowle before the Eagles ſight,
                  Euen ſo we fall, ſubmit, and yeeld vs ſtill
                  At Prince his call, obeyſant to his will.
               
               
                  And for that time the Hunnes full mightie were,
                  And did encreaſe by martiall feats of warre:
                  Therefore our Germane Kings agaſt, did beare
                  Them greater fauour, then was need by farre.
                  My father durſt not Humbers heſt debarre,
                  Nor I my ſelfe, I rather was content
                  In hope of crowne, with Humber to conſent.
               
               
                  Two Princely dames with me came then away,
                  He brag'd to win theſe countrie parts all three.
                  We Ladies rather were this Prince his pray,
                  Becauſe he promiſt that we Queenes ſhould be.
                  We came to coſt, theſe countrey coaſts to ſee,
                  Sith he on whom our hope did wholly ſtand,
                  Was drown'd, nam'd Humber waters, loſt the land.
               
               
                  For as you heard before when he ſuppoſ'd
                  He had won all, becauſe he won a part,
                  Straightway he was againe thereof depoſ'd,
                  Conſtrain'd to flie and ſwim for life poore heart:
                  Loe heere the cauſe of all my dolefull ſmart:
                  This noble King with whom I came to raigne,
                  Was dreucht, and drown'd vnto my grieuous paine.
               
               
                  
                  Then were his ſouldiers taken, ſlaine, or ſpoild,
                  And well were they, that could make ſuite for life.
                  Was neuer ſuch an armie ſooner foild:
                  O wofull warre, that flowd'ſt in flouds of ſtrife,
                  And card'ſt not whom thou cut'ſt with cruell knife.
                  So, had not Venus fraught my face with hue,
                  I had no longer liu'd my forme to rue.
               
               
                  But as I came a captiue with the reſt,
                  My countenance did ſhine as braue as Sunne,
                  Ech one that ſaw my natiue hue, were preſt
                  To yeeld themſelues, by beames of beautie wonne.
                  My fame ſtraight blowne, to gaze on me they runne,
                  And ſaid I paſt ech worldly wight, as farre
                  As Phoebus bright excels the morning ſtarre.
               
               
                  Like as you ſee in night, if light appeare,
                  Straightway to that ech man directs his eye:
                  Euen ſo among my captiue mates that were,
                  When I did ſpeake, or make my plaints with crie,
                  Then all on me they ſtared by and by,
                  Bemoning of my fates, and fortune, ſo,
                  As they had bin partakers of my woe.
               
               
                  My forme did praiſe my plea, my ſighes they ſued,
                  My teares enti'ſt their hearts, ſome ruth to take.
                  My ſobs in ſight a ſeemely hue renew'd,
                  My wringing hands, wan ſuiters ſhift to make,
                  My ſober ſoothes did cauſe them for my ſake
                  Me to commend, vnto their noble King,
                  Who wild they ſhould me into preſence bring.
               
               
                  T' whom when I came, in cords as captiue bound,
                  " O King (quoth I) whoſe power we feele too ſtrong,
                  " O worthie wight, whoſe fame to skies doth ſound,
                  " Doe pitie me, that neuer wiſht thee wrong.
                  " Releaſe me, one, thy captiues all among,
                  " Which frō my friends, by fraud am brought away,
                  " A Prince his daughter, drown'd in deepe decay.
               
               
                  
                  " Now as thou art a Prince thy ſelfe, of might,
                  " And maiſt do more then I do dare deſire:
                  " Let me (O King) find fauour in thy ſight,
                  " Aſſwage ſomewhat thy deadly wrath and ire.
                  " No part of knighthood tis for to require
                  " A Ladies death thee neuer did offend,
                  " Sith that thy foe, hath brought her to this end.
               
               
                  " But let me rather ſafely be conuay'd,
                  " O gratious King, once home before I die:
                  " Or let me liue thy ſimple wayting maid,
                  " If it may pleaſe thy royall Maieſtie.
                  " Or let me ranſome pay for libertie.
                  " But if you mind reuenge of vnwraught ill,
                  " Why ſpare you Britaines my deare blood to ſpill?
               
               
                  With that the King: Good Ladie faire, what iſt
                  Thou canſt deſire or aske but muſt obtaine?
                  Eke would to God with all my heart I wiſt
                  Beſt way to eaſe thee of thy wofull paine.
                  But if thou wilt, do heere with me remaine.
                  If not content, conductors ſhalt thou haue,
                  To bring thee home, and what thou elſe wilt crau
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                  
               
               
                  " O King (quoth I) the gods preſerue thy grace,
                  " The heauens requite thy mercie ſhew'd to me,
                  " And all the ſtarres, direct thy regall race,
                  " With happie courſe, long length of yeares to ſee.
                  " The earth with fertill fruits enrich ſo thee,
                  " That thou maiſt ſtill like Iuſtice heere diſpoſe,
                  " And euermore treade downe thy deadly foes.
               
               
                  The noble King commanded to vnbind
                  Mine armes, and giue me libertie at will.
                  With whom ſuch fauour I did after find,
                  That as his Queene I was at elbow ſtill:
                  And I enioy'd all pleaſures at my fill.
                  So that they quite had quenched out my thrall,
                  And I forgat my former Fortunes all.
               
               
                  
                  Thus loe by fauour I obtain'd my ſuite,
                  So had my beautie ſet his heart on fire,
                  That I could make Locrinus euen as mute,
                  Or pleaſant as my cauſes did require.
                  And when I knew he could no way retire,
                  I prai'd he would his fauour ſo extend,
                  As I might not be blamed in the end.
               
               
                  For if (quoth I) you take me as your owne,
                  And eke my loue to you hath conſtant beene:
                  Then let your loue likewiſe againe be ſhowne,
                  And wed me as you may your ſpouſed Queene.
                  If ſince in me miſliking you haue ſeene,
                  Then beſt depart betime, before defame
                  Begin to take from Elstride her good name.
               
               
                  No wauering heart (ſaid he) Locrinus beares,
                  No fained flatterie ſhall thy faith deface:
                  Thy beautie, birth, fame, vertue, age and yeares,
                  Conſtraineth me mine Elstride to imbrace.
                  I muſt of force, giue thy requeſts a place,
                  For as they do with reaſon good conſent,
                  Euen ſo I grant thee all thy whole intent.
               
               
                  Then was the time appointed and the day,
                  In which I ſhould be wedded to this King.
                  But in this caſe, his Counſell cauſde a ſtay,
                  And ſought out meanes at diſcord vs to bring.
                  Eke Corinaeus claim'd a former thing,
                  A precontract was made and full accord
                  Between his daughter, and my ſoueraigne Lord.
               
               
                  And yet the King did giue me comfort ſtill,
                  He ſaid he could not ſo forſake my loue:
                  He euermore would beare me all good will,
                  As both my beautie and deſerts did moue.
                  Yet faithleſſe in his promiſe he did proue:
                  His Counſell at the laſt did him conſtraine
                  To marrie her, vnto my grieuous paine.
               
               
                  
                  At which I could not but with hate repine,
                  It vexed me, his mate that ſhould haue beene:
                  To liue in hate a Prince his concubine,
                  That euer had ſuch hope to be his Queene.
                  The ſteps of ſtate are full of woe and teene,
                  For when we thinke we haue obtain'd the throne,
                  Then ſtraight our pompe and pride is quite orethrowne.
               
               
                  Lo twice I fell from hope of Princely crowne,
                  Firſt, when vnhappie Humber loſt his life:
                  And next I laid my peacocks pride adowne,
                  When I could not be King Locrinus wife.
                  But oft they ſay the third doth end the ſtrife,
                  Which I haue prou'd, therefore the ſequell view,
                  * The third paies home, this prouerbe is too true.
               
               
                  The King could not refraine his former minde,
                  But vſde me ſtill, and I my doubtfull yeares
                  Did linger on, I knew no ſhift to finde,
                  But paſt the time full oft with mourning teares.
                  * A concubine is neuer void of feares,
                  For if the wife her at aduantage take,
                  In rage reuenge with death ſhe ſeekes to make.
               
               
                  Likewiſe I wiſt if once I ſought to flie,
                  Or to intreat the King depart I might:
                  Then would he ſtraight be diſcontent with me.
                  Yea if I were purſued vpon the flight,
                  Or came deflour'd into my fathers ſight,
                  I ſhould be taken, kept perforce, or ſlaine,
                  Or in my countrey liue in great diſdaine.
               
               
                  In ſuch a plight what might a Ladie doe,
                  Was euer Princeſſe poore, in ſuch a caſe?
                  O wretched wight bewrapt in webs of woe,
                  That ſtill in dread waſt toſt from place to place,
                  And neuer foundeſt meane to end thy race,
                  But ſtill in doubt of death in carking care
                  Didſt liue a life deuoid of all welfare.
               
               
                  
                  The King perceiuing well my chaunged cheare,
                  To eaſe my heart with all deuiſ'd deceates,
                  By ſecret wayes I came deuoyde of feare,
                  In vaults, by cunning Maſons craftie feates.
                  Whereas we ſafely from the Queene her threats,
                  So that the King and I, ſo vſde our art,
                  As after turn'd vs both to paine and ſmart.
               
               
                  By him I had my Sabrine ſmall, my childe,
                  And after that his wife her father loſt.
                  I meane he died and ſhe was ſtrayght exilde,
                  And I made Queene vnto my care and coſt.
                  For ſhe went downe to Cornwall ſtrayght in poſt,
                  Anc cauſed all her fathers men to riſe
                  With all the force and ſtrength they might deuiſe.
               
               
                  My King and hers, with me, gainſt her prepar'd
                  An army ſtrong: but when they came to fight,
                  Dame Guendoline did wax at length too hard,
                  And of our King vs both depoſed quight.
                  For from her campe an arrow ſharp did light
                  Vpon his breſt, and made him leaue his breath:
                  Lo thus the King came by vntimely death.
               
               
                  Then I too late, began in vaine to flye,
                  And taken was preſented to the Queene:
                  Who me beheld with cruell Tigers eie.
                  "  O queane (quoth ſhe) that cauſe of warres haſt beene,
                  "  And deadly hate, the like was neuer ſeene,
                  "  Come on, for theſe my hands ſhall ridde thy life,
                  "  And take reuengement of our mortall ſtrife.
               
               
                  "  I longed long to bring thee to this day,
                  "  And thou likewiſe haſt ſought to ſuck my bloud:
                  "  Now art thou taken in my ſpoiles, a pray
                  "  For thee my life full long in daunger ſtood.
                  "  I will both teach thy ſelfe and others good,
                  "  To breake the bands of faithfull wedlocke plight,
                  "  And giue thee that which thou deſerueſt right.
               
               
                  
                  "  O harlot whore, why ſhould I ſtay my hands?
                  "  O paynted picture, ſhall thy lookes thee ſaue?
                  "  Nay, bind her faſt both hand and foote in bands,
                  "  And let her ſome ſtraunge kinde of torments haue.
                  "  What ſtrumpet, think'ſt for that thou ſeemeſt braue,
                  "  Or for thy teares, or ſighes, to ſcape my ſight?
                  "  My ſelfe will rather vanquiſh thee by fight.
               
               
                  Thou rather ſhould'ſt my vitall breath depriue
                  Then euer ſcape, if none were here but wee.
                  But now I will not file my hands to ſtriue,
                  Or elſe to touch ſo vile a drab as ſhe.
                  Come on at once, and bring her after me,
                  With hand and feete (as I commaunded) bound,
                  And let mee ſee her here, as Humber, drown'd.
               
               
                  A thouſand things beſide ſhe ſpake in rage,
                  While that a caitiffe did with cords me binde.
                  No teares, nor ſobs, nor ſighes, might ought aſſwage
                  The ielous Queene, or mollifie her minde.
                  Occaſions ſtill her franticke head did finde,
                  And when ſhe ſpake her eies did ſeeme as fire,
                  Shee lookt as pale as chalke, with wrathfull ire.
               
               
                  Ne ſtood ſhe ſtill, but fearcely me defide,
                  Raung'd vp and downe, and oft her palmes ſhee ſtrooke.
                  
                     Locrinus now (quoth ſhe) had not thus dide,
                  If ſuch an harlot whore he had not tooke.
                  And therewithall ſhee gaue a Tigers looke,
                  That made me quake, what lettes (quoth ſhe) my knife
                  To ridde this whore, my huſbands ſecond wife.
                  H'is dead, I liue, and ſhall I ſaue her life?
               
               
                  O Queene (quoth I) if pitie none remayne,
                  But I be ſlaine or drown'd as Humber was:
                  Then take thy pleaſure by my pinching payne,
                  And let me hence as thou appointeſt paſſe.
                  But take ſome pitie on my childe, alas,
                  Thou know'ſt the infant made no fault but hee
                  That's dead, and I, therefore reuenge on mee.
               
               
                  
                  No baſtards here ſhall liue to diſpoſſeſſe
                  My ſonne, (ſhe ſayd) but ſith thou ſoughteſt ſame,
                  I will prouide for her a kingdome leſſe,
                  Which ſhall hereafter euer haue her name.
                  Thou know'ſt whereof the name of Humber came,
                  Euen ſo Sabrina ſhall this ſtreame bee cal'd,
                  Sith Sabrine me, as Humber Locrine thral'd.
               
               
                  With that my childe was Sabrine brought in ſight,
                  Who when ſhe ſaw mee there in bandes to lie,
                  Alas (ſhe cri'd) what meanes this piteous plight?
                  And downe ſhee fell before the Queene, with cry:
                  O Queene (quoth ſhee) let me more rather die
                  Than ſhe that's guiltleſſe ſhould: for why, thy king
                  Did as his captiue her to leaudnes bring.
               
               
                  Which when I ſaw the kindnes of the childe,
                  It burſt my heart much more then doome of death:
                  Poore little lambe, with countenance how milde
                  See pleaded ſtill: and I for want of breath,
                  (With woefull teares that lay her feete beneath)
                  Could not put foorth a word our liues to ſaue,
                  Or if therefore I might a kingdome haue.
               
               
                  Her piteous plaints did ſomwhat death withdraw,
                  For as ſhee long beheld the Queene with teares,
                  (Quoth ſhee) let me haue rigour void of law,
                  In whome the ſigne of all thy wrath appeares.
                  And let me die, my fathers face that beares.
                  Sith he is dead, and we are voide of ſtay,
                  Why ſhould I thee for life or mercy pray?
               
               
                  My mother may to Germany returne,
                  Where ſhee was borne, and if it pleaſe thy grace:
                  And I may well lie in my fathers tombe,
                  If thou wilt grant his childe ſo good a place.
                  But if thou think my bloud is farre too bace,
                  (Although I came, by both, of princely line)
                  Then let me haue what ſhroud thou wilt aſſigne.
               
               
                  
                  With that the Queene replied with milder cheere,
                  And ſayd the childe was wonderous feate, and wittie▪
                  
                  But yet ſhee would not her reuenge forbeare,
                  For why (quoth ſhee) the prouerbe ſayes, * that pittie
                  Hath lewdly loſt full many a noble Cittie.
                  Here Elſtride now ile wreke my greefes on thee
                  To die, take leaue, but talke no more to mee.
               
               
                  On this my leaue I tooke, and thus I ſayd,
                  Farewell my countrey Germany, farewell:
                  Adew the place from whence I was conueyd.
                  Farewell my father, and friends there dwell.
                  My Humber drown'd, as I ſhall be, farewell.
                  Adew Locrinus dead for thee I die:
                  Would God my corps might by thy coffine lie.
               
               
                  Adew my pleaſures paſt, farewell, adew.
                  Adew the cares and ſorrowes I haue had.
                  Farewell my friends that earſt for me did ſue,
                  Adew that were to ſaue my life full glad.
                  Farewell my fauning friends I lately had,
                  And thou my beauty, cauſe of death, farewell,
                  As oft as heart can thinke, or tongue can tell.
               
               
                  Adew you heauens, my mortall eyes ſhall ſee
                  No more your lights and planets all farewell,
                  And chiefly Venus faire that paintedſt me,
                  When Mercury his tale to me did tell,
                  Eke afterwards when Mars with vs did dwell.
                  And now at laſt thou cruell Mars adew,
                  Whoſe dart my life and loue Locrinus ſlew.
               
               
                  And muſt I needes depart from thee my childe?
                  If needs I muſt, ten thouſand times farewell:
                  Poore little lambe, thy friends are quite exilde?
                  And much I feare thou ſhalt not long doe well.
                  But if they ſo with boyling rancour ſwell
                  As thee to ſlea which neuer wroughteſt ill,
                  How can they ſtay my ſtayned corps to kill?
               
               
                  
                  With that, my Sabrines ſlender armes imbraſt
                  Me round, and would not let me ſo depart.
                  Let me (quoth ſhe) for her the waters taſt,
                  Or let vs both together end our ſmart.
                  Yea rather rip you forth my tender heart:
                  What ſhould I liue? But they the child withdrew,
                  And me into the raging ſtreame they threw.
               
               
                  So in the waters as I ſtriu'd to ſwimme,
                  And kept my head aboue the waues for breath:
                  Me thought I ſaw my child would venter in,
                  Which cri'd amaine, O let me take like death.
                  The waters ſtraight had drawne me vnderneath,
                  Where diuing, vp at length againe roſe I,
                  And ſaw my child, and cri'd farewell, I die.
               
               
                  Then as my ſtrength was waſted, downe I went,
                  Eke ſo I plunged twice or thrice yet more:
                  My breath departed, needs I muſt relent.
                  The waters pierſt my mouth and eares ſo ſore,
                  And to the bottome with ſuch force me bore,
                  That life, and breath, and mind, and ſenſe was gone,
                  And I as dead and cold as marble ſtone.
               
               
                  Lo thus you heare the race of all my life,
                  And how I paſt the pikes of painfull woe:
                  How twice I thought to be a Princes wife,
                  And twice was quite depriu'd my honor fro,
                  The third time Queene, and felt foule ouerthro.
                  Let Princely Ladies view mine hiſtorie,
                  Mine haps, and woes, and hatefull deſtinie.
               
               
                  Bid them beware, leſt beautie them abuſe,
                  Beware of pride, for haue a fall it muſt:
                  And bid them Fortunes flatterie refuſe,
                  Her turned wheele is void of ſteadie truſt.
                  Who reckes no meane, but leaueth all to luſt,
                  Shall find my words as true as I them tell:
                  Bid them beware in time, I wiſh them well.
               
            
            
               
               HOW THE LADIE SAbrine, daughter of King Locrinus and Elstride, was drowned by Queene Guendoline, the yeare before Christ, 1064.
               
                  
                     BEhold me Sabrine orphane erſt bereft
                  Of all my friends, by cruell caſe of warre:
                  When as not one to treate for me was left,
                  But ielouſie did all their powers debarre.
                  When as my father eke was ſlaine in warre,
                  And when my mother euen before my ſight
                  Was drown'd to death, O wretch in wofull plight.
               
               
                  Truſt who ſo will the ſtaffe of high eſtate,
                  And bring me word what ſtay thereby you haue:
                  For why, if Fortune once diſpleaſure take,
                  She giues the foile, though lookes be neu'r ſo braue.
                  * Tis wiſdome when you winne, to winne to ſaue:
                  For oft who truſts to get a Prince his traine,
                  Would at the length of beggers life be faine.
               
               
                  This might the Hunne erſt Humber well haue ſaid,
                  And this my mother Elstride prou'd too true,
                  When as his life by ſtriuing ſtreames was ſtaid,
                  And when the tyrants her in waters threw.
                  What I may ſay, my ſelfe reports to you,
                  Which had more terror ſhew'd then twice ſuch twaine:
                  Giue eare, and iudge if I abode no paine.
               
               
                  Firſt when my fathers corps was ſtricken downe
                  With deadly ſhaft, I came to mourne and ſee:
                  And as he lay with bleeding breſt in ſowne,
                  He caſt aſide his watring eyes on me.
                  Flie, flie, (quoth he) thy ſtepdame ſeekes for thee,
                  My wofull child: what flight maiſt thou to take
                  My Sabrine poore, I muſt thee needs forſake.
               
               
                  
                  See heere mine end, behold thy fathers fall,
                  Flie hence, thy ſtepdame ſeekes thy ſtayleſſe life:
                  Thy mother eke ere this is wrapt in thrall,
                  You cannot ſcape of iealous griefe her knife.
                  Farewell my child, mine Elstride and my wife,
                  Adue (quoth he) I may no longer bide:
                  And euen with that he gaſped breath, and dide.
               
               
                  What bird can flie, and ſoare, if ſtormes do rage?
                  What ſhip can ſaile if once the winds reſiſt?
                  What wight is that can force of warres aſſwage?
                  Or elſe what warre can bridle fortunes liſt?
                  What man is he, that dare an hoaſt reſiſt?
                  What woman only dare withſtand a field?
                  If not? what child but muſt to enemies yeeld.
               
               
                  My fathers ſouldiers fled away for feare,
                  As ſoone as once their Captaines death they ſcand:
                  The Queene proclaim'd a pardon euery where
                  To thoſe would yeeld and craue it at her hand:
                  Excepting ſuch as did her aye withſtand.
                  For ſo the courſe alwaies of pardons goes
                  As ſaues the ſouldier, and entraps the foes.
               
               
                  Then wiſt I flight could nothing me preuaile,
                  I fear'd her pardon would not ſaue my life:
                  The ſtorme was ſuch I durſt not beare a faile,
                  I durſt not go t'intreate my fathers wife,
                  Although I neuer was the cauſe of ſtrife:
                  For iealoſie, deuoid of reaſons raigne,
                  With frenzies fume enragde her reſtleſſe braine.
               
               
                  But ſee the chance: thus compaſt round with feare
                  In broiles of blood, as in the field I ſtand,
                  I wiſht to God my corps were any where
                  As out of life, or off this hatefull land.
                  No ſooner wiſht, but there was euen at hand
                  A ſouldier vile, in haſte (quoth he) come on,
                  Queene Elstride will before thou 
                        ••
                     me begon.
               
               
                  
                  The raſcall rude, the rogue, the clubfiſt grept
                  My ſlender arme, and plucktme on in haſt:
                  And with my robes the bloodie ground he ſwept,
                  As I drue backe he hal'd me on full faſt.
                  Vnder his arme my carefull corps he caſt.
                  Sith that (quoth he) thou put'ſt me to this paine,
                  Thou ſhalt thereby at length but little gaine.
               
               
                  So at the length we came where we deſcri'd
                  A number huge of folkes about the Queene:
                  As when you ſee ſome wonder great betide,
                  Or elſe the place where ſome ſtrange ſight hath beene:
                  So might you there the people ſtanding ſeene,
                  And gazed all when as they ſee me brought,
                  Then ſure I deem'd I was not come for nought.
               
               
                  And in the preaſe, ſome praiſde my comely face,
                  In beautie Elstride which reſembled right:
                  Some ſaid I looked like my fathers grace,
                  But others ſaid it was a piteous ſight
                  I ſhould ſo die: the Queene me pardon might.
                  They ſaid the beaſt me bore did me abuſe,
                  Which not ſo rudely ought a Princeſſe vſe.
               
               
                  But what did this redreſſe my wofull care,
                  You wot the Commons vſe ſuch prouerbs ſtill:
                  And yet the captiues poore no better are,
                  It rather helpes their pained hearts to kill.
                  * To pitie one in griefe doth worke him ill.
                  Bemone his woe, and cannot eaſe his thrall,
                  It kils his heart, but comforts none at all.
               
               
                  Thus paſt we through the preaſe: at length we came
                  Into the preſence of the iealous Queene,
                  Who nought at all the raſcall rude did blame
                  That bare me ſo, but askt if I had ſeene
                  My father ſlaine, that cauſe thereof had beene.
                  O Queene (quoth I) God knowes my whole intent
                  Of ſlaughter guiltleſſe: I am innocent.
               
               
                  
                  With that I ſaw the people looke aſide,
                  To view a mourning voice: I heard thereby
                  It was my wofull mother by that cri'd,
                  Lo Sabrine, bound at brinke of death I lie.
                  What pen, or tongue, or teares with weeping eie
                  Could tell my woes, that ſaw my mother bound
                  On waters ſhoare, wherein ſhe ſhould be drown'd.
               
               
                  With that I fell before the Queene, and pray'd
                  For mercie, but with fierie eyes ſhe bent
                  Her browes on me, out baſtard vile (ſhe ſaid)
                  Thou wot'ſt not yet wherefore for thee I ſent.
                  O Queene (quoth I) haue pitie, be content,
                  And if thou mind of mercie ought to ſhow,
                  Drowne me, and let my mother harmeleſſe go.
               
               
                  For why, ſhe was a Prince his daughter, borne
                  In Germany, and thence was brought away
                  Perforce, by Humber, who by warres forlorne
                  Thy King as captiue tooke her for his pray:
                  Thou maiſt full well her caſe with reaſon way.
                  What could ſhe do, what more then ſhe or I
                  Thy captiues now, thine owne to liue or die?
               
               
                  Take pitie then on Princely race, O Queene,
                  Haue pitie, if remorce may ought require,
                  Take pitie on a captiue thrice hath beene,
                  Let pitie pierce the rage of all thine ire.
                  But if thy breaſt burne with reuenging fire,
                  Then let my death quench out that fuming flame,
                  Sith of thy husbands blood and hers I came.
               
               
                  Much more I ſaid while teares out ſtreaming went,
                  But nought of eaſe at all thereby I gain'd.
                  My mother eke, did, as ſhe lay, lament,
                  Wherewith my heart a thouſand fold ſhe pain'd.
                  And though the Queene my plaints to fauour fain'd,
                  Yet at the laſt ſhe bad ſhe ſhould prepare
                  Her ſelfe to die, and end her courſe of care.
               
               
                  
                  Then all her friends my mother Elstride nam'd,
                  And pleaſures paſt, and bade them all adue
                  Eke as ſhe thus her laſt farewell had fram'd,
                  With loſſe of him from whom her ſorowes grue.
                  At length to me (which made my heart to rue)
                  She ſaid farewell my child, I feare thy fall,
                  Ten thouſand times adue, my Sabrine ſmall.
               
               
                  And as the cruell caytiffes came to take
                  Her vp, to caſt and drowne her in the floud,
                  I faſt mine armes about her clipt did make,
                  And cri'd, O Queene let mercie meeke thy mood,
                  Do rather reaue my heart of vitall blood,
                  Then thus I liue: with that they ſlackt my hold,
                  And drencht my mother in the waters cold.
               
               
                  For loue to aide her, venter in would I,
                  That ſaw my mother ſtriue aloft for wind.
                  To land ſhee lookt and ſaid farewell, I die,
                  O let me go (quoth I) like fate to find.
                  Said Guendoline, come on likewiſe and bind
                  This Sabrine heere likewiſe, for ſo ſhall ſhe
                  At once receiue, her whole requeſt of me.
               
               
                  Eke as I wiſh to haue in mind her fame,
                  As Humbers is, which ſhould her father been:
                  So ſhall this floud of Sabrine haue the name,
                  That men thereby may ſay, a righteous Queene
                  Heere drown'd her husbands child of concubine.
                  Therefore leaue Sabrine heere thy name and life,
                  Let Sabrine waters end our mortall ſtrife.
               
               
                  Diſpatch (quoth ſhe) with that they bound me faſt,
                  My ſlender armes and feet, with little need:
                  And ſau's all mercie, me in waters caſt,
                  Which drew me downe, and caſt me vp with ſpeed,
                  And downe me drencht the Sabrine fiſh to feed:
                  Where I abode till now from whence I came,
                  And there the waters hold as yet my name.
               
               
                  
                  Lo thus this ielous Queene, in raging ſort,
                  With bloodie hate bereft her husbands health:
                  And eke my mother Elstrides life (God wot)
                  Which neuer ment to hurt this Common-wealth.
                  And me, Locrinus child, be got by ſtealth.
                  Againſt all reaſon was it for to kill
                  The child, for that her parents erſt did ill.
               
               
                  But heere you ſee, what time our pompe doth bide,
                  Hereby you ſee, th' vnſteadie truſt in warre,
                  Hereby you ſee, the ſtay of States etride,
                  Hereby you ſee, our hope to make doth marre,
                  Hereby you ſee, we fall from bench to barre.
                  From bench (quoth I) yea from the Princely ſeate,
                  You ſee how ſoone vs Fortune downe doth beate.
               
               
                  And heere you ſee, how lawleſſe loue doth thriue,
                  Hereby you ſee, how ielous folkes doe fare:
                  Heere may you ſee, with wiſdome they that wiue,
                  Need neuer recke Cupidoes curſed ſnare.
                  Heere may you ſee, diuorcement breedeth care,
                  Heere ſeldome thriue, the children may you ſee,
                  Which in vnlawfull wedlocke gotten be.
               
               
                  Declare thou then our fall and great miſhap,
                  Declare the hap, and glory we were in:
                  Declare how ſoone we taken were in trap,
                  When we ſuppoſde we had moſt ſafeſt bin.
                  Declare what loſſe they haue that hope to win.
                  * When Fortune moſt doth ſweetly ſeeme to ſmile,
                  Then will ſhe frowne: ſhe laughes but euen a while.
               
            
            
               
               HOW KING MADAN FOR HIS EVILL LIFE was ſlaine by Wolues, the yeare before Christ, 1009.
               
                  
                     AMong'ſt the reſt that ſate in hautie ſeat,
                  And felt the fall, I pray thee pen for me
                  A Tragedie may ſome ſuch wiſdome geat
                  As they may learne, and ſome what wiſer be.
                  For in my glaſſe when as themſelues they ſee,
                  They may beware: my fall from Fortunes lap
                  Shall teach them how t'eſchew the like miſhap.
               
               
                  I am that Madan, once of Britaine King,
                  The third that euer raigned in this land:
                  Marke well therefore my death: as ſtrange a thing,
                  As ſome would deeme could ſcarce with reaſon ſtand.
                  Yet when thou haſt my life well throughly ſcand,
                  Thou ſhalt perceiue, not halfe ſo ſtrange as true,
                  * Ill life, worſe death, doth after ſtill enſue.
               
               
                  For when my mother Guendoline had raign'd
                  In my nonage, full 15. yeares, ſhe dide:
                  And I but yong, not well in vertues train'd,
                  Was left this noble Iland for to guide:
                  Whereby when once my mind was puft with pride,
                  I paſt for nought, I vſde my luſt for law.
                  Of right, or iuſtiee, reckt I not a ſtraw.
               
               
                  No meane I kept, but ruled all by rage,
                  No bounds of meaſure could me compaſſe in.
                  No counſell could my meekeleſſe mind aſſwage:
                  When once to fume I fiercely did begin.
                  And I exceld in nothing elſe but ſin.
                  So that my ſubiects all did wiſh my end,
                  Saue ſuch to whom for vice I was a friend.
               
               
                  
                  And pleaſures plung'd I tooke my whole repaſt,
                  My youth mee led deuoide of compaſſe quite:
                  And vices were ſo rooted in at laſt,
                  That to recure the ill, it paſt my might.
                  For * who ſo doth with will and pleaſure fight,
                  (Though all his force doe ſtriue them to withſtand)
                  Without good grace they haue the vpper hand.
               
               
                  * What licour firſt the earthen pot doth take,
                  It keepeth ſtill the ſauour of that ſame.
                  Full hard it is a Cramocke ſtraight to make,
                  Or crooked Logges with wainſcot fine to frame.
                  Tis hard to make the cruell Tiger tame.
                  And ſo it fares with thoſe haue vices caught:
                  * Naught once (they ſay) and euer after naught.
               
               
                  I ſpeake not this as though it paſt all cure
                  From vices vile to vertue to retire:
                  But this I ſay, if vice bee once in vre,
                  The more you ſhall to quite your ſelfe require.
                  The more you plunge your ſelfe in fulſome mire.
                  As hee that ſtriues in ſoakte quicke ſirts of ſand,
                  Still ſinkes, ſcarce euer comes againe to land.
               
               
                  The gifts of grace may nature ouercome,
                  And God may graunt the time when we repent.
                  But I did ſtill in laps of lewdnes runne,
                  At laſt my ſelfe to cruelty I bent.
                  But who ſo doth with bloudy acts content
                  His minde, ſhall ſure at laſt finde like againe,
                  And feele for pleaſures thouſands pangs of paine.
               
               
                  For in the midſt of thoſe vntruſty toyles,
                  When as I nothing fearde, but all was ſure:
                  With all my traine, I hunting rode for ſpoiles
                  Of thoſe, who after did my death procure.
                  Theſe lewd delights did boldly me allure,
                  To follow ſtil and to purſue the chaſe,
                  At laſt I came into a deſert place.
               
               
                  
                  Beſet with hils, and monſtrous rockes of ſtone,
                  My company behinde mee loſt, or ſtayde:
                  The place was eke with hautie trees oregrowne,
                  So vaſt and wilde it made mee halfe afraid.
                  And ſtraight I was with rauening wolues betraid,
                  Came out of caues, and dens, and rockes amaine,
                  There was Irent in peeces, kilde, and ſlaine.
               
               
                  Woe worth that youth (in vayne) ſo vily ſpent
                  Should euer cauſe a King to feele ſuch ſmart:
                  Woe worth that euer I ſhould here lament,
                  Or ſhew the hurt of my poore Princely heart.
                  I thinke the clowne that driues the mixen cart
                  Hath better hap then Princes, ſuch as I:
                  No ſtorme of Fortune caſts him downe ſo hie.
               
               
                  A man by grace and wit may ſhun the ſnare.
                  Tis ſayd * a wiſe-man all miſhap withſtands:
                  For though by ſtarres we borne to miſchieues are,
                  Yet grace and prudence bayles our carefull bands.
                  * Each man (they ſay) his fate hath in his hands,
                  And what he marres, or makes to leeſe, or ſaue
                  Of good or euill, is euen ſelfe doe, ſelfe haue.
               
               
                  This thing is ſeene by me, that led my daies
                  In vitious ſort, for greedy wolues a pray.
                  I wiſh, and will, that Princes guide their wayes:
                  Lo, here by this eſchew like chance they may,
                  And vices ſuch as worke their whole decay.
                  Which if they doe, full well is ſpent the time
                  To warne, to write, and eke to ſhun the crime.
               
            
            
               
               HOW KING MALIN WAS SLAINE BY HIS BROther King Mempricius, the yeare before Christ, 1009.
               
                  
                     IF Fortune were ſo firme as ſhee is fraile,
                  Or gloſing glorie were ſtill permanent:
                  If no miſhap mens doings did aſſayle,
                  Or that their acts and facts were innocent:
                  If they in hope no hurt nor hatred ment,
                  Or dealings aye were done with duty due,
                  They neuer neede their great miſfortunes rue.
               
               
                  If pompe were paine, and pride were not in price,
                  Or hautie ſeate had not the higheſt place:
                  If they could learne by others to be wiſe,
                  Or els eſchew the daungers of their race:
                  If once they could the golden meane imbrace,
                  Or baniſh quite ambition from their breaſt,
                  They neuer neede to recke or reape vnreſt.
               
               
                  But they doe thinke ſuch ſweetenes in renowne,
                  Vpon this earth is all the greateſt hap:
                  They nothing feare the hurt of falling downe,
                  Or little roome in Lady Fortunes lap.
                  They giue no heede before they get the clap:
                  And then too late they wiſh they had bin wiſe,
                  When from the fall they would, and cannot, riſe.
               
               
                  As if two twinnes, or children at the teate
                  Of nurce, or mother, both at once might bee,
                  And both did ſtriue the better dugge to geat,
                  Till one were downe, and ſlipt beſide her knee:
                  Euen ſo it fares, by others as by mee,
                  In fortunes lap they haue ſo little hold,
                  She cannot ſtay both ſtriuing if ſhee would,
               
               
                  
                  I am that Malm one of Madans ſonnes,
                  Which thought to raigne and rule this noble Ile,
                  And would ſo done: but ſee what chaunce there comes
                  Where bretheren loue and frendſhip quite exile.
                  * Who thinkes in truſt no treaſon neither guile,
                  Is ſooneſt cleane bereau'd of life and all,
                  In ſtead of rule hee reapes the crop of thrall.
               
               
                  My yongeſt brother then Mempricius hight,
                  Whoſe hautie minde, and mine, were ſtill at ſquare:
                  We euermore as foes hight other ſpite,
                  And deadly ire in hatefull hearts wee bare.
                  He ſought all waies he might to worke mee care,
                  And each regarded others enuie, ſo,
                  As after turned both to painfull woe.
               
               
                  Becauſe my father lou'd him well, therefore
                  I fear'd my brother ſhould obtaine my right:
                  Likewiſe on fauour boldned hee him bore,
                  And neither had in vertues wayes delight.
                  What neede I here our inward griefes recite?
                  Wee, not as brethren, liu'd in hatred ſtill,
                  And ſought occaſion other each to kill.
               
               
                  I hauing hope for to preſerue the crowne,
                  And hee for that he feard my title bred
                  Such friendſhip, as might alwaies keepe him downe
                  And both depriue him of his crowne and head.
                  But when it chaunſt our father once was dead,
                  Then ſtraight appeared all his enuy plaine:
                  For he could not from his attempt refraine.
               
               
                  Some wiſht we ſhould diuide the realme in two,
                  And ſaid my father eke was of that minde:
                  But neither of vs both, that ſo would doe,
                  Wee were not each to other halfe ſo kinde.
                  And vile ambition made vs both ſo blinde,
                  We thought our raigne could not bee ſure and good
                  Except the ground thereof were laid with bloud.
               
               
                  
                  At laſt a time of parle choſen was,
                  And truce concluded for our titles right:
                  Wherein I hoped might be brought to paſſe
                  That I enioy in peace my kingdome might.
                  But ſecretly by policie and ſleight
                  He ſlew me with his ſword, before I wiſt:
                  Where crowne, peace, kingdome life and all I miſt.
               
               
                  Thus was I by my wicked brother ſlaine,
                  Which with my death his cruell eyes did fill.
                  This oftentimes they vſe to get and gaine,
                  That cannot ſhunne misfortune as they will.
                  Was neuer man pretended ſuch an ill,
                  But God to him like meaſure ſhortly ſent
                  As he to others erſt before had ment.
               
               
                  Vſurping wrong incurres the curſe of heauen,
                  And blood cries out for vengeance at his hand,
                  Who ſtill in care of humane good is giuen
                  The good to aide, and graceleſſe to withſtand.
                  If either vice or vertue we aband,
                  We either are rewarded as we ſerue,
                  Or elſe are plagued, as our deeds deſerue.
               
               
                  Let this my warning then ſuffice each ſort,
                  Bid them beware: example heere you ſee:
                  It paſſeth play, t'is tragicall diſport
                  To clime the ſteps of ſtately high degree.
                  For though they thinke good fortune ſeru'd not mee,
                  Yet did ſhe vſe me as ſhe vſde the reſt:
                  And ſo full oft ſhe ſerueth euen the beſt.
               
            
            
               
               HOW KING Mempricius giuen to all luſt, was deuoured by VVolues, the yeare before Christ, 989.
               
                  
                     TIs often ſaid, a man ſhould do likewiſe
                  To other, as he would to him they did.
                  * Do as thou would'ſt be done to, ſaith the wiſe,
                  And do as conſcience and as iuſtice bid.
                  Ther's no man ought for Empire, as I did
                  His impious hands with cruell blood diſtaine:
                  For * blood doth alwaies crie for blood againe.
               
               
                  Eke luſtfull life, that ſleepes in ſinkes of ſinne,
                  Procures a plague: fie, fie on Venus vile:
                  We little wot the miſchiefes are therein,
                  When we with poiſons ſweet our ſelues beguile.
                  The pleaſures paſſe, the ioyes endure but while,
                  And naught thereby at all we get or gaine
                  But dreadfull death, and euerlaſting paine.
               
               
                  Me thinkes thou harkeneſt for to heare my name,
                  And muſeſt what I am that thus do come.
                  I would or this haue told it, but for ſhame:
                  And yet to giue example heere to ſome,
                  I will no longer faine my ſelfe ſo dome,
                  But euen as others I will tell my fall:
                  Take heere my name, my life, my death, and all.
               
               
                  I am Mempricius, Madans yonger ſon,
                  Once King of Britaine, that my brother ſlew:
                  Whereby the crowne, and kingdome all I won,
                  And after nouriſht vices moe that grew.
                  Not natures lawes, nor Gods, nor mans I knew,
                  But liu'd in luſt not recking any thing,
                  I deemed all things lawfull for a King.
               
               
                  
                  Firſt when I had my brother brought on beare,
                  I thought in reſt to keepe the Kingdome long:
                  I was deuoid of doubt, I had no feare,
                  Was none durſt checke me, did I right or wrong.
                  I liu'd at large, and thought my power ſo ſtrong
                  There could no man preuaile againſt my will,
                  I ſteede of law that vſed rigour ſtill.
               
               
                  Then wickedly I fell to ſlothfull eaſe,
                  A vice that breeds a number moe beſide.
                  I was ſo teſtie none durſt me diſpleaſe,
                  And eke ſo puft with glorie vaine, and pride.
                  My ſenceleſſe ſence, as ſhip without a guide,
                  Was toſt with euery fancie of my braine,
                  Like Phoebus chariot vnder Phaëtons raigne.
               
               
                  I deem'd them foes that me good counſell gaue,
                  And thoſe my chiefeſt friends could gloſe and lie:
                  I hated them that were ſo ſage and graue,
                  And thoſe I lou'd were luſtie, lewde, and ſlie.
                  I did the wiſeſt wits as fooles defie,
                  Such ſots, knaues, ruffians, royſters I embraſte,
                  As were vnwiſe, vnhoneſt, rude, vnchaſte.
               
               
                  I luſted eke, as laſie lechers vſe,
                  My ſubiects wiues and daughters at my will
                  I did ſo often as me pleaſde abuſe,
                  Perforce I kept them at my pleaſure ſtill.
                  Thus gate I queanes and concubines at fill,
                  And for their ſakes I put away my wife:
                  Such was my lewdneſſe, luſt, and lawleſſe life.
               
               
                  But ſhame forbids me for to tell the reſt,
                  It me abhors to ſhew what did enſue:
                  And yet becauſe it moueth in my breaſt
                  Compunction ſtill, and was God wot too true,
                  Ile farther tell whence my deſtruction grue.
                  To Sodome ſinne I foulely fell, and than
                  I was deſpiſed both of God and man.
               
               
                  
                  Could I long proſper thus, do you ſuppoſe?
                  Might any ill exceed theſe vices told?
                  Thinke you ther's any wight on ground that goes
                  Might ſcape reuenge of vice ſo manifold?
                  No ſure: * who is in ſinfulnes ſo bold,
                  His vices fare like weeds, they ſprout ſo faſt
                  They kill the corps, as weeds the corne, at laſt.
               
               
                  My great outrage, my heedleſſe head, the life
                  I beaſtly led could not continue ſo:
                  My brothers blood, my leauing of my wife,
                  And working of my friends and ſubiects woe
                  Cri'd ſtill to God, for my foule ouerthroe,
                  Who heares the wrong'd, who viewes their carefull caſe,
                  And at the length doth all their foes deface.
               
               
                  Yet I miſtruſting no miſhaps at hand,
                  (Though I were worthie twentie times to die)
                  I lewdly liu'd, and did my wealth withſtand.
                  I neuer thought my end was halfe ſo me.
                  For my diſport I rode on hunting, I,
                  In woods the fearefull Hart I chaſed faſt,
                  'Till quite I loſt my company at laſt.
               
               
                  And or I wiſt, to coſt I found my foes,
                  By chance I came whereas the Wolues they bred:
                  Which in a moment did me round incloſe,
                  And mounted at my horſe his throat and head.
                  Some on the hinder parts their panches fed.
                  Yet fought I ſtill to ſcape, if it might be,
                  Till they my panting horſe puld downe with me.
               
               
                  Then was I hopeleſſe to eſcape their iawes,
                  They faſtned all their holders faſt on mee:
                  And on my royall robes they ſet their clawes:
                  My Princely preſence, nor my high degree
                  Mou'd them no more obeyſant for to bee,
                  Nor of my corps to take no more remorce,
                  Then did the grieuous groning of my horſe.
               
               
                  
                  But rauenouſly they rent my breaſt and throat,
                  Forſooke my ſteed, came all at once and tare
                  My Kingly corps, from which they fleid my coat,
                  And of my fleſh they made at all no ſpare,
                  They neuer left me till my bones were bare.
                  Lo thus I ſlew my brother, left my wife,
                  Liu'd vilely, and as vilely ended life.
               
               
                  Beware of bloodie broiles, beware of wrong,
                  Embrace the counſell of the wiſe and ſage:
                  Truſt not to power though it be nere ſo ſtrong,
                  Beware of raſhnes rude and roiſters rage.
                  Eſchew vile Venus toyes, ſhe cuts off age,
                  And learne this leſſon oft, and tell thy friend,
                  By ſudden death, pockes, begging, harlots end.
               
            
            
               HOW KING BLADVD, TAKING ON HIM TO FLIE, fell vpon the Temple of Apollo, and brake his necke, the yeere before Chriſt, 844.
               
                  
                     I Pray thee Higgins take in hand thy pen,
                  And write my life and fall among'ſt the reſt:
                  A warning ſet me downe for curious men,
                  Whoſe wits the worke of nature ſeeke to wreſt.
                  I was Prince Bladud pregnant as the beſt.
                  Of wiſdome, wealth, and learning I had ſtore,
                  Of regall race: or what I craued more?
               
               
                  But this in all the ſorts of men we ſee,
                  An vncontented mind, when much they haue:
                  The learned yet would more profounder be,
                  The richeſt moſt t'encreaſe their wealth do craue.
                  The fineſt Dames do ſlike their faces braue.
                  The noble higher climes and to the skies
                  T'aduance his name he daily doth deuiſe.
               
               
                  
                  In Britaine though I learned had full well
                  The artes, and could among'ſt the wiſe conferre:
                  Yet when of Athens I the fame heard tell,
                  (Though it in Greece ſo far hence diſtant were)
                  I trauail'd thither, writers witnes are,
                  I ſtudied there, thence learned men I brought,
                  That noble Arts in Britaine might be taught.
               
               
                  But after he was dead that was my ſtay,
                  My father graue, I meane the worthie King:
                  Then all the Britaines ſhortly by a day,
                  To royall ſeat elected me did bring.
                  Where I to place in order euery thing,
                  Receiu'd both crowne and ſcepter in my hand,
                  With right and equitie to rule this land.
               
               
                  Then, for becauſe the ſway of all the Ile
                  Depended on my gouernment to reſt:
                  I did conſult with all the Peeres a while,
                  And of my fathers Counſellers the beſt.
                  I order tooke for matters vnredreſt,
                  Giuing to each ſuch place as beſt did fit,
                  Their birth, their wealth, their perſons and their wit.
               
               
                  The learned Greekes, whom I from Athens brought,
                  Conferring with the Britiſh learned men:
                  A place, as I commanded them, had ſought
                  Amid'ſt the Realme, and brought me word agen.
                  At Staneford there I built a Colledge then,
                  And of my land I gaue the fertil'ſt partes,
                  To foſter learning and the famous Artes.
               
               
                  By this, of skilfull men the land had ſtore,
                  And all the arts were read in Britaine well:
                  No countrey was for learning praiſed more.
                  We did in noble ſcience ſo excell,
                  From other nations hither came to dwell
                  The wiſeſt wits, commending vs to skies:
                  Deeming vs people valiant, learn'd and wiſe.
               
               
                  
                  And for that time, of Gods we honor'd all,
                  
                     Apollo high for wiſdome, arte, and skill:
                  At Troynouant a Temple ſpeciall
                  I built to him, for ſacrifices ſtill.
                  Whereon I fell, as after ſpeake I will.
                  Such was our vſe and ſuperſtition then,
                  To deeme as Gods the images of men.
               
               
                  By arts I made the holeſome Baths at Bathe,
                  And made therefore two Tunnes of burning braſſe:
                  And other twaine ſeuen kinds of ſalts that haue
                  In them in cloſde, but theſe be made of glaſſe,
                  With ſulphur fil'd, wilde fire emixt there was,
                  And in foure welles theſe Tunnes I did aſſay,
                  To place by arte that they might laſt of aye.
               
               
                  Which waters heate and clenſing perfect powre,
                  With vapours of the ſulphur, ſalts, and fire,
                  Hath vertue great, to heale, and waſh, and ſcowre
                  The bathed ſores therein that health deſire.
                  If of the vertues, moe thou doſt require,
                  I will recite what old experience telles,
                  In cauſes cold the vertues of theſe welles.
               
               
                  The bathes to ſoften ſinewes vertue haue,
                  And alſo for to clenſe and ſcowre the skin
                  From Morphewes white and blacke, to heale and ſaue
                  The bodies freckled, faint, are bath'd therein:
                  Scabs, lepry, ſores both old and feſtered in,
                  The ſcurfe, botch, itch, gout, poxe, and humors fell,
                  The milt and liuer hard it healeth well.
               
               
                  I muſt confeſſe by learned skill I found
                  Thoſe natiue welles whence ye haue helpe for men.
                  But well thou know'ſt there runnes from vnder ground
                  Springs ſweet, ſalt, cold, and hote euen now as then,
                  From rocke, ſalt-petre, alume, grauell, fen,
                  From ſulphur, iron, lead, gold, braſſe and tinne:
                  Springs vertue take of vaines that they been in.
               
               
                  
                  Then who ſo knowes by natures worke in theſe,
                  Of metals or of mines the force to heale,
                  May ſooner giue his iudgement in diſeaſe,
                  For curing by the bath, and ſurer deale
                  With ſickly people of the publique weale,
                  And alſo find of fountaines hot, and cold,
                  To heale by them the ſicke, both yong and old.
               
               
                  The Citie eke of Bathe, I founded there,
                  Renouned far by reaſon of the wels:
                  And many monuments that ancient were
                  I placed there, thou know'ſt the ſtorie tels.
                  I ſought renowne and fame and nothing els.
                  But when our actes extols vs to the skies,
                  We look not downe from whence we firſt did riſe.
               
               
                  There are but few, whom Fortune bathes in bleſſe,
                  But blinded are, and dazelingly they looke:
                  They ſee nought elſe but worldly happineſſe,
                  At that they only fiſh with Fortunes hooke.
                  Ambition will not wiſdomes counſell brooke,
                  Pride ſets her thoughts on things that vade away,
                  Forſaking vertue which doth nere decay.
               
               
                  Mens vaine delights are wondrous to behold,
                  For that that reaſon nils, nor nature ſowes
                  They take in hand on ſcience far too bold,
                  Deceiu'd by ſuttle ſnares of diueliſh ſhowes.
                  From which attempts a floud of miſchiefe flowes,
                  An heape of hurts, a frie of foule decaies,
                  A flocke of feares, and thrals a thouſand waies.
               
               
                  If that the water fiſh forſake the ſtreame
                  Againſt his kind, feeles he no hurt enſues?
                  Or if the brocke would learne to play the breame,
                  And leaue the lambes at land, were this no newes?
                  A fethered fowle in th' earth a den to chuſe,
                  Or flounder ſay to flie the larke to catch,
                  We might admire what monſters time did hatch.
               
               
                  
                  But ſith we ſee that nature hath aſſign'd
                  The fowle to flie, the aire, as ſeemeth well,
                  The fiſh to ſwim, the ſea, as fits his kind,
                  The earth for men and beaſts to breed and dwell:
                  Of right a man, which doth the reſt excell,
                  Should euen ſo far ſurpaſſe in his degree,
                  As all the reſt in wiſdome weaker bee.
               
               
                  All this I ſpeake to warne the reſt that heare,
                  And eke to ſhew the blindneſſe of delites.
                  Herein my folly vaine may plaine appeare,
                  What hap they heape which trie out cunning ſlights,
                  What hurt there hits, at ſuch vaine ſhewes and ſights,
                  Where men for pleaſure only take much paine,
                  To alter natures gifts for pleaſure vaine.
               
               
                  Were not it ſtrange, thinke you, a King to flie,
                  To play the tombler, or ſome iugling caſt?
                  To dreſſe himſelfe in plumes, as erſt did I,
                  And vnder armes to knit on wings full faſt?
                  A ſport you thinke that might the wiſe agaſt.
                  But Magicke arte had taught me points of skill,
                  Which in the end did proue my future ill.
               
               
                  I deckt my corps with plumes (I ſay) and wings,
                  And had them ſet, thou ſeeſt, in skilfull wiſe
                  With many feats, fine poyſeing equall things,
                  To aide my ſelfe in flight to fall or riſe,
                  Few men did euer vſe like enterpriſe,
                  Gainſt ſtore of wind, by practiſe riſe I could,
                  And turne and winde at laſt which way I would.
               
               
                  But ere the perfect skill I learned had,
                  (And yet me thought I could do paſſing well)
                  My ſubiects hearts with pleaſant toyes to glad,
                  From Temples top, where did Apollo dwell,
                  I ſayd to flie, but on the Church I fell,
                  And in the fall I loſt my life withall.
                  This was my race, this was my fatall fall.
               
               
                  
                  What vainer thing could any Prince deuiſe,
                  Then ſo himſelfe a fooliſh fowle to ſhow?
                  Learne you by me, that count your ſelues ſo wiſe,
                  The worſt to doubt of things, what ere you know.
                  Flie not ſo high for feare you fall ſo low.
                  Be wiſe in artes, exceed not wiſdomes bound,
                  The depth of arte by wit may not be found.
               
               
                  Theſe curious artes allurements haue alone,
                  They profer much in recompence of paine:
                  But yet among'ſt a thouſand ſcarce is one
                  In practiſe, ought by them can ſaue or gaine.
                  In their effects they are but falſe and vaine,
                  Sophiſticall, deceitfull, and vntrue,
                  That nothing haue, yet promiſe all to you.
               
               
                  I ſpeake not of the reſt that are in vſe
                  Amongſt the wiſer ſort, Philoſophie,
                  Nor of the parts thereof, but of th' abuſe
                  That comes by magicke artes of Imagerie,
                  By vile inchauntments, charmes, and parnpeſtrie,
                  All which by nature are abhor'd as euill,
                  Practiſde by fooles, inuented by the diuell.
               
               
                  To make an end: you noble Kings content
                  Your ſelues with ſtudies ſeruing for the State:
                  You Lords alſo with all your wits inuent
                  What way t'eſchew the Prince and peoples hate.
                  Yee Subiects loue your Prince, eſchew debate.
                  I wiſh you all beware of climing high,
                  Leſt that you helpeleſſe fall, as erſt did I.
               
            
            
               
               HOW QVEENE CORDILA IN DESPAIRE SLEW her ſelfe, the yeare before Christ, 800.
               
               
                  
                     IF any wofull wight haue cauſe to waile her woe,
                  Or griefes are paſt do pricke vs Princes, tell our fall:
                  My ſelfe likewiſe muſt needs conſtrained eke do ſo,
                  And ſhew my like misfortunes and miſhaps withall.
                  Should I keepe cloſe my heauie haps and thrall?
                  Then did I wrong: I wrong'd my ſelfe and thee,
                  Which of my facts a witneſſe true maiſtbee.
               
               
                  A woman yet muſt bluſh when baſhfull is the caſe
                  Though truth bid tell the tale and ſtorie as it fell:
                  But ſith that I miſlike not audience, time, nor place,
                  Therefore, I cannot keepe my woes in counſell well.
                  * No greater eaſe of heart then griefes to tell,
                  It daunteth all the dolours of our mind,
                  Our carefull hearts thereby great comfort find.
               
               
                  For why to tell that may recounted be againe,
                  And tell it as our cares may compaſſe eaſe:
                  That is the ſalue and med'cine of our paine,
                  Which cureth corſies all and ſores of our diſeaſe:
                  It doth our pinching pangs and paines appeaſe:
                  It pleads the part of an aſſured friend,
                  And telles the trade, like vices to amend.
               
               
                  Therefore if I more willing be to tell my fall,
                  With my miſhaps to eaſe my burdened breaſt and mind:
                  Some others haplie may auoid and ſhunne the thrall,
                  And thereby for diſtreſſe more aide and comfort find.
                  They keeping meaſure, whereas I declin'd,
                  May be as prompt to flie like brute and blame
                  As I to tell, or thou to write the ſame.
               
               
                  
                  Wherefore if thou wilt afterwards record
                  What Queene Cordila telles to eaſe her inward ſmart:
                  I will recite my ſtorie tragicall each word
                  To thee that giu'ſt an eare, and readie art.
                  But leſt I ſet the horſe behind the cart,
                  I mind to tell each thing in order, ſo,
                  As thou maiſt ſee and ſhew whence ſprang my woe.
               
               
                  My grandſire Bladud hight, that found the bathes by skill,
                  A fethered King that practiſde high to ſoare:
                  Whereby he felt the fall, God wot againſt his will,
                  And neuer went, road, raign'd, nor ſpake, nor flew no more.
                  After whoſe death my father Leire therefore
                  Was choſen King, by right apparent heire,
                  Which after built the towne of Leirceſtere.
               
               
                  He had three daughters faire, the firſt hight Gonerell,
                  
                  Next after her his yonger Ragan was begot:
                  The third and laſt was I the yongeſt, nam'd Cordell.
                  
                  Vs all our father Leire did loue too well God wot.
                  But minding her that lou'd him beſt to note,
                  Becauſe he had no ſonne t'enioy his land,
                  He thought to guerdon moſt where fauour moſt he fand.
               
               
                  What though I yongeſt were, yet men me iudg'd more wiſe
                  Then either Gonerell, or Ragan more of age:
                  And fairer farre: wherefore my ſiſters did deſpiſe
                  My grace and gifts, and ſought my wrecke to wage.
                  But yet though vice on vertue die with rage,
                  It cannot keepe her vnderneath to drowne:
                  For ſtill ſhe flittes aboue, and reapes renowne.
               
               
                  My father thought to wed vs vnto Princely peeres,
                  And vnto them and theirs diuide and part the land.
                  For both my ſiſters firſt he call'd (as firſt their yeares
                  Requir'd) their minds, and loue, and fauour t'vnderſtand.
                  (Quoth he) all doubts of dutie to aband,
                  I muſt aſſay your friendly faithes to proue:
                  My daughters, tell me how you do me loue.
               
               
                  
                  Which when they anſwered him they lou'd their father more
                  Then they themſelues did loue, or any worldly wight:
                  He praiſed them, and ſaid he would therefore
                  The louing kindneſſe they deſeru'd in fine requite.
                  So found my ſiſters fauour in his ſight,
                  By flatterie faire they won their fathers heart,
                  Which after turned him and me to ſmart.
               
               
                  But not content with this, he asked me likewiſe
                  If I did not him loue and honor well.
                  No cauſe (quoth I) there is I ſhould your grace deſpiſe:
                  For nature ſo doth bind and dutie me compell,
                  To loue you, as I ought my father, well.
                  Yet ſhortly I may chance, if Fortune will,
                  To find in heart to beare another more good will.
               
               
                  Thus much I ſaid of nuptiall loues that ment,
                  Not minding once of hatred vile or ire:
                  And partly taxing them, for which intent
                  They ſet my fathers heart on wrathfull fire.
                  Shee neuer ſhall to any part aſpire
                  Of this my Realme (quoth he) among'ſt you twaine:
                  But ſhall without all dowrie aie remaine.
               
               
                  Then to Maglaurus Prince, with Albany he gaue
                  My ſiſter Gonerell, the eldeſt of vs all:
                  And eke my ſiſter Ragan height to Hinniue to haue,
                  And for her dowrie Camber and Cornwall.
                  Theſe after him ſhould haue his kingdome all.
                  Betweene them both he gaue it franke and free,
                  But nought at all he gaue of dowrie mee.
               
               
                  At laſt it chanſt a Prince of France to heare my fame.
                  My beautie braue, my wit was blaz'd abroad each where.
                  My noble vertues praiſde me to my fathers blame,
                  Who for I could not flatter did leſſe fauour beare.
                  Which when this worthie Prince (I ſay) did heare,
                  He ſent ambaſſage lik'd me more then life,
                  And ſoone obtained me to be his wife.
               
               
                  
                  Prince Aganippus reau'd me of my woe,
                  And that for vertues ſake, of dowries all the beſt:
                  So I contented was to France my father fro
                  For to depart, and hopt t'enioy ſome greater reſt.
                  Where liuing well belou'd, my ioyes encreaſt:
                  I gate more fauour in that Prince his ſight,
                  Then euer Princeſſe of a Princely wight.
               
               
                  But while that I theſe ioyes ſo well enioy'd in France,
                  My father Leire in Britaine waxt vnwealdie old.
                  Whereon his daughters more themſelues aloft t'aduance
                  Deſir'd the Realme to rule it as they wold.
                  Their former loue and friendſhip waxed cold,
                  Their husbands rebels void of reaſon quite
                  Roſe vp, rebeld, bereft his crowne and right:
               
               
                  Betwixt their husbands twaine they cauſde him to agree
                  To part the Realme, and promiſt him a gard
                  Of ſixtie Knights that on him ſhould attendant bee
                  But in ſixe moneths ſuch was his hap too hard,
                  That Gonerell of his retinue bard.
                  The halfe of them, ſhe and her husband reft:
                  And ſcarce allow'd the other halfe they left.
               
               
                  As thus in his diſtreſſe he lay lamenting ſates
                  When as my ſiſter ſo, ſought all his vtter ſpoile:
                  The meaner vpſtart courtiers thought themſelues his mates,
                  His daughter him diſdain'd and forced not his foile.
                  Then was he faine for ſuccour his to toile
                  With halfe his traine, to Cornwall there to lie
                  In greateſt need, his Ragans loue to trie.
               
               
                  So when he came to Cornwall, ſhe with ioy
                  Receiued him, and Prince Maglaurus did the like.
                  There he abode a yeare, and liu'd without annoy:
                  But then they tooke all his retinue from him quite
                  Saue only ten, and ſhew'd him daily ſpite.
                  Which he bewail'd complaining durſt not ſtriue,
                  Though in diſdaine they laſt allow'd but fiue.
               
               
                  
                  What more deſpite could diuelliſh beaſts deuiſe,
                  Then ioy their fathers wofull daies to ſee?
                  What vipers vile could ſo their King deſpiſe,
                  Or ſo vnkind, ſo curſt, ſo cruell bee?
                  Fro thence againe he went to Albany,
                  Where they bereau'd his ſeruants all ſaue one:
                  Bad him content himſelfe with that, or none.
               
               
                  Eke at what time he ask'd of them to haue his gard,
                  To gard his noble grace where ſo he went:
                  They call'd him doting foole, all his requeſts debard,
                  Demanding if with life he were not well content.
                  Then he too late his rigour did repent
                  Gainſt me, my ſiſters fawning loue that knew
                  Found flattery falſe, that ſeem'd ſo faire in vew.
               
               
                  To make it ſhort, to France he came at laſt to mee,
                  And told me how my ſiſters ill their father vſde.
                  Then humblie I beſought my noble King ſo free,
                  That he would aide my father thus by his abuſde.
                  Who nought at all my humble heſt refuſde,
                  But ſent to euery coaſt of France for aide,
                  Whereby King Leire might home be well conueide,
               
               
                  The ſouldiers gathered from each quarter of the land
                  Came at the length to know the noble Princes will:
                  Who did commit them vnto captaines euery band.
                  And I like wiſe of loue and reuerent meere good will
                  Deſir'd my Lord, he would not take it ill
                  If I departed for a ſpace withall,
                  To take a part, or eaſe my fathers thrall.
               
               
                  He granted my requeſt: Thence we arriued here,
                  And of our Britaines came to aide likewiſe his right
                  Full many ſubiects, good and ſtout that were.
                  By martiall feats, and force, by ſubiects ſword and might,
                  The Britiſh Kings were faine to yeeld our right.
                  Which wonne, my father well this Realme did guide
                  Three yeares in peace, and after that he dide.
               
               
                  
                  Then I was crowned Queene this Realme to hold,
                  Till fiue yeares paſt I did this Iſland guide:
                  I had the Britaines at what becke I would,
                  Till that my louing King mine Aganippus dide.
                  But then my ſeat it faltered on each ſide.
                  My ſiſters ſonnes began with me to iarre,
                  And for my crowne wag'd with me mortall warre.
               
               
                  The one hight Morgan Prince of Albany,
                  And Conidagus King of Cornwall and of Wales:
                  Both which at once prouided their artillerie,
                  To worke me wofull woe, and mine adherents bales.
                  What need I fill thine eares with longer tales?
                  They did preuaile by might and power, ſo faſt,
                  That I was taken priſoner at laſt.
               
               
                  In ſpitefull ſort they vſed then my captiue corſe,
                  No fauour ſhew'd to me, extinct was mine eſtate:
                  Of kindred, Princes, blood, or peere was no remorce,
                  But as an abiect vile, and worſe, they did me hate.
                  To lie in darke ſome dungeon was my fate
                  As t'were a thiefe, mine anſweres to abide,
                  Gainſt right and iuſtice, vnder Iailours guide.
               
               
                  For libertie at length I ſu'd to ſubiects were:
                  But they kept me in priſon cloſe, deuoid of truſt
                  If I might once eſcape, they were in dread and feare
                  Their fawning friends with me would proue vntrue and iuſt.
                  They told me take it patiently I muſt,
                  And be contented that I had my life:
                  Sith with their mothers I began the ſtrife.
               
               
                  Whereby I ſaw might nothing me preuaile to pray,
                  To plead, or proue, defend, excuſe, or pardon craue.
                  They heard me not, deſpiſde my plaints, ſought my decay,
                  I might no law, nor loue, nor right, nor iuſtice haue.
                  No friends, no faith, nor pitie could me ſaue:
                  But I was from all hope of freedome bard,
                  Condem'd, my cauſe like neuer to be heard.
               
               
                  
                  Was euer noble Queene ſo drencht in wrecks of woe,
                  Depoſde from Princely power, bereft of libertie,
                  Depriu'd of all theſe worldly pompes her pleaſures fro,
                  And brought from wealth to need, diſtreſſe, and miſerie,
                  From Pallace proud in priſon poore to lie,
                  From Kingdomes twaine, to dungeon one, no more,
                  From Ladies waiting, vnto vermine ſtore?
               
               
                  From light to darke, from holeſome aire to lothſome ſmell,
                  From odour ſweet to ſmart, from eaſe to grieuous paine,
                  From ſight of Princely wights, to place where theeues do dwell:
                  From daintie beds of downe, to be of ſtraw full faine:
                  From bowers of heauenly hew, to dens of daine:
                  From greateſt haps that worldly wights atchiue,
                  To more diſtreſſe then any wretch aliue?
               
               
                  When friends I left in France that did me firſt exalt,
                  And eke my noble King, mine Aganippus true:
                  And came to England: for their heinous facts and fault
                  Which from his right and kingdome quite our father threw
                  To take his Realme: to raigne and treaſon knew
                  I thinke of all misfortunes was the worſt:
                  Or elſe I deeme the cauſers all accurſt.
               
               
                  For marke my hapleſſe fall that fortune did me ſend,
                  As thus in priſon vile aliue I lingring lay,
                  When I had mourned long, but found no faithfull friend
                  That could me helpe, or aide, or comfort any way,
                  Was ſeru'd at meat as thoſe that Kings betray
                  With fare God wot was ſimple, bare, and thin
                  Could not ſuſtaine the corps it entred in.
               
               
                  And when the ſighes, and teares, and plaints nigh burſt my hea
                        ••
                     
                  
                  And place, and ſtench, and fare nigh poyſon'd euery pore:
                  For lacke of friends to tell my ſeas of guiltleſſe ſmart,
                  And that mine eies had ſworne to take ſweet ſleepe no more,
                  I was content, ſith cares oppreſſe me ſore,
                  To leaue my food, take mourning, plaints, and crie,
                  And lay me downe, let griefe and nature trie.
               
               
                  
                  Thus as I pining lay, my carcaſſe coucht on ſtraw,
                  And felt the paine erſt neuer earthly creature knew:
                  Me thought by night a grizely ghoſt in darkes I ſaw,
                  Eke nearer ſtill to mee with ſtealing ſteps ſhee drew.
                  Shee was of colour pale and deadly hew,
                  Her clothes reſembled thouſand kinds of thrall
                  And pictures plaine of haſtened deathes withall.
               
               
                  I muſing lay in paines, and wondred what ſhe was,
                  Mine eies ſtood ſtill, mine haire roſe vp for feare an end,
                  My fleſh it ſhooke and trembled: yet I cride (alas)
                  What wight art thou? a foe? or elſe what fawning frend?
                  If death thou art, I pray thee make an end,
                  But th' art not death. Art thou ſome fury ſent,
                  My woefull corps, with paines, to more torment?
               
               
                  "With that ſhe ſpake: I am (quoth ſhee) thy friend Deſpaire,
                  
                  "Which in diſtreſſe each worldly wight with ſpeede do aide:
                  "I rid them from their foes, if I to them repaire.
                  "Too long from thee by other captiues was I ſtaide.
                  "Now if thou art to die no whit afraide,
                  "Here ſhalt thou chooſe of Inſtruments (behold)
                  "Shall rid thy reſtleſſe life, of this bee bold.
               
               
                  And therewithall ſhee threw her garments lap aſide,
                  Vnder the which a thouſand things I ſaw with eies:
                  Both kniues, ſharpe ſwords, poinadoes all bedide
                  With bloud, and poiſons preſt which ſhee could well deuiſe.
                  "There is no hope (quoth ſhee) for thee to riſe,
                  "And get thy Crowne or Kingdome refte againe:
                  "But for to liue long laſting pining paine.
               
               
                  "Lo here (quoth ſhee) the blade that Did' of Carthage hight,
                  "Whereby ſhe was from thouſand pangs of paine let paſſe:
                  "With this ſhee ſlew her ſelfe, after Aeneas flight,
                  "When hee to Sea from Tirian ſhoares departed was.
                  "Doe chooſe of theſe thou ſeeſt from woes to paſſe,
                  "Or bide the end, prolong thy painefull daies
                  "And I am pleaſde from thee to packe my waies.
               
               
                  
                  With that was I (poore wretch) content to take the knife,
                  But doubtfull yet to die, and fearefull faine would bide.
                  So ſtill I lay in ſtudy with my ſelfe, at bate and ſtrife
                  What thing were beſt of both theſe deepe extreames vntride.
                  
                     Good hope all reaſons of Deſpaire denide:
                  And ſhee againe replide to proue it beſt
                  To die: for ſtill in life my woes increaſt.
               
               
                  Shee cal'd to mind the ioyes in Fraunce I whilome had,
                  Shee told me what a troupe of Ladies was my traine:
                  And how the Lords of Fraunce, and Britaines both were glad
                  Of late to wait on mee, and ſubiects all were faine.
                  Shee told I had bin Queene of kingdomes twaine,
                  And how my kinſmen had my ſeat and Crowne.
                  I could not riſe, for euer fallen downe.
               
               
                  A thouſand things beſide recited then Deſpaire,
                  
                  Shee told the woes in warres, that I had heapt of late:
                  Rehearſt the priſon vile in ſteede of Pallace faire,
                  My lodging low, and mouldy meates my mouth did hate.
                  Shee ſhewd me all the dongeon where I ſate,
                  The dankiſh walles, the darkes, and bade mee ſmell,
                  And bide the ſauour if I likt it well.
               
               
                  Whereby I wretch deuoid of comfort quite and hope,
                  And pleaſures paſt compard with preſent paines I had:
                  For fatall knife ſlipt forth my fearefull hand did grope,
                  
                     Deſpaire in this to aide my ſenſeles limmes was glad,
                  And gaue the blade: to end my woes ſhe bad.
                  I will (quoth I) but firſt with all my hart
                  Ile pray to Gods, reuenge my woefull ſmart.
               
               
                  If any wrong deſerue the wrecke, I pray you skies
                  And ſtarres of light (if you my plight doe rue)
                  O Phoebus cleere I thee beſeech and pray likewiſe,
                  Beare witnes of my plaints well knowne to Gods are true.
                  You ſee from whence theſe iniuries they grue.
                  Then let like vengeance hap and light on thoſe
                  Which vndeſerued were my mortall foes.
               
               
                  
                  God grant immortall ſtrife betweene them both may fall,
                  That th' one the other may, without remorce, deſtroy:
                  That Conidagus may his coſin Morgan thrall,
                  Becauſe he firſt decreaſt my wealth, bereft my ioy.
                  I pray you Gods he neuer be a Roy:
                  
                  But caytife may be pai'd with ſuch a friend,
                  As ſhortly may him bring to ſudden end.
               
               
                  Farewell my Realme of France, farewell, Adieu,
                  
                  
                     Adieu mes nobles tous, and England now farewell:
                  Farewell Madames my Ladies, car ie ſuis perdu
                  
                  
                     Il me fault aler deſespoir m'adonne conſell
                  
                  
                     De me tuer, no more your Queene farewell.
                  My coſins me oppreſſe with maine and might
                  A captiue poore, gainſt Iuſtice all and right.
               
               
                  And there withall the ſight did faile my dazeling eyne,
                  I nothing ſaw ſaue ſole Despaire bad me diſpatch:
                  Whom I beheld, ſhe caught the knife from me I weene.
                  And by her elbow carian death for me did watch.
                  Come on (quoth I) thou haſt a goodly catch.
                  And therewithall Despaire the ſtroke did ſtrike,
                  Whereby I di'd, a damned creature like:
               
               
                  Which I too late bewaile. Let thoſe aliue beware,
                  Let not the loſſe of goods or honors them conſtraine
                  To play the fooles, and take ſuch carefull carke and care,
                  Or to deſpaire for any priſon, pine, and paine.
                  If they be guiltleſſe let them ſo remaine.
                  Farre greater follie is it for to kill
                  Themſelues deſpairing, then is any ill.
               
               
                  Sith firſt thereby their en'mies haue that they deſire,
                  By which they proue too deadly foes vnwares a friend:
                  And next they cannot liue, to former bliſſe t'ſpire,
                  If God do bring their foes in time to ſudden end.
                  They laſtly, as the damned wretches, ſend
                  Their ſoules thereby to darkeſome Stygian lake
                  Which kill the corps that mightie Ioue did make.
               
            
            
               
               HOW KING MORGAN OF ALBANY was ſlaine at Glamorgan in Wales, The yeare before Christ, 766.
               
                  
                     I Wot not well what reaſon I may vſe,
                  To quit my ſelfe from laſting infamie:
                  Wherefore I muſt perforce my ſelfe accuſe,
                  I was in fault I cannot it denie.
                  Remorce of conſcience prickes my heart ſo nie.
                  And me torments with pangs of pinching paine,
                  I can no longer me from ſpeech refraine.
               
               
                  I am that Morgan ſonne of Gonerell
                  
                  Th' vngratefull daughter of her father Leire:
                  
                  Which from his kingdome did him once expell,
                  As by the Britiſh ſtories may appeare.
                  
                     Ragan and ſhe conſpir'd (both ſiſters were)
                  But were ſubdu'd againe and cauſde to yeeld
                  Their fathers Crowne: Cordila wan the field.
               
               
                  I need not heere the ſtories all recite,
                  It were too long, but yet I briefly ſhall:
                  The cauſe Cordila ought her ſiſters ſpite
                  Was, they procur'd her, and their fathers thrall.
                  Yet t'was her chance at length t'out liue them all,
                  Both ſiſters elder, and her father graue,
                  And eke at length the kingdome all to haue.
               
               
                  That time was I, of Albany, the King,
                  Call'd Scotland now, and eke my couſin then,
                  Of Cornwall and of Wales, whom I did bring
                  To warre, againſt Cordila and her men:
                  We ſaid we would our title winne agen,
                  And that becauſe our fathers had it yore,
                  We ment to get it ours againe therefore.
               
               
                  
                  I muſt confeſſe I was the cauſe of warre,
                  I was not pleaſde with that was lotted mee:
                  Euen ſo our minds ambitious often are
                  And blinded, that we cannot reaſon ſee.
                  We thinke no men, but Gods on earth we bee,
                  Yet worſe are we then beaſts which know their kind:
                  For we haue nought but miſchiefe oft in mind.
               
               
                  We thinke, if ſo we may our willes attaine
                  By right or wrong, by might or malice, we
                  Could neuer liue like Fortune for to gaine:
                  Or if on foes we once reuenged bee,
                  If that our foe-mens fall we chance to ſee,
                  O then we ioy, we lift our ſelues to skie,
                  And on the poore we crucifige crie.
               
               
                  I deem'd if that I might once put her downe,
                  The Kingdomes all were Conidags and mine:
                  And I could eaſly after win the crowne,
                  If alſo I his ſtate might vndermine.
                  I thought, indeed, to haue it all in fine:
                  By force or fraud I did intend alone
                  To ſit as King vpon the Britaine throne.
               
               
                  To ſpeake in few, we waged warre ſo long
                  Gainſt her, at laſt we put her vnto flight:
                  We warriers for our Aunt were far too ſtrong,
                  Purſude and tooke, depriu'd her of her right.
                  We thought it ours what ſo we wan by might:
                  Eke ſo play tyrants: Traitors all do watch
                  To get by ſpoile, and count their owne they catch.
               
               
                  Not ſo contented were we with the pray,
                  But fearing leſt ſhe ſhould recouer aide:
                  I ſent in haſt to priſon her away,
                  And all recourſe of meſſengers denaid.
                  Thus when ſhe ſaw her Maieſtie decaid,
                  And that her griefes and ſorowes daily grew:
                  In priſon at the length her ſelfe ſhe ſlew.
               
               
                  
                  O caytife vile, that did conſtraine a Queene,
                  That Iuſtice ment, her kingdome to forſake?
                  Nay traytor I, her cauſe of death haue been,
                  That would my ſelfe by bloodſhed ruler make.
                  How could reuenge on me but vengeance take?
                  Before the ſeat of God her blood did call
                  For vengeance ſtill, and ſo procur'd my fall.
               
               
                  Lo heere Gods iuſtice: ſee my treaſon, ſee:
                  Behold and ſee, to raigne was my delight:
                  And marke, and make a mirrour heere of me,
                  Which afterward was ſeru'd by iuſtice right.
                  We wan the crowne betweene vs both in fight:
                  And then becauſe I was the elder ſonne
                  Of th' elder Queene, I claimed all we wonne.
               
               
                  So were my dealings nought in peace and warre,
                  But by my force and fortunes vſde in fight,
                  I paſt, that time, the Britaines all by farre:
                  I was of perſon, fortitude, and might
                  Both comely, tall, ſtrong, ſeemely eke in ſight,
                  Whereby I won mens fauour, glorie, wealth,
                  And, puft with pride, at length forgate my ſelfe.
               
               
                  I ſaid it was my right the crowne to haue,
                  But Conidagus ſtoutly it deni'd:
                  Wherefore I went to Wales, my right to craue,
                  With all mine armie, and to haue it tri'd.
                  Where long we fought it ſtoutly on each ſide,
                  Till at the laſt vnto my wofull paine,
                  I was depriu'd of kingdome quite, and ſlaine.
               
               
                  And for to keepe in memorie for aye
                  That there vnfaithfull Morgan loſt his life,
                  The place is call'd Glamorgan to this daye.
                  There was I pierſt to death with fatall knife:
                  There was the end of all my hatefull ſtrife.
                  So Morgan, where he thought to win the crowne,
                  Was at Glamorgan traytor ſtriken downe.
               
               
                  
                  Thus maiſt thou tell how proud ambition proues,
                  What hap haue tyrants, what we Traytours haue:
                  What end he hath that cruell dealing loues,
                  What ſubiects get that Diademe do craue.
                  Tis better, then to winne, thine owne to ſaue:
                  For ſo orethwartly trade of Fortune goes,
                  When win thou would'ſt, then art thou ſure to loſe.
               
            
            
               HOW KING IAGO DIED OF THE LETHARGIE, about the yeare before Chriſt, 612.
               
                  
                     HAue I oreſlept my ſelfe, or am I wake?
                  Or had'ſt thou late oreſlept thy ſelfe that wrote?
                  Could'ſt thou not for the Letharge paines to take:
                  And with the reſt his ſleepie life to note?
                  Was I amongſt the wicked wights forgote?
                  Well then, awaked ſith we are both twaine,
                  To write my ſleepie ſinfull life, take paine.
               
               
                  I am that Iago, once of Britaine King,
                  That ruled all this noble Britiſh Ile:
                  No fame of me the writers old do bring,
                  Becauſe my life and gouernment was vile.
                  Yet, Higgins, heere take paines for me a while,
                  Enregeſter my mirrour to remaine,
                  That Princes may my vices vile refraine.
               
               
                  At firſt, a while, I ruled well the land,
                  I vſed iuſtice, right tooke regall place:
                  No wight but found iuſt iudgement at my hand,
                  And truth durſt ſhew, without rebuke, her face.
                  I gaue my ſelfe to all good gifts of grace,
                  My ſubiects liu'd in reſt within my raigne:
                  No cauſe of Prince compel'd them to complaine.
               
               
                  
                  But as in calme a ſtorme we nothing feare,
                  When as the ſeas are milde and ſmooth as glaſſe:
                  And as in peace no thought of warres we beare,
                  Which leaſt ſuppoſe of miſchiefes come to paſſe:
                  Euen ſo my ſtill and rightfull raigning was.
                  The calme, a tempeſt boads: the ſhine, a raine:
                  Long peace, a warre: and pleaſure, pinching paine.
               
               
                  For reſt, and peace, and wealth abounding thoe,
                  Made me forget my Iuſtice late well vſde:
                  Forſaking vertues, vices gan to floe,
                  And formernoble acts I quite refuſde.
                  My gifts, my treaſures, wealth and will miſuſde,
                  Began all goodnes quite at length diſdaine,
                  And did my facts with filthie vices ſtaine.
               
               
                  Miſgouern'd both my Kingdome and my life,
                  I gaue my ſelfe to eaſe, to ſleepe, and ſinne:
                  And I had clawbackes euen at Court full rife,
                  Which ſought by outrage golden gaines to winne.
                  For * Kings no ſooner well or worſe beginne,
                  But euen at hand the good or bad take paine,
                  For vertues ſake, or meede, the Prince to traine.
               
               
                  As vices grew encreaſing more and more,
                  So vertues fled and bad their friends a dew:
                  Diſeaſes bad likewiſe, and ſickneſſe ſore
                  Began to waxe, and griefes about me grew.
                  I may full well my naughtie ſurfets rue,
                  Which peſter'd ſo at length my drouſie braine,
                  I could not ſcarce from ſleeping ought refraine.
               
               
                  A ſleepie ſickneſſe nam'd the Lethargie,
                  Oppreſt me ſore, till death tooke life away:
                  This was the guerdon of my gluttonie,
                  As with the candles light the flie doth play,
                  Though in the end it worke her liues decay:
                  So of the gluttons cup ſo long I drunke,
                  Till drown'd in it with ſhamefull death I ſunke.
               
               
                  
                  Phyſitians wiſe may take on them the cure,
                  But if Iehoua ſmite the Prince for ſin,
                  As earſt of me, then is the helpe vnſure,
                  That's not the way for health to enter in.
                  No potions then, nor powders worth a pin:
                  But euen as we, they muſt to die be faine.
                  Bid them in time from vices now refraine.
               
            
            
               HOW KING FORREX WAS SLAINE by his brother King Porrex, about the yeare before Christ 491.
               
                  
                     TO tell my ſtorie on the tragicke ſtage
                  Compeld I am amongſt the reſt that fell:
                  I may complaine that felt god Mars his rage,
                  Alas that fate to State ſhould be ſo fell
                  Had I been meaner borne I know right well
                  There had no enuie vndermin'd my State,
                  Nor fortune foild the ſeat whereon I ſate.
               
               
                  While that my Kingly Sire Gorbodug raign'd
                  I had no care, in honor I did liue:
                  Would God I had in that eſtate remain'd,
                  But what vs fortune wonted is to giue,
                  Good hap that holds as water in a ſiue:
                  She ſhowes a glimpſe of thouſand ioyes, and moe,
                  Which hides in it ten thouſand ſeas of woe.
               
               
                  That hatefull helliſh hag of vglie hue,
                  With ruſtie teeth and meygre corps misſhape,
                  I meane that monſtervile, the worſt in view,
                  Whom ſome call Diſcord, enuie, ire and hate:
                  
                  She ſet my brother firſt with me at bate:
                  When we fiue yeares had raigned ioyntly well,
                  By her entiſements, foule at ſtrife we fell.
               
               
                  
                  We liu'd that ſpace well in this noble Ile,
                  Diuided well we ioyntly did enioy
                  The Princely ſeat, while Fortune faire did ſmile,
                  Without diſdaine, hate, diſcord or anoy:
                  Euen as our father raign'd the noble Roy
                  
                  In wealth, peace, praiſe, purport, renowne and fame,
                  Without the blots of euerlaſting blame.
               
               
                  But when ambition bleared both our eyes,
                  And haſtie hate had brother-hood bereft:
                  We friendſhip faire and concord did deſpiſe,
                  And far a part from vs we wiſdome left:
                  Forſooke each other at the greateſt heft.
                  To rule the kingdome both we left, and fell
                  To warring, iarring like two hounds of hell.
               
               
                  For bounds we banded firſt on either ſide,
                  And did incroach each one on others right.
                  T'inlarge the limits of our kingdome wide,
                  We would not ſticke oft times in field to fight,
                  The wretched ground had ſo bewitcht our ſight.
                  For why, * the earth that once ſhall eate vs all,
                  Is th' only cauſe of many Princes fall.
               
               
                  * On th' earth we greeue the ground for filthie gaine,
                  On th' earth we cloſe the earth t'inlarge our land,
                  In th' earth we moile with hunger, care, and paine,
                  We cut, we dig thence ſiluer, gold, and ſand.
                  Into her bowels by the force of hand,
                  With ſteele and iron we do dig profound,
                  Working her woe to make our ioyes abound.
               
               
                  For th' earth forget we God, (vnfaithfull fooles)
                  For ground forſake we faith and all our friends:
                  For th' earth we ſet our ſelues to ſubtill ſchooles,
                  Of ground like ſwine we ſeeke the fartheſt ends.
                  We ſpoile the ground that all our liuing lends,
                  Of ground to winne a plat a while to dwell
                  We venter liues, and ſend our ſoules to hell.
               
               
                  
                  If we behold the ſubſtance of a man,
                  How he is made of Elements by kind,
                  Of earth, of water, aire, and fire: than
                  We would full often call vnto our mind,
                  That all our earthly ioyes we leaue behind:
                  And when we paſſe to th' earth we turne to rot:
                  Our pompe, our pride, and glorie is forgot.
               
               
                  The fire firſt receiues his heate againe,
                  The aire the breath bereaues away by right:
                  The watrie and the earthly parts remaine,
                  Of Elements compoſed ſcarce ſo light.
                  And in the ground a place is for them dight.
                  The moiſtures drie, the bones conſume to duſt,
                  The wormes with fleſh ſuffice their greedie luſt.
               
               
                  But we forget our compoſition old,
                  Both whence we came, and whereunto we ſhall:
                  We ſcarce remember we be made of mould,
                  And how the earth againe conſumeth all.
                  This great forgetfulnes breeds Princes thrall.
                  While preſent ioyes we gaze vpon, meane while
                  A fading bliſſe doth all our wits beguile.
               
               
                  All this I ſpeake to th' end it may aduiſe
                  All Princes great, and noble peeres that are,
                  To learne by me the rather to be wiſe,
                  And to abandon hate and malice farre.
                  To baniſh all ambitious bloodie warre:
                  To liue content in peace, with their eſtate:
                  For * miſchiefe flowes from diſcord and debate.
               
               
                  And now Ile tell what diſcord vile hath done
                  To me King Forrex. Thus the caſe it ſtood:
                  I thought indeed to haue ſome caſtles wonne
                  And holds, which were my brothers, ſtrong and good.
                  So might I intercept his vitailes, forrage, food,
                  Abate his pride, obtaine the kingdome all:
                  Me thought the halfe a portion was too ſmall.
               
               
                  
                  Ther's no man takes an enterpriſe in hand,
                  But he perſwades himſelfe it is not ill:
                  He hath of reaſons eke in ſteed to ſtand
                  As he ſuppoſeth framed wiſe by skill.
                  So I was led by reaſon rude, to kill
                  My brother, if I caught him at the nicke,
                  Becauſe the quarrell firſt he gan to picke.
               
               
                  And for becauſe I was the elder Prince,
                  The elder ſonne, and heire vnto the crowne:
                  Me thought no law, nor reaſon could conuince
                  Me from the fact, though I did beat him downe.
                  This was my way to winne and reape renowne.
                  I did prouide an armie ſtrong for field,
                  Not farre from where I hop'd to cauſe him yeeld.
               
               
                  And ſundrie ſharpe aſſaults on each we gaue,
                  On purpoſe both enflamed for to fight:
                  We had in parle heard the counſell graue
                  Of wiſe and worthie men, perſwading right.
                  It pitie was (they ſaid) ſo foule a ſight
                  That brethren twaine, both Princes of a land,
                  Should take at home ſuch wofull warres in hand.
               
               
                  But where ambition dwelles is no remorce,
                  No countries loue, no kindred holden kind,
                  No feare of God, no ſentence wiſe of force
                  To turne the heart, or mollifie the mind.
                  Good words are counted waſting of your wind.
                  The gaine propoſde, the crowne and ſcepter hie,
                  Are th' only things where at men gaze and prie.
               
               
                  At length my brother for to end the ſtrife,
                  Thought beſt to worke the ſureſt way to win:
                  He found the meanes to take away my life,
                  Before which time the warres could neuer lin.
                  How much might better both contented bin!
                  For * hope will ſlip, and hold is hard to ſnatch.
                  Where blood embrues the hands that come to catch.
               
               
                  
                  Thus our ambition bred our ſubiects ſmart,
                  Our broiles powr'd out their guiltleſſe blood on ground:
                  Which vile deuice of mine ambitious heart
                  Procured Ioue my purpoſe to confound.
                  Therefore beware ye wights whoſe wealths abound,
                  Content your ſelues in peace to ſpend your daies,
                  By vertues good aloft your names to raiſe:
               
            
            
               HOW KING PORREX WHICH SLEW HIS brother, was ſlaine by his owne mother and her maidens, about the yeare before Christ, 491.
               
                  
                     CAn curſed Caine that caitiue ſcuſe himſelfe,
                  That ſlew his brother Abel innocent?
                  Or Typhon who for ſtate and worldly pelfe
                  His deare Oſiris downe to Lymbo ſent?
                  King Dardan then to do the like may trie,
                  They ſlew their brethren each: and ſo did I.
               
               
                  The witch Medaea rent in pieces ſmall
                  
                     Abſirtus limbes her brother, did not ſhe?
                  She threw him in the way diſmembred all,
                  That ſo her fathers iourney ſtai'd might be.
                  
                     Orodes ſlew his brother Mithridate:
                  
                  And ſo did I my brother in debate.
               
               
                  
                     Learchus ſlew his brother for the Crowne,
                  So did Cambrſes fearing much the dreame:
                  
                     Antiochus of infamous renowne
                  His brother ſlew, to rule alone the Realme.
                  
                     Ardieus did the like for Kingdomes ſake:
                  So I my brothers life away did take.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Mempricius Iewde of life likewiſe did kill
                  His brother Manlius, for the ſame intent:
                  Theſe Princes vile were brother ſlayers ill,
                  For kingdomes ſake vnnaturally bent.
                  But reade the ſtories, thou ſhalt find it plaine
                  The bloodie wretches all were after ſlaine.
               
               
                  Euen ſo I Porrex eke, which ſlew my brother,
                  And ruled once the Britaine land with him,
                  Vnkindly kil'd was by my cruell mother,
                  Which with her maideus chopt me euery limme.
                  As I lay ſleeping on my bed at reſt,
                  Into my chamber full and whole they preſt.
               
               
                  Appointed well they were with weapons ſharpe,
                  And boldly laid on me with all their might:
                  Oft quite and cleane they thruſt me through the hart,
                  And on my corps each where their weapons light.
                  They chopt me ſmall (I ſay) as fleſh to pot,
                  And threw me out, my limbes yet trembling hot.
               
               
                  Can I complaine of this reuenge ſhe raught,
                  Sith I procur'd the ſlaughter of her ſonne?
                  Can I excuſe my ſelfe deuoid of faut,
                  Which my deare Prince and brother had fordonne?
                  No; tis too true that * who ſo ſlayes a King
                  Incurres reproch, and ſlaughter blood doth bring.
               
               
                  The traytors to their Prince haue alwaies bin
                  As ſlayers of their parents, vipers brood:
                  The killers of their brothers, friends, and kin,
                  In like degree well nigh of treaſon ſtood.
                  But what by this win they, ſaue death, defame,
                  Diſtaine their blood, and ſhroud themſelues with ſhame.
               
               
                  Example take you Princes of this land,
                  Beware of diſcord, ſhun ambitious pride:
                  By right take ye the ſcepter in your hand,
                  Let not your ſword with ſoueraignes blood be dide.
                  The mightie Ioue, that raignes eternall aye,
                  Cuts off the Kings that enter in that waye.
               
               
                  
                  Vſurpers may perſwade themſelues a while
                  There is no God, no lawes of ſacred crowne:
                  No wrong they do, no murther ſeemeth vile,
                  Nor no reſpect of Princely high renowne.
                  But if they could conſider well the caſe,
                  They would not ſo aſpire to Princes place.
               
               
                  They would example take by Lucifer,
                  
                  That was caſt downe, the father firſt of pride:
                  And all his impes how high ſo ere they were,
                  Vſurping Realmes and Kingdomes far and wide.
                  From light to darke, from throne to thrall they fell:
                  From bale to bliſſe and downe from heauen to hell.
               
               
                  Sufficient heere is ſaid to warne the wiſe,
                  For he by prudence oft forecaſts the doubt:
                  The foole is bent all warnings to deſpiſe,
                  He runneth headlong with the raſcall rout.
                  Then if thou caſt to liue at reſt a ſubiect good,
                  Touch not the Prince, crowne, ſcepter, nor his blood.
               
            
            
               HOW KING PINNAR WAS SLAINE IN BATtaile by Mulmucius Donwallo, about the yeare before Christ, 441.
               
                  
                     MIght oftentimes right ouerrunnes too faſt,
                  Right after comes and hopes to haue his owne:
                  And when he ouertakes might at the laſt;
                  Then is the truth of all the quarrell knowne.
                  Men neuer reape no other, then was ſowne,
                  If good be gaine, the better comes the crop,
                  The grape growes on the vine and not the hop.
               
               
                  
                  Of this now ſpoken, this would I inferre,
                  Men may by might a kingdome long withhold
                  Not due to them: but they far better were
                  To yeeld vnto the right, what reaſon would.
                  Good mettals bides the touch, which tries the gold,
                  When copper counted counterfeit in caſt,
                  Is deem'd but droſſe and called in at laſt.
               
               
                  I am that Pinnar, who when Brutus blood
                  Extincted was in bloodie Porrex raigne,
                  Amongſt the Princes in contention ſtood,
                  Who in the Britaine throne by right ſhould raigne
                  Mongſt whom by might a part I did obtaine,
                  That part of Albion call'd Logria hight,
                  I did long time vſurpe againſt all right.
               
               
                  
                     Stater who ſtept into the Scottiſh throne,
                  And Rudacke, that vſurpt the Cambrian crowne
                  Their minds to mine did frame and ioyn'd in one,
                  To keepe the Corniſh Prince ſtout Cloten downe,
                  Twixt whom and vs in fighting, for renowne
                  Faire Ladie Albion Europes wondred Ile,
                  Rob'd of her beautie was, alas the while.
               
               
                  Duke Cloten, though a man of worthie praiſe,
                  Who claim'd the crowne as due to him by right:
                  Could not preuaile till death did end his daies,
                  His ſonne Mulmucius that vndaunted Knight
                  Purſu'd his fathers claime with all his might,
                  And meeting vs in many a bloodie field,
                  At length in manly fight did make vs yeeld.
               
               
                  He Lion-like himſelfe with his tall troope
                  Of nimble Corniſh met vs on the way,
                  And to his conquering arme did cauſe vs ſtoope,
                  The price of treaſon I with blood did pay,
                  My wrong deem'd right appear'd in my decay.
                  Who ſo by violence ſcales the throne of State,
                  Seldome ſits ſure, but falles by violent fate.
               
            
            
               
               HOW KING STATER OF SCOTLAND was ſlaine by Mulmucius Donwallo, about the yeare before Christ, 441.
               
                  
                     DEſiſt not in hiſtories truly to tell
                  The fall of vſurpers the mirrours of pride.
                  Recite of our treaſons, and how that we fell,
                  Intruders vntruſtie the Realme for to guide:
                  Of wit and of reaſon reckleſſe and wide,
                  That tooke ſo vpon vs to rule all the land,
                  No Princes preſum'd yet with ſcepter in hand.
               
               
                  How ſtately I Stater of Scotland the King,
                  Did beare me full ſtoutly when I had the crowne:
                  And what a great armie of Scots I did bring,
                  Againſt Lord Donwallo, of noble renowne.
                  I deemed dame Fortune would neuer ſo frowne,
                  Who made me a Prince, that kingdome my pray,
                  Of late but a ſubiect and ſimple of ſway.
               
               
                  But heere now behold how ſteadie the ſtate
                  Of climbers aloft is aboue their degree,
                  And how they do fall from fortune to fate,
                  Example are ſuch as my fellow and me.
                  The fruit giues a taſte of the ſap of the tree,
                  The ſeed of the herbe, the grape of the vine:
                  The worke wrayes the man, ſeeme he neuer ſo fine.
               
               
                  For when I had leuied an armie to fight,
                  I ioyned with Pinnar, my power to preuaile:
                  And Rudacke of Wales came eke with his might,
                  
                     Mulmucius Donwallo the King to aſſaile.
                  Our purpoſe the Prince by prowes did quaile,
                  Which came out of Corne wall, vs vanquiſht in field,
                  Our ſouldiers were ſlaughterd, or forced to yeeld.
               
               
                  
                  O fortune I blame thee, my ſelfe more vn wiſe:
                  Thou gau'ſt me a kingdome, with life I it loſt.
                  My ſouldiers were killed before mine owne eies,
                  Or forced to yeeld, or abandon the coaſt.
                  I need not of honor or dignitie boaſt,
                  Or tell of my triumphes, or crake of my crowne:
                  * The vaunt of vſurpers is void of renowne.
               
            
            
               HOW KING RVDACKE OF WALES WAS ſlaine by Mulmucius Donwallo about the yeare before Christ, 441.
               
                  
                     RVde are the reuelles royaltie that rape,
                  Reſtleſſe the raignes of rebels in the robe,
                  Reck leſſe the rage where crueltie doth ſcrape,
                  Roundneſſe eſteem'd but little of the globe,
                  No man ambitious prudent with the probe,
                  Crownerape accounted but cunning and skill,
                  Bloodſhead a blockehouſe to beate away ill.
               
               
                  The rudeneſſe of rebels reaching the crowne,
                  May be compar'd to Bladhuds fond diuice.
                  Better ſit ſtill then fall ſo far adowne,
                  By my miſhaps let other men be wiſe.
                  My ſelfe of climbing haue pai'd well the price,
                  That rudely in throne my ſelfe did inſtall
                  Aloft, not regarding how low I might fall.
               
               
                  When Britaine was reſtleſſe, wanting a King,
                  (For Forrex hight and Porrex both were ſlaine)
                  The land many peeres ambitious did wring,
                  Endeuouring each the Kingdome to gaine.
                  The heires to forſake it wrong did conſtraine,
                  The ſubiects were armed, we nobles did ſtriue,
                  At length we amongſt vs diuiſion contriue.
               
               
                  
                  Then reckleſſe we were when all was at reſt,
                  And each had a kingdome allotted his part:
                  The vice of the ſubiects daily increaſt,
                  And iuſtice and right were laid quite apart.
                  The lawes ouerlaſhed by couine and craft,
                  And we that did gouerne did winke at this geare:
                  The worſer thereby, our faithfull friends were.
               
               
                  The ball that dame Fortune emparteth of bliſſe
                  Is golden to gaze on, but voluble round:
                  If once of your handfaſt in holding you miſſe,
                  Away then it roleth, and you are on ground.
                  Of watchers thereon ſo many abound,
                  And catchers thereat, with ſnatching therefore,
                  That if once you leeſe it, you catch it no more.
               
               
                  A Chirurgian that taketh a wound for to cure,
                  If skilfull and carefull he ſearcheth it furſt:
                  The ſea-man doth ſound to take the depth ſure,
                  By wiſdome well taught for feare of the worſt.
                  But our vile ambition, blind, blockiſh, accurſt,
                  Not prouing the ſore, nor reckoning the ſound,
                  Our ſhips and our ſcience we ſinke and confound.
               
               
                  Ambition out ſearcheth to glorie the greece,
                  The ſtaire to eſtate, the graple of grace:
                  But in her is hid of perill a peece,
                  Which all our attempts doth dimme and deface.
                  We do enioy her vaine ioyes but a ſpace,
                  Short, brittle as glaſſe: falſe faire giuing light:
                  Not golden, though glittring braue in the ſight.
               
               
                  For when ſhe hath brought vs vnto the throne,
                  And Fortune hath fraught vs with honor at fill:
                  Then there to ſit ſtedie and rule all alone
                  We racke our deuices, and ſend with our skill.
                  We cut off occurſions; we prole, pole, and pill:
                  We bolſter, we band out, to bribe, baniſh, ſlay
                  The pillers of prudence that ſtand in our way.
               
               
                  
                  Our race is then reſtles, our ſleeping vnſound:
                  Our waking is warfare, our walking hath woe:
                  Our talking is truſtles, our cares doe abound:
                  Our fauners deemd faithfull, and friendſhippe a foe.
                  Which troubles our fancies ſo toſt to and froo,
                  That ſcarcely wee neuer inioy any reſt
                  Tormented, whom Fortune exalted and bleſt.
               
               
                  This thing can I witneſſe what troubles enſue.
                  What cares doe vs compas enhaunſed aloft:
                  I therefore wiſh rebels to take better view
                  Of the falles of iutruders, recorded ſo oft.
                  Who climeth ſo high his fall is not ſoft.
                  If once hee doe ſtagger or falter aſide,
                  He cannot recouer the reſt for to guide.
               
               
                  When I who with others did thinke my ſelfe ſure,
                  Here ruled the realme, there fell out a flawe:
                  
                     Donwallo did ſeeke the Crowne to procure,
                  Alleaging a title thereto by the lawe.
                  Who, when to field our powers we did draw,
                  Came ſtraight with an hoaſt prepared to fight,
                  With ſword for to trie out whoſe title was right.
               
               
                  Our number was great, our title vniuſt:
                  Our conſciences guilty, our ſoudiers agaſt:
                  
                     Donwallo with honour had ſouldiers of truſt:
                  And Fortune was friendly to them as they paſt.
                  They ſlew of our men by manhood full faſt,
                  Or forſt them to flie: in the field wee were faine
                  T'oppoſe them (poore Princes) and ſo we were ſlaine.
               
               
                  Firſt Pinnar, then Stater, I Rudacke likewiſe
                  At laſt was with number oppreſſed diſpatcht.
                  Let Lordings beware how aloft they doe riſe,
                  By Princes and commons their climing is watcht.
                  No ſooner they haue at the ſcepter once ſnatcht,
                  But guilty themſelues they deeme worthy to die,
                  And Gods powerfull iuſtice ſuch ſentence doth hie.
               
            
            
               
               HOW THE NOBLE King Brennus, after many triumphant victories, at the ſiege of Delphos in Greece ſlew himſelfe, about the yeare before Christ, 375.
               
                  
                     AMongſt the noble martiall worthy men,
                  Renowned farre, victorious great of fame,
                  Though Authors ſound my praiſe: eftſoones agen
                  Amongſt the Britaine Princes write the ſame.
                  I am that Britaine once that Brennus had to name:
                  My facts, exploits in warre, my conqueſts life and end
                  Doe write as I recite, when time doth leaſure lend.
               
               
                  The mightie Monarch of this noble Ile
                  
                     Mulmucius who with conquering blade did free
                  The Britans troubled ſtate from tyrants vile,
                  Was father both to Belinus and me.
                  His noble acts and lawes commended bee.
                  This Belinus (mine elder brother) was his heire,
                  And Queene Corwenna was our mother wiſe and faire.
               
               
                  When after him my brother had the crowne,
                  Hee was content to make me eke a king:
                  He gaue mee Albany, where with renowne
                  I rulde a while by Iuſtice euery thing.
                  But at the laſt ambition made me bring
                  An army thence, againſt my brother for to fight:
                  Which rather ought t'haue honord him with homage right.
               
               
                  When Belinus perceiued mee approach
                  Vnto his Realme, an army hee addreſt:
                  Hee warned me I ſhould not ſeeke t'incroach
                  That was not mine, for hee was ready preſt
                  Me to repell: hee wild mee bee at reſt.
                  I marched on, the armies met, wee fearcely fought:
                  My ſouldiers ſlaine, to ſaue my ſelfe by flight I fought.
               
               
                  
                  To Norway then, I fled for ſuccour hence,
                  Where good Elſingus reignde the gentle King:
                  I told him what I was, and eke of whence,
                  Deſirde his aide, me home againe to bring.
                  And he not only graunted me this thing,
                  But eke his daughter Samye faire to bee my wife,
                  With me in Albany to leade a Princely life.
               
               
                  But while we were prouiding ſhips and men,
                  The fame abroad of my returne was ſpread:
                  And Guthlake that was King of Denmarke then,
                  Prouided with a nauie mee forlead.
                  His eie on Samyes beautie had ſo fed,
                  That for her ſake he muſt perforce my ſhips forlay,
                  By force of armes to beare the Lady faire away.
               
               
                  And when our nauies met, hee wilde me yeelde
                  This Lady ſtraight, or elſe defend the cauſe:
                  A thing (quoth I) requeſted erſt but ſeelde,
                  Againſt of Gods and men the ſacred lawes.
                  It hath not erſt bene heard'mongſt wiſe men ſawes,
                  That any King ſhould claime the like by ſtrife,
                  Or make aſſault by wrong to winne a Princes wife.
               
               
                  From words to fight we fell on either ſide,
                  But on his ſide the conqueſt did appeare:
                  I yeelded her that liſted ſcarce abide,
                  For ſhe to him before did fauour beare.
                  By tempeſt then our nauies ſeuered were,
                  And he perforce by ſtorme on ſhores of Britaine caſt,
                  For tribute hoſtage gaue to Beline ere he paſt.
               
               
                  At ſeas turmoilde fiue daies with raging winde,
                  Sore wearied with the fight, the foile, and loſſe:
                  And caſting with my ſelfe in woefull minde,
                  The cauſe why ſo God Neptune did me toſſe:
                  And why falſe fortune my attempt did croſſe:
                  I made a vowe to kill the man that cauſde me flye,
                  Or with my bloud, the kingdome all from him to buy.
               
               
                  
                  The Seas alaid, at laſt my ſhips I found,
                  And rigde againe, at ſeas we met our foes
                  The wandring Danes, where we beſet them round
                  In warlike ſort, we did them all incloſe,
                  Euen ſo the wheele of Lady Fortune goes,
                  Abiects, caſts downe, turnes topſie toruie quight,
                  The men of late extold with all her maine and might.
               
               
                  Theſe ſhips my wants in ſome reſpect ſupplied
                  With tackle, armour, vitailes and the reſt:
                  And ſo to Britaine land apace I hide,
                  For kingdome loſt to make againe requeſt:
                  Or elſe by might and force away to wreſt
                  The ſcepter from my brother Beline, and the crowne,
                  Which lay that time by North at Euerwike the towne.
               
               
                  To land I came, and threatned Beline ſore,
                  But he an armie did with ſpeed addreſſe:
                  Which met me ſtraight at th' entry on the ſhore,
                  Our battailes ioind and fought with valiantneſſe.
                  But I was put in th' end to ſuch diſtreſſe
                  To ſhips I flew, and tooke a few with me beſide,
                  And hoiſing ſailes, for hap to Callia ſtrands I hide.
               
               
                  Arriued there, I trauaild long to ſee
                  The nature of the Countrey and the men:
                  And for my purpoſe I diſpoſed mee,
                  To pleaſe the Princes and the people then,
                  In hope to ſee my countrey once agen.
                  To win my noble kingdome, or to wreacke the wrong
                  That I ſuſtaind exilde from natiue ſoile ſo long.
               
               
                  When I had tolde the great miſhaps I had
                  Vnto the Peeres of Fraunce, ſome aide to craue:
                  I could obtaine no ſuccour me to glad,
                  Nor men, munition, ſhips, ne vittailes haue.
                  I gate me thence to Duke Seginus graue,
                  Of Prouence then the Prince, renowned noble farre,
                  For prudence prompt in peace, and wiſdome great in warre.
               
               
                  
                  This worthy Duke receiued me with ioy,
                  (For of afflicted wights he had remorce)
                  He heard me oft declare the great anoy
                  That I had felt, and of my brothers force.
                  How Guthlacke did my wife and me diuorce:
                  The broiles at Sea, the toiles I taken had at land:
                  Which neuer could the face of Fortunes foile withſtand.
               
               
                  Thou Britaine tall (quoth he) I rue thy fate
                  Thou noble Prince (for ſo thou art in ſhowe)
                  If I could now reſtore thee thine eſtate,
                  Thou ſhouldſt perceiue what fauour I thee owe.
                  T'is Fortunes vſe t'exalt and ouerthrowe.
                  My counſaile then is this, expect her grace a while,
                  Till where ſhee frownes ſhee turne her friendly face and ſmile.
               
               
                  So in his court he did me intertaine,
                  Where long I liu'd and bare my ſelfe full well:
                  Sometimes to play the captaine I was faine,
                  To win ſome praiſe, as cauſes did compell,
                  For when his ſubiects either did rebell,
                  Or confines made inroads, to ſpoile or pray his land,
                  Then appointed was to take the warre in hand,
               
               
                  In armour fearce, and ſtout, and ſtrong was I,
                  God Mars me gaue a ſtearne and ſtormie looke:
                  With feates of armes by land or ſeas to try,
                  Experience taught me what I vndertooke.
                  No paine, no toile nor daunger I forſooke,
                  That might content the noble Duke of Sauois minde,
                  Whoſe bounteous grace, for aye my loue to him did bind.
               
               
                  In peace full milde I was, of comely grace,
                  And wiſe in talke, as time occaſion gaue:
                  And (though I ſay't) I had a Princely face,
                  I could both hunt and hawke, and court it braue.
                  Eke Fortunes paſt had made me ſage and graue:
                  More heedy all attempts to proſecute with skill:
                  Raſhnes (by poofe I found) incurs the greateſt ill.
               
               
                  
                  When Duke Seginus ſaw my humble hart,
                  A regall Britaine Prince, of royall bloud,
                  How I emploide my ſelfe and all my art,
                  Mine actiue feates with grace and prowes good
                  To ſerue, and quaile his foes that him withſtood:
                  He gaue his Daughter vnto me, a peerleſſe dame,
                  With her his Dukedome after him to guide the ſame.
               
               
                  By her (when hee was deade) I Sauoye had,
                  A countrey fertile, famous for the ſoile.
                  With liberall gifts the ſouldiers hearts I glad.
                  To winne the reſts good will I tooke ſome toile,
                  By banquets, iewels, gifts, or warlike broile:
                  Still vſing all the meanes t'obeiſance thē to moue,
                  Eke all the wayes that might allure them me to loue.
               
               
                  And ſetled ſo in honour great at reſt,
                  Without the feare of forraine foes, or nie:
                  I muſed what for Britaine warres was beſt,
                  Which way I might againe my quarell trie.
                  Such reſtles heades haue they that ſit on hie.
                  O poore eſtate, how bleſt were thou that ſitſt below,
                  How happy, ſafe and ſure, if thou thy ſtate couldſt know?
               
               
                  A councell called for the ſame intent,
                  I told the Lords my purpoſe for the warre:
                  How I to haue my kingdome here was bent.
                  They all agreed to leuy neere and farre,
                  Such ſouldiers good and captaines ſtout that were.
                  They offered ſeruice eke themſelues to fare with mee,
                  To winne the crowne by ſword, or els reuenged bee.
               
               
                  Concluding thus, a powre prouided was,
                  Munition good, and vitailes, ſhipping ſtrong:
                  On voiage ſo with hoiſed ſailes wee paſſe,
                  We cut the ſeas, and came apace along
                  To Britaine ſhores: In hope to wrecke the wrong
                  That oft before was done, or winne the land againe:
                  Whence whilome twice I was to fly with daunger faine.
               
               
                  
                  When we were landed here, I Herolds ſent
                  To claime my Kingdome at his hands, my right:
                  I bad them, if he were not ſo content,
                  To ſound defiance, fire, and ſword, and fight.
                  But of my meſſage hee eſteemed light.
                  Hee brought an army ſtrong, appointed was the day
                  Of battaile, then to try who beares the Crowne away.
               
               
                  This when our mother ſawe Corwenna wiſe,
                  That mortall warres we wage for kingdome ſake:
                  Shee with her ſelfe did many waies deuiſe,
                  A peace betweene her Martiall ſonnes to make,
                  And with the Lords full oft did counſell take.
                  Yet all in vaine: there could no parle of peace preuaile,
                  But on we marcht agreed each other to aſſaile.
               
               
                  The feelds once pight, and time of battaile come,
                  In place where ſhould bee tride this quarell ſad,
                  In armour eke the ſouldiers all and ſome,
                  With all the force that might ſo ſoone bee had,
                  We captaines vſing ſpeech our men to glad,
                  T'incourage them with promiſe proud of laſting fame:
                  Tweene th' armies Corwenna ſtood that noble dame.
                  And thus ſhee ſpake:
               
               
                  "O out alas my ſonnes what meanes this broile?
                  "Wil you in field my tender bowels harme?
                  "What furies force you thus t'unkindly toile?
                  "What meane your men for ſlaughter here to ſwarme?
                  "Did not this wombe once both incloſe you warme?
                  "And cannot now all Britaine hold you brethren twaine,
                  "But needes by one of you his brother muſt be ſlaine?
               
               
                  "Cannot the feare of Ioues immortall hate,
                  "Your mothers teares, nor woefull wailings moue?
                  "Nor naked breſts you ſuckt your malice ſlake?
                  "Nor cauſe t'imbrace the ſacred lore of loue?
                  "O euerlaſting Ioue that liu'ſt aboue!
                  "Then I proteſt ere you doe fight the feelde this day,
                  "You ſhall in field (vngratefull ſonnes) your wofull mother ſlay,
               
               
                  
                  "Betweene you both you ſhall bereaue my life.
                  "What woes (my ſonnes) aliue ſhall I ſuſtaine,
                  "When I ſhall after this ambitious ſtrife,
                  "So many ſee of both your ſubiects ſlaine?
                  "And you with brothers bloud your ſwords diſtaine.
                  "I ſhall (I ſay) in th' end of fight take woefull vewe,
                  "Of that my ſonne, which this my ſonne his brother ſlewe.
               
               
                  "O rather now, my ſonnes, leaue off to iar,
                  "Lay weapons both aſide, take truce a while:
                  "If you doe loue to ſpend your time in war,
                  "Deſtroy not here at home your natiue Ile:
                  "The preſent cauſe and quarell is too vile.
                  "Ioine friendly both your armies faith, and firme the ſame,
                  "To take ſome conqueſt great in hand of laſting fame.
               
               
                  "Therein you may with greater honour deale,
                  "By this you ſhall defame your ſelues for aye.
                  "Thereby you may enlarge your publique weale,
                  "By this your ſelues and it ſhall quite decay.
                  "Thereby you ſhall mine age with honour ſtay.
                  "Thereby you ſhall moſt like your noble father bee:
                  "Which ere he wore the crowne did conquer kingdomes three.
               
               
                  "Once for my ſake then ioine yet hands againe,
                  "Let me enioy once both before I die.
                  "I would to ſee you friends my ſonnes bee faine,
                  "And hope I haue you will not this denie.
                  "I aſke a thing ſhall neuer hurt perdy.
                  "For if you now ſurceaſe, and loue as brethren well,
                  "Then all the world of this your concord aye ſhall tell.
               
               
                  "And turning then to me thus wiſe ſhe ſaid:
                  "Thou knoweſt, my ſonne, how twice thou haſt been foild:
                  "Thou twice to ſcape with life waſt well apaide,
                  "And ſince full farre to countries ſtraunge haſt toild.
                  "If now thou ſhouldſt of life and all bee ſpoilde,
                  "(When liue thou maiſt in Princely ſort with peereleſſe ioy)
                  "What tongue can tell thy mothers griefe and great anoy.
               
               
                  
                  "I heare thou haſt in France a Dukedome good,
                  "Of ſubiects good thou haſt an armie heere:
                  "Thou haſt a wife that came of noble blood,
                  "Thou need'ſt at home no foes at all to feare.
                  "What mean'ſt thou then ſuch mortall hate to beare,
                  "Againſt my ſonne thy brother heere, which gaue to thee
                  "His kingdome halfe, the noble land of Albany?
               
               
                  "Sith thine ambition firſt procur'd the ſtrife,
                  "Which did'ſt in armour riſe againſt thy King,
                  "Againſt thy brother lou'd thee more then life,
                  "Thou did'ſt thy ſubiects his againſt him bring,
                  "Think'ſt thou it was a wiſe or worthie thing?
                  "If not: thou haſt good cauſe thy treaſon all confeſſe:
                  "And though he draue thee hence, to loue him ne're the leſſe.
               
               
                  "Thou ſhalt therefore ſubmit thy ſelfe to me,
                  "And take a truce, a peace I will conclude:
                  "Thy brother eke ſhall ſo contented be,
                  "No quarrels old ſhall be againe renew'd.
                  "Theſe broiles haue oft my cheekes with teares bedew'd,
                  "My heart is rent, my hope bereau'd, my ioyes are gone,
                  "My life is loſt, if you conioyne not both in one.
               
               
                  "Then turning vnto Belinus ſhe ſpake:
                  "My noble ſonne (quoth ſhe) thou twice haſt quail'd
                  "Thy brothers power, and mad'ſt him twice forſake
                  "His natiue land, which I haue oft bewail'd.
                  "What though thou haue ſo oft before preuail'd,
                  "Think'ſt thou againe the third time eke to win the field?
                  "Or art thou ſure to ſlay my ſonne, or force him yeeld?
               
               
                  "What glorie canſt thou get thereby in th' end?
                  "Will not the world of your foule ſlaughters tell?
                  "Will not they all that liue, ſtill diſcommend
                  "The man that did his owne deare brother quell?
                  
                     "Mempricius ſhamefull acts are knowne too well,
                  "And Porrex Britaines both, their noble brethren ſlew,
                  "Confounded after both, examples good for you.
               
               
                  
                  "Now further this againe to both I ſay:
                  "Do not you rue theſe noble ſouldiers good?
                  "Do not you ſee how many you ſhall ſlay?
                  "Haue you no care to ſhed their guiltleſſe blood?
                  "The ſtate of tyrants neuer ſtable ſtood,
                  "By bloodſhed they do build, and prop their tottering State,
                  "Raigne, liue and die deſpiſde, in neuer dying hate.
               
               
                  "You noble men, in briefe I ſpeake to you,
                  "And vnto all the Captaines of your bands:
                  "And eke to all you ſouldiers good and true,
                  "Which haue the ſway of bloodſhed in your hands.
                  "Conſider well the ſtate of both our lands:
                  "You ſhall decreaſe your force, by diſcord and by ſtrife,
                  "Diſtaine your bloods, and reaue Corwennas of her life.
               
               
                  "Then if that either Ioues immortall ire,
                  "(Which euer hated ſlaughters ſuch as theſe)
                  "Or feare of Plutoes euerlaſting fire,
                  "Or dangers threatned both by land and ſeas,
                  "Or mothers mind (which both you ought to pleaſe)
                  "Or countries loue, or peace (which all are bound t'imbrace)
                  "May ought perſwade, then let my iuſt requeſt haue place.
               
               
                  "If not, loe heere my naked breaſt (quoth ſhe)
                  "Which once you both did ſucke in tender age.
                  "Let both your ſwords in theſe firſt bathed be,
                  "Perhaps this ſlaughter ſhall your thirſts aſſwage.
                  "It ſhall be counted euen as ſmall outrage
                  "To ſlay your mother pleading for a righteous peace,
                  "As wage the warres which gods commands you to ſurceaſe.
               
               
                  Much more ſhe ſaid which were too long to tell:
                  And proffred forth to ſwords her naked breſt.
                  But when we both conſidered had full well
                  Her wofull teares, her wiſe and graue requeſt,
                  They ſo to peace our hautie hearts addreſt,
                  We laid our weapons downe: we met, and did imbrace,
                  All warre was ſet aſide, and Ladie peace tooke place.
               
               
                  
                  We ioyned hands, our captaines did the like,
                  And eke the ſouldiers linked all in loue:
                  There was not one that did our truce miſlike,
                  Our peace did all to ioy and maruell moue.
                  With many triumphes feates of armes we proue,
                  Our ſubiects all reioyce, in ſongs we ſound Corwennas praiſe,
                  Her fame to skies, aloft with many ſhouts and cries they raiſe.
               
               
                  The Galles and Senons then ſuppoſing me
                  In Britaine from my Dukedome hard at fight,
                  Thought great occaſion offred them to be,
                  And ſet themſelues in armes and order right.
                  My ſubiects eke of Sauoy day and night
                  They did entice, perſwade, ſolicite and conſtraine,
                  To chuſe another Duke at home with them to raigne.
               
               
                  Whereof when I heard tell in Britaine Ile,
                  Eke when my brother Beline thereof knew,
                  We laid aſide our ſports and plaies a while,
                  And of our ſouldiers tooke a muſter new.
                  Of both our hoaſts we choſe a noble crew.
                  We paſt the ſeas, as brethren ought, in concord knit:
                  And both our force in one to conquer France we fit.
               
               
                  Without reſiſtance much we ſpoil'd the land
                  At th' entrie in, and after many fights
                  We conquer'd all the Realme, my foes we fand,
                  Which were in armes ſtout, valiant, noble wights.
                  By ſword they fell, or flew before our ſights.
                  The Germans force, likewiſe that did them ſuccour ſend,
                  We made to fall therefore, and to our ſcepters bend.
               
               
                  Three hundred thouſand we in armour had,
                  An armie great renown'd Europa through:
                  The Kings and Princes of our peace were glad,
                  We were in fight ſo puiſſant fierce and rough.
                  Munition, victuals, money eke enough,
                  We had of tributes ſtore, of duties in that came:
                  Through all the world of Brenne and Beline flew the fame.
               
               
                  
                  To vs came ſouldiers out of many parts,
                  And captaines worthie for the fame of warre,
                  Of fierce Bellona braue we had the arts,
                  Whereof we wanne the praiſe both neere and farre.
                  But not with this we ſo contented are.
                  As Hercules to ſcale the Alpes did firſt contend:
                  So we againe (a worke of toile) the cloudie Alpes aſcend.
               
               
                  The craggie mountaines that do touch the skies,
                  With aged heads are euer white with ſnow,
                  The ſeas allow do rore, whence vapours riſe,
                  And from the hilles great ſtreames of waters floe.
                  The pathes ſo ſtrict to paſſe which few do goe.
                  The ice, ſnow, cold, clouds, rombling ſtormes, and ſights aboue,
                  Are able conſtant hearts with doubtfull feare to moue.
               
               
                  For as you go, ſometimes y'ar faine to reatch
                  And hang by hands, to wend aloft the way:
                  And then on buttocks downe another breatch,
                  With elbowes and with heeles your ſelfe to ſtay.
                  Downe vnder well behold the ſtreames you may,
                  And waters wilde which from the mountaines falling flow:
                  Ore head the rocks hang threatning death to them below.
               
               
                  When we theſe Alpes had paſt with dangers great,
                  To Cluſium towne in Tuſcane land we came:
                  The Tuſcans as we droue our heards of neat.
                  Did iſſue out to intercept the ſame.
                  Ambaſſage to the Romans eke they frame,
                  To helpe them 'gainſt the Galles (ſo vs they counted there)
                  Becauſe I was of France, and Frenchmen with vs were.
               
               
                  The Romans then, becauſe that our ſucceſſe
                  Reported was to them in warres before,
                  Fearing their owne eſtate could do no leſſe,
                  But aide their neighbours now at need the more.
                  To treate of peace they ſent to vs therefore.
                  We anſwer'd we deſir'd but ſpace wherein to dwell,
                  Becauſe our peopled countrie could not hold vs well.
               
               
                  
                  But they forgetting quite of armes the lawe,
                  Did arme themſelues, ambaſſadours full ſtoute:
                  With Cluſians came to bring vs all in awe,
                  Without reſpect of any further doute.
                  Whereon, the ſiege from Cluſium walles about
                  We raiſed ſtraight, at Rome we ſounded loud alarmes,
                  To wreake reuenge for breach done gainſt the law of armes.
               
               
                  Yet firſt we thought it beſt ambaſſage ſend,
                  To haue truce breakers ſuch deliuered vs
                  By law of armes as ought no weapons wend,
                  And yet againſt the lawes came armed thus.
                  They ſaid we were a people barbarous,
                  They neither puniſh would nor yeeld thoſe Romanes good,
                  But honour them: they came of Fabius noble blood.
               
               
                  Full ſwiftly on we marched then in haſte,
                  And towards Rome with all our power we hide:
                  At Alia flood gan forty thouſand taſte
                  Of Romanes that vs met what might betide.
                  We ſlew them faſt, the reſt durſt not abide.
                  We had the ſpoile, to Rome we came, which we poſſeſſe:
                  A thouſand waight of gold the Romanes paid for peace.
               
               
                  Pannonia eke with broiles of warres we tame,
                  And many yeares we kept them vnder yoke:
                  The Princes all about that heard our fame
                  Deſired peace, not daring vs prouoke.
                  We Britaines made Europa all to ſmoke.
                  To part our armies then in twaine we tooke no doubt,
                  And ſeuerall conqueſts tooke in hand, as captaines ſtout.
               
               
                  To Macedonie Belme tooke the way,
                  Where raigned Ptolome the tyrant fell,
                  Which did his ſiſters ſonnes vniuſtly ſlay
                  Before their mothers face, and her expell,
                  
                     Arſinoë that vſde him earſt ſo well:
                  Though by the gods he ſware to take her to his wife,
                  And loue her ſonnes, and here he them bereft of life.
               
               
                  
                  Euen ſo that wicked King at firſt refuſde
                  To purchaſe peace with price, or hoſtage ſend,
                  That had before the faith of Gods abuſde,
                  Was deſtinate to haue a noughtie end.
                  Let Princes well beware what they pretend.
                  * Who for a crowne breakes faith, and murders foule commits,
                  He will be ſure to fall, on ſliperie throne he ſits.
               
               
                  Our cuſtome was that time to ſend each where
                  Our Hearolds offering peace for tribute gold:
                  But from King Ptolome theſe newes we heare,
                  No peace he crau'd, no tribute pay he would,
                  Ne friendſhip crau'd (as he the Hearold told)
                  Except our weapons laid adowne we would ſubmit,
                  No arguments of peace he would admit.
               
               
                  King Beline ſmil'd to heare the heedleſſe King
                  Raſh witted, ſo ſelfe-wild, and after this
                  The Dardanes offered twentie thouſand bring
                  Of ſouldiers arm'd for aide, to ioyne with his.
                  Quoth he, not loſt all Macedonie is.
                  If we once conquer'd by Alexanders hand,
                  Need we the Dardanes aide, theſe ſtrangers to withſtand?
               
               
                  We haue (quoth he) ſome ſouldiers ſonnes of thoſe
                  Which ſeru'd in pay with them that vanquiſht all:
                  And for our ſelues we nothing feare our foes,
                  Although our armie ſeeme to Dardane ſmall.
                  This when th' ambaſſadours related all
                  To good King Dardane, then this noble Realme (quoth he)
                  By this yong princox pride, will all diſpoiled be.
               
               
                  With that alarme they crie, and armies ioyne,
                  Where Britaines ſlay the Macedonian crew:
                  And haue for ſpoile their victuals, armour, coyne,
                  Tooke Ptolomey their King, and him they ſlew.
                  His head aboue the campe they beare for view
                  On ſpeare, to make the reſt of Greekes in doubt to ſtand,
                  Before they enterpriſe to take ſuch warres in hand.
               
               
                  
                  On this the fame of Britaines farre was ſpred,
                  All Macedonie held their countrey ſpoil'd:
                  To Alexander (erſt their armies led)
                  And vnto Philip, Princes neuer foil'd,
                  As vnto Gods they crie in warres tormoil'd.
                  O helpe (quoth they) our countrey falles, we are vndone,
                  Without your powerful aides: whoſe acts the world haue won.
               
               
                  But Sosthenes a Macedonian ſtout,
                  When as the Britaines bathed in their bliſſe,
                  Gate vnto him a warlike worthie rout,
                  And ſet againe on Beline there and his,
                  Put him to foile for all his worthineſſe.
                  For which the ſouldiers all did chuſe him for their King,
                  But them as captaine he againſt their foes would bring.
               
               
                  When this in Greece I heard, and their ſucceſſe
                  Firſt of the field they won, and follie then
                  Enricht with ſpoiles, giuen all to idleneſſe,
                  Which were before approued valiant men:
                  I ſound retreate, and backwards gate agen,
                  With ſeuen ſcore and ten thouſand footmen for the fight,
                  And fifteene thouſand horſe, which made a goodly ſight.
               
               
                  With theſe appointed well my friends to aide
                  The Britaines good, and Beline in that caſe,
                  To Macedone I martcht with vengefull blade
                  To take reuenge for Belines late diſgrace.
                  Whereto when as we came, in little ſpace
                  We wan the field in fight, we ſpoil'd the land at will,
                  In pleaſures plung'd we had of wealth, and fame, our fill.
               
               
                  So I that had all Macedone in awe,
                  With ſpoile of mortall men was not content:
                  I paſt not of theſe conqueſts all a ſtraw,
                  The temples of the gods to ſpoile I ment,
                  And towards Delphos with mine armie went.
                  On high his temple ſtood moſt glorious to behold,
                  And god Apollos ſhrine enricht with gifts of gold.
               
               
                  
                  The rich and wealthy gods (quoth I) may lend
                  To mortall men ſome of their treaſures great:
                  They haue no neede thereof for to diſpend
                  For clothing, victuals, armour, drinke or meate.
                  But yet we muſt therefore their prieſts intreate.
                  There is enough for them, and many moe beſide,
                  Of offerings great, from Princes brought both far and wide.
               
               
                  This Delphos is on mount Parnaſſus faire
                  In Greece, well fenſt with riſing rockes about,
                  By nature plaſte aloft in pleaſant ayre,
                  So high to ſcale they neede no foes to doubt.
                  No watch, no warde to keepe the walles about.
                  So ſtrong ſteepe pendent are the rockes whereon it ſtands:
                  As not the like could ſince be made with mortall hands.
               
               
                  When in this citie ſhoutes aloude they make,
                  Or when the trumpets ſound therein is heard,
                  The Ecchoes ſhrill ſo cauſe the skies to ſhake,
                  That ſtrangers ſtaring ſtand and muſe affeard.
                  The words and tunes reſound againe ſo hard,
                  So oftentimes about from euery rocke ſo plaine,
                  As if to one that cride, one cride to him againe.
               
               
                  This made the men that came from far to maze,
                  To maruaile much, to feare and wonder ſtill:
                  And at the ſight thereof to ſtare and gaze,
                  Deuiſing oft the high and mighty hill,
                  A building founded firſt by heauenly skill
                  In citie built, and coſtly grau'd with worke of hand,
                  
                     Apolloes temple high aboue the reſt doth ſtand.
               
               
                  T'is round theater wiſe ſo braue within
                  And large aloft, without pendant vpright,
                  So high it ſeemes impoſſible to win,
                  With comely forme the gazers to delight.
                  The maieſtie whereof did them inuite
                  That choſe that ſeate, t'erect a temple in the ſame,
                  Whereof for Oracles was ſpread a wondrous ſame.
               
               
                  
                  Amid'ſt the height of this Parnaſſus mount
                  A turning way there is, and in the plaine
                  A den through rockes for deepneſſe doth ſurmount,
                  And turning vaults far in, whence anſweres vaine
                  The Prieſts receiue from ſprites to tell againe.
                  When any come for counſell there, of things to know:
                  The anſwere of deluding ſprites the Prieſts do ſhow.
               
               
                  Wherefore the Kings and peoples offerings brought,
                  From all the world and coaſts of nations far:
                  With many gifts of gold and ſiluer wrought,
                  The gold of Kings and iewels rich were there.
                  To Delphos all they run that doubtfull are.
                  This was the madnes then that mortall men bewitcht:
                  Whereby Apolloes Temple was with gold ſo inricht.
               
               
                  Lo now I tell at Delphos what I did,
                  For towards it as with my mates I went,
                  Them be of courage good nought feare Ibid,
                  With Delphos ſpoile them to reward I ment.
                  But now I askt how they would giue conſent,
                  Stout Exridane and Theſſalone I did aſſay,
                  Where it were good to ſcale, or elſe a while to ſtay.
               
               
                  The Captaines counſell was alarme to call,
                  Before the Grecians did prouide defence:
                  And ſtraight to ſcale with skill the mightie wall,
                  Before the citie knew of our pretence.
                  The ſouldiers ſtout abroad encamped thence,
                  And ſaid they muſt refreſh their wearied limbes a ſpace,
                  Vnable elſe to ſcale, or meet their foes in face.
               
               
                  The Greekes in villages to make them trip
                  Intreated them to make no ſpare of wine:
                  The Britaine ſouldiers fell thereon to ſip,
                  Forgate their feats of warre and plai'd the ſwine.
                  Againſt their captaines eke they gan repine.
                  So that full long it was or we could them perſwade
                  To flie from Bacchus boothes, and fall againe to blade.
               
               
                  
                  Of ſouldiers thouſands ſixtie fiue I had,
                  But of our foes ſcarce fourteene thouſand were:
                  The ſtately towne they ſee, their hearts to glad,
                  I bad them not at all to ſtand in feare.
                  Behold (quoth I) what doth in fight appeare,
                  Thoſe charets glittering braue, and ſtatures all of gold
                  Of ſollid maſſe, more rich then glorious to behold.
               
               
                  For on the Temple ſtood faire golden ſhapes,
                  And in the walles thereof their pictures ſhone:
                  Not one of theſe (quoth I) the Britaines ſcapes,
                  We ſouldiers ſhall poſſeſſe them euery one.
                  Let vs therefore not linger here vpon,
                  But giue th' aſſault: for heere the God Apolloes pride,
                  In price of gold, and gemmes, ſurmounts all Greece beſide.
               
               
                  We haue or this the wealth of men poſſeſt
                  (Yet worthie Princes all) of mortall men:
                  But heere the treaſures of the Gods are preſt
                  To looke for vs: ſhall we refuſe them then?
                  We ſhall not ſo be proffered oft agen.
                  Within the walles hereof are greater farre by oddes:
                  Th' attire, crownes, ſcepters, plate and garniſh of the Gods.
               
               
                  We ſound Alarame, th' aſſault the rockes aſſayes,
                  Our ſouldiers brainſicke, heedleſſe vp aſcend:
                  The Delphos men had fenſt the eaſieſt waies,
                  So that againſt the rockes our force we bend.
                  With ſtones the ſcaling Britaines downe they hend.
                  An earthquake eke by vowes the ſacrificers reare.
                  Which on my ſouldiers downe a mightie rocke did teare.
               
               
                  The ground did ſhake, and rent, and tempeſts riſe,
                  The haileſtones mightie fall, the thunders rore:
                  The lightnings flaſhing dazled all our eyes,
                  The Britaines from th' aſſault were ouerborne.
                  My ſouldiers ſlaine diſcomfit me before.
                  And I ſore wounded, foule amazde, orecome with ſmart,
                  
                     
                        •
                     'eſcape the Greekiſh ſword, did pierce my ſelfe to th' heart.
               
               
                  
                  You noble captaines now that know my facts,
                  Learne valiantly in warres the ſword to wend:
                  Let fame extoll your wiſe and warlike acts,
                  And let report your fortitude commend.
                  But let your warfares haue a wiſer end,
                  And let what Bochas writes and Higgins heere doth pen,
                  Declare what good we gate, to warre with Delphos men.
               
            
            
               HOW KING KIMARVS WAS DEVOVred by wilde beaſts the yeare before Christ, 321.
               
                  
                     NO place commends the man vnworthie praiſe.
                  No Kingly ſtate doth ſtay vp vices fall:
                  No wicked wight to woe can make delaies,
                  No loftie lookes preſerue the proud at all.
                  No brags or boaſt, no ſtature high and tall,
                  No luſtie youth, no ſwearing, ſtaring ſtout,
                  No brauerie, banding, cogging, cutting out.
               
               
                  Then what auailes to haue a Princely place,
                  A name of honor or an high degree,
                  To come by kindred of a noble race?
                  Except we princely, worthie, noble be.
                  The fruit declares the goodnes of the tree.
                  Do brag no more, of birth or linage than,
                  For vertue, grace, and manners make the man,
               
               
                  My ſelfe might brag, and firſt of all begin,
                  
                     Mulmucius made and conſtituted lawes:
                  And Belinus and Brenne his ſonnes did win
                  Such praiſe, that all the world giue them applauſe,
                  
                     Gurgunstus Readbeard with his ſober ſawes.
                  The ſonne of Beline and my Grandſire grand
                  Was fortunate, what ere he tooke in hand,
               
               
                  
                  His ſonne my grand fire Guintheline did paſſe
                  For vertues praiſe, and Martia was his wife,
                  A noble Queene that wiſe and learned was,
                  And gaue her ſelfe to ſtudie all her life,
                  Deuiſing lawes, diſcuſt the ends of ſtrife
                  Amongſt the Britaines to her endleſſe fame:
                  Her ſtatutes had of Martian lawes the name.
               
               
                  My father eke was ſober, ſage and wiſe,
                  
                     Cicilius hight, King Guintheline his ſonne:
                  Of noble Princes then my ſtocke did riſe,
                  And of a Prince of Cornwall firſt begonne.
                  But what thereby of glorie haue I wonne?
                  Can this ſuffice to anſwere eke for mee,
                  I came by parents of an high degree?
               
               
                  Or ſhall I ſay I was forſooth the King?
                  Then might I liue as lewdly as I luſt.
                  No ſure, I cannot ſo auoid the ſting
                  Of ſhame, that prickes ſuch Princes are vniuſt.
                  We rather ſhould vnto our vertues truſt.
                  For * vertue of the ancient blood or kin,
                  Doth only praiſe the men that vertuous bin.
               
               
                  And nobles only borne (of this be ſure)
                  Without the vertues of their noble race,
                  Do quite and cleane themſelues thereby obſcure,
                  And their renowne and dignities deface.
                  They do their birth and linage all deface.
                  For why, indeed they euer ought ſo well
                  In vertues graue, as titles braue excell.
               
               
                  But oft (God wot) they fare as erſt did I,
                  They thinke if once they come of Princely ſtocke,
                  Then are they placed ſafe and ſure, ſo hie
                  Aboue the reſt, as founded on a rocke.
                  Of wiſe mens warnings all they make a mocke,
                  They counſels graue, as abiectreeds, deſpiſe,
                  And count the braue, men gratious, worthie, wiſe.
               
               
                  
                  This Kingdome came to me by due diſcent,
                  For why my father was before me King:
                  But I to pleaſure all, and luſt was bent,
                  I neuer reckt of Iuſtice any thing.
                  What purpoſe I to paſſe did meane to bring,
                  That ſame t'accompliſh I with all my might
                  Endeuour'd euer, were it wrong or right.
               
               
                  I deem'd the greateſt ioyes in earthly hap,
                  I thought my pleaſures euer would abide,
                  I ſeem'd to ſit in Lady Fortunes lap,
                  I reckt not all the world, me thought, beſide.
                  I did by luſt my ſelfe and others guide,
                  Whereby the fates to worke my bane withall
                  And cut me off, thus wiſe procur'd my fall.
               
               
                  As I was alwaies bent to hunting ſtill,
                  (Yet hunting was no vice to thoſe I had)
                  When I three yeares had rul'd this Realme at will,
                  In chace a chance did make my heart full ſad.
                  Wilde cruell beaſts as deſperate and mad
                  Turn'd backe on me, as I them brought to bay,
                  And in their rage my ſinfull corps did ſlay.
               
               
                  A iuſt reward for ſo vniuſt a life,
                  No worſe a death, then I deſerued yore.
                  Such wreckes in th' end to wretches all are rife,
                  Who may and will not call for grace before.
                  My wilfull deeds were nought, what wilt thou more?
                  For wanton wildeneſſe, witleſſe, heedleſſe toyes:
                  The brutiſh beaſts bereau'd me of my ioyes.
               
            
            
               
               HOW KING MORINDVS WAS DEuoured by a monſter, the yeare before Christ. 303.
               
                  
                     LEt me likewiſe declare my facts and fall,
                  And eke recite what meanes this ſlimie glere:
                  You need not faine ſo quaint a looke at all,
                  Although I ſeeme ſo fulſome euery where.
                  This blade in bloodie hand, which I do beare,
                  And all his gore bemingled with this glew,
                  In witneſſe I the dreadfull monſter ſlew.
               
               
                  Then marke my tale: beware of raſhnes vile,
                  I am Morindus, once a Britaine King,
                  On whom long time did Ladie Fortune ſmile,
                  Till to her wheeles ſteepe top ſhe did me bring.
                  My fame both far and neare ſhe made to ring,
                  And eke my praiſe exalted ſo to skie,
                  In all my time more famous none then I.
               
               
                  Some ſay I was, by birth, a baſtard bace,
                  Begotten of the Prince his concubine:
                  But what I was declared well my grace,
                  My fortitude, and ſtature Princely mine.
                  My father eke that came of Princely line
                  King Danius gaue not ſo bace degree,
                  Nor yet the noble Britaines vnto mee.
               
               
                  For feats of armes and warlike points I paſt,
                  In courage ſtout there liu'd not then my peere:
                  I made them all that knew my name agaſt,
                  And hea
                        •
                      thow great mine enterpriſes were,
                  To ſhrinke and ſlinke, and ſhift aſide for feare.
                  All which at length did me ſuch glorie bring,
                  My father dead, the Britaines made me King.
               
               
                  
                  But ſee how blind we are, when Fortune ſmiles,
                  How ſenceleſſe we, when dignities increaſe:
                  We euer vſe our ſelues diſcreetly whiles
                  We little haue, and loue to liue in peace.
                  Subiected thoughts doth wicked pride ſuppreſſe:
                  We vſe no rigour, rancour, rapine, ſuch
                  As after, when we haue our willes too much.
               
               
                  For whiles that I a ſubiect was, no King,
                  While I had nothing, but my facts alone:
                  I ſtudied ſtill, in euery kind of thing
                  To ſerue my Prince, and vnderfang his fone:
                  To vſe his ſubiects friendly euerychone:
                  And for them all aduentures ſuch to take,
                  As might them all my perſon fauour make.
               
               
                  But when I once attained had the Crowne,
                  I waxed cruell, tyrannous and fell:
                  I had no longer minde of my renowne,
                  I vſde my ſelfe too ill, the truth to tell.
                  O bace degree in happie caſe full well!
                  Which art not puft with pride, vaine-glorie, hate,
                  But art beneath, content to bide thy fate.
               
               
                  For I aloft, when once my heate was in,
                  Not raind by reaſon, ruled all by might:
                  Ne prudence reckt, right, ſtrength, or meane a pin,
                  But with my friends, in anger all would fight.
                  I ſtroke, kild, ſlew who euer were in ſight,
                  Without reſpect, remorce, reproofe, regard,
                  And like a mad man in my furie far'd,
               
               
                  I deem'd my might and fortitude was ſuch,
                  That I was able thereby conquer all:
                  High kingdomes ſeat encreaſt my pompe ſo much,
                  My pride me thought impoſſible to fall.
                  But God confounds our proud deuices all,
                  And brings that thing wherein we moſt do truſt,
                  To our deſtruction, by his iudgement iuſt.
               
               
                  
                  For when three yeares I ruled had this Ile
                  Without all law, as was my lawleſſe life,
                  The rumour ran abroad within a while,
                  And chiefly in the Norweſt countrie rife,
                  A monſter came from Th' iriſh ſeas, brought griefe
                  To all my ſubiects in thoſe coaſts did dwell,
                  Deuouring man and beaſt, a monſter fell.
               
               
                  Which when I knew for truth, I ſtraight prepar'd
                  In warlike wiſe my ſelfe to trie the caſe:
                  My haſte thereto a courage bold declar'd,
                  For I alone would enter in the place.
                  At which, with ſpeare on horſe I fet my race,
                  But on his ſcales it enter could no more,
                  Then might a bulruſh on a braſen dore.
               
               
                  Againe I prou'd, yet nought at all preuail'd
                  To breake my ſpeare, and not to pierce his ſide:
                  With that the roring monſter me aſſail'd,
                  So terrifi'd my horſe I could not ride.
                  Wherewith I lighted, and with ſword I tri'd
                  By ſtrokes to find a paſſage to his life,
                  But now I found in vaine was all my ſtrife.
               
               
                  And when I wearied was, and ſpent with fight,
                  That kept my ſelfe with heed his danger fro:
                  At laſt almoſt aſham'd I wanted might
                  And skill, to worke the beaſtly monſter wo.
                  I gate me neerer with my ſword him to,
                  And thought his flanckes or vnder parts to wound,
                  If there, for ſcales, might any place be found.
               
               
                  But fruſtrate of my purpoſe, finding none,
                  And eke within his danger entring quite:
                  The grizely beaſt ſtraight ſeazed me vpon,
                  And let his talants on my corps to light.
                  He gript my ſhoulders, not reſiſt I might:
                  And roting with a greedie rauening looke,
                  At once in iawes my bodie whole he tooke.
               
               
                  
                  The way was large, and downe he drew me in,
                  A monſtrous paunch for roomth and wondrous wide:
                  But (for I felt more ſofter there the skin)
                  At once I drew a dagger by my ſide.
                  I knew my life no longer could abide
                  For rammiſh ſtench, bloud, poiſon, ſlimy glere
                  That in his body ſo aboundant were.
               
               
                  Wherefore I labouring to procure his death,
                  While firſt my dagger digde about his hart,
                  His force to caſt me welnigh drewe my breath.
                  But as he felt within, his woundes to ſmart,
                  I ioyed to feele the mighty monſter ſtart,
                  That roard, and belcht, and groande, and plungde, and cride,
                  And toſt me vp and downe, from ſide to ſide.
               
               
                  Long ſo in pangs hee plungde, and panting lay,
                  And drew his winde ſo faſt with ſuch a powere,
                  That quite and cleane he drew my breath away,
                  Wee both were dead well nigh within an houre.
                  Lo thus one beaſtly monſter did deuoure
                  Another monſter moodles, to vs paine:
                  At once the realme was rid of monſters twaine.
               
               
                  Here maiſt thou ſee of fortitude the hap,
                  Where prudence, iuſtice, temperance hath no place:
                  How ſuddenly we taken are in trap,
                  When we deſpiſe good vertues to embrace.
                  Intemperance doth all our deeds deface,
                  And lets vs heedles headlong run ſo faſt,
                  We ſeeke our owne deſtruction at the laſt.
               
               
                  For he that hath of fortitude and might,
                  And thereto hath a kingdome ioind withall:
                  Except he alſo guide himſelfe aright,
                  His powre and ſtrength prewaileth him but ſmall,
                  He can not ſcape at length an haples fall.
                  You may perceiue a myrrour plaine by me,
                  Which may with wiſdome well ſufficient be.
               
            
            
               
               HOW KING EMERIANVS FOR HIS TYRANNIE WAS DEPOSED, ABOVT THE yeare before Chriſt, 225.
               
                  
                     THe wofull wight that fell from throne to thrall,
                  The wretch that woue the web wherin he goes:
                  A dolefull blacke bad weede ſtill weare hee ſhall
                  In woefull ſort, and nothing blame his foes.
                  What neede ſuch one at all his name diſcloſe?
                  Except the reſt of Britaine princes ſhould,
                  Not here for ſhame reſite his name he would.
               
               
                  I am Emeriane King that raign'd a ſpace,
                  Scarce all one yeare, in Britaine Iſle long ſence,
                  But for I was in maners voide of grace,
                  Fierce, tyrannous, and full of negligence,
                  Bloud thirſty, cruell, vaine, deuoide of ſence,
                  The Britaines me depoſed, from ſeate and crowne,
                  And reau'd me quite, of riches and renowne.
               
               
                  I was deſpiſde and baniſht from my bliſle,
                  Diſcountnanſt, faine to hide my ſelfe for ſhame:
                  What neede I longer ſtand to tell thee this?
                  My ſelfe was for my woefull fall too blame.
                  My raigne was ſhort in few my fall I frame.
                  My life was lothſome, ſoone like death that found.
                  Let this ſuffice a warning blaſt to ſound.
               
            
            
               
               HOW KING CHRINNVS GIVEN TO DRVNKENNES raigned but one yeare. He died about the yeare before Christ, 137.
               
                  
                     THough I my ſurfets haue not yet out ſlept,
                  Nor ſcarce with quiet browes begin my tale,
                  Let not my drowſy talke bee ouer leapt,
                  For though my belching ſent of wine or ale,
                  Although my face be fallo, puft, and pale,
                  And legs with dropſy ſwell, and panch reſound:
                  Yet let me tell what vice did me confound.
               
               
                  Perhaps thou thinkſt ſo groſſe a blockhead blunt,
                  A ſleepy ſwiniſh head can nothing ſay:
                  The greateſt heads and ſmalleſt eke were wont
                  To beare in them the fineſt wits away.
                  This thing is true, thou canſt it not denay,
                  And Bacchus eke enſharps the wits of ſome,
                  
                     Foecundi calices quem non fecere deſertum?
                  
               
               
                  Yet ſith long ſince both braines and all were ſpent,
                  And this in place amongſt my mates I ſpeake:
                  I truſt thou wilt be herewithall content,
                  Although indeed my wits of talke are weake.
                  So old a veſſell cannot chuſe but leake.
                  A drunken ſot whoſe faltering feete do ſlip.
                  Muſt pardon craue, his tongue in talke will trip.
               
               
                  
                     Chirinnus was my name a Britaine King,
                  But rulde ſhort time: Sir Bacchus was my let:
                  
                     Erinnus eke my ſenſes ſo did ſwing,
                  That reaſon could no ſeat amongſt them get.
                  Wherefore the truth I pray thee plainely ſet.
                  I gaue my ſelfe to ſurfets ſwilling wine,
                  And led my life much like a dronken ſwine.
               
               
                  
                  Diſeaſes grew, diſtemprance made me ſwell,
                  My parched liuer luſted ſtill for baſte:
                  My timpane ſounded like a taber well,
                  And nought but wine did like my greedie taſte.
                  This vice and moe my life and me defaſte,
                  My face was blowne and blubd with dropſie wan,
                  And legs more like a monſter then a man.
               
               
                  So not in ſhape I onely altered was,
                  My diſpoſitions chang'd in me likewiſe:
                  For vices make a man, a goate, an aſſe,
                  A ſwine or horſe, (as Poets can compriſe)
                  Transforming into beaſts by ſundry wiſe
                  Such men as keepe not onely ſhape of men,
                  But them miſhapeth alſo now and then.
               
               
                  Wherefore let who ſo loues to liue long daies
                  Without diſeaſes, ſtrong, in youthfull ſtate,
                  Beware of Bacchus booth which all betraies,
                  The vaile of vices vaine, the hauen of hate,
                  The well of weake delights, the brand of bate,
                  By which I loſt my health, life, Realme and fame,
                  And onely wonne the ſhrouding ſheete of ſhame.
               
            
            
               HOW KING VARIANVS GAVE HIMSELFE TO THE luſtes of the fleſh, and dyed about the yeare before Christ, 136.
               
                  
                     WHere no good gifts haue place, nor beare the ſway,
                  What are the men, but wilful caſtaway?
                  Where gifts of grace doe garniſh well the King,
                  There is no want, the land can lacke nothing.
                  The Court is ſtill well ſtor'd with noble men,
                  In Townes and Cities Gouernours are graue:
                  The common wealth doth alſo proſper then,
                  And wealth at will the Prince and people haue.
               
               
                  
                  Perhaps you aske, what Prince is this appeares?
                  What meanes his talke in theſe our golden yeares?
                  A Britaine Prince that Varianus hight,
                  I held ſometime the Scepter here by right.
                  And though no need there be in theſe your daies
                  Of ſtates to tell, or vertues good diſcriue,
                  Good counſaile yet doth ſtand in ſtead alwaies,
                  When time againe may vices olde reuiue.
               
               
                  If not: yet giue me leaue amongſt the reſt
                  Which felt their fall, or had their deaths addreſt:
                  My cauſe of fall let me likewiſe declare,
                  For * falles the deaths of vicious Princes are.
                  They fall, when all good men reioice or ſee
                  That they ſhort time enioide their places hie.
                  For Princes which for vertues praiſed be,
                  By death ariſe, extold they ſcale the skie.
               
               
                  I will be ſhort, becauſe it may ſuffice
                  That ſoone is ſaid, to warne the ſage and wiſe.
                  Or if that they no warning need to haue,
                  This may perchance ſomewhat their labour ſaue
                  With thoſe, that will not heare their faults them told,
                  By ſuch as would admoniſh them for loue:
                  When they my words and warnings here behold,
                  They may regard and ſee their owne behoue.
               
               
                  About my time the Princes liu'd not long,
                  For all were giuen almoſt to vice and wrong:
                  My ſelfe voluptuous was abandond quite,
                  To take in fleſhly luſt my whole delite:
                  A pleaſure vile, that drawes a man from thrift and grace,
                  Doth iuſt deſires, and heauenly thoughts expell:
                  Doth ſpoile the corps, defiles the ſoule, and fame deface,
                  And brings him downe to Plutoes paines of hell.
               
               
                  
                  For this my ſinne my ſubiects hated mee,
                  Repining ſtill my ſtained life to ſee.
                  As when the Prince is wholly giuen to vice,
                  And holdes the lewder ſort in greateſt price,
                  The land decaies, diſorder ſprings abroad,
                  The worſer ſort doe robbe, pill, pole, and ſpoile
                  The weaker force to beare the greateſt loade,
                  And leeſe the goods for which they earſt did toile.
               
               
                  How can Iehoua iuſt abide the wrong?
                  He will not ſuffer ſuch haue ſcepter long.
                  As he did ſtrike for ſinfull life my ſeate,
                  And did me downe from royall kingdome beate:
                  The like examples are in ſtories rife,
                  No wicked wight can gouerne long in reſt:
                  For either ſome bereaues him of his life,
                  Or downe his throne and kingdome is depreſt.
                  Bid Princes then and noble Peeres the like delights deteſt.
                  There is no way the wrath of Ioue to wreſt.
               
            
            
               HOW THE WORTHIE Britaine Duke Nennius as a valiant Souldier and faithfull Subiect encountred with Iulius Caeſar, was by him death-wounded: yet neuertheleſſe he gate Caeſars ſword, put him to flight, ſlew therewith Labianus a Tribune of the Romans, endured fight till his countrie men wan the field, and now encourageth all good Subiects, to defend their countrey from the power of forraine and intruding enemies. He was ſlaine about the yeare before Chriſt, 52.
               
                  
                     I May by right, ſome later writers blame,
                  Of ſtories olde, as rude or negligent:
                  Or elſe I may them well vnlearned name,
                  Or heedleſſe in thoſe things about they went.
                  Some time on me as well they might haue ſpent,
                  As on ſuch tyrants, who as bloodie foes,
                  Vnto their countrey wrought ſuch deadly woes.
               
               
                  
                  As for my ſelfe I doe not this recite:
                  (Although I haue occaſion good thereto)
                  But ſure, me thinks it is too great deſpite
                  That to the dead theſe moderne writers doe,
                  For there are Britaines, neither one or two,
                  Whoſe names in ſtories ſcarcely once appeare:
                  And yet their liues examples worthy were.
               
               
                  T's worthy praiſe (I graunt) to write the ends
                  Of vicious men, and teach the like beware:
                  For what hath he of vertue that commends
                  Such perſons lewde, as naught of vertues care?
                  But for to leaue out thoſe praiſe worthy are,
                  Is like as if a man had not the skill
                  To praiſe the good, but diſcommend the ill.
               
               
                  I craue no praiſe, although my ſelfe deſeru'd
                  As great a laude as any one of yore:
                  But I would haue it tolde how well I ſeru'd
                  My Prince and Countrey. Faith to both I bore.
                  All noble hearts, hereby with courage more
                  May both tall forraine force in fight withſtand,
                  And of their foes may haue the vpper hand.
               
               
                  Againe, to ſhew how valiant then we were
                  (You Britaines good) to mooue your hearts thereby
                  All other nations leſſe in fight to feare,
                  And for your countrey rather ſo to die
                  With valiant hauty courage as did I,
                  Then liue in bondage, ſeruice, ſlauery, thrall
                  Of forraine powers, which hate your manhood all.
               
               
                  Doe giue me leaue to ſpeake but euen a while,
                  And marke, and write the ſtory I thee tell.
                  By North from London more then fifty mile,
                  There lies the Iſle of Ely, knowne full well,
                  Wherein my Father built a place to dwell:
                  And for becauſe he liked well the ſame,
                  He gaue the place height Ely of his name.
               
               
                  
                  He raigned forty yeares as ſtories tell,
                  And fame did beare his name both wide and far.
                  By Iuſtice guided he his ſubiects well,
                  And liu'd in peace, without the broiles of war.
                  His childrens noble acts in ſtories are,
                  In vulgar tongue: but nought is ſaid of mee,
                  And yet I worthy was the yongſt of three.
               
               
                  His eldeſt ſonne and heire was after King,
                  A noble Prince, and he was named Lud:
                  
                  Full polliticke and wiſe in euery thing.
                  And one that wiſh'd his Countrey alwaies good.
                  Such vſes, cuſtomes, ſtatutes he withſtood.
                  As ſeem'd to bring the publique weales decay,
                  And them aboliſht, brake, repeald away.
               
               
                  So he the walles of Troy the new renewde,
                  Them ſortified with fortie Towers about:
                  And at the weſt ſide of the wall he vewde
                  The Towers ſtrong gate to keepe the foemen out,
                  That made he priſons for the poore bankrout,
                  Nam'd Ludgate yet, for free men debters, free
                  From hurt, till with their creditours they gree.
               
               
                  Some ſay the City alſo tooke the name
                  Of Lud my brother: for he it reparde:
                  And I muſt needs as true confeſſe the ſame,
                  For why, that time no coſt on it he ſparde,
                  He ſtill increaſt and peopled euery warde,
                  And bad them aie Kaerlud the City call,
                  Or Ludſtone, now you name it London all.
               
               
                  At length he dide, his children vnder age,
                  The elder named was Androgeus,
                  
                  Committing both vnto my brothers charge,
                  The younger of them hight Tenancius.
                  
                  The Britaines wanting aged rulers thus,
                  Choſe for that time Caſſibellane their King
                  My brother, Iuſtice ment in euery thing.
               
               
                  
                  The Romane then the mighty Caeſar fought
                  Againſt the Galles, and conquerd them by might:
                  Which done, he ſtood on ſhores where ſee hee mought
                  The Ocean Seas, and Britaine clieues full bright.
                  (Quoth hee) what region lies there in my ſight?
                  Mee thinkes ſome Iland in the Seas I ſee,
                  Not yet ſub dued, nor vanquiſt yet by mee.
               
               
                  With that they told him we the Britaines were,
                  A people ſtout, and fearce in feates of warre.
                  (Quoth he) the Romanes neuer yet with feare
                  Of nation rude, were daunted of ſo farre:
                  We therefore mind to proue them what they are.
                  And there withall theſe letters he did frame,
                  Brought by ambaſſadours which hither came.
               
               
                  
                     
                        C. IVLIVS CAESAR CONſull of Rome, to Caſſibellane, King of Britaine, ſendeth greeting.
                     
                     
                        
                           SIth that the Gods haue giuen vs all the Weſt
                        
                        
                           As ſubiects to our Romane Empire hie
                        
                        
                           By warre, or as it ſeemed Ioue the beſt,
                        
                        
                           Of whom wee Romanes came, and chiefly I:
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Therefore to you which in the Ocean dwell,
                        
                        
                           (As yet not vnderneath ſubiection due)
                        
                        
                           Wee ſend our letters greeting: wete yee well,
                        
                        
                           In warlike caſes thus we deale with you.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Firſt, that you, as the other regions, pay
                        
                        
                           Vs tribute yearely, Romanes we require:
                        
                        
                           Then, that you will with all the force you may
                        
                        
                           Withſtand our foes, as yours, with ſword and fire:
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           And thirdly, that by theſe you hoſtage ſend
                        
                        
                           Taſſure the couenants once agreed by you:
                        
                        
                           So with your daunger leſſe, our warres may end:
                        
                        
                           Elſe bid we warre. Caſsibellane adieu.
                        
                     
                     
                        Caeſar.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  No ſooner were this Caeſars letters ſeene,
                  But ſtraight the King for all his nobles ſent:
                  He ſhew'd them what their anceſtors had beene,
                  And prai'd them tell in this their whole intent.
                  He told them whereabout the Romans went,
                  And what ſubiection was, how ſeruile they
                  Should be, if Caeſar bare their pompe away.
               
               
                  And all the Britaines euen as ſet on fire
                  (My ſelfe not leaſt enflamed was to fight)
                  Did humblie him in ioyfull wiſe deſire,
                  That he his letters would to Caeſar write,
                  And tell him plaine we paſt not of his ſpite:
                  We paſt as little of the Romans, we,
                  And leſſe, then they of vs, if leſſe might be.
               
               
                  Wherefore the ioyfull King againe repli'd,
                  Through counſell wiſe of all the nobles had:
                  By letters he the Romans heſts denide,
                  Which made the Britaines hautie hearts full glad:
                  And eke the Romane Conſul proud as mad
                  To heare theſe letters written: thus they went,
                  Which he againe to mightie Caeſar ſent.
               
               
                  
                     
                        CASSIBELLANE KING OF BRITAINE TO C. IVLIVS Caeſar Conſull of Rome.
                     
                     
                        
                           AS thou, O Caeſar, writ'st the Gods haue giuen to thee
                        
                        
                           The West: ſo I replie, they gaue this Ile to mee.
                        
                        
                           Thou ſai'st you Romans, and thy ſelfe of Gods deſcend:
                        
                        
                           And dar'st thou then, to ſpoile our Troian blood pretend?
                        
                        
                           Againe, though Gods haue giu'n thee all the world as thine,
                        
                        
                           That's parted from the world, thou get'st no land of mine.
                        
                        
                           And ſith likewiſe of Gods we came a Nation free:
                        
                        
                           We owe no tribute, aide, or pledge to Rome or thee.
                        
                        
                           
                           Retract thy will, or wage thy warre: as likes thee best,
                        
                        
                           We are to fight, and rather then to friendſhip, prest.
                        
                        
                           To ſaue our countrey from the force of forren ſtrife,
                        
                        
                           Each Britaine heere, is well content to venter life.
                        
                        
                           We feare not of the end, or dangers thou dost tell:
                        
                        
                           But vſe thy pleaſure if thou maist: thus fare thou well.
                        
                     
                     
                        Caſſibellane.
                     
                  
               
               
                  When Caeſar had receiu'd his anſwere ſo,
                  It vext him much: he thereupon decreed
                  To wage vs warre, and worke vs Britaines woe.
                  Wherefore he haſted hitherward with ſpeed.
                  The Britaines eke, prepar'd themſelues with heed
                  To meete the Romans all, in warlike guiſe,
                  With all the force, and ſpeed they might deuiſe.
               
               
                  And heere the wiſer deem'd it meeter much
                  T'aſſaile them firſt at th' entry on this land,
                  Then for to giue arriuall heere to ſuch,
                  Might with our victuals aide, our ſelues withſtand.
                  T'is better far the enemies t'aband
                  Quite from thy borders, to a forren ſoile,
                  Then he at home, thee and thy countrie ſpoile.
               
               
                  Wherefore we met him at his entrie in,
                  And pitcht our camps directly in his way:
                  We minded ſure to loſe, or elſe to win
                  The praiſe, before we paſt from thence away.
                  So when that both the armies were in ray,
                  And trumpets blaſt on euery ſide was blowne,
                  Our minds to either each, were quickly knowne.
               
               
                  We ioyned battaile, fiercely both we fought,
                  The Romanes to enlarge their Empires fame:
                  And we with all the force and might we mought,
                  To ſaue our countrie, and to keepe our name.
                  O worthie Britaines! learne to do the ſame.
                  We brake the rayes of all the Romane hoaſt,
                  And made the mightie Caeſar leaue his boaſt.
               
               
                  
                  Yet he the worthieſt Captaine euer was,
                  Brought all in ray, and fought againe a new.
                  His skilfull ſouldiers he could bring to paſſe
                  At once, for why his traynings all they knew.
                  No ſooner I his noble corps did view,
                  But in I brake amongſt the captaines band,
                  And there I faught with Caeſar hand to hand.
               
               
                  O God thou might'ſt haue giuen a Britaine grace,
                  T'haue ſlaine the Roman Caeſar noble then:
                  Which ſought the noble Britaines to deface,
                  And bring in bondage valiant worthie men.
                  He neuer ſhould haue gone to Rome agen,
                  To fight with Pompey, or his peeres to ſlay,
                  Or elſe to bring his countrie in decay.
               
               
                  It ioy'd my heart, to ſtrike on Caeſars creſt.
                  O Caeſar that there had been none but wee,
                  I often made my ſword to trie thy breſt:
                  But Ladie fortune did not fauour mee.
                  I able was me thought with Caeſars three
                  To trie the caſe: I made thy heart to quake,
                  When on thy creſt, with mightie ſtroke I ſtrake.
               
               
                  The ſtrokes thou ſtrook'ſt me, hurt me nought at all:
                  For why, thy ſtrength was nothing in reſpect.
                  But thou had'ſt bath'd thy ſword in poyſon all,
                  Which did my wound, not deadly elſe, infect.
                  Yet was I or I parted thence bewreckt.
                  I gate thy ſword from thee, for all thy fame:
                  And made thee flie, for feare to eate the ſame.
               
               
                  For when thy ſword was in my target faſt,
                  I made thee flie, and quickly leaue thy hold:
                  Thou neuer waſt in all thy life ſo gaſt,
                  Nor durſt againe be euer halfe ſo bold.
                  I made a number Romans hearts ful cold.
                  Fight, fight, you noble Britaines now (quoth I)
                  We neuer all will vnreuenged die.
               
               
                  
                  What Caeſar though thy praiſe and mine bee od,
                  (The ancient ſtories ſcarce remember me)
                  Though Poets all of thee doe make a God,
                  (Such ſimple fooles in making Gods they bee)
                  Yet if I had my quarell try'd with thee,
                  Thou neuer hadſt returnde to Rome againe,
                  Nor, of thy faithfull friends, bin beaſtly ſlaine.
               
               
                  A number Britaines mightſt thou there haue ſeene
                  Wounded in fight, and ſpoile their ſpitefull foes.
                  My ſelfe maimde, ſlew and mangled mo (I weene)
                  When I was hurt, then twenty more of thoſe.
                  I made the Romanes ſtout their courage loſe.
                  In all the campe no Romane ſcarce I ſpide
                  Durſt halfe the combate gainſt a Britaine bide.
               
               
                  At length I met a noble man, they cald
                  Him Labienus, one of Caeſars friends,
                  A Tribune erſt had many Britaines thrald,
                  Was one of Caeſars Legats forth he ſends:
                  Well met (quoth I) I minde to make th' amends,
                  For all thy friendſhips to our Country crew.
                  And ſo with Caeſars ſword, his friend I ſlew.
               
               
                  What neede I name you euery Britaine here,
                  As firſt the King, the nobles all beſide,
                  Full ſtout and worthy wights in warre that were,
                  As euer erſt the ſtately Romanes tride.
                  We fought ſo long they durſt no longer bide.
                  Proude Caeſar he for all his bragges and boaſt
                  Flew backe to ſhips, with halfe his ſcattered hoaſt.
               
               
                  If he had bene a God (as ſots him nam'd)
                  He could not of vs Britaines taken foile:
                  The Monarch Caeſar might haue been aſham'd,
                  From ſuch an Iland with his ſhips recoile,
                  Or elſe to flie and leaue behind the ſpoile.
                  But life is ſweete, he thought it better flie,
                  Then bide amongſt vs Britaines, here to die.
               
               
                  
                  I had his ſword, was named Croceamors,
                  
                  With which he gaue me in the head a ſtroke:
                  The venime of the which had ſuch a force,
                  It able was to pierce the heart of oke:
                  No medcines might the poyſon out reuoke.
                  Wherefore though ſcarce he pierced had the skin,
                  In fifteene daies my braines it ranckled in.
               
               
                  And then too ſoone (alas) therefore I dide.
                  Yet would to God he had returnde againe,
                  So that I might but once the daſtard ſpide
                  Before he went, I had the ſerpent ſlaine.
                  He plaide the coward cutthrote all too plaine.
                  A beaſtly ſerpents heart that beaſts detects,
                  Which, or he fight, his ſword with bane infects.
               
               
                  Well, then my death brought Caeſar no ronowne,
                  For both I gate thereby eternall fame,
                  And eke his ſword to ſtrike his friends adowne,
                  I ſlew therewith his Labiene by name.
                  With Prince, againſt my Countrey foes I came,
                  Was wounded, yet did neuer faint nor yeeld,
                  Till Caeſar with his ſouldiers fled the field.
               
               
                  Who would not venture life in ſuch a caſe?
                  Who would not fight, at Countries whole requeſt?
                  Who would not meeting Caeſar in the place,
                  Fight for life, Prince, and Countrey, with the beſt?
                  The greateſt courage is by facts expreſt:
                  Then for thy Prince, with fortitude, as I,
                  And Realmes defence, is praiſe to liue or dy.
               
               
                  Now write my life when thou haſt leaſure, and
                  Will all thy countrymen to learne by me,
                  Both for their Prince and for their natiue land
                  As valiant, bold, and feareleſſe for to be,
                  A paterne plaine of fortitude they ſee:
                  To which directly if themſelues they frame,
                  They ſhall preſerue their Countrey, faith, and fame.
               
            
            
               
               HOW THE LORD IRENGLAS COSIN TO KING CASSIBELLANE, was ſlaine by the Lord Elimine, coſin to Androgeus Earle of London, about the yeare before Christ, 51.
               
                  
                     AMongſt the reſt that whilome ſate aloft,
                  Amongſt the reſt, that once had happie chance,
                  Amongſt the reſt, that had good fortune oft,
                  Amongſt the reſt, that could themſelues aduance,
                  Amongſt the reſt, that led in warres the dance,
                  And wan the palme, the praiſe, renowne, and fame,
                  Leaue in thy booke a place to put my name.
               
               
                  I will be briefe and truly tell thee all
                  The cauſe why I from graue do now appeare,
                  I will recite to thee my ſudden fall,
                  And what in life mine exerciſes were.
                  To which ſince I do ſee thee ſet thine eare,
                  Marke now my tale, and beare it well away,
                  Marke what me brought ſo ſudden in decay.
               
               
                  Let who ſo ſtands truſt to a ſtedfaſt hold,
                  If ſtedfaſt hold he thinke that he may find,
                  Preſume not on thy ſtrength, nay yet be bold
                  On Fortunes gifts, nay let her guide thy mind
                  In hope of hap, for ſhe is counted blind:
                  To praiſe her prankes occaſion giues no cauſe.
                  Do wiſely, or you praiſe her take the pauſe:
               
               
                  Some loue to boaſt what fortune they haue had,
                  Some other blame misfortune theirs as faſt:
                  Some tell of fortunes there be good and bad,
                  Some fooles of fortune make themſelues agaſt.
                  Some ſhew of fortune comming, preſent, paſt,
                  And ſay there is a fate that ruleth all:
                  But ſure it ſeemes their wiſdome is but ſmall.
               
               
                  
                  No fortune is ſo bad but we it frame,
                  There is no chaunce at all hath vs preſeru'd:
                  There is no fate whom we haue need to blame,
                  There is no deſtiny but is deſeru'd,
                  No lucke that leaues vs ſafe or vnpreſeru'd.
                  Let vs not then complaine of Fortunes skill:
                  For all our good deſcends from Gods good will.
               
               
                  If ſo a man might ſtay on Fortunes holde,
                  Or elſe on Prince, as pillar of defence:
                  Then might my ſelfe t'haue done the ſame be bolde,
                  In euery perill, purpoſe, or pretence.
                  
                     Caſſibellane as much as any Prince
                  Lou'd me his Coſin Irenglas by name,
                  For feates in armes, for fauour and for fame.
               
               
                  I came (by parents) of his regall race,
                  Liu'd happie daies (if happy mortall be)
                  Had (as I ſaid) his fauour, bare the grace,
                  I was his loyall ſeruant franke and free.
                  But what of this at all preuailed mee?
                  Yet furthermore the feates of armes I knew,
                  I fought in field, when mighty Caeſar flew.
               
               
                  Shall I for this praiſe Fortune ought at all?
                  Did Fortune ought in this? no whit be ſure.
                  Or ſhall I blame her after for my fall
                  That neuer could me any hurt procure?
                  T'was glory vaine did ſweetely me allure.
                  Wherefore giue eare, and then with pen diſcloſe
                  How ſeeming friends did prooue my chiefeſt foes.
               
               
                  Full happy were our Countrey men that dide,
                  (As noble Nennius) in the field that ſought:
                  When firſt both Britaines, and the Romanes tride
                  With dint of ſword, if titles theirs were ought.
                  They dide in their defence: no pompe they ſought:
                  They liu'd to ſee their Countrey conquer ſtill:
                  They dide before they felt of priuate ill.
               
               
                  
                  When Caeſar ſo with ſhamefull flight recoil'd,
                  And left our Britaine land vnconquer'd firſt:
                  Which only thought our Realme and vs t'haue ſpoil'd,
                  We came to ſee (of all our field the worſt)
                  Our ſouldiers ſlaine. O cruell Caeſar curſt,
                  (Quoth we) by thee did all theſe Britaines die,
                  That durſt not bide, but like a daſtard flie.
               
               
                  But then to ſee them in array to lie,
                  And for to ſee them wounded all before,
                  Not one but in his place his life did trie:
                  To ſee the Romans bloodie backes that bore
                  Their wounds in flight all ſcattered on the ſhore,
                  What thouſand tongues our ioy to light could bring,
                  This made our hearts reuiue, this pleaſde our King.
               
               
                  With trompets mourning tune, and wayling cries,
                  And drums, and fluits, and ſhawmes we ſound adieu:
                  And for our friends we watred all our eyes,
                  As loth to loſe the liues of ſuch a crew.
                  To th' earth we bare them all in order dew,
                  According vnto each mans noble name,
                  And as their birth requir'd and worthie fame.
               
               
                  Of noble triumphes after was no ſpare,
                  We Britaines erſt were neuer halfe ſo glad:
                  That ſo we made the Romans hence to fare,
                  No tongue can tell the heartie ioyes we had.
                  We were therewith for battaile bent as mad,
                  Our fingers tickled ſtill, which came from fight:
                  We had before our eyes our foes foule flight.
               
               
                  So fares it when the meaner giue the ſpoile,
                  And make the mightie all their force reuoke:
                  So fares it when great victours feele the foile,
                  And men leſſe deem'd do giue the conquering ſtroke,
                  That pierceth euen the hardeſt heart of oke.
                  For where the weaker win the wage of fame,
                  The victours hearts a thouſand ioyes enflame.
               
               
                  
                  A ſolemne Iuſts proclaimed was for thoſe
                  Who would to win renowne their valour trie,
                  Where th' Earle of Londons coſin did expoſe
                  Himſelfe to purchaſe praiſe, againſt whom I
                  To win the prize did all my powers applie:
                  But fatall was the ſcope I did intend,
                  Th' effects bewray'd my folly in the end.
               
               
                  For why, when glorie vaine ſtirres men to ſtrife,
                  When hope of praiſe prouokes them once to ire:
                  Then they at all regard no goods nor life,
                  From faithfull friendſhip rudely they retire:
                  They are ſo ſet with glories gloſe on fire,
                  That quite they rule and reaſon wreſt awrie,
                  They turne away their former friendly eie.
               
               
                  O God that workeſt all the wonder wrought,
                  (And haſt the power to turne the hearts aliue)
                  Grant grace to thoſe that labour ſo for nought
                  But flitting fame, and titles hautie ſtriue.
                  Let not ambition ſo the earth depriue
                  Of worthie wights, giue them ſome better grace,
                  That they may run for countries weale their race.
               
               
                  Let them not breake the bond of friendly loue
                  In broiles of bate, but friendly faults redreſſe:
                  Let not them ſo their manhood ſeeke to proue
                  By priuate hate, to worke their owne diſtreſſe:
                  So ſhall they need their foes to feare the leſſe.
                  Friends worſe then forren foes themſelues do make,
                  That fall at oddes for fond vaine glories ſake.
               
               
                  But what need I on thoſe aliue to ſtay?
                  They haue examples good before their eyes:
                  By which (if they haue grace) beware they may,
                  * The happieſt men by others harmes are wiſe.
                  Let them not then our warning words deſpiſe,
                  Do will them wiſely of theſe things debate:
                  For why, the fooliſh aye the warning hate.
               
               
                  
                  We ſpent the day in iuſting (as I ſaid)
                  Appointed erſt among our ſelues before:
                  And all the feats of armes in field we plaid
                  
                     Aenaeas taught our anceſtors of yore.
                  What need I fill thine eares with talking more?
                  My men and I had put thoſe feats in vre,
                  And he likewiſe (but nothing yet ſo ſure)
               
               
                  For as with fortune ſtill I gaue the foile,
                  To him that thought the glorie all to haue,
                  When he perceiu'd he could not keepe the coile,
                  Nor yet with equall match himſelfe to ſaue:
                  Occaſion of diſſenſion great he gaue.
                  In ſtead of ieſt he offered earneſt play,
                  In lieu of ſport he ſpite did ſtill diſplay:
               
               
                  The traytour vile, the tyrant (ſo he prou'd)
                  With coward, canker'd, hatefull, haſtie ire
                  And caytife dealing, ſhew'd how me he lou'd.
                  When as he could not to his hope aſpire,
                  To win the praiſe of triumph, his deſire,
                  He challeng'd me: and heere began the broile:
                  He thought with banding braue to keep the coile,
               
               
                  And that becauſe mens iudgement favour'd me.
                  Report almoſt of all the common rout
                  Ran ſtill that I was worthie praiſde to be,
                  And often times they gaue me all a ſhout.
                  This made my foes to ſtare and looke about,
                  And often wiſh them ill aloude that cride:
                  * Such is the nature ſtill of naughtie pride.
               
               
                  We twaine (quoth he) betweene our ſelues will trie
                  Alone our manhoods both, if thou conſent.
                  We ought not breake the Prince his peace (quoth I)
                  His grace would not therewith be well content.
                  And ſith no hurt was heere, nor malice ment,
                  You ought not ſo on choler take it ill,
                  Though I to win the prize put forth my skill:
               
               
                  
                  With that quoth Elenine (for ſo he hight)
                  That was the Earle his coſin, then my foe,
                  I meane (quoth he) to trie the caſe in fight,
                  Before thou paſſe againe my preſence froe:
                  And euen with that he raught to me a bloe.
                  My friends nor I could not this wrong abide:
                  We drew, and ſo did thoſe on th' other ſide.
               
               
                  But I was all the marke whereat he ſhot,
                  The malice ſtill he meant to none but me:
                  At me he caſt, and drew me for the lot
                  Which ſhould of all reuenge the ranſome bee.
                  Wherefore he ſet them at me franke and free
                  Till me they tooke, ſo compaſt round about,
                  As I could not ſcape from among them out.
               
               
                  To make it ſhort: I ſingled was therefore,
                  Euen as the Deere to find his fatall ſtroke:
                  I could not ſcape, in number they were more,
                  My pageant was in preſence there beſpoke.
                  A pillow they prepared me of oke,
                  My hands they bound, along my corps they led,
                  From off my ſhoulders quite they ſtroke my head.
               
               
                  If euer man that ſeru'd his Prince with paine,
                  And well deſerued of his publique weale:
                  If euer Knight eſteem'd it greateſt gaine,
                  For Prince and Countrey in the warres to deale:
                  My ſelfe was ſuch, which venter'd life and heale
                  At all aſſayes, to ſaue my natiue ſoile,
                  With all my labour, trauell, paine and toile.
               
               
                  Yet heere you ſee, at home I had my fall,
                  Not by my fierceſt foes that came in warre:
                  But by my friend I gate this griping thrall,
                  When folly fram'd vs both at home to iarre,
                  Oh that my friend of yore ſhould range ſo farre
                  From wiſdomes way, to wed himſelfe to will,
                  From reaſons rule, to wreſt his wits to ill.
               
               
                  
                  Well, bid the reſt beware of triumphes ſuch,
                  Bid them beware for titles vaine to ſtriue:
                  Bid them not truſt ſuch ſullen friends too much,
                  Bid them not ſo their honours high atchieue.
                  For if they will preſerue their names aliue,
                  There is no better way to worke the ſame
                  Then to eſchew of tyranny defame.
               
            
            
               HOW CAIVS IVLIVS CAESAR, which firſt made this Realme tributarie to the Romanes, was ſlaine in the Senate houſe, about the yeare before Christ, 42.
               
                  
                     ALthough by Bocas I haue whilom told my mind,
                  And Lydgate haue likewiſe tranſlated well the ſame:
                  Yet ſith my place in order here againe I finde,
                  And that my facts deſeru'd in Britaine worthy fame:
                  Let me againe renue to memory my name:
                  Recite my minde; which if thou graunt to mee,
                  Thou ſhalt therefore receiue a friendly fee.
               
               
                  If euer erſt the fame of ancient Romane facts
                  Haue come to pierce thine eares before this preſent time,
                  I thinke amongſt the reſt, likewiſe my noble acts
                  Haue ſhew'd themſelues in ſight, as Phoebus faire in prime.
                  When firſt the Romane ſtate began aloft to clime,
                  And wanne the wealth of all the world beſide,
                  When firſt their force in warlike feates were tride.
               
               
                  I Caius Iulius Caeſar Conſull had to name,
                  That worthy Romane borne, renownd with noble deeds.
                  What neede I here recite the linage whence I came,
                  Or elſe my greate exploites? ſurelyt's more then needs:
                  But onely this to tell, of purpoſe now proceedes:
                  Why I a Romane Prince, no Britaine, here
                  Amongſt theſe Britaine Princes now appeere.
               
               
                  
                  And yet becauſe thou maiſt perceiue the ſtorie all
                  Of all my life, and ſo deeme better of the end:
                  I will againe the ſame to mind yet briefly call,
                  To tell thee how thou maiſt me praiſe or diſcommend.
                  Which when thou haſt, in briefe, as I recite it, pend,
                  Thou ſhalt confeſſe that I deſerued well,
                  Amongſt them heere my tragedie to tell.
               
               
                  What need I firſt recite my pedigree well knowne?
                  No noble author writes that can forget the ſame:
                  My praiſe I know in print through all the world is blowne,
                  Ther's no man ſcarce that writes, but he recites my fame.
                  My worthie father Lucius Caeſar had to name,
                  
                     Aurelia faire my mother alſo hight,
                  Of Caius Cotta daughter borne by right.
               
               
                  How I was trained vp in youth what need I tell?
                  Sith that my noble Aunt (that Iulia hight) me taught,
                  Who could with morall diſcipline inſtruct me well,
                  And ſaw the frame in me that natures skill had wrought,
                  By her inſtructions aye I wit and fauour ſought.
                  I was accounted comely of my grace,
                  I had by natures gift a Princely face.
               
               
                  Of ſtature high and tall, of colour faire and white,
                  Of bodie ſpare and leane, yet comely made to ſee:
                  What need I more of theſe impertinent recite,
                  Sith Plutarch hath at large deſcrib'd it all to thee,
                  And eke thy ſelfe that think'ſt thou ſeeſt and heareſt me,
                  Maiſt well ſuppoſe the reſt, and write the truth,
                  Of all my noble actions from my youth.
               
               
                  In iourney ſwift I was, and prompt and quicke of wit,
                  My eloquence was likte of all that heard me pleade,
                  I had the grace to vſe my tearmes, and place them fit,
                  My roling Rhetoricke ſtood my Clients oft in ſtead:
                  No fine conueyance paſt the compaſſe of my head.
                  I wan the ſpurres, I had the laud and praiſe,
                  I paſt them all that pleaded in thoſe daies.
               
               
                  
                  At ſeuenteene yeares of age a Flamin was I choſe,
                  An office great in Rome of Prieſthood Princely hie,
                  I married eke Coſſutia, whereof much miſchiefe roſe,
                  Becauſe I was diuorc'ſt from her ſo ſpeedilie.
                  * Diuorcement breeds deſpite, defame is got thereby.
                  For ſuch as fancies fond by chance fulfill,
                  Although they thinke it cannot come to ill.
               
               
                  Of theſe the ſtories tell, what need I more recite,
                  Or of the warres I waged Conſul with the Galles?
                  The worthieſt writers had deſire of me to write,
                  They plac'ſt my life amongſt the worthies and their falles.
                  So Fame me thinkes likewiſe amids the Britaines calles
                  For Caeſar with his ſword, that bare the ſway,
                  And for the cauſe that wrought his ſwift decay.
               
               
                  When I in France had brought the valiant Galles to bend,
                  And made them ſubiect and obeyſant vnto mee:
                  I then did thinke I had vnto the world his end
                  By Weſt ſubdued the Nations which were whilome free.
                  There of my famous warres I wrote an hiſtorie,
                  I did deſcribe each places and ſequels of my warre,
                  The Commentaries cal'd of Caeſars acts that are.
               
               
                  At length I did perceiue there was an Iſland yet
                  By Weſt of France, which in the Ocean ſea did lie:
                  And that there was likewiſe no cauſe or time to let,
                  But that I might with them the chance of fortune trie.
                  I ſent to them for hoſtage of aſſurance, I,
                  And wil'd them tribute pay vnto the Romane ſtout,
                  Or elſe I would both put their liues and goods in doubt.
               
               
                  But they a people fierce and reckleſſe of my powers,
                  Abuſed thoſe which brought th' ambaſſage that I ſent:
                  Now ſith (quoth they) the land and region heere is ours,
                  We will not Caeſar to thy rightleſſe heſtes aſſent.
                  By doome of friendly Gods this Iland firſt we hent,
                  Of Priames blood we are, from Greece we Troians came,
                  As Brutus brought vs thence, and gaue this land his name.
               
               
                  
                  This land reported was full fertile for the ſoile,
                  The wealthie warlike ſort of Britaines ſtout within,
                  Were rather able well to giue, then take the foile,
                  To thoſe which came by warres, their freedome for to win.
                  My ſelfe made firſt aſſault, with them I did begin,
                  Of all the Romanes firſt I waged with them warre:
                  And this I can report, they valiant people are.
               
               
                  It was reported eke that in my warres in France
                  Some Britaines thither came amongſt the Galles to fight,
                  And that for pleaſure ſake, to try of Mars the chance,
                  And for to haue in field of Romane warres the ſight:
                  That they no labour ſparde by day nor yet by night,
                  In campe, in ſcoute, for hunger, heate, or colde:
                  But were in all attempts of armes both ſtout and bolde.
               
               
                  This fame enflamed me, diſpleaſure eke I tooke,
                  That glory hopte to get ſo doughtie hearts to daunt:
                  On which, with winds at wil, I Gallia ſhores forſooke,
                  Full minded for to make the Britaines tribute graunt,
                  Sith at my meſſage ſent, they ſeemed ſo to taunt.
                  With armour, ſouldiers good, and of munition ſtore,
                  I went appointed wel, with fiftie ſailes or more.
               
               
                  But ſo the noble Britaines plaide the valiaunt men
                  By policies, and force to hurt my ſhippes and me,
                  That I was forced after my returne agen,
                  To rigge my ſhipppes: againe a wondrous thing to ſee:
                  For in the ſtrands and in the ſeas, where hauens be,
                  Sharpe poſtes they pight, whereon our ſhippes we ron:
                  When many diu'd the deepe before the land wee won.
               
               
                  Being hardly come to land, at length we met the hoaſt,
                  And ſharpely fought with them, whoſe praiſes earſt we hard:
                  I haue no cauſe of Britane conqueſt for to boaſt,
                  Of all the Regions firſt and laſt with whom I ward.
                  A people ſtout and ſtrong, enduring chances hard,
                  And deſperate, wilde and fearce, and reckleſſe found I then,
                  Not ſoone agaſt with dint, or fright with fall of men.
               
               
                  
                  For when our armies met, no dangers they forſooke,
                  But ſo behau'd themſelues in euery place of fight,
                  As though to Martiall feates they onely had betooke
                  Themſelues, and for the palme did all their dealings dight.
                  Though with my Romanes I wag'd all my warlike might,
                  I was not able there, to cauſe them yeeld or flee,
                  Or for a ſpace to take a time of truce with me:
               
               
                  The toiles wee tooke to enter at the firſt on land,
                  And for to ſaue our ſhattered ſhips and armour brought,
                  To wey them out that elſe had bulg'd themſelues in ſand,
                  Hereon before the fielde with might and maine we wrought,
                  Beſide at skirmiſh oft, vpon the ſhore we fought.
                  Theſe labours tired ſo my men and me that tide,
                  That we could not endure the battailes brunt t'abide,
               
               
                  They followed hard the chace, with ſcath and loſſe we ſcapte,
                  And ſhipt, we hoiſed ſailes, to Fraunce we made retire:
                  Where for an armie new, another roade we ſhapte,
                  If winter colde were paſt, to come the following yeare:
                  And ſo we did indeed, and bought our comming deere:
                  For they prouided had ſo well to fight, that I
                  With all mine armies ſtout could finde no victorie.
               
               
                  Againe to ſhippe my mates I bad my Captaines ſtur,
                  Eke from this people fearce with ſpeede to ſhift away:
                  The chance of warre is hard and doubtfull for t'aſſure,
                  Where th' enemies neither dint of death nor dangers fray.
                  They reckt not of their wealth nor loſſe of goods decay,
                  But for their freedome fought, on Princes caſe they ſtood,
                  With ioyfull hearts they waged warlike life and blood:
               
               
                  Almoſt I had no hope at all to make returne,
                  The people were ſo fearce, ſo ſtubburne, ſtout, and bold:
                  No time of reſt I wrought amongſt them to ſoiurne,
                  They could not by our power bee ruled nor controld.
                  They ſaid they would vs pay no ſiluer, braſſe, nor gold.
                  To our indictions ſent, they would not ſet their hand,
                  But for to trie the caſe, with all their power to ſtand.
               
               
                  
                  When to the coaſts of Gallia againe with loſſe we come,
                  That neuer erſt with ſuch repulſe to foes did turne the backe,
                  The Britaines they reioyce with triumphes all and ſome,
                  And fame doth ſound report, they make the Romanes packe:
                  Where we no men, no coine, nor no munition lacke,
                  No captaines good, no art, no victuall, hearte to fight,
                  A goodly ſpoile, the land a pray before our ſight.
               
               
                  Now marke the hap we had: while I in Gallia lay,
                  The Britaines paſt the time in triumphes and in feaſts,
                  And for our ſecond flight with ſports they ſpend the day,
                  Accounting vs in their reſpect but coward beaſts.
                  Amongſt their other ſport of Iuſts and pleaſant ieſts,
                  A ciuill diſcord fell betweene two worthy peeres,
                  Of courage both ſo good, that neither beſt appeares:
               
               
                  The one hight Irenglas, of kinred to the king,
                  A worthy wight in warre, and prudent, wiſe and ſage:
                  The other Elenine, whoſe praiſe no ſtories bring,
                  But ſtoutneſſe in his fight, as ruled all by rage.
                  Yet both againſt the Romanes with the king did wage
                  The Britiſh warre full well, and ſerued as they ought,
                  Till time at home the praiſe of triumphes vaine they ſought.
               
               
                  This Elenine was ſtout, for he was neere of kin
                  Vnto Androgeus which was th' Earle of London then,
                  And claimed eke the palme (they ſay) that he did win
                  In triumphs at the iuſts amongſt the noble men.
                  But as they went about to trie the line agen,
                  They fell from words to ſharpe, and laide on loade amaine,
                  Vntill at length in fight hight Irenglas was ſlaine.
               
               
                  The King did ſend for Elenine, but he was fled
                  Vnto the Earle his coſin, whence he would not come:
                  He feared leſt he ſhould haue loſt his hated head.
                  'The guilty heart conceau's before the Iudge doe doome.
                  He wiſt if once he went, there needed him no toome.
                  Wherefore he it refuſed, and th' Earle was diſcontent:
                  Who meſſage ſharpe againe vnto the King had ſent.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Caſſibellane diſpleaſed much that ſubiects ſhould
                  Both ſlay his friend, and eke refuſe to bide the lawe,
                  And alſo in rebellious wiſe, endeuour what they could
                  To cut themſelues vniuſtly from the Princes awe,
                  Though it him greeu'd to ſee at home ſo foule a flawe,
                  He could not yet abide the iniuries were ſhowne,
                  But armde himſelfe and his, gainſt ſubiects once his owne.
               
               
                  When th' Earle Androgeus ſaw that he was far too weake,
                  Againſt his Prince to wage rebellious wars begon,
                  He ſent to me in France, deſiring helpe to wreake
                  The iniuries and wrong Caſſibellane had don.
                  He alſo Sceua ſent, for pledge, his onely ſonne,
                  And thirtie youths beſide, of honour great well borne▪
                  
                  I would not truſt his talke, nor meſſage ſent beforne.
               
               
                  On this I expedition made the third and laſt,
                  (For he did warrant me my purpoſe to obtaine)
                  I ſhipt my men, and hide me thitherward full faſt,
                  Had winde at will, and came to ſee the ſhining ſhores againe:
                  And of my comming ſo the Earle was glad and faine.
                  We ioined hands and league and armies for the fight:
                  And ſought, and put Caſſibellane the noble King to flight.
               
               
                  Yet he repaird his hoſte againe, that fiercely faught,
                  And oft aſſaid to ſlay or take the Earle or mee:
                  And when hee ſaw at length his labour vailed naught,
                  And Britanes with the Romanes linked ſo to bee,
                  Great griefe he had in them ſuch treaſon for to ſee.
                  His loſſe in doubtfull war not grieu'd him halfe ſo ſore,
                  His peoples baſe reuolt he chiefely did deplore.
               
               
                  To make it ſhort: the King was faine at length to yeeld,
                  The tribute granted was three thouſand pound a yeere:
                  We bare away the price, we wan the worthy field,
                  And made them friends againe that bought our fauour deere.
                  I need no longer ſtay to tell the ſtory heere,
                  Nor yet to giue my friend the Earle of London blame,
                  Sith by his meanes I wan to Rome eternall fame.
               
               
                  
                  From France I after ſent to Rome, reporting how
                  Amongſt the warlike Galles and Britaines I had ſped:
                  I made requeſt; by friends, I might be Conſull now
                  On my returne againe: but Pompeyes hautie hed
                  Did ioyne himſelfe with Peeres and armies which he led,
                  Alledging plaine I meant the publique weale t'inuade:
                  They would repreſſe my pride with might and dint of blade.
               
               
                  With ſpeed I came and force, which made them all to flie
                  To Greece from Rome in haſte, where they prepared war:
                  For in Epyrus then with ſouldiers they did lie.
                  This Pompey proud that made the Romans with me iar,
                  He at Dyrrachium ſtaid, to which (though it were far)
                  I led my conquering hoſt: I skirmiſht often there:
                  But from the fight to flie we ſoone contented were.
               
               
                  On this he followed faſt, in hope to win the field,
                  To Theſſalie he came, where I did ſtay therefore:
                  Our armies met and fiercely faught, not bent to yeeld,
                  Till fifteene hundred men were ſlaine in fight, or more.
                  But in the end they fled, we tooke of priſoners ſtore,
                  They durſt not dare t'abide the chance of Mars to trie,
                  But either fell in fight or from the field did flie.
               
               
                  Thence Pompey fled the field, and into Egypt came
                  To Ptolemie the King as then but yong of age,
                  Where of his ſlaughter foule Septimius hath the blame,
                  He was his end that did theſe warres againſt me wage.
                  Euen ſo by courſe we come to play vpon the ſtage,
                  Our trauels haue an end when we do feele the fall:
                  For all our life is but a race of miſerie and thrall.
               
               
                  But Pompeyes friends and ſonnes by might did oft aſſay
                  When he was done to death, to take reuenge on me,
                  And I by dint of ſword repel'd their force away,
                  Gate offices of rule, and gouern'd each degree,
                  At Caeſars beck and call obeyſant all they bee:
                  Enacted lawes, directed each eſtate,
                  Emperially the firſt aloft I ſate.
               
               
                  
                  But glorie won, the way to hold and keepe the ſame,
                  To hold good fortune faſt, a worke of cunning skill:
                  Who ſo with prudent art can ſtay that ſtately dame,
                  Which ſets vs vp ſo high vpon her hautie hill,
                  And conſtant aye can keepe her loue and fauour ſtill,
                  He wins immortall fame, thrice bleſſed is the crowne:
                  If once misfortune kicke and caſt the ſcepter downe.
               
               
                  For when in Rome I was alone Dictator choſe,
                  And Emperour or Captaine ſole to be for ay:
                  My glorie did procure me many ſecret foes,
                  Becauſe aboue the reſt I bare the ſoueraigne ſway.
                  By ſundrie meanes they ſought my ruine and decay.
                  For why, there could no thing in ſtate determin'd be,
                  Vnleſſe it likte me firſt, and were approu'd by me.
               
               
                  This they enui'd at me that ſu'd aloft to clime,
                  As hautie Caſſius, which the Pretorſhip did craue,
                  And Brutus eke his friend which bare the chiefeſt crime
                  Of my diſpatch and death, for they did firſt depraue
                  My life, mine acts, my raigne, and ſought my blood to haue,
                  Full ſecretly amongſt themſelues conſpir'd, decreed
                  To be attemptors of that cruell bloodie deed.
               
               
                  Yet I forewarned was by Capis fatall tombe
                  His Epitaph my death did long before foreſhow:
                  
                     Cornelius Balbus ſaw mine horſes headleſſe ronne
                  Without the guide of man, forſaking food for woe.
                  
                     Spurina warned me that ſooth of things did know,
                  A little wren in beake with Laurell greene that flew,
                  Foreſhew'd my dolefull death, as after all men knew.
               
               
                  The night before my fall in ſlumber I did dreame
                  I caried was, from earth and flew the clouds aboue,
                  And ſomtime hand in hād I thought I walkt with Ioue ſupreame,
                  My wife Calphurnia, Caeſars only loue,
                  Did dreame ſhe ſaw her creſt of houſe to fall,
                  Her husband thruſt through breaſt a ſword withall,
                  Eke that ſame night her chamber dores thēſelues flew open all.
               
               
                  
                  Theſe things did make me much that mourning to miſlike,
                  And Iacrazed was and thought at home to ſtay:
                  But who is he can void deaths dart when he doth ſtrike,
                  Where ſo great number ſeekes his life for to betray?
                  The traytor bloodie Brutus bad me not delay,
                  Nor yet to fruſtrate there ſo great aſſemblie ſate,
                  At laſt I went and there did meet vntimely ſate.
               
               
                  To Senate as I went, behold a Roman ſtood,
                  Preſenting me a ſcrole of euery traytors name:
                  And all their whole deuice that ſought to ſpill my blood,
                  That preſently decreed to execute the ſame.
                  But I blind wretch ſuppoſde that for ſome ſuite he came,
                  I heedleſſe bare this ſcrole in my vnhappie hand,
                  For which I loſt my life, as you ſhall vnderſtand.
               
               
                  
                     Spurina as I came at ſacrifices was,
                  Neere to the place where I was after ſlaine:
                  Of whoſe diuinings true I then did little paſſe,
                  To warne me of my death the Prieſt did ſeeke in vaine,
                  My hautie heart growne proud theſe warnings all diſdaine.
                  (Quoth I) the Ides of March be come, yet harme is none,
                  (Quoth he) the Ides of March be come, yet th' are not gone.
               
               
                  Aſſoone as I was ſet, the traytors all aroſe,
                  And one approched neere, as to demand ſome thing:
                  To whom as I gaue eare, at once my cruell foes
                  Beſet me round about, their weapons hid they bring.
                  Then I too late perceiu'd my deaths approching ſting.
                  O this (quoth I) is violence: then Caſſius pierſt my breſt:
                  And Brutus thou my ſonne (quoth I) whom erſt I loued beſt?
               
               
                  Yee Princes all, and noble men beware of pride,
                  Wracke not the Commonwealth for wealthie kingdomes ſake:
                  Be warn'd by me, that ſee my ſelfe the world to guide,
                  Beware what bloodie warres for rule you vndertake.
                  Ere three and twentie wounds had made my heart to quake,
                  How many thouſands fell for Pompeyes pride and mine?
                  How many valiant Knights did loued life reſigne?
               
               
                  
                  Full many nobie men, to rule alone, I ſlew,
                  And ſome themſelues againe for griefe of heart did ſlay:
                  For they would neuer yeeld though I did them ſubdue:
                  Some I did force to yeeld, ſome trauail'd farre away,
                  As loth to ſtay and ſee their countries ſwift decay.
                  The world on Aphrike coaſts, and Aſia diſtant farre,
                  And Europe alſo knew my bloodſheds great in warre.
               
               
                  But ſith my whole pretence was nought but glorie vaine,
                  To haue renowne and rule 'mongſt men aboue the reſt,
                  Without remorce in mind of many thouſands ſlaine,
                  Which, for their owne defence, their warres ſo oft addreſt:
                  I iuſtly deeme therefore my ſtonie heart and breſt
                  Receiu'd ſo many wounds this ſentence long hath ſtood
                  That who ſo ſlayes, he paies the price of blood for blood.
               
            
            
               HOW CLAVDIVS TIBERIVS NERO EMPEROVR OF Rome, was poiſoned by Caius Caligula, the yeare of Christ, 39.
               
                  
                     WHat bootes it hautie hearts depend ſo much
                  On high eſtate, auailes it ought thinke yee?
                  The gold is tri'd when it is brought to tuch:
                  So triall telles what worldly triumphs bee.
                  When glorie ſhines, no dangers deepe we ſee,
                  Till we at aſt find true the prouerbe old:
                  * Not all th at ſhines is pure and perfect gold.
               
               
                  While valiant men ſo burne with hot deſire
                  Of royall rule, and thirſt ſo ſore for ſeat,
                  No ſprings of Pernaſſe mount can quench the fire,
                  Nor Boreas blaſt allay the hautie heate.
                  On high renowne ſo much their braines they beate,
                  And toyle ſo much for fading flickering fame,
                  On earth for aye to leaue behind a name.
               
               
                  
                  But if they would marke Fortunes double face,
                  And how ſhe turnes about the tottering wheele:
                  How ſhe doth change her minde and turne her grace,
                  How blinde of ſight ſhe is, how light of heele:
                  They would not rue the fatall falles they feele,
                  They would not after blame her blindneſſe ſo,
                  But looke before, and leape her lightneſſe fro.
               
               
                  All men that in affaires themſelues imploy,
                  Doe praiſe Dame Fortune firſt if they ſpeede well:
                  But if thereby fall after ſome annoy,
                  They curſe her then, as hatefull hagge of hell:
                  If Fortune firme had ſtoode, they had not fell.
                  They ban her then, and yet themſelues were curſt,
                  Which tooke her baite ſo freely at the firſt.
               
               
                  For while her idle impes doe bathe in bliſſe,
                  They count her gifts and pleaſures all good hap:
                  But if at laſt ſhe frowne (as cuſtome is)
                  And let them ſlip againe beſide her lap,
                  They then confeſſe her baites did boad ſome trap.
                  As I haue prou'd, what Fortune giues to men,
                  For pleaſure each, ſhe brings diſpleaſures ten.
               
               
                  
                     Augustus great that good Octauius hight,
                  The Emperour which in peace did rule ſo long,
                  In whoſe good raigne was borne the Lord of light
                  Nam'd Ieſus Christ, in power and works ſo ſtrong,
                  Whom in my daies the Iewes oppreſt with wrong,
                  Of which good Christ anon I haue to tell:
                  But firſt vnto Augustus what befell.
               
               
                  This noble Emprour did my mother wed
                  Which Liuia hight, a faire and noble dame:
                  His daughter Iulia I likewiſe did bed,
                  And put away my wife of better fame
                  
                     Agrippa great with child, the more my blame:
                  I was through this and th' Empreſſe Liuias skill,
                  Adopted Emprour by Augustus will.
               
               
                  
                  When he was dead, then I Tiberius raign'd
                  Adopted thus, and for my noble acts,
                  I was both vnto warre and peace well train'd,
                  Th' Illyrians muſt confeſſe my famous facts:
                  In three yeares ſpace my power their pride ſubacts.
                  On them and Germanes triumpht neare and farre,
                  Saue Punike fight the greateſt Roman warre.
               
               
                  Now (for it was my hap a victour ſo
                  To Rome returne a yeare before his end)
                  Throughout the world the fame of me did go,
                  The Romans all to fauour me did bend.
                  To them Augustus did my warres commend,
                  Adopted me, and (as I ſaid) for this
                  The Romanes heapt on me all worldly bliſſe.
               
               
                  So when I had obtained my deſire,
                  Who then but Caeſar? I did rule alone:
                  By nature proud, preſuming to aſpire,
                  Diſſembling that which afterward was knowne.
                  For when the fathers mind to me was ſhowne,
                  Of their electing mine Emperiall place,
                  I ſeem'd to ſtay, refuſing it a ſpace.
               
               
                  And thus to proue my friends before I did,
                  And eke to heare what euery one would ſay,
                  Which was the cauſe why ſome I after rid,
                  The beſt'mongſt them I made as foes away.
                  By ſlaughter ſo I thought my throne to ſtay,
                  But otherwiſe then I had thought it fell,
                  As time doth trie the fruit of things full well.
               
               
                  Another griefe conceiu'd I will recite,
                  Which made me with the Senate diſcontent:
                  About that time did Pontius Pilate write
                  His letters how the Iewes, to malice bent,
                  Had put to death one Christ full innocent,
                  The Sonne of God, of might, of power no leſſe,
                  Which roſe from death, as Chriſtians all confeſſe.
               
               Thus wiſe he wrote:
               
                  
                     
                     
                        PONTIVS PILATE TO HIS LORD CLAVDIVS, wiſheth health.
                     
                     OF late it chanst, which I haue proued well,
                     The Iewes through wrath by cruell doome haue lost 
                           
                              •
                           his letter is 
                              ••
                           
                           Flores hi
                              
                                 ••
                              oriarum; but 
                              •••
                            may not 
                              ••
                           inke that I do 
                              〈◊〉
                            it dovvne 
                              ••
                           ereby to af
                           
                              •••
                           me that he 
                              ••
                           rote it. For 
                              •
                            
                           
                              ••
                            perſvva
                           
                              ••
                           d he vvould 
                              ••
                           t vvrite ſo 
                              ••
                           ell, and yet 
                              ••
                            appeares by 
                              
                                 •
                              roſius and o
                           
                              ••
                           ers, that 
                              
                                 ••
                              audius 
                           
                              ••
                           ould haue 
                              ••
                           de Christ to 
                              ••
                           ue bin taken Rome for a 
                              ••
                           d, and that Senate and 
                              ••
                            
                           
                              •
                           ell ſo at va
                           
                              •••
                           nce about 
                              •••
                            ſame mat
                           
                              •••
                           .
                     
                     Themſelues, and all their ofspring that enſue.
                     For when their fathers promiſe had that God
                     Would ſend to them from heauen his holy one,
                     That might deſeruingly be nam'd their King,
                     And by a virgin him to th' earth to ſend,
                     Loe now when as the Hebrewes God was come,
                     And they him ſaw restore the blind to ſight,
                     To cleanſe the leapers, cure the palſies eke,
                     To cast fiends out of men, and raiſe the dead,
                     Command the winds, on ſea with drie feete walke,
                     And many maruels great beſide to do,
                     When all men called him the Sonne of God,
                     The Priests in enuie brought him vnto me,
                     And bringing many forged fained faults
                     Nam'd him a wiſard, 'gainst their lawes to do:
                     Which I belieuing whipt him for the cauſe,
                     And gaue him vp to vſe as they thought best.
                     They crucifi'd him, buried him, his tombe,
                     They kept three daies with ſouldiers ſtout: yet he
                     The third day roſe againe, and came to life.
                     Which when they heard, they brib'd the ſouldiers all,
                     And bad them ſay, his corpes was ſtolne away.
                     The ſouldiers yet, when they the money had,
                     Could not the truth keepe ſilent of the fact:
                     For they did witneſſe he did riſe againe,
                     And of the Iewes, that they money taken had.
                     I write the truth; if any otherwiſe
                     Do bring report, account it but vaine lies.
                  
               
               
                  
                  THe letters read, I did thereon conferre,
                  Booh with the Fathers graue in high degree,
                  And with the nobles who of Senate were
                  That Chriſt in Rome as God might counted bee,
                  To which they only did not diſagree,
                  (Becauſe the letters came not firſt to them)
                  But by edict did puniſh Chriſten men.
               
               
                  To thei
                        •
                      accuſers threaten death I did,
                  Although Seianus from my partie fell:
                  The Senate which the Chriſtians ſought to rid,
                  By me were after ſeru'd in order well.
                  For as Chriſts Godhead they would Rome expell,
                  And would not ſerue the God of meekeneſſe ſent,
                  To pot apace their hautie heads were pent.
               
               
                  I baniſht ſome, and ſome to death I put,
                  And foure and twentie Fathers graue I choſe:
                  From ſhoulders eke moſt of their heads I cut,
                  And left likewiſe aliue but twaine of thoſe.
                  
                     Seianus I did ſlay, all Druſus deadly foes.
                  I eke Germanicus with poyſon ſlew,
                  His ſonnes likewiſe, my poyſons force well knew.
               
               
                  The men that did Iehouaes ſonne refuſe,
                  The King of Iewes, the Lord of life and health,
                  Were gouern'd thus: Tiberius thus did vſe
                  The men that were the Gods in Commonwealth,
                  Forſaking ſo their heauenly ſauing health.
                  The Emprour I which ſhould their liues defend,
                  Sought all the meanes to bring their liues to end.
               
               
                  Yet to religion I was nothing bent,
                  Diſſembled things that leaſt I fauour'd ſtill:
                  I neuer vſde to ſpeake the things I ment,
                  But bare in mind the waies to worke men ill.
                  I ſeem'd to ſome to beare them great good will,
                  And thoſe I tooke away as time did ſerue,
                  Inconſtant vnto each, yet ſeldome ſeem'd to ſwerue.
               
               
                  
                  To drunkenneſſe and riot, ſports and eaſe,
                  And pleaſure all I gaue my ſtudie then:
                  Nought more then ſubtill ſhiftings did me pleaſe,
                  With bloodſhed, craftie, vndermining men.
                  My Court was like a Lions lurking den.
                  The Ieſters nam'd me Caldius Biberius Mero,
                  
                  In ſtead of this my name, Clandius Tiberius Nero.
                  
               
               
                  I will no more my life deſcribe this time,
                  For why, my facts at laſt deſeru'd defame,
                  Infected with ſo many a fulſome crime,
                  As may not heere repeated be for ſhame.
                  I haue no cauſe the Ladie blind to blame,
                  But mine owne ſelfe, who did abuſe my place,
                  Which might full well haue vſde the gifts of grace.
               
               
                  Three things in fine I tell, that wrought my fall,
                  Firſt vile diſſembling both with God and man:
                  For bloodſhed then, which hauocke made of all,
                  Blood cries to him that well reuenge it can.
                  For filthie life I much offended than:
                  Wherefore aliue thus poyſoned with theſe three,
                  
                     Caligula at laſt did poyſon me.
               
               
                  To Princes this I ſay, and worthie Peeres,
                  I wiſh them wiſely weigh that heare me ſhall,
                  And poiſe my firſt exploits with latter yeeres,
                  And well conſider one thing in my fall:
                  * Abuſe of power abaſeth Princes all.
                  In throne on earth, a Prince as God doth ſit,
                  And as a God no iuſtice ſhould omit.
               
            
            
               
               HOW CAIVS CAESAR CALIGVLA EMPEROVR OF Rome was ſlaine by Cherea and others, the yeare of Christ, 42.
               
                  
                     VNhappie Princes haue in wealth no grace,
                  To ſee how ſoone their vices bring them vnder,
                  But run vnruly, reckeleſſe of their race,
                  Till at the length they make themſelues a wonder,
                  When from aloft their traces fall aſonder,
                  There is no hope to hold aright the trace:
                  They cannot keepe aloft th' Emperiall place.
               
               
                  Beholde my hap, on whom the Romane rout
                  With ioy did gaze, when bloudy ſlaine I lay.
                  Here lies (quoth they) thruſt thirtie times throughout,
                  The monſter vile, that beaſt Caligula,
                  
                  Which did ſo many guiltleſſe Romanes ſlay.
                  The nobles now the matrons need not doubt.
                  The worthy writers may their works ſet out.
               
               
                  I was (I grant) full leaudly led by luſt,
                  I forced nought of vertue, faith, nor law:
                  In power I put my confidence and truſt,
                  Regarding right nor Iuſtice ſtrict a ſtraw.
                  My facts infarſt my life with many a flawe,
                  Did me to deedes of foule luſt inceſt draw:
                  Which had of God nor natures heſts the awe.
               
               
                  To make my ſelfe a God I did deuiſe,
                  That Iupiter to name my ſelfe did dare,
                  For inceſts vile, which all good wights deſpiſe,
                  Nam'd Bacchus eke a drunken ſhrine I bare.
                  To call me God ſome flatterers did not ſpare.
                  By meſſage I commanded them likeviſe,
                  My ſtatue in the Temple to compriſe.
               
               
                  
                  I would not haue my ſlaughters here enrolde,
                  And murdrous miſchieues mingled with the reſt,
                  Without regard of ſexe, of yong or olde,
                  For which the Romanes did my life deteſt.
                  To vices vile my deedes were all addreſt:
                  Which mine owne ſeruants loathing at the laſt
                  With their owne hands my timeleſſe death did haſt.
               
               
                  My life was naught, and thus at laſt I dide,
                  My life procur'd both Gods and men my foes:
                  Let Princes then beware of pompe and pride,
                  And not themſelues to vices ſuch diſpoſe.
                  The throne will ſoone a Princely minde diſcloſe,
                  The tyrants heart at once in throne is tride:
                  The Princely robe no tyrant thoughts can hide.
               
            
            
               HOW GVIDERIVS KING of Britaine, and the elder ſon of Cimbaline was ſlaine in battaile by a Romane, the yeare of Christ, 44. or as ſome write, 46.
               
                  
                     TAke, Higgins, now in hand thy pen for me,
                  Let not my death and ſtory lie forgote:
                  Good cauſe there is I ſhould remembred be,
                  If thou the falles of Britaine Princes note.
                  Aloft I ſate in Princely place aflote,
                  I had the ſword, I bare the ſcepter right:
                  I was accounted aye a worthy wight.
               
               
                  
                     Guiderius was my name, the ſonne of yore
                  Of noble Cimbaline, and after King:
                  The Romane tribute I would pay no more,
                  Me thought it was too baſe a ſeruile thing.
                  No Romane ſhould me in ſubiection bring,
                  I ſtoutly did deny what they did claime,
                  Though many counſeld me to yeeld the ſame.
               
               
                  
                  When Claudius ſent this tribute for to haue,
                  I ſent him word againe, I would not pay:
                  I would not graunt, vniuſtly he did craue,
                  That might in time procure my Realmes decay:
                  He ſhould not beare our freedome ſo away:
                  By force and fraude proud Caeſar heere did raigne,
                  But now by might my right I would maintaine.
               
               
                  On this addreſt himſelfe in warlike ſort,
                  The noble Claudius came to trie the caſe:
                  Which had before receiued high report,
                  Both of my wealth, my force, and noble grace.
                  So thinking well he might my fame deface,
                  From Rome he came to Britaine with his hoaſt,
                  And landed here vpon my Southerne coaſt.
               
               
                  Now marke my tale, and hereby ſhalt thou know
                  The ſubtill ſleights of Romanes in their war:
                  The ſlie deceits of ſuch doe make a ſhow,
                  Whereby to trie the people what they are.
                  Note well ſuch foes in dealing neere and far,
                  Amidſt the field, in ſcout, or fight alone:
                  Of all the reſt example take by one.
               
               
                  Amongſt his men, a Captaine ſtout he had,
                  With whom in fight I made my party good:
                  
                     Hamonius men him cal'd, who for his blade
                  In ſingle fight ſo often I withſtood:
                  At laſt did worke a wile to ſhed my blood,
                  He clad himſelfe as he a Britaine weare,
                  Like armour, ſword, and target did he beare.
               
               
                  He marcht with vs as he a friend had been,
                  And when we came to fight he ſhew'd a face
                  Of comfort and bold courage gainſt his men:
                  And when they fled, and we purſu'd the chace,
                  Purſue (quoth he) the Romans flie apace,
                  In Britiſh tongue he cride, they flie, they flie,
                  Our hoſtages had taught him ſo to crie.
               
               
                  
                  As we purſude, in me he thruſt his blade,
                  Betweene my armour ſplints he gaue the wound:
                  And faſt away for life to ſhift he made,
                  Thus by deceits my life hee did confound.
                  Of my decay this was the fatall ground:
                  Which thou muſt pen, that I a miror be
                  For men to ſhun the flights of trecherie.
               
            
            
               HOW LAELIVS HAMO THE ROMANE CAPTAINE was ſlaine, after the ſlaughter of Guiderius, about the yeare of Christ, 46.
               
                  
                     A Romane Captaine I in Britaine armour clad,
                  Diſguiſde therfore, in field did ſlay their noble King,
                  I ventred in their hoſt, and I my purpoſe had:
                  To venture ſo for Countries ſake a worthy thing.
                  But whoſo weenes to win by ſlaughter high renowne,
                  Hath often times the ſate, to fall by ſlaughter downe.
               
               
                  Euen ſo my ſelfe that ſlew, ſhort time my ioyes did laſt,
                  In flight I taken was, and hewde in pieces ſmall,
                  Which downe the cleeues they did into the waters caſt,
                  And by my name as yet the hauen and harbor call.
                  Who thinkes by ſlaughters praiſe, to winne immortall fame
                  By treaſon vile, deſerues a ſhrowding ſheete of ſhame.
               
            
            
               
               HOW CLAVDIVS TIBERIVS DRVSVS EMPEROVR of Rome, was poiſoned by his wife Agrippina, The yeare of Christ, 56.
               
                  
                     SAy not the people well, that fortune fauours fooles?
                  So well they ſay, I thinke, which name her beetle blind.
                  I need not tell thee heere what I haue learn'd at ſchooles,
                  But may by proofe expreſſe the madneſſe of my mind.
                  My mother by her prouerbs me a foole defin'd,
                  Which often ſaid when any fooliſhly had done:
                  In faith you are as wiſe as Claudius my ſonne.
               
               
                  It pleaſed her not only ſo to name me ſot,
                  But alſo me in ire a monſter oft ſhe nam'd,
                  Vnperfect all, begun by nature, but begot
                  Not abſolute, not well, nor fully compleat fram'd.
                  Sith thus my mother oft in anger me defam'd,
                  What meant the men of Rome, which ſo elected me,
                  A foole, a monſter foule, their gouernour to be?
               
               
                  Th' Emperiall blood and high deſcent was partly cauſe,
                  That I (vnfit therefore) attain'd the ſupreame throne:
                  And yet the bloodie Senate tooke a while the pauſe,
                  Determining in mind t'aboliſh euery one
                  Of Caeſars ancient linage, as their mortall fone.
                  For why they could, they thought, receiue no quiet reſt,
                  But ſtill by our proud raigne were cruelly oppreſt.
               
               
                  The ſouldiers which me found where I my ſelfe had hid,
                  Loe from a place obſcure, vnfit for Caeſars grace,
                  They brought me forth by force, there me proclaime they did,
                  Becauſe I ſeem'd in heart much meekeneſſe to embrace,
                  And could diſſemble eke t'obtaine th' Emperiall place,
                  Whereby the warriers ſtout were vnto me inclinde,
                  Suppoſing I was meeke, and of a gentle mind.
               
               
                  
                  The wilie wolfe that ſeekes to ſlay the ſilly ſheepe,
                  Doth faine himſelfe oft times to beare a ſimple eye:
                  The craftie fox likewiſe would take of lambes the keepe,
                  If that he do perceiue the maſtiue lying by:
                  The Crocodile in Nile will faine to weepe and crie:
                  But if the ſheepe, her yong, or wandring man be caught:
                  Wolfe, Foxe, and Crocodile, haue euen the prey they ſought.
               
               
                  So I could wiſely faine, as though I did refuſe
                  To take the Empires ſway, a charge for me too great,
                  But well in mind I wiſt, if th' armie did me chuſe,
                  The Senate could not me by force thereof defeate:
                  They had no power to ſtay me from the hautie ſeate.
                  Thus though I ſeem'd at firſt ſo ſimple, meeke and plaine:
                  Yet was I ſubtill, ſlie, and glad of glorie vaine.
               
               
                  But after I was thron'd, I gaue my ſelfe to eaſe,
                  To wine, to women eke, to ſport, and bellie chere,
                  And fooliſh fearefull was, my wife for to diſpleaſe
                  Who Meſſalina hight, whoſe manners homely were.
                  She made not only me the cuckolds horne to beare,
                  But alſo did allure good matrons vnto vice,
                  And virgins chaſt to ſinne, or made them pay the price.
               
               
                  For if that either they did ſeeme t'abhor the fact,
                  Or if that men with her adulterate would not be,
                  Some famous crime was fain'd or elſe ſome hainous act,
                  For which not they nor theirs from ſlaughter could be free.
                  My houſhold ſeruants were prefer'd in place by me,
                  Their wealth was more then mine: the prouerbe went as then,
                  * I need no treaſure want, if I would pleaſe my men.
               
               
                  On this I cauſed her for to be made away,
                  And made a vow no more with women for to wed,
                  Becauſe my vicious wiues ſought either me to ſlay,
                  Or elſe with whoredome vile to violate my bed.
                  But blind at length with folly from my vow I fled,
                  And Agrippina hight my brothers daughter braue
                  Inceſtuouſly I choſe, for ſpouſed wife to haue.
               
               
                  
                  So leading then my life in ſloth and loth ſome ſinne,
                  I gaue my ſelfe to riot, drinking, cards and dice:
                  And I ſo skilfull was by practiſe growne therein,
                  That I of dicing arte did write a worke of Price.
                  This may full well declare if I were graue and wiſe.
                  Growne old in all my deeds ſo credulous was I,
                  That in each doubtfull place I had ſome ſecret ſpie.
               
               
                  So bloodie was I growne, that euery light offence
                  Was cauſe enough to take away th' offenders life:
                  I ſo forgetfull was, and ſuch my negligence,
                  I would enquire for thoſe that cauſde my former griefe
                  For Meſſalina faire, of late my wanton wife:
                  Eke for ſuch others dead I would enquire againe,
                  As I in rage before commanded to be ſlaine.
               
               
                  I fondly did extoll the meaner ſort of men,
                  Adorning their degrees with titles of eſtate,
                  Euen ſuch as ſeruants were and ſeru'd my diet then,
                  Amongſt the ancient men in Senate often ſate,
                  For which the Romans me vnto the death did hate.
                  And for the cruell deeds and beaſtly life I lead,
                  Full often times they wiſht that I their Prince were dead.
               
               
                  My Agrippine perſwaded me t'adopt her hopefull ſonne,
                  That after my deceaſe the Empire he might haue:
                  Which when too ſoone at length I had vnwiſely donne
                  At her vniuſt requeſt, as ſhe the ſame did craue:
                  In recompence to me ſhe deadly poyſon gaue,
                  Whereof at laſt I di'd: this was my life and end:
                  Which as a mirour heere to thee I do commend.
               
            
            
               
               HOW THE EMPEROVR DOMITIVS NERO LIVED wickedly and tyrannouſly, and in the end miſerablie ſlew himſelfe, the yeare of Christ, 70.
               
                  
                     MVſt I that lead ſo looſe a life ſpeake heere,
                  Amongſt the wreckes whom Fortunes tempeſts tore?
                  Well, then I ſee I muſt, the caſe is cleere,
                  But blame I muſt my onely ſelfe therefore.
                  I am that Nero rule in Rome that bore,
                  My mother Agrippine ſo wrought for me,
                  Her husband poiſned, I might Emprour be.
               
               
                  A while I gaue my ſelfe to gouerne well,
                  As Senec graue inſtructed me thereto:
                  But after, I to ſhameleſſe dealings fell,
                  At randome liu'd in luſt as Lechers doe,
                  To ſlaughters fell, of friends and kinred too,
                  Not ſparing thoſe in fleſhly luſts deſire,
                  Whom natures impes dumb beaſts will not require.
               
               
                  A ſhame it were to tell my hatefull life:
                  But he that wanted ſhame, whoſe face was braſſe,
                  That ſpared neither men, maide, virgine, wife,
                  Not mother, ſiſter, kind, nor kin that was:
                  Whoſe facts both care and ſhame did alwaies paſſe:
                  What ſhould he ſhame to do, ſpeake, think, or ſay,
                  Which all his life caſt baſhfull ſhame away?
               
               
                  For wantonneſſe, I paſt the filthie ſtues:
                  For gluttonie, I had no where my peere:
                  No kind of crueltie but I did vſe,
                  No wickedneſſe from which my life was cleere,
                  My pride did paſſe them all, both far and neere.
                  Againſt the trade of kinde in ſhameleſſe life,
                  One man had me for bride and for bride-wife.
               
               
                  
                  With golden nets in riot I would fiſh.
                  And purple lines to draw my nets I had:
                  I vſed eke for pleaſures many a diſh,
                  And was with nought but luſt and miſchiefe glad.
                  Though theſe things made the Romans hearts full ſad,
                  They durſt not ſpeake: for whoſo did complaine,
                  Without reſpect or ſentence more, was ſlaine.
               
               
                  For pleaſures ſake to ſee the flames ariſe,
                  I cauſde that Rome ſhould then on fire be ſet:
                  And for to feede therewith my gazing eyes,
                  On high Maecenas Tower to ſtand I get.
                  So, ſixe daies fire and ſeuen nights waſte I let,
                  And ſang there while, beholding it with ioy,
                  The Iliades ſweet of Grecians burning Troy.
               
               
                  Then I reſtrain'd that no man ſhould reſort
                  To the ruines great, when as the fire was paſt:
                  Nor ſhould therefrom the reliques left tranſport,
                  But to my ſelfe reſeru'd them all at laſt.
                  The Merchants cauſeleſſe from their goods I caſt,
                  And Senatours depriu'd of all they had,
                  Some ſlaine, the reſt with life to ſcape were glad.
               
               
                  Still out the ſword to ſlay all ſorts I drew,
                  My mother could not ſcape amongſt them free:
                  My brother deare, and ſiſters eke I ſlew,
                  And of my wiues likewiſe a two or three.
                  My kinſemen eke I kil'd of each degree,
                  Reioycing in ſo heinous bloodſhed ſtill,
                  Nought elſe with Nero then but, kill, them kill.
               
               
                  And for that Seneca me counſaile gaue
                  (My tutour good in youth) to leaue my vice,
                  I bad him chooſe what death him lik'd to haue,
                  Which now ſhould pay, for then, my ſtripes the price.
                  In water warme to ſtand was his deuice,
                  And there to bleede: a milde and gentle death:
                  Euen ſo I cauſde them reaue his vitall breath.
               
               
                  
                  So with almightie Ioue I gan to warre,
                  The Chriſtians good I did torment and flay:
                  Commanding all my ſubiects neere and farre,
                  Their liues and goods to ſpoile and take away.
                  Which they accompliſht ſtraight without delay:
                  Both Paul and Peter Chriſts diſciples twaine,
                  Th' Apoſtles, both by mine edict were ſlaine.
               
               
                  But what endureth long that's violent?
                  The thunder ſeemes ſome time to teare the skies,
                  At ſeas full oft the ſtormes are vehement,
                  To cloudes aloft the waues and waters riſe,
                  Soone after th' aire is cleare, the water lies:
                  Experience and the prouerbs olde doe ſhowe,
                  * Each ſtorme will haue his calme, each tide his flowe.
               
               
                  For when I went for to deſtroy the ſtate,
                  And all the Romanes noble fame t'obſcure:
                  The Senate all, and people did me hate,
                  And ſought which way they might my death procure.
                  Mine outrage they no longer could endure,
                  They me proclaimed a foe to publique weale,
                  To ſaue my ſelfe away by night I ſteale.
               
               
                  The iudgement was, ſuch foes ſhould pillered be
                  By necke, in forke made faſtfull ſure to bide:
                  And ſhould with rods ſo long there beaten be,
                  Vntill therewith the wofull caytiues dide:
                  From this correction therefore faſt I hide,
                  From Galba then proclaimed Emprour new,
                  For feare of death, by deeds deſerued due.
               
               
                  By night (I ſay) forſaken quite, I fled,
                  And Sporus th' Eunuch moſt impure likewiſe,
                  With others three, like filthy life that led.
                  To ſlay my ſelfe I deſperate then deuiſe,
                  Whom all the world did ſo for ſinne deſpiſe:
                  And thirſting ſore in fight, full faine I dranke
                  The waters foule, which in the ditches ſtanke.
               
               
                  
                  At my requeſt my friends would me not kill:
                  Haue I (quoth I) no foe, nor yet no frend,
                  To reaue me from this feare of conſcience ill?
                  Will no man make of Nero yet an end?
                  With that my breſt to point of ſword I bend,
                  With trembling hand, which Sporus holpe to ſtay,
                  And on the ſame my ſelfe aſſai'd to ſlay.
               
               
                  With that, of Galbaes ſeruants one drew nie
                  With fained cheere, as though he helpe me would:
                  Too late you come, call you this helpe (quoth I)?
                  Is this the friendſhip firme and faith you hold?
                  My life was filthie, vile for to behold,
                  My death more vile, more filthie I depart:
                  So mine owne ſword I ran quite through my hart.
               
            
            
               HOW SERGIVS GALBA THE EMPEROVR OF ROME (giuen to ſlaughter, ambition, and gluttonie) was ſlaine by the ſouldiers, the yeare of Christ, 71.
               
                  
                     AMongſt the hautie Emprours downe that fell,
                  I Sergius Galba may be placed heere:
                  Where who ſo ſees and markes my dealings well,
                  To him may ſoone the fruits of fraud appeare.
                  All murders great are bought with price full deare.
                  Foule ſlaughters done, procure as foule a fall,
                  As he deſerues that workes the wofull thrall.
               
               
                  In Rome ſometime I Pretour choſen was,
                  And then obtain'd of Spaine the Prouince faire:
                  To gouerne there, I brought by friends to paſſe,
                  In hope to be the Emprour Neroes heire,
                  For when the Romans did of him deſpaire,
                  So bent at home to ſlaughter, luſt and vice,
                  By warres abroad I wan the praiſe and price.
               
               
                  
                  To get the ſouldiers fauour I tooke paine,
                  For in the Emprours choice they gaue the ſtroke:
                  I therefore ſought ſome ſpoiles for them to gaine,
                  Though thereby oft the lawes of armes I broke.
                  But who may words or actions done reuoke?
                  The ſtaine abides, where euill ſtrikes the good,
                  And vengeance wrecks the waſte of guiltleſſe bloud.
               
               
                  In Luſitania while that time I lay,
                  I cauſde the people there aſſemble ſhould,
                  Reporting I had ſomwhat for to ſay,
                  Which in effect procure them profit would:
                  To which they came as many neere as could,
                  Full thirtie thouſand, thinking nought of ill:
                  All which I cauſde the ſouldiers there to kill.
               
               
                  I ſought by death to poſt proud Nero hence,
                  Not for his vicious life, but for his place:
                  Although his vice, were made the chiefe pretence,
                  Whom all good men accounted void of grace.
                  But yet I could not ſtay ſo long a ſpace:
                  I cauſde in Spaine the ſouldiers me proclame,
                  Which ſtraight they did, and gaue me Caeſars name.
               
               
                  To Rome I hide, and Nero gate him thence,
                  He ſtole away for feare of ſentence paſt,
                  A publique foe proclaim'd for negligence,
                  For ſlaughters done, for fire of Rome the waſt:
                  Eke for becauſe he was of me agaſt
                  He ſlew him ſelfe, before my man could come,
                  Which ſlaughter elſe my ſeruants there had done.
               
               
                  When I my maſter thus ſubuerted had,
                  The Romanes eke began miſlike with mee,
                  They ſaid I was ambitious, nigh ſo bad
                  And cruell, giuen to pride and gluttony.
                  How I was ruled all by Romanes three,
                  
                     Cornelius, Iulius, Celius, for the State
                  My ſchoolemaſters, for which they did me hate.
               
               
                  
                  And Siluius Otho ſought the Empire then,
                  That vicious beaſt, and coward varlet vile:
                  He dealt by gifts ſo with mine armed men,
                  That factions roſe in campe within a while.
                  Which when I came them for to reconcile,
                  To Curtius lake, neere which the armie lay,
                  Of Siluius friends the ſouldiers did me ſlay.
               
               
                  Strooke off my head, and bare it to my foe,
                  Who cauſde it ſhould be ſet vpon a ſpeare:
                  So through the campe they bare it to and fro,
                  Saluting it, now dead, a ſort there were,
                  Which late thereof, aliue, did doubt and feare.
                  O Galba, ioifull daies the Gods thee giue,
                  God ſend thee Galba well long time to liue.
               
               
                  This was the guerdon of my hautie pride,
                  To haue mine head thus wiſe extold aloft:
                  Thus I the gaines of haſty climing tride,
                  To leeſe mine head, and after haue it ſcoft:
                  A thing indeed that chaunceth wonders oft.
                  * Who thinkes that gaine is ſweet by ſheading blood,
                  In purple gore oft yeeldes like gainfull good.
               
            
            
               HOW THE VICIOVS SILVIVS OTHO EMPEROVR OF Rome ſlew himſelfe, the yeare of Christ, 71.
               
                  
                     LIke will to like (for ſo the Prouerbe ſaies)
                  Such are the men, as thoſe with whom they vſe:
                  The Goate with Goate together is alwaies,
                  The Wolfe of Wolfe no friendſhip doth refuſe,
                  The crafty Foxe the Foxe for friend doth chuſe:
                  And euery liuing creature loues his kinde,
                  As well the ſhape as qualities of minde.
               
               
                  
                  And yet all men that come in company,
                  Are not indu'd with qualities alike:
                  One loues ſoft muſick and ſweet melodie,
                  Another is perhaps Melancholike,
                  Another fumiſh is and Cholerike,
                  Another dull and ſottiſh in his ſence,
                  And all (in ſome what) full of negligence.
               
               
                  Now then Complexion is ſomewhat in caſe,
                  Concerning chiefe the diſpoſition:
                  But yet the learned writers haue a place,
                  That manners alter our Complexion.
                  So ſome ſay alſo of correction.
                  And ſure I thinke if that they ſay be true,
                  I after was the worſe for Neroes crue.
               
               
                  His Courtiſane brought me in fauour firſt,
                  Into his Court and fellowſhip I came:
                  To me recount his villanies he dirſt,
                  Not fit to tell, he thought which had no ſhame.
                  I will no more recite of his defame:
                  The day was curſt to me which brought me in,
                  At Neroes houſe, ſuch infamy to win.
               
               
                  But yet another did me more infect,
                  
                     Seleucus ſeene in Mathematiques well:
                  He of my birth a figure did erect,
                  Of many haps and chaunces he did tell:
                  Incited me gainſt Galba to rebell,
                  With warrant if I would inuade the throne,
                  I might aloft with Scepter ſit alone.
               
               
                  To ſeeke reuenge for Neroes death likewiſe,
                  Incited me his enemy to kill:
                  Then with my Souldiers all I did deuiſe,
                  The wayt' accompliſh mine endeuour ſtill,
                  Whom well I might perſwade almoſt to any ill.
                  Eke ſo indeed the Souldiers did him ſlay,
                  And brought to me his head with them away.
               
               
                  
                  I cauſed them to ſet it on a ſpeare,
                  About the Campe to beare it as a ſhow,
                  To put the reſt mine enemies in feare:
                  So they before their puniſhment might know.
                  Great gifts amongſt the Souldiers I beſtow,
                  Where with they all in campe with one aſſent,
                  To chuſe me for their Caeſar, were content.
               
               
                  But now to holde it faſt a worke of skill,
                  I caſt about and many waies did trie
                  With prudent forecaſt to preuent all ill:
                  
                     Non minor est virtus, quàm quaerere, parta tueri.
                  
                  The hautie ſeate hath many a greedy eye.
                  The election was miſlikte, and in ſhort ſpace,
                  
                     Vitellius ſought to vndermine my grace.
               
               
                  In armes we were, and he me battaile gaue,
                  Firſt at Placentia, where I had the foile:
                  From Bebriacke by force he next me draue,
                  And did mine army vanquiſh quite, and ſpoile.
                  There I not able farder to recoile,
                  Deſpairing quite, I wiſt to flie no way,
                  As Nero earſt, with ſword my ſelfe I ſlay.
               
            
            
               HOW AVL VS VITELLIVS EMPEROVR OF ROME, came to an infortunate end: the yeare of Christ, 71.
               
                  
                     TO tread the ſtaire to ſtate, who takes in hand,
                  And thereon enters firſt, by bribes or blood:
                  On ſlippery ground he cannot firmely ſtand,
                  Ne fixt is he, his hold is nothing good.
                  Though hee knew earſt, how firme on ground he ſtood,
                  And thinke to fixe his ſeate with better hold:
                  He cannot ſcape yet ſcotfree vncontrold.
               
               
                  
                  To ſee before his face, the fall of ſuch
                  As climbe vp ſo, and cannot yet take heed,
                  But muſt of force th' imperiall title tuch,
                  Wherein ſo many doubts of danger breed:
                  A point of peeuiſh pride, a rage indeed
                  By blindneſſe blunt, a ſortiſh ſweame he feeles:
                  With ioyes bereft, when death is hard at heeles.
               
               
                  Hence Fortune well tooke name, accounted blind,
                  Becauſe men fortunat, vnfitly ſee:
                  To pleaſures ſweet, and honors all enclin'd,
                  Without reſpect the moſt addicted bee,
                  Regarding nought but titles of degree,
                  Whereby miſhaps, infortunes of their race,
                  In high proſpects, of view can take no place.
               
               
                  This blindneſſe is not of the eyes alone,
                  But of the mind, a dimneſſe and a miſt:
                  For when they ſhift to ſit in hautie throne
                  With hope to rule the ſcepter as they liſt,
                  Ther's no regard nor feare of had-I-wiſt.
                  The preſent pleaſure, glorie, wealth, and ioy
                  Bereaues their gaze, the feare of all annoy.
               
               
                  The trade of men is ſuch, too late th' are wiſe,
                  Too late they know which way miſchances tell.
                  At firſt the Phrygians counſell did deſpiſe,
                  At laſt they knew the way t'haue holpe it well.
                  When Grecians did their noble Princes quell,
                  Had fier'd and ſackt their towne of worthie fame,
                  Then they too late knew how t'haue ſau'd the ſame.
               
               
                  Our Caeſar ſaw too late his cauſe of fall,
                  And Druſus poiſned, had as fortune ill:
                  
                     Domitius Nero hated moſt of all,
                  Eke Galba, which his maſter ſought to kill.
                  So Siluius Otho, whoſe blood I did ſpill,
                  And I Vitellius may affirme with theſe,
                  
                     Illud verum, Serò ſapiunt Phryges.
                  
               
               
                  
                  We all aſſaild, and gate the throne by ſword,
                  So each wee ſaw how they before vs ſped:
                  The only fruite which treaſon hath t'afford,
                  Is loſſe of pleaſures, goods, lands, life or head.
                  The gaine we get, ſtands vs ſmall time in ſtead:
                  The Fame we craue, becomes defame and ſhame,
                  And ruſts for aie, deuouring our good name.
               
               
                  Of ſlaughters mine what neede I here deſcry,
                  Or how the Romanes reft away my life?
                  When I ſeuen monthes had raigned wickedly,
                  Which entred in by bloud and ciuill ſtrife.
                  But this I find too late a ſequell rife,
                  Who takes by ſword from Prince the ſcepters guide,
                  By ſword from him the ſcepter ſo ſhall ſlide.
               
            
            
               LONDRICVS THE Pict, ſlaine by King Marius of Britaine, about the 80. yeare of Christ.
               
               
                  
                     FOrtune was wont in ſtate to lift her children high,
                  And giue thē kingdomes great, & conqueſts at her will,
                  And place thē, as they thought, aboue ye gods welnigh.
                  She blindly leades them forth, as is her cuſtome ſtill,
                  With pleaſures all a while, ſhe doth their fancies fill,
                  And at the laſt doth let them fall adowne againe.
                  Shee ſets aloft, and pulles them downe with might and maine.
               
               
                  When we the glory ſee of thoſe that haue renowne,
                  We are enflamed ſtraight, the like attempts to make:
                  But when we ſee miſchance againe to driue them downe,
                  We are not able yet example there to take.
                  The ſtormes of enuie blacke the hautieſt houſen ſhake,
                  The baſeſt ſort contend, with all their force t'aſpire:
                  The meaner perſons eke, the loftie roomes require.
               
               
                  
                  Amongſt the ſtates of men beſt is the meaner ſort,
                  And golden meane is beſt in euery trade of life:
                  For though a mightie man doe keepe a ſtately port,
                  And yet with men as great doe daily liue in ſtrife,
                  His pleaſure is but paine, and all his ioy but griefe.
                  When we not with our own contented can abide,
                  With auarice we clime, but fall againe with pride.
               
               
                  So though a noble borne could get an higher ſeate
                  By conqueſt, or by weale, by fauour or by fight,
                  And would from mightie Ioue his petegree repeate,
                  Yet ought he not aduance himſelfe aboue his height,
                  He ought not make a claime to that he hath no right,
                  Or truſt to Fortune ſo (although ſhe ſeeme to ſmile)
                  As though ſhe did not turne her ſelfe within a while.
               
               
                  When with my Picts I came firſt to the Scotiſh ſhore,
                  I bare my ſelfe in hand that I could Britaine win,
                  Becauſe that Scythes of whom I came had won before
                  Right many noble Realmes, which they had entred in:
                  Yet I no ſooner could my conqueſt here begin,
                  But ſtraight King Marius came with all his warlike band,
                  And met with me and mine in fruitfull Weſtmerland.
               
               
                  I truſted ſure that Fortune would me guide ſo well
                  As ſhe before had done, in battailes whilome fought:
                  But proofe doth teach me now the certaine truth to tell,
                  What I by Fortune falſe with death ſo dearely bought.
                  Whom ſhe ſometimes ſets vp, ſhe bringeth ſoone to nought.
                  As I that thought this land from Britaines to regaine,
                  In field with all my Picts were vanquiſhed and ſlaine.
               
               
                  T'is folly or the end, for men to praiſe their chaunce,
                  Or brag what luck they haue, or tell their happie fate,
                  Or boaſt how Lady Fortune doth their deedes aduance:
                  For vnto change of chaunce ſubiected is their ſtate:
                  Whom firſt ſhe loues, ſhe afterward doth hate,
                  She flings them headlong downe, whom erſt ſhe made excell,
                  She makes them bare and poore, whom ſhe enriched well.
               
            
            
               
               HOW SEVER VS THE EMPEROR of Rome and gouernour of Britaine was ſlaine at Yorke, fighting againſt the Picts, about the yeare after Chriſt, 206. after others, 213.
               
                  
                     THe ſtay of ſtately throne is nothing ſure,
                  Where great eſtates on bribes or bloodſhed build:
                  As Didius Iulian put for proofe in vre,
                  Th' Emperiall ſeate he bought, and ſoone was kild.
                  So Niger after him aſſaide the ſame,
                  
                     Albinus then, from Britaine armed came.
               
               
                  Theſe three ſtood in my way to high eſtate,
                  Which I ſore thirſted for, but yet at laſt
                  I made therto, by bloudſhed bold, a gate,
                  And vnreſiſted to the throne I paſt.
                  The ſouldiers Iulian ſlew, for inſufficient pay:
                  My ſeruants eke at Antioch Niger ſlay.
               
               
                  Then was my ſeate, me thought, aſſur'd to bide,
                  There could no tempeſt teare my ſailes adowne:
                  No ſhower could cauſe my fixed foote to ſlide,
                  Nor vndercreeper take from me the Crowne,
                  Which had the guide of all Europaes might,
                  He needed not to feare the force of fight.
               
               
                  Encouraged with loue of laſting fame,
                  I entred with an armie into th' Eaſt,
                  Armenia can full well report the fame,
                  Whereas my warlike glory firſt increaſt.
                  
                     Angarus I ſubdude by fight the noble King,
                  And did his ſonnes to Rome for hoſtage bring.
               
               
                  Arabia foelix felt my force likewiſe,
                  Although thoſe warres had not ſo good ſucceſſe:
                  Yet made I them with bowes (goood archers) riſe,
                  Or elſe they had ben driuen to greate diſtreſſe.
                  Their ſhafts from Arras ſhot, made vs to ſmart,
                  They poyſoned of my men by policie and art.
               
               
                  
                  To Parthia thence, againſt the law of armes,
                  We gate, forgot the truce before was plight:
                  And when occaſion fit we found to worke our harmes,
                  King Artabane we did ſubdue in fight.
                  With fire and ſword we brent, and ſpoil'd his land,
                  Tooke captiues, ſlew his men that did withſtand.
               
               
                  To Rome I came, and cauſed mappes be drawne
                  Of iournies mine, by land and ſeas the plats:
                  Not erſt before ſuch expedition ſawne,
                  Nor of thoſe Countries ſeene ſo perfect maps.
                  The world did wonder at my heapes of haps,
                  Rome honourd mee with triumphs when I came,
                  They vnto me of Parthique gaue to name.
               
               
                  But when can princes beſt aſſure themſelues?
                  What ſtate without the ſtormes of ſtrife doth ſtand?
                  What barke beares ſaile in tempeſt on the ſhelues?
                  What bliſſe abides and laſts, by ſea or land?
                  Who takes to raigne the ſcepter in his hand,
                  Is like to him, in ſterne to ſtirre that ſits,
                  Commanding all the reſt, their race he fits.
               
               
                  For while that I abroad for glorie hunt,
                  My ſonnes at home in pleaſures ſpent the time:
                  And as their father erſt before was wont,
                  Endeuourd how aloft they both might clime.
                  The elder fierce and cruell Antonine,
                  
                  The yonger Geta far more milde then hee,
                  Could not at any time in peace agree.
               
               
                  So I endeuoured to appeaze the ſtrife,
                  But nought at all I could therein preuaile:
                  This made me woe and weary of my life,
                  Which erſt ſo many Kingdomes did aſſaile.
                  I had the hap mine enmies force to quaile,
                  To rule the Romanes well, and all the reſt:
                  But for to rule my ſonnes, I was vnbleſt.
               
               
                  
                  Perceiuing then ſome perſons leaud there were,
                  Which counſell'd oft my ſonnes embracing vice,
                  (As ſtill is ſeene in Court enueiglers are,
                  Procurers of deſpite, and auarice,
                  That flattery hold for gaine a gift of price)
                  I cauſde be put to death thoſe Thraſoes vile,
                  And ſome were ſent or baniſht to exile.
               
               
                  My elder ſonne did thinke my life too long,
                  The yonger lou'd the elders life as ill:
                  They ſtudied both to make their parties ſtrong,
                  Which griefe my griped heart well neere did kill.
                  Such are the miſchiefes of the ſtately ſtill.
                  In Britaine eke the Picts rebelling roſe,
                  Some Britaines there became our ſecret foes.
               
               
                  Firſt to be abſent from the force at home,
                  And partly greater glorie to attaine,
                  My wicked children ſought my death in Rome,
                  But chiefely Antonine tooke herein paine,
                  I ſhould by guard or Phyſicke drugs be ſlaine,
                  That by my death the Empire he might ſway,
                  T'obtaine the ſame he often gaue th' aſſay.
               
               
                  Yet no man would accompliſh his intent,
                  For my Phyſitions bare me loyall hearts:
                  My ſeruants eke full true no treaſon ment,
                  But plai'd in each reſpect their faithfull parts.
                  They knew themſelues ſo bound by due deſerts,
                  They ought not, ſeruants, ſuch a Lord betray,
                  That gaue ſo great rewards and gifts alway.
               
               
                  To Britaine ouer ſeas from Rome went I,
                  To quaile the Picts that ruffled in that Ile:
                  And tame the ſtout that tribute did denie,
                  Which were withheld from Romans there a while,
                  And to be abſent from my ſonnes ſo vile.
                  But ſee what haps befall vs in the end,
                  Which ſo in throne to raigne alone contend:
               
               
                  
                  For when I was to Britaine come that land,
                  Where people ſtout, vntam'd vnuanquiſht dwelt:
                  Although once Caeſar Fortunes fauour fand,
                  That erſt before their valiant valour felt:
                  I found the people nothing preſt to pelt,
                  To yeeld, or hoſtage giue, or tributes pay,
                  Or couenants to accept, or fearefully to fray.
               
               
                  They ſaid that we did tributes ſore exact,
                  Whereby their Iſle impoueriſht greatly was:
                  The Picts likewiſe them rob'd, and ſpoil'd, and ſackt,
                  Whereof the Romans ſeemed nought to pas.
                  We ought (they ſaid) to tame the Galloglaſſe,
                  The ranging Scythian Pict that them did ſpoile,
                  If we would reape our tribute of their toile.
               
               
                  On which at length, I did conclude a peace,
                  And ioyn'd in league with them againſt the Pict:
                  But yet the wilfull people did not ceaſe,
                  My Britaines good by inroads to afflict:
                  Whereon to wall them out I made edict.
                  Long ſix ſcore miles and twelue, the banke I made
                  From ſea to ſea, that Picts ſhould not inuade.
               
               
                  By helpe of this, I chaſte the Picts away,
                  And draue them into Albany to dwell:
                  Whereon Fulgentius ſtout without delay
                  To Scythia ſail'd, and there his chance did tell:
                  And with an hoſt of Picts appointed well,
                  He did returne with ſpeed to Britaine ſtrand:
                  (That time I lay by North to guide the land)
               
               
                  At length to Yorke with all his hoſt he came,
                  Beſieging it full ſharpe aſſaults he gaue:
                  Where I likewiſe for to defend the ſame,
                  And from our foes the caſtell good to ſaue
                  Came with my power, as deſtnies on me draue:
                  But in that field it was my chance to fall,
                  I tooke my deadly wound, there ended all.
               
               
                  
                  The Scythian eke receiu'd a deadly wound,
                  Which came to conquer vs, and loſt his feeld:
                  Thus fortune fares her children to confound,
                  Which on her wheele their baſtiles brauely beeld.
                  Let noble Princes then to reaſon yeeld,
                  The dainefull Ladie daintie and demure,
                  Dame Fortunes fauour fickle and vnſure.
               
               
                  Some ſay that I return'd to Rome againe,
                  Sore troubled with the gout, deſiring death:
                  And that I would haue taken poiſon faine,
                  Which me deni'd, to reaue my vitall breath.
                  I tooke a ſurfet great, which wrought my death.
                  The Britaines ſay, at Yorke my bones do lie,
                  The Romans ſay at Rome in Italie.
               
               
                  But this I wiſh, all noble wights to view
                  How I by ſlaughter gate the throne at firſt,
                  My ſouldiers noble men for Empire ſlew,
                  This way to riſe, of all I proued worſt:
                  For why, his hand of gods and men is curſt,
                  To riſe aloft that layes the ground with blood:
                  The ſtates of ſuch vnſtable ſtill haue ſtood.
               
            
            
               HOW FVLGENTIVS A SCYTHIAN, OR PICT, WAS ſlaine at the ſeige of Yorke, about the yeare of Christ, 206. or 213.
               
                  
                     I Am that valiant Scythian Prince the Pict,
                  That vanquiſht oft the Britaines in this Ile:
                  Againſt the noble Romans power I kickt,
                  And kept them play in Britaine both long while,
                  I forſt them make a wall an hundred mile,
                  From ſea to ſea, with towers to keepe me out,
                  Which of vs Picts did daily ſtand in doubt.
               
               
                  
                  Our ancient race (as I can ſhew with skill)
                  Had right by due deſcent to claime this land:
                  Of which repeate ſome proofe therefore I will,
                  That ſo thou maiſt our title vnderſtand.
                  When all mankind felt Ioues almightie hand,
                  That drencht all nations quite, for their foule ſin,
                  Then ſtraight in Scythia did the world begin.
               
               
                  Th' Egyptians hold forſooth that they reſtord
                  The world againe; but, how vnlikely, ſee:
                  For Scythiaes ſite is high as all accord,
                  From vs the fountaines great'ſt deriued bee.
                  The ancient writers all likewiſe agree,
                  That on Armenia mount the Arke did reſt,
                  Till Ioue againe the earth with drowth addreſt.
               
               
                  But they alledge againe their Zone is milde,
                  And fertill, temperate, meete to foſter men:
                  Our Scythian hilles (they ſay) are froſtie, wilde,
                  Which cannot breed but ruder people then.
                  To which I may well anſwere make agen,
                  As God did make the Zones hot, milde, and cold,
                  So did he make like men the ſame to hold.
               
               
                  They ſay we are nigh neighbours to the Pole,
                  Or frozen point: more neere the fire are they:
                  What poyſons breed with them, and Lybians ſole
                  In parching ſands the writers wiſe diſplay.
                  Can nature fraine mankind more deepe decay?
                  Where parching heat, where ſerpents vglie breed,
                  Is no fit clime, whence man ſhould firſt proceed.
               
               
                  But now Ile tell why Scythians ſhould poſſeſſe
                  This noble Iſle: firſt, Lord Neptunus gaue
                  The Iſlands to his ſonnes, both more and leſſe,
                  Eke Albion firſt of all this Iſle ſhould haue:
                  He not with this content, the Firme did craue.
                  Wherefore in France him Hercules diſpatcht,
                  When as he would a Kingdome there haue catcht.
               
               
                  
                  Now as from Noah (of Scythia) by deſcent,
                  Downe vnto Albions time they held the land:
                  From Scythe to Scythian as of right it went,
                  And after him no Scythian Prince it fand,
                  When as vſurpers tooke the raigne in hand,
                  Was it not reaſon we ſhould vndertake,
                  This noble Realme our owne againe to make?
               
               
                  The Romans this deny, but euen themſelues likewiſe
                  (If they from vertue ſtray, as they do vſe,
                  And do Iehouaes lawes and heſts deſpiſe,
                  And right, and truth, and iuſtice ſo refuſe)
                  Shall find how much their Scepter they miſuſe.
                  The Scythian ſhall their loftie ſeate aſſaile,
                  The Prince of Picts againſt them ſhall preuaile.
               
               
                  But of Proud Romes Seuerus now I tell,
                  When he the wall had made to keepe me out,
                  To Scythia hence I ſail'd, and ſtor'd me well
                  With men, munition good, a warlike rout,
                  Of youthfull Picts full ſtrong in armout ſtout
                  A Nauie good I brought, and taking land,
                  Of ſtately Yorke I tooke the ſiege in hand.
               
               
                  The Emperour great Seuerus Parthique proud,
                  With Romans, Galles, and Britaine ſouldiers came:
                  To make me raiſe the ſiege of Yorke he vow'd,
                  And I likewiſe to win and race the ſame.
                  To win the prize we both our armies frame:
                  But he was ſlie, his ſouldiers skilfull train'd,
                  My men to flie by ambuſh, he conſtrain'd.
               
               
                  Againe to fight we fell afreſh, the battell grew,
                  About I brought my wings, and now they ſound
                  Tantara teares alarme, the fluits fight, fight anew,
                  And there a while the Romans fell to ground.
                  The cries and ſhouts of men to skies reſound,
                  They fall, fall, flie, the fluits; downe downe the droms do crie:
                  Whereon the Romans ſound retraite, and ſaine to flie.
               
               
                  
                  My ſouldiers all too raſh had broke array,
                  The Romane rereward caſt about with ſpeed,
                  And both their wings encloſed vs each way,
                  Their maine likewiſe to keepe array gaue heed.
                  Which when I ſaw, it made my heart to bleed,
                  And to Seuerus ſelfe I made my way,
                  Where with my Picts the Parthique I did ſtay.
               
               
                  So when the Emperour fell, a ſhout aroſe,
                  The Romans blancke, amazed, wofull were:
                  
                     Fulgentius faſt recoil'd, death wounded goes,
                  And of my crew a troupe to aide me there.
                  I bought my Britiſh conqueſt all too deere.
                  No conqueſt yet: for as I conqueſt ſought,
                  With my life blood the conqueſt deare was bought.
               
               
                  You noble men, yee ſee what truſt there is
                  In Fortunes gifts, how miſchiefe makes the marts,
                  And how our hoped haps in warres do miſſe,
                  When backe the braue and blinded Ladie ſtarts.
                  High reaching heads ſwim oft in ſeas of ſmarts.
                  The man content, is bleſt, and beſt at eaſe,
                  Which in meane ſtate both God and man do pleaſe.
               
            
            
               HOW GETA THE YONGER SONNE OF THE EMPErour Seuerus once Gouernour of Britaine, was ſlaine in his mothers armes by his brother ANTONINE, Emperour of Rome, about the yeare of Christ, 214.
               
                  
                     IF euer Prince had cauſe his ſtate to rue,
                  Or by his end might moue men mone his chance,
                  My wofull tale may ſhew the like to you,
                  Whom fortune erſt, and birth did high aduance.
                  In Rome, in Britaine, Germanie, and France
                  I fauour had, and liu'd belou'd alway,
                  I Emprour was, what need I more to ſay?
               
               
                  
                  In Britaine while my father waged fight
                  By North againſt the Picts, I rul'd the South:
                  
                     Seuerus ſo appointed it my right,
                  And Britaine Iuſtice had from Getaes mouth.
                  I gaue not then my ſelfe to idle ſlouth,
                  But gaue an end to cauſes great of ſtrife,
                  With doome ſo iuſt, that men reioyſt my life.
               
               
                  The Senate honor'd me for vertues ſake,
                  Abroad the Britaines bleſt me for their bliſſe,
                  The ſouldiers ſtout of me account did make.
                  Let ſtories tell if I do faine in this:
                  Leſt ſome ſuſpect, that I report amiſſe.
                  For what is he, which is not counted vaine,
                  When for himſelfe he ſpeakes, though nere ſo plaine?
               
               
                  In peace I prudent was, and graue of grace,
                  In warres as ſtout, but not ſo fierce withall:
                  Not forſt with feare to turne from foes my face,
                  Nor bought with bribes to let Dame Iuſtice fall,
                  I not oppreſt the weaker ſort with thrall,
                  But ſought to pleaſure all, both neare and farre:
                  More prone to peace I was, then bent to warre.
               
               
                  What heart ſo hard but will for pitie bleed,
                  To heare a Prince which meant to each ſo well,
                  Should haue ſuch cauſe to liue in feare and dreed
                  Of ſword, of bane, of force, or poiſon fell,
                  Not daring Emprour nere his brother dwell,
                  Whom Romans lou'd, and ſtrangers honor'd ſtill,
                  But brothers treaſon cauſed all our ill.
               
               
                  Hight Antonine, I hate his name and facts,
                  Sith he my butcher was, as may appeare:
                  The world deteſts his vile and viprous acts,
                  And ſubtill ſhifts to kill his father deare:
                  So void of grace, ſo void of honeſt feare,
                  He durſt attempt the guard to bribe and fee,
                  That ſo by them his fire might poiſoned bee.
               
               
                  
                  This when our Sire Seuerus wiſt and ſaw
                  How Antonine that bloodie beaſt was bent,
                  Againſt the order quite of natures law,
                  Eke how to take the Empire whole he ment;
                  For both of vs at Yorke he often ſent,
                  Perſwading vs true concord for to hold,
                  And of the fruits of diſcord oft he told.
               
               
                  Yet Antonine regarded nought his heſt,
                  Nay yet the charge of warres he had in hand:
                  T' enlarge his power for th' Empire he addreſt.
                  Which when Seuerus old did vnderſtand,
                  All pleaſures quite and ioyes he did aband,
                  Purſuing warre: neere Yorke he tooke his end
                  By ſword of Picts, or by ſome traytour friend.
               
               
                  Then Antonine made ſpoile of all his men,
                  Phyſitions nil'd before at his requeſt
                  Diſpatch their Lord, to death he put them then,
                  And ſo he ſeru'd of faithfull guard the reſt.
                  What villanie was in this vipers breſt?
                  Was not content with death of thoſe he ſought,
                  But after brings their friends likewiſe to nought.
               
               
                  I was foretold my life he thirſted ſore,
                  And that the Empire ſole he ſought to haue,
                  As we to Rome did paſſe I feared more,
                  I from his courts and diets did me ſaue:
                  I knew my life and th' Empire he did craue,
                  Wherefore in Rome my court I kept likewiſe
                  Apart from his, that did my death deuiſe.
               
               
                  My ſeruants were allur'd by ſundrie gifts
                  By poyſon to procure my lifes decay:
                  He tri'd to cut me off a thouſand ſhifts,
                  What maruell, ſince he ſought his ſire to ſlay?
                  He made his Fathers friends for ſpite away,
                  Becauſe they would not to his will be wrought,
                  To bring them vnto death he daily ſought.
               
               
                  
                  His ſleights for me could take no ſure ſucceſſe,
                  For ſtill his traines and treaſons were deſcri'd:
                  In danger I was forſt to ſeeke redreſſe
                  By like attempts, but that likewiſe was ſpide.
                  * Pretended murder no man cloſe can hide,
                  But out it flies, the rumor runnes a pace,
                  The ſpot thereof all vertues elſe deface.
               
               
                  When this was knowne that I likewiſe aſſai'd
                  His life to reaue (though t'were my life to ſaue)
                  Not long to wrecke the ſame the butcher ſtai'd,
                  He had the thing ſo long he ſought to haue,
                  Cauſe of reuenge the rumor ſmall him gaue,
                  That in the euen he came to ſpill my blood,
                  As I vnarmed with my mother ſtood.
               
               
                  There ſhe perceiuing him with ſword approch,
                  In armes me caught to ſaue my life and blood,
                  But he deſeruing all the worlds reproch,
                  No whit in doubt to end my ſlaughter ſtood.
                  She him beſought (as ſeem'd an Empreſſe good)
                  While he without remorſe of her requeſt,
                  Betweene her armes did run me through the breſt.
               
               
                  Theſe were the acts of that vile monſter then
                  For Empire ſake, to raigne alone aloft:
                  Deſpiſde that was, abhor'd of Gods and men,
                  And curſt to hell by all good men ſo oft,
                  You ſee the fall of Geta, milde, and ſoft,
                  Whoſe line of life no longer fates could ſtretch,
                  Cut off by ſword of Antonine that wretch.
               
               
                  Now maiſt thou deeme of my deſerts and his,
                  He to his ſire of ſonnes was moſt vnkind:
                  His mothers ioyes he reau'd away her bliſſe,
                  That Dame which bare to both ſo milde a mind:
                  And let my dealings aye due fauour find,
                  Whoſe murder may giue plaine proſpect and ſhow
                  What monſter wrought his faithfull friends ſuch woe.
               
            
            
               
               HOW AVRELIVS AN TONIVS BASSIANVS CARACALLA Emperour of Rome, was ſlaine by one of his owne ſeruants, about the yeere of Chriſt, 209.
               
                  
                     WHo thirſts to throng vnto the higheſt throne,
                  Ne wiſely windes Dame Fortunes ſubtile ſnare:
                  Or who in Court would rule the roſt alone,
                  And ſees not what he heapes himſelfe of care,
                  Let him well weigh my caſe, and then beware:
                  Whom forth the ſtately ſeate did firſt allure,
                  Which after did my haſtie death procure.
               
               
                  And, Higgins, here in purpoſe ſith thou haſt
                  The hapleſſe hauen where Fortunes impes arriue,
                  A mirour make likewiſe of me thou maiſt,
                  If thou my life and dealings wilt diſcriue.
                  It may perhaps much profit ſome aliue:
                  Which when themſelues plaine painted forth they ſee,
                  They may preſage their fatall falles in me.
               
               
                  I am that Antonine, Seuerus ſonne,
                  That once of mightie Rome did beare the ſway,
                  Which in my fathers life a ſtrife begone
                  With Geta, thirſting often him to ſlay.
                  I ſought to haue my father made away,
                  To raigne alone ſo great deſire I had,
                  Nought but their deathes my wicked hart could glad.
               
               
                  My father oft exhorted both to peace,
                  Declar'd by ſtories olde what came by ſtrife,
                  Dehorted both from ciuill diſcord ceaſe,
                  But I ſought meanes to rid him of his life.
                  I baniſht to Sycilia Iſle my wife,
                  Encreaſt mine hoſt, reckt not my Britiſh charge,
                  But how I might enioy the Empire large.
               
               
                  
                  And firſt when as my father once was dead,
                  I gaue my ſelfe to all reuenge of foes,
                  The ſeruants late which ſtood mee not in ſtead,
                  And ſome who did my trecherie diſcloſe,
                  Or ſuch to ſaue their Prince themſelues diſpoſe,
                  Or reconcile vs brethren tooke ſore paine,
                  I cauſde them all without reſpect be ſlaine.
               
               
                  The captaines all my friends I ſought to make,
                  In Britaine then deſiring them to chuſe
                  Me Emprour ſole, and Geta to forſake:
                  Which they to doe for duties ſake refuſe.
                  Our mother eke all meanes with vs did vſe,
                  Perſwading vs to loue and concord bend,
                  To which in ſhew I granted in the end.
               
               
                  We both in Empire like from Britaine paſſe,
                  A truce concluded there, and hoſtage take:
                  His reliques ſhrinde (as then the cuſtome was)
                  To Rome therewith our voyage faſt we make.
                  And yet the malice could not ſo aſlake:
                  For in our iournies we durſt neither truſt,
                  But ſeuerall Courts and Diets keepe we muſt.
               
               
                  Both fearing poyſon, force or treaſon wrought,
                  Both crauing all the Empire to enioy,
                  Both working all the waies that might be ſought,
                  To worke to each ſome ſecret great annoy,
                  Both ſeeking how his partner to deſtroy.
                  The brother which to brother ſhould be ſtay,
                  Endeuours how to make him quite away.
               
               
                  And thoſe that bare of dignities degree,
                  The officers, were diuerſly diſtract:
                  Some fauour'd Geta, ſome did fauour mee,
                  In him no point of courteſie there lackt:
                  He was of maners milde, of doome exact,
                  To ſtudies good addict, of comely grace,
                  In warres and peace diſcharging well the place.
               
               
                  
                  But I was rough, and violent, and fierce,
                  Of fierie Mars affected all to blood:
                  What need I more my qualities rehearſe,
                  Which were ſo far vnlike my brothers good?
                  On threatnings, force, and feare, my Empire ſtood,
                  Whereby indeed of fauning friends I had,
                  For feare or gaine were of my fauour glad.
               
               
                  Our mother long perſwading vs to peace,
                  And both perceiuing our attempts but vaine,
                  Did both agree our diſcords to ſurceaſe,
                  And for to part the Empire into twaine:
                  My ſelfe ſhould hold of Europe all the maine
                  With th' Iſles thereof, and Geta all the Eaſt,
                  Of Aſia all the Iſlands moſt and leaſt.
               
               
                  As thus we parle amongſt the Counſell all,
                  And ſo decree, full purpoſed thereto,
                  The Senate, which foreſaw miſhaps might fall,
                  Still ſadly ſate, durſt nothing ſay nor do:
                  But Iulia then the mother of vs two,
                  When ſhe perceiu'd the Senate pauſe for feare,
                  Aroſe to ſpeake, and ſaid as you ſhall heare.
               
               
                  "The ſea and land (quoth ſhe) my ſonnes you get,
                  "You find a way how you may them diuide:
                  "The Pontique floud betweene you both is ſet
                  "For bounds of both it buts on either ſide:
                  "But how will you your mother now diuide?
                  "How ſhall my hapleſſe corps be parted, put
                  "Betweene you both, ſhall I likewiſe be cut?
               
               
                  "If needs in twaine you part this Empire muſt,
                  "I ſee what diſcord after may betide:
                  "How Empire makes men guiltleſſe blood to thruſt,
                  "What noble Peeres for this betrai'd, haue dide.
                  "T'were better both the Romans well to guide,
                  "Then ſeparate farre, without ſo firme a ſtay,
                  "Your ſeuered force ſome treaſon ſhould decay.
               
               
                  
                  "One man himſelfe may much by wit foreſee,
                  "But twaine may more perceiue then one alone:
                  "One friendly man by fauour much may be,
                  "But two in friendſhip knit, need feare no ſone.
                  "Two brethren then to rule the world alone
                  "As brethren ſhould, and liue in faithfull ſort,
                  "The world their loue and honors will report.
               
               
                  "But if diuide the Empire all you will,
                  "Firſt ere you go for to enioy your raigne,
                  "My wofull corps I pray you heere to kill,
                  "And it diuide betweene you both in twaine,
                  "That I may eke with both of you remaine.
                  "Do burie each apart ſo diſtant farre,
                  "Diuided as your ſeats, ſelues, Kingdomes are.
               
               
                  So when ſhe ſpoken had, with teares ſhe came,
                  And ſobs, beſeeching both, embracing vs,
                  And wil'd we ſhould our ſelues to friendſhip frame,
                  Not bearing hate in heart, and enuie thus:
                  On which the Senate nothing durſt diſcuſſe,
                  But all aroſe, departing did lament,
                  Which view'd our thirſting ſore, to bloodſhed bent.
               
               
                  Our hatred ſtill encreaſed more and more,
                  For when that Captaines new elected were,
                  Or officers in place we did reſtore,
                  In theſe, our minds to all men plaine appeare,
                  We diuerſly affected fauour beare:
                  Of right in ſentence eke, of diuers minds,
                  As hate full oft the eyes of Iuſtice blinds.
               
               
                  Our owne we ſought, and not the publike weale,
                  Yet both the publike wealth alone to haue:
                  We nothing reckt to hap the publike heale,
                  But to enioy the publike wealth we ſtraue.
                  To Cookes and Butlers gifts of price we gaue,
                  To poiſon each: when yet not theſe proceed,
                  I hired ſome by force to do the deed.
               
               
                  
                  When this likewiſe had not ſucceſſe aright,
                  My ſelfe, to ſlay my brother, I addreſt:
                  I ruſht into his chamber euen or night,
                  While of my force I thinke he feared leſt:
                  There with my ſword I ſtroke him through the breſt.
                  Eke while our mothers lap his wounds embrew,
                  Her Geta deare betweene her armes I ſlew.
               
               
                  Which done, I flew the place, and call'd the guard,
                  Cri'd treaſon, told I ſcarce eſcapt vnſlaine,
                  Commanding ſouldiers well to watch and ward,
                  And me conuey vnto the campe amaine,
                  Where I might ſafe from violence remaine:
                  I ſaid I ſhould by foes be forc'd to die,
                  If in the Court I longer time did lie.
               
               
                  So they ſuppoſing all was truth I told,
                  (Not weeting what was done to Geta than)
                  Made ſpeed to runne with me vnto the hold:
                  The people hearing this, to flocke began,
                  Enquiring why the Prince and ſouldiers ran:
                  In tent I kneel'd encampt, the gods to praiſe
                  With promiſt vowes, which had prolong'd my daies.
               
               
                  The ſouldiers all reſorted to my tent,
                  Where I the Gods with honor ſerued tho:
                  On which I forth amongſt them boldly went,
                  Told them great dangers I had ſcaped fro,
                  And of mine enmies fall and ouerthro.
                  By Fortunes gift (quoth I) our foe is ſlaine,
                  And th' Empire wholly doth to me remaine.
               
               
                  I promiſt if the ſouldiers me would ſaue,
                  My Empire ſtabliſh ſure, and ſafetie ſee,
                  Each twentie hundred Attique grotes ſhould haue,
                  More corne then earſt by halfe allow'd ſhould bee,
                  The temples wealth and treaſures ſhould be free
                  For them to vſe at large, in that one day
                  
                     Seuerus treaſure I did make away.
               
               
                  
                  The ſouldiers all perceiuing well my mind,
                  (And ſlaughter blaz'd by thoſe in houſe that fled)
                  I was by them the Emperour ſole aſſign'd,
                  And he an enmie nam'd that now was dead.
                  All night in temple forth with vowes I led,
                  Next day to Senate houſe with th' hoſt I gate,
                  And ſeruice done, thus wiſe in throne I ſpake:
               
               
                  I Know right well (quoth I) domestique ſlaughters hatefull ſeeme,
                  
                  
                     And euen the name thereof makes men full ill of parties doeme:
                  
                  
                     For why, th' vnhappie ſlaine moues milder men to mercy ſtill,
                  
                  
                     And noble Peeres are enui'd when compell'd their foes they kill,
                  
                  
                     The vanquiſht iniur'd ſeeme, and victours deem'd vniustly ill,
                  
                  
                     But whoſoeuer ſhall this caſe it ſelfe with truth perpend
                  
                  
                     Not partially that deemes, enſearching what he did pretend:
                  
                  
                     He ſhall perceiue and find it better farre and needfull more
                  
                  
                     To wrecke the wrong, then wincke thereat, and after ſmart therefore.
                  
                  
                     For, to the ſlaine beſide his woe, there comes a dastards name,
                  
                  
                     The victour hath beſide his health, of fortitude the fame.
                  
                  
                     But certes how by poyſons he, and all meanes ſought my ſpoile,
                  
                  
                     You may right ſoone by tortures trie without of farther toile.
                  
                  
                     And therefore I commanded all his ſeruants preſent bee,
                  
                  
                     That you the truth may know, when their confeſſions plaine you ſee:
                  
                  
                     While I was at my mothers houſe, he brought with ſwords his traine,
                  
                  
                     Forwarn'd, ſo arm'd, by fight my foe, I haue mine enmie ſlaine.
                  
                  
                     Sith he about a miſchiefe went, no brothers heart that bore,
                  
                  
                     To take reuenge on ſuch, is due: as custome telles of yore.
                  
                  
                     The founder right of Rome, not with his brother flouting bare:
                  
                  
                     I leaue to ſpeake what Germanique and Titus erst did dare,
                  
                  
                     And Marcus wiſe and milde, his daughters huſband did not ſpare.
                  
                  
                     But I, for me when poyſons were and ſwords to ſlay me drest,
                  
                  
                     Reueng'd my foe, (of foe the name his workes aſſign'd him best)
                  
                  
                     Therefore thanke you the Gods, that they one Prince preſerued you,
                  
                  
                     Behold the ſame, him loyall loue, to him be iust and true:
                  
                  
                     For euen as Ioue aboue, amongst the gods doth rule alone,
                  
                  
                     So he in earth the Empire all, allottes and giues to one.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Thus hauing ſaid aloud, with irefull mood,
                  And bloodie countnance caſt about the place,
                  Th' aſſemblie pale and trembling, fearefull ſtood,
                  And I return'd to'th Palace thence a ſpace.
                  My brothers houſe and fame I did deface,
                  His friends, his ſeruants all, yong, old, and new,
                  And th' infants eke, without reſpect I ſlew:
               
               
                  The Wraſtlers and the Waggeners likewiſe,
                  Muſitians, players, which did pleaſe his mind:
                  Of th' order of the Senators full wiſe,
                  In whom was noble blood or wealth to find.
                  Not one of Getaes friends I left behind:
                  Alſo my wife whom I exil'd away
                  To Sicile Ile, I cauſed them to ſlay.
               
               
                  
                     Lucilla eke that ancient noble Dame,
                  To Marcus wiſe the daughter ſage and graue,
                  Of Commodus that ſiſter great of fame,
                  Which honor much in Rome deſeru'd to haue,
                  I ſay, ſhe did my deeds therein depraue,
                  Becauſe to Getaes mother ſhe wept ſore,
                  For Getaes death: I cauſde her die therefore.
               
               
                  Her ſonne likewiſe, I cauſed ſhould be ſlaine,
                  And of th' Imperiall blood (to make all ſure)
                  I left not one aliue, that might remaine,
                  Or vnto whom they might my place procure.
                  By night likewiſe I put like acts in vre:
                  For day and night I ceaſed not to ſlay,
                  Of Getaes friends to roote the reſt away.
               
               
                  I Veſtall virgins buried eke aliue,
                  And made the ſouldiers multitudes to kill,
                  Becauſe I deem'd they were in words too bliue.
                  Againſt my coach wherein I trauell'd ſtill,
                  The ſouldiers ſlew the men that thought no ill,
                  Or made them buy their liues with all they had,
                  Which were, to ſcape with life alone, full glad.
               
               
                  
                  This done, for feare from Rome with ſpeede I gate:
                  The towne like life at home miſliked me:
                  For why the City did my murders hate,
                  Where ſouldiers held their ſlaughters franke and free,
                  And were enricht by ſpoile of each degree.
                  I gate therefore with all my Martiall crew
                  From Itayle land, Danubian ſhores to view.
               
               
                  Where, vnto hunting I applide my ſelfe,
                  To ride abroad in couch, and giue them lawes:
                  In few diſpacht their pleas about but pelfe,
                  Not giuen to heare long pleading plaints for ſtrawes.
                  I counted ſuch but cau'lling caitiue dawes
                  As ſpent their ſubſtance, time, and goods in ſuite,
                  About ſuch things as could not yeeld them fruit.
               
               
                  I clad my ſelfe much like the Germans then,
                  So trimde my haire, choſe them my guard to ſerue:
                  So framde my ſelfe to pleaſe theſe ruder men,
                  As might them cauſe of me full well deſerue,
                  From labour none with them I ſeem'd to ſwerue,
                  To digge, lift, beare, to grinde, mould, knead or bake
                  In painfull ſort, and ſimple fare to take.
               
               
                  The Germans much reioyc'd my kind of life,
                  My ſufferance great in during labours long:
                  The name of mate with vs was holden rife,
                  I ſeem'd a fellow ſouldier them among:
                  Of ſtature ſmall, yet was I wondrous ſtrong,
                  So that few men which in mine armies were,
                  Could with like ſtrength ſuch weightie burthens beare.
               
               
                  When at Danubius I had placed ſtrength,
                  To Thracia thence with ſpeed apace I went:
                  There Monuments againe I made at length
                  To Alexanders fame: to Rome I ſent
                  Likewiſe of ſtatues for the ſame intent,
                  In Capitole and Temples them to place,
                  For honour great of Alexanders grace.
               
               
                  
                  I made me garments eke of Thracian guiſe,
                  And Captaines me to Alexander call:
                  To Pergame thence in Aſia great that lies
                  I gate, Achilles tombe with honours all
                  With eie to view, as ſtories witneſſe ſhall:
                  Whence (order ſet) to Antioch I farde,
                  Where my receit with honour was preparde.
               
               
                  To Alexandria then I fared faſt,
                  For they had ſcoft full oft before at mee:
                  My mother they had named Queene Iocaſte,
                  
                  
                     Achilles great and Alexander mee.
                  They ſmilde my folly great herein to ſee,
                  Which though I were a dwarfe of ſtature ſmall,
                  Durſt take the name of Captaines great and tall.
               
               
                  Ne Getaes murder ſpared oft to ſpread,
                  As is their nature giuen to taunt and ieſt:
                  Wherefore as though Religion had me lead,
                  I offred ſacrifice with ſolemne feaſt
                  At Alexanders tombe, where moſt and leaſt
                  Of all the youth were preſent to behold
                  The offerings great I brought, and gifts of gold.
               
               
                  This done, I wil'd the youth ſhould all prepare
                  To ſhew themſelues in field: for I would chuſe
                  A band by Alexanders name to fare,
                  As erſt in Thrace and Sparta I did vſe.
                  They came reioicing all, to heare the newes:
                  Where I with ſouldiers come to take the view,
                  Them compaſt in, and all the people ſlew.
               
               
                  The valley all did ſwimme with ſtreames of bloud,
                  So great that time a ſlaughter was there made:
                  It ſtainde the mightie mouthes of Nilus floud,
                  And on the ſhores you might bloud wetſhod wade:
                  My piners eke were preſt with ſhowle and ſpade
                  Tinterre the dead, a monſtrous trench that fill,
                  And on them dead, they reard a mightie hill.
               
               
                  
                  But then deſiring glorie more to get
                  By Parthian name, which erſt my father had,
                  I ſent to Artabane, without of let,
                  Ambaſſage great, with gifts his minde to glad:
                  And for his daughter them perſwade I bad,
                  Deſiring him to giue her me to wife,
                  The cauſe of laſting loue, and end of ſtrife.
               
               
                  By this both ioind in one, we might for ay
                  Of all the world the Diademe poſſeſſe:
                  And might to each in all attempts be ſtay,
                  In fight our foes by firmer force ſuppreſſe.
                  When they my meſſage thus did there expreſſe,
                  At firſt he feard deceit: againe I ſent:
                  Wherewith he was at laſt full well content.
               
               
                  By gifts I wrought, and plight my faith withall
                  For truth to him, and for his daughters loue,
                  And he began me ſonne in lawe to call.
                  Which new report, did all the Parthians moue
                  Vs to receiue, our friendſhips firme t'approue,
                  Reioycing now ſuch league at laſt to ſee,
                  Whereby they might from Romane warres be free.
               
               
                  And ſo I entred Parthia as mine owne,
                  The Parthians me receiued with triumphs great:
                  When mine approch to Artabane was knowne,
                  In plaine before the City of his ſeat
                  He came to meete mee, with a number great
                  Ware garlands gay, in golden veſtures clad,
                  With all the ioy, and triumphs might be had.
               
               
                  So when great multitudes aſſembled were,
                  Their horſes left behind and bowes laid downe,
                  Amongſt their cups deuoide of force the feare,
                  By numbers great the chiefe of all the towne,
                  Which came to ſee the bridemans high renowne,
                  Diſorderly vnarm'd as ſo they ſtand,
                  I gaue my ſouldiers ſigne, to vſe their hand.
               
               
                  
                  And downe by ſword they fell, they could not flie,
                  The King ſcarſe ſcap'd, conueid by horſe away:
                  Their ſolemne garments long, their flight did tie,
                  A ſlaughter great of Parthians was that day,
                  We ſackte their Townes, and noble men did ſlay.
                  From thence I paſt t'Azamia after this
                  To hunt, and gaue my ſelfe to bathe in bliſſe.
               
               
                  Thus hauing runne my reckleſſe race vnkinde,
                  And doubting both of treaſon and my thrall,
                  I ſought by curious arts of ſprites to finde
                  Who ſhould procure in th' end my fatall fall:
                  
                     Maternian at Rome ſhould ſearch for all,
                  He ſhould enquire my fate, of all wiſe men,
                  And write hereof, what was their mindes agen.
               
               
                  What he did write againe; I wote not I,
                  From Carras I to Lunaes Temple went:
                  And for becauſe it neere the Campe did lie,
                  To ſacrifice with few was mine intent:
                  For why to towne from thence returne I ment,
                  And ſo from thence to Campe likewiſe againe
                  I might retire, without a greater traine.
               
               
                  Amongſt the which, one Martiall of my garde,
                  Whoſe brother (not conuinſt, accuſde) I ſlew,
                  Thus wiſe my caytiue corps did watch to warde,
                  (For when therefore conuenient time hee knew,
                  While I apart mee gate for natures due,
                  And bad the reſt aſide a ſpace depart)
                  He came and ſtabde me ſtifly through the heart.
               
               
                  
                     Seuerus ſeruants I corrupted oft,
                  Them fee'd to make their Lord my fire away:
                  With Getaes men the like attempts I wrought,
                  To bane their Lord, and brother mine to ſlay.
                  How I the Alexandrians did betray,
                  And Parthians eke, before to you I told,
                  Deſeruing death for thoſe a thouſand fold.
               
               
                  
                  But ſith thoſe faithfull ſeruants I did kill,
                  Which would not ſley their noble Lords for gold,
                  I worthy was to haue a gard ſo ill,
                  As ſhould to pierce my hatefull heart be bold.
                  The Iuſtice great of Ioua here behold:
                  * Vniuſtly who ſo ſeekes to ſlay the good,
                  The ſword at length ſhall iuſtly ſhed his bloud.
               
               FINIS.
            
            
               HOW CARASSVS A HVSBANDMANS SONNE, AND AFTER King of Britaine, was ſlaine in battell by Alectus a Roman, Anno Dom. 293.
               
                  
                     SIth men be borne by Nature naked all,
                  With their eſtates why are not men content?
                  Why doe they deeme the want of wealth a thral?
                  Why ſhould they loath the lot, which God hath ſent?
                  
                     Adam himſelfe I finde, at firſt was ſent,
                  As one who did diſdaine his poore eſtate,
                  To diſobey, with God to be a mate.
               
               
                  Thou maiſt be made a God, (quoth ſatan than,)
                  If on the fruite forbidden thou wilt feede:
                  The ſenſeleſſe wight the feeble forceleſſe man,
                  Did taſte thereof, ſuppoſing that with ſpeed
                  He ſhould in haſt haue beene a God indeed.
                  He not content, hoping for higher place,
                  Brought bitter bale to him and all his race.
               
               
                  And I the ſonne of Adam by deſcent,
                  Did ſeeke to ſet my ſelfe in princely ſeate,
                  With mine eſtate I could not be content,
                  For which I felt the force of hatreds heat.
                  As at the firſt, my good ſucceſſe was great,
                  So at the laſt, by fancies fond deſires,
                  I groapt for grapes amidſt the bramble briers:
               
               
                  
                  Let ſuch as would by vertue them aduance,
                  Marke by what meanes I did my ſelfe addreſſe,
                  To flie at firſt my poore allotted chance
                  By honeſt meanes: let them from wickedneſſe
                  Which faine would flie, learne this by my diſtreſſe,
                  That he who doth from right and reaſon ſtray,
                  Deſtruction ſhall deſtroy him with decay.
               
               
                  For I by birth borne next to beggers dore,
                  Was ſtai'd aloft with ſtaffe of high eſtate:
                  But whil'ſt that I ſo high a pitch did ſore,
                  I left the meanes which made me riſe of late,
                  I vices lou'd, I did all vertues hate.
                  For which, Caraſſus ran a race in vaine,
                  And nothing got, but death and deepe diſdaine.
               
               
                  When ciuill ſtrife had Britaine quite vndone,
                  So that her ſtrength was now of none auaile,
                  The faithleſſe Picts with ruth did ouerrunne
                  That royall Realme: and did ſo far preuaile,
                  That ſorrow did on euery ſide aſſaile
                  My natiue ſoile: and being thus diſmai'd,
                  To Rome we ſent for ſuccour, helpe, and aid.
               
               
                  
                     Seuerus then by Baſſianus ſent,
                  To bring this Realme vnto ſome quiet ſtay,
                  The Romans and the Britaines both were bent,
                  To bring the barbarous Picts to their decay,
                  Them to returne againe to Scythia.
                  And at the laſt, by good Seuerus aid,
                  We them deſtroi'd, when we were moſt afraid.
               
               
                  Whoſe force though twice the Romans felt too ſtrong,
                  Yet at the laſt we got a goodly day,
                  Euen by my meanes, who thruſt into the throng
                  Of th' armed Picts, I deſperate there did play
                  The part of him, whom feare did neuer fray.
                  And at the laſt to end this mortall ſtrife,
                  I did depriue King Lodricke of his life.
               
               
                  
                  And when the Picts did ſee their king depriu'd
                  Of vitall life, Lord, how they fled the field!
                  They made me muſe, to ſee how faſt they ſtriu'd,
                  With ſtaileſſe ſteppes, ech one his life to ſhield:
                  Who could not flie, he there with care was kilde.
                  So by my meanes, my countrey did obtaine
                  Her ancient ſtate, and liberty againe,
               
               
                  At my returne I to Seuerus ſaid,
                  See here how I with woundes am all beſtead?
                  I cannot liue, I feele how life doth fade,
                  
                     Lodricke himſelfe did carue and cut my head,
                  For which my blade his luke warme blood hath ſhed:
                  He cut my cap, and I haue got his crowne,
                  He loſt his life, and I haue found renowne.
               
               
                  
                     Seuerus then vnto his Surgion ſaid,
                  Heale him, and bring him ſafe and ſound againe,
                  Thou for thy paines with poundes ſhalt wel be paid,
                  And he ſhall haue ſuch honour for his paine,
                  As vnto him for euer ſhal remaine:
                  For by the Gods which rule the ſkies aboue,
                  His noble acts deſerue eternall loue.
               
               
                  When by the ſkill of Surgions curious art,
                  My hurts were heal'd, and holeſome health enſude,
                  
                     Seuerus then reioicing at the hart,
                  Made me a Lord, with wealth hee me indude,
                  Yea, he although my learning were but rude,
                  Sent me to Rome, as Legate of this land,
                  To make report how here our ſtate did ſtand.
               
               
                  My deedes at Rome, inricht me with renowne,
                  My talke abroad with proper filed phraſe,
                  Adornd my head euen with a Laurell crowne.
                  The Emperour did much commend my waies,
                  So that I was bedeckt with double praiſe.
                  I could not reade, my learning was but weake,
                  Yet they of Rome did muſe to heare me ſpeake.
               
               
                  
                  As learned Art doth giue a goodly grace
                  To ſome: ſo ſome by natures gifts doe get
                  Eternall fame, and purchaſe them a place
                  Aboue the place where learned men do ſit.
                  We finde the fine dexteritie of wit
                  In them which be both wiſe and ful of skill:
                  Yet neuer ſtriu'd to clime Pernaſſus hill.
               
               
                  So I with praiſe a time at Rome did ſtay,
                  And tract of time returnd mee backe againe,
                  The Emperour, he gaue my right away
                  Within a while, which made me ſtorme amaine:
                  I had great cauſe me thought for to complaine,
                  
                     Seuerus, he was made the king of all:
                  The gifts hee gaue to me were very ſmall.
               
               
                  I was but made the Captaine of the coaſt,
                  From Forraine force to keepe my realme in reſt,
                  
                     Seuerus, he was crowned king in poſt,
                  Which did ſo boile within my warrelike breſt,
                  That I with griefe moſt ſtrangely was diſtreſt.
                  Shall hee (ſaid I) thus reape the high renowne
                  Which I deſerue? Shall he enioy the Crowne?
               
               
                  I wonne the wreath, and he wil weare the ſame:
                  I got the goale, and he will get the gaine.
                  For me in faith it were a deadly ſhame,
                  If I in this his regall royall raigne,
                  Without repulſe ſhould ſuffer him remaine.
                  Which if I do, then let the dreadfull dart
                  Of 
                        Ʋulcans wrath, torment in twaine my hart.
               
               
                  For why, I ſee what ſeruile ſeruitude
                  Shall then inſue, if he may raigne in reſt:
                  Shall Brittane braue by Romanes be ſubdude?
                  It ſhal no doubt, by Romanes bee diſtreſt,
                  Except my might againſt his might be preſt.
                  My might as yet cannot his ſtrength conſtraine,
                  Yet may my might compell him to complaine.
               
               
                  
                  The draining drops do make the Marble yeeld
                  In time: the ſeas the cragged rockes do rend:
                  And Courtly Kings by tearing time be kil'd.
                  For time doth make the mightie Okes to bend,
                  And time doth make the little twigs aſcend:
                  So I in time, ſuch power may prepare,
                  As ſhall conſtraine Seuerus death, with care.
               
               
                  But whil'ſt I did endeuour to deſtroy
                  
                     Seuerus ſtrength, the Picts were prickt with pride,
                  For their reuenge vs Britaines to annoy.
                  Which when I heard, in poſt I did prouide
                  A power great, then I in haſte did ride,
                  And kept the coaſt ſo ſtrong with men of warre,
                  That no man could arriue, to make or marre.
               
               
                  The Picts preuented of their wiſhed pray,
                  In waltering waues did bouſe their bitter baine,
                  They dig'd a ditch, and caught their owne decay,
                  On rocks their Barkes, in ſeas themſelues were ſlaine.
                  The Weſterne winds with woe did them conſtraine,
                  By Britaine bankes to make ſo long delay,
                  I, and the Seas, brought them to their decay.
               
               
                  By meanes whereof my credit did encreaſe:
                  
                     Seuerus did eſteeme me as his ſtay,
                  I from my firſt deuices could not ceaſe,
                  For aye I hop'd to haue a happie day,
                  To bring the Roman rule to their decay,
                  With fauning face good fortune ſmiled ſo,
                  I had my wiſh, what might I hope for mo?
               
               
                  For into Spaine the Roman ſouldiers ſent,
                  I had at home the might him to depriue,
                  Then wiſely I all perils to preuent,
                  Prouided ſo that no man could arriue,
                  No Pict, nor Scot, nor Roman then could ſtriue
                  With me at home, then I the Lords with ſpeed
                  Of Britaine call'd, and thus I did proceed:
               
               
                  
                  The Roman rule vs ſubiect ſlaues hath made,
                  You ſee my Lords, a Roman heere doth raigne,
                  Whom to deſtroy my power ſhall inuade,
                  I do indeed this ſeruile life diſdaine:
                  And you your ſelues do much thereof complaine.
                  If you with helpe will me aſſiſt, I ſweare,
                  The Roman rule ſhall haue no power heere.
               
               
                  Then they moſt glad with one conſent repli'd,
                  We will aſſiſt thee with what might we may,
                  And we our ſelues moſt willing will prouide,
                  No Britaine borne againſt thee ſhall diſplay
                  His ſhield, but all at the appointed day,
                  As preſt to pleaſe thy heſt, ſhall thee aſſiſt:
                  Win thou the crowne, and weare it at thy liſt.
               
               
                  Which when I heard them ſay with one conſent,
                  Blame not though pride did then poſſeſſe my heart
                  For Princely crowne: the dreadfull diery dent
                  Of wrackfull warre, who would not feele the ſmart
                  Of griping griefe? who would not feele the dart
                  Of dreadfull death? or who regardeth paine?
                  If he a crowne and kingdome may obtaine?
               
               
                  For his gray grotes the countrie clowne doth care,
                  Reſtleſſe with ruth, the Ruſticke gets his gaine:
                  The Merchant man for wealth doth ſend his ware
                  About the world, with perill and great paine.
                  And all the world for wealth doth not diſdaine,
                  Amidſt the ſurge of mightie mounting ſeas,
                  To caſt themſelues their owne delights to pleaſe.
               
               
                  If to obtaine ſuch triffles they do toile,
                  And neuer ceaſe to bring their drifts about:
                  Why ſhould I feare the force of forren foile?
                  Why ſhould I not aſſay with courage ſtout,
                  To wreake my wrath vpon the Romiſh rout
                  Which heere remaine? whom to the bale to bring,
                  Were me to crowne my natiue countries King.
               
               
                  
                  One thing there is which greatly doth me grieue,
                  
                     Seuerus, he who did inhance my ſtate,
                  He did in my diſtreſſe with life relieue
                  My dying daies, he neuer did me hate:
                  Yet now with him I muſt be at debate.
                  Euen him with might I greatly muſt diſgrace,
                  Ere I can ſet my ſelfe in Princely place.
               
               
                  Vntimely death ſhall not deſtroy his daies:
                  For if he will returne to Rome againe,
                  Or if he will reſigne his crowne with praiſe,
                  Or if he will amongſt vs ſtill remaine.
                  If he can like of theſe, we will refraine
                  From ſheading blood: which if he doth diſdaine,
                  I then againſt my will, muſt worke his paine.
               
               
                  So forth I paſt with all my power preſt,
                  
                     Seuerus did at Durham then delay,
                  Whereas I ment his ſtate to haue diſtreſt:
                  But ſome I thinke my ſecrets did bewray,
                  For he to Yorke in haſte did take his way.
                  Which when I had beſieg'd on euery ſide,
                  With care and griefe of mind, Seuerus dide.
               
               
                  See heere the force of cruell fretting care?
                  See heere how ſorow doth diſmay the mind?
                  For when he heard Caraſſus did prepare
                  To reaue his crowne, he iudging me vnkind,
                  With ſobbing ſighes of ſorrow, he reſign'd
                  Before his time his mind from manly breſt:
                  Behold with care how ſorow reaues mans reſt.
               
               
                  Thus he intomb'd in his vntimely cheſt,
                  It was decreed Caraſſus ſhould be King,
                  The three eſtates of all my Realme were preſt,
                  With one conſent they all to me did bring
                  The kingly crowne, then thus they all did ſing,
                  The due deſerts of this renowned wight,
                  Deſerues to be the Britaine King by right.
               
               
                  
                  Marke by what ſteps I did the top obtaine,
                  With keeping ſheepe my youthful yeares were ſpent:
                  Then with the whip I pli'd the plow amine,
                  In Mars his fields to fight my mind was bent,
                  As Legate then to Rome my ſelfe was ſent,
                  I dubbed was a Lord of high renowne,
                  And now at laſt I haue obtain'd the Crowne.
               
               
                  The end of th' act (the Plaudite) doth proue,
                  And all is well, whoſe ending is not ill:
                  Who ſits aloft had neuer need to moue,
                  For feare leſt he ſhould fall againſt his will.
                  Though creeping he did gaine the top with skill,
                  Yet at the laſt, by turning of his toe,
                  A ſudden fall may worke his wretched woe.
               
               
                  Which fall I felt, and how? I heere will ſhow:
                  When I as King did all the Realme command,
                  I fearefull did ſuſpect mine ouerthrow:
                  The place (me thought) did ſhake where I did ſtand.
                  Then for my guard I did prouide a band
                  Of warlike wights, to guard my noble grace,
                  I laſtly did my noble men diſplace.
               
               
                  From forth the fields I for my father ſent,
                  Him of a clowne a noble man I made:
                  My Brethren all euen for the ſame intent,
                  Like Courtiers there in Court with me they ſtai'd,
                  And all my ſtocke were glad and well apai'd:
                  For they of late which rul'd the painfull plow,
                  Of Britaine land they be the Rulers now.
               
               
                  From cart to Court, a countrie man to call,
                  With braue attire to decke a dunghill Dicke,
                  Is like a painted Image in a wall,
                  Which doth deceiue, and ſeemeth to be quicke,
                  Though workmanſhip moſt trimly doth it tricke,
                  Yet of a ſtone, a ſtone will ſtill remaine▪
                  
                  A clowne cannot from clowniſh deeds refraine
               
               
                  
                  As hard it is of quarried Marble ſtone,
                  For man to make a liuely mouing wight,
                  As of a Lout, or elſe of ſuch a one
                  Who daily doth imploy his whole delight
                  To dig and delue, it paſſeth mortall might,
                  To make him ſerue the Court a Kings beheſt:
                  Turne him to plow, the cart for him is beſt.
               
               
                  For though thou canſt by cunning art compell
                  Nature a time to leaue her wonted place,
                  She will returne, in ſpight of heauen or hell:
                  No Alcumiſt Dame Nature can diſplace,
                  Except that God doth giue abundant grace.
                  The Caske will haue a taſte for euermore,
                  With that where with it ſeaſoned was before.
               
               
                  Why did I then my courtleſſe court maintaine
                  With Hob and Iohn, Ralph Royster, and his mate?
                  Whoſe greedie iawes aye gaping after gaine,
                  Did pole, and pill, and bred ſuch ſterne debate:
                  Men much vnmeet to maintaine mine eſtate.
                  Why did I them ſo neere mine elbow place?
                  Becauſe my ſelfe by birth was borne but bace.
               
               
                  Like will to like, the Mule doth claw her mate,
                  With horned beaſts the Ienite cannot ieſt,
                  Thoſe bauling Hounds, the haughtie Hart doth hate,
                  With Beares the Beare in ſafetie counts her beſt.
                  So I amongſt my like did looke for reſt,
                  Their deeds by me were alwaies well allow'd,
                  By them likwiſe my doings were auow'd.
               
               
                  But as you ſee the Husbandman with care
                  From new ſowne fields the rauening rookes to driue,
                  So did the Gentrie of my Realme prepare,
                  My countrie Court and me for to depriue.
                  But Gentlemen were then too weake to ſtriue
                  With me, and mine, for which they did prepare
                  A new found ſnach, which did my feet inſnare.
               
               
                  
                  In ſurgeleſſe ſeas of quiet reſt when I
                  Seuen yeares had ſail'd, a perrie did ariſe,
                  The blaſts whereof abrig'd my libertie:
                  For whil'ſt I did with buſie braine deuiſe
                  Them to deſtroy, which did my Court deſpiſe,
                  The boiſtrous blaſts of hatred blew a gale,
                  My cables crakt, my Barke was bong'd with bale.
               
               
                  For they (I meane the Gentrie of my land)
                  Both me, and mine, theirs, and themſelues had ſold
                  Subiects to Rome, from whence a mightie band
                  They had conuey'd, to make my courage cold:
                  Into my Realme they could not be controld,
                  But when they were arriu'd, they quickly brought
                  Both me and mine, and all the reſt to nought.
               
               
                  
                     Alectus then the Chiefetaine of the reſt,
                  Spoiling my friends, he forſt me to the field,
                  The day was come, we both in fight were preſt.
                  His truſtleſſe traine, did ſeeme to me to yeeld,
                  But all the fields with great ambuſhments fill'd,
                  I could not flee, Alectus had the day,
                  With his owne ſword for breath he made me bray.
               
               
                  As due deſert did force my ſhip to flote,
                  So vices vile me drencht in waues of woes.
                  O falſe ſuſpect, why did'ſt thou make me dote?
                  Fearing my fall, my friends I deem'd my foes:
                  Fearing the worſt, the beſt I did depoſe,
                  And was depoſde: let other learne hereby,
                  The crooked Crab will alwaies walke awry.
               
               
                  And let them know which do not lothe to learne,
                  That Kings in Court, be combred moſt with care.
                  The Pilots charge, who ſitteth at the ſtearne,
                  Doth make him watch, when other do prepare
                  Themſelues to ſleepe: ſo Kings diſtreſſed are
                  With doubtfull dread, and many other things.
                  The ſheepheards life is better then the Kings.
               
               By Thomas Blener Haſſet.
               
            
            
               
               HOW QVEENE HELENA OF BRITAINE MARried CONSTANTIVS the Emperour, and much aduanced the Christian faith through the whole world, An. Dom. 289.
               
                  
                     MEns due deſerts each Reader may recite,
                  For men of men do make a goodly ſhow,
                  But womens workes can neuer come to light,
                  No mortall man their famous facts may know,
                  No writer will a little time beſtow,
                  The worthy workes of women to repeat,
                  Though their renowne and due deſerts be great.
               
               
                  For Iby birth to Coel daughter deere,
                  King Lucy was my good Grand-mothers ſonne,
                  My father dead, I rull'd his kingdome heere,
                  And afterward, the World ſo wide I wonne.
                  I Empreſſe was of all vnder the Sunne,
                  I liued long, I di'd with perfect bliſſe,
                  Yet writers will repeate no word of this.
               
               
                  But now at laſt I haue obtained leaue,
                  My ſpotleſſe life to paint in perfect white:
                  Though writers would all honor from me reaue,
                  Of all renowne they would depriue me quite,
                  Yet true report my deeds ſhall burniſh bright,
                  And rub the ruſt which did me much diſgrace,
                  And ſet my name in her deſerued place.
               
               
                  From Roman rule who Britaine did redeeme?
                  Who planted firſt Gods word in Britaine land?
                  Who did ſo much virginitie eſteeme?
                  Who did the force of forren foes withſtand?
                  Who all the world ſubdu'd without a band
                  Of Martiall men? who did theſe noble acts?
                  I Helena, haue done theſe famous facts.
               
               
                  
                  And now haue heere the ſtorie of my ſtate:
                  The Britaine Queene inheritage me crown'd,
                  Euen then when Romans had ſo great debate
                  Amongſt themſelues for Caracallas wound,
                  An Emperour, who highly was renown'd,
                  As then at Rome, whoſe death vndoubtedly,
                  Diminiſht much the Roman Emperie.
               
               
                  The Romans then were ſtor'd with ciuill ſtrife,
                  And many Realmes againſt them did rebell,
                  Their trouble turn'd me to a quiet life,
                  My Commonweale did proſper paſſing well,
                  When all the world agreed like diuels in hell,
                  Then I and mine becalm'd from hatreds blaſt
                  In happie hauen harboured wee at laſt.
               
               
                  Then I a maid of tender youthfull yeares,
                  Report did ſay, of beautie freſh and faire,
                  Refuſde the ſute of many noble Peeres,
                  Which daily did vnto my court repaire.
                  What thought there were vnto my crowne no heire?
                  Yet I who did regard my Commons good,
                  Refuſde to linke my ſelfe with forren blood.
               
               
                  On forren coaſts, on kingdomes to incroch,
                  With wrath of wrackfull warres I did deſpiſe,
                  And fearing aye the ruth of rude reproch,
                  With carking care I daily did deuiſe,
                  How I with peace might make my kingdome riſe,
                  And how by law of God and man, I might
                  Giue Caeſar his, and vnto God his right.
               
               
                  No God of heauen, no Chriſt my people knew:
                  Wherefore to Rome for learned men I ſent,
                  King Lucies lawes decay'd I did renew,
                  Then preaching made my people ſo repent
                  Their former faults, that all incontinent
                  Were baptiſed, and ſo within a ſpace,
                  The faith of Chriſt they firmely did embrace,
               
               
                  
                  That nothing ſeemed currant in their ſight,
                  But that which holie writers would allow:
                  And that they would imbrace with all their might.
                  To ſhed their bloud, the ſame for to auow,
                  They did not feare, at 
                        Ʋerolane euen now,
                  Amidſt the force of fiery flaſhing flame:
                  
                     Albon the Protomartyr prou'd the ſame.
               
               
                  As carefull merchant men do much reioice,
                  When from thoſe Iles Molocchi, they haue brought
                  Their fraighted ſhips, for then they haue great choice
                  Of Merchandize, which trafficke long hath ſought,
                  To finde the ware, which trial true hath taught
                  Wil get moſt gaine, which being got they giue
                  And caſt their care, how they thereby may liue:
               
               
                  So I, whom both Sir Neptunes ſurging Seas,
                  And Eoles windes, euen God himſelfe aboue
                  Did fauour much, my labouring minde to pleaſe,
                  Giuing thoſe things were beſt for my behoue,
                  Gods word I meane, which all my men did loue.
                  The Pearles which Chriſt commanded to be bought,
                  Muſt here be found, and no where els be ſought.
               
               
                  Then they and I made haſte, poſt haſt, to leade
                  Our ſinful liues as Scripture did allow.
                  We knowing God, him lou'd with feare and dreade,
                  Deuotion made vs crouch, and creepe, and bow
                  Our hearts, our heads; we ſauage were but now,
                  Yet by and by ſuch was the good ſucceſſe,
                  In fiery flames the truth we did profeſſe.
               
               
                  Then flitting Fame the truth to teſtifie,
                  Againſt my wil, at Rome made ſuch report,
                  That Conſtatinus thence did hither hie,
                  And being come vnto my Britaine Court,
                  With louers lookes he ſtriu'd to ſcale the Fort
                  Of my good will: but when it would not bee,
                  He ſighing, thus addreſt his talke to me:
               
               
                  
                  O Queene quoth he, thy deeds deſerue great fame,
                  The goodly gifts that God hath giu'n to thee
                  Be ſuch, as I cannot thee greatly blame,
                  Though thou without deſert diſdaineſt me,
                  Who for thy ſake doth lothe all crueltie.
                  But for thy loue, with Mars his cruell knife,
                  I could command thy Realme, and reaue thy life.
               
               
                  But (out alas) whil'ſt breath doth lend me life,
                  My heart ſhall hate to thrall thy happie ſtate,
                  What though thou doſt refuſe to be my wife,
                  Thy hatred tho, ſhall neuer cauſe me hate:
                  But whil'ſt I liue, I will thee loue, let Fate
                  And Fortune fell powre on me all their ſpight,
                  To die for thee ſhall greatly me delight.
               
               
                  Then I repli'd, O Duke, without deſert
                  Thou doſt me loue, a little Ilands Queene,
                  I know thou to the Emperour heire art,
                  Thy valiant acts I diuers waies haue ſeene,
                  I like thy deeds, moſt noble which haue been,
                  And thee I loue: yet priuate pleaſures luſt
                  May neuer make me throw my Realme to duſt.
               
               
                  If thou (quoth he) wilt daine my Queene to be,
                  Thy Britaines ſhall to Rome no tribute yeeld,
                  You if you pleaſe, to Rome may go with me,
                  Your mightie mate the world ſo wide may wield,
                  Or if you pleaſe, I heere with you will bilde
                  My biding place, and in this little land,
                  I will remaine yours, heere at your command.
               
               
                  His comely grace, his friendly promiſe plight,
                  His famous actes, his Noble royall race,
                  Some other things which heere I could recite,
                  The Romans heart within my breſt did place.
                  And when my wit had weighed well the caſe,
                  Then for the chiefe of all my Realme I ſent,
                  And thus I ſpake to know the whole intent.
               
               
                  
                  My louing Lords, and you my ſubiects, ſee
                  This Roman heire, whom I indeed do loue,
                  He will reſtore your ancient libertie,
                  If I will bend my heſt to his behoue:
                  Which benefits they chiefely do me moue,
                  To loue at laſt, a man by whom you may,
                  Receiue a Shield to keepe you from decay.
               
               
                  Perhaps you thinke I loue, becauſe I ſee
                  His comely ſhape, and ſeemely ſanguine face,
                  You be deceiu'd, no outward brauery,
                  No perſonage, no gallant courtly grace.
                  What though he be by birth of royall race?
                  I recke it not, but this I do regard,
                  My Commonweale by him may be preſeru'd.
               
               
                  For if he will from tribute ſet you free,
                  And end the worke which I haue well begonne,
                  That Chriſts Goſpell preached ſtill may bee,
                  God may by him ſend vnto me a ſonne,
                  To you a King: what wealth then haue you wonne?
                  What great renowne? what honor will inſue?
                  Speake you your minds, theſe things me thinke, be true.
               
               
                  O Queene, quoth they, the Lord preſerue thy grace:
                  Do thou the thing that ſeemes to thee the beſt,
                  We do allow the match in euery caſe:
                  If by that meanes we may haue quiet reſt,
                  With what great good ſhal this our Realme be bleſt?
                  Do thou therefore O noble Queene, we pray,
                  The thing which beſt may keepe vs from decay.
               
               
                  The Roman Duke he nothing would deny,
                  But granted more then I could aske or craue,
                  So that there was proclaimed by and by,
                  A famous feaſt, a banquet paſſing braue.
                  There to the Duke the Britaine crowne I gaue,
                  With ſacred ſpouſall rights, as man and wife
                  We wedded, liu'd in loue, for terme of life.
               
               
                  
                  And whil'ſt we ment to rule this little Ile,
                  A greater good vnlooked for befell,
                  Death did deſtroy his Sire with hateful hand:
                  For which we both at Rome muſt now go dwell,
                  And ſo we did: things proſpered paſſing well,
                  My Feere was made the Emperour, Lord and king
                  Of all: and I the Queene of euery thing.
               
               
                  His mightie Mace did rule the Monarchie,
                  My wit did rule (ſome writers ſay) his Mace,
                  And to increaſe with ioy our merrie glie,
                  I brought him forth a babe of Royall race,
                  The boy he had an amiable face.
                  O Rome thou maiſt reioyce, for this was he,
                  Which did at Rome erect Diuinitie.
               
               
                  Whil'ſt thus in bliſſe I did at Rome remaine,
                  A Britaine ſtill my mind her care did caſt,
                  For which I cauſ'd my husband to ordaine,
                  That euermore thoſe ancient Lawes ſhould laſt,
                  Which heretofore amongſt them there I paſt,
                  And that to Rome no Britaine borne, for aye,
                  Should taxe, or toll, or tenth, or tribute pay.
               
               
                  Though there at Rome an Empreſſe life I led,
                  And had at hand what I could wiſh or craue,
                  Yet ſtill me thought I was not wel beſtead,
                  Becauſe I was ſo farre from Britaine braue.
                  Which when my louing Lord did once perceiue,
                  He ſet a ſtay in all the Emperie,
                  To Britaine then he did returne with me.
               
               
                  We raign'd of yeeres thrice ſeuen with good ſucceſſe,
                  Then Dolor and Debilitie did driue
                  My louing Lord with fainting feebleneſſe,
                  For vitall life with braying breath to ſtriue:
                  He felt, how death of life would him depriue,
                  He cal'd his Lords, his child, and me his wife,
                  And thus he ſpake, euen as he left his life:
               
               
                  
                  The haughtie Pines of loftie Libanus,
                  From earth, to earth, in tract of time returne:
                  So I whoſe ſpreading praiſe were maruellous,
                  Muſt now returne my fleſh to filthie ſlime,
                  On Fortunes wheele I may no longer clime.
                  Therefore my Lords, although my glaſſe be runne,
                  Yet take remorſe on Constantine my ſonne.
               
               
                  My Monarch, Court, my Kingdomes all,
                  (O ſtately Rome) farewell to them, and thee,
                  Farewell my Lords, which ſee my finall fall,
                  Farewell my child, my wife, more deare to mee
                  Then all the world, we muſt depart I ſee:
                  And muſt we needs depart? O Fortune fie,
                  We muſt depart, adue, farewell, I die.
               
               
                  Wherewith he ſigh'd and ſenſeleſſe did remaine,
                  Then I his death as women do, did waile:
                  But when I view'd, that weeping was but vaine,
                  I was content to beare that bitter bale,
                  As one who found no meanes for her auaile.
                  His corps at Yorke in Princely Tombe I laid,
                  When funerall ſacred ſolemne rites were paid.
               
               
                  And when report his death about had blowne,
                  
                     Maxentius then the triple crowne to weare,
                  Did challenge all the Empire as his owne,
                  And for a time that mightie Mace did beare:
                  Which when my ſonne, my Constantine did heare,
                  The youthfull Lad, indeuour'd by and by,
                  To claime his right by Mars his crueltie.
               
               
                  I then his tender youthfull yeares to guide,
                  Went with my ſonne to ſee his good ſucceſſe,
                  He being Campt by fruitfull Tybers ſide,
                  To ſpoile his foe he did himſelfe addreſſe,
                  He knew that God did giue all happineſſe.
                  Therefore to God, euen then the youth did pray,
                  With mightie hand to keepe him from decay.
               
               
                  
                  Behold how God doth godly men defend,
                  And marke how he doth beate Vſurpers downe.
                  
                     Maxentius now he all his force doth bend,
                  For to defend his Diadem and Crowne.
                  But froward Fate vpon the Prince did frowne:
                  For why his men were ſcattered euery where,
                  In Tyber he did drowne himſelfe for feare.
               
               
                  To Rome then we and all our hoſt did hie,
                  The Romans they with ioy did vs receiue,
                  To Constantine they gaue the Emperie,
                  But he of them moſt earneſtly did craue,
                  That I the rule of all the world might haue:
                  It is (quoth he) my mothers right to raigne,
                  Till dreadfull death hath ſhred her twiſt in twaine.
               
               
                  I grant my ſonne, the Monarchie is mine,
                  For at his death thy father gaue it me
                  For terme of life: but let it now be thine,
                  I aged muſt go pay the earth her fee,
                  I am content to liue with leſſe degree.
                  O louing ſonne, giue eare vnto my heſt,
                  I will not rule, that charge for thee is beſt.
               
               
                  And when he might not rule his mothers mind,
                  Againſt his will he willing did aſſent,
                  That all ſhould be as I had then aſſign'd,
                  To rule the world, he grieued was content.
                  And whil'ſt that there my happie daies I ſpent,
                  Reioycing much to ſee my ſonnes ſucceſſe,
                  I di'd and had a heauenly happineſſe.
               
               
                  Thrice happie I who ran this royall race,
                  And in the end my wiſhed Goale did get:
                  For by my meanes all people did embrace
                  The faith of Chriſt, the orders I did ſet
                  They were obey'd with ioy, which made me ier.
                  Euen in this bliſſe a better bliſſe befell,
                  I di'd, and now my ſoule in heauen doth dwell.
               
               
                  
                  So now you ſee the happie hap I had:
                  Learne then thereby to do as I haue done,
                  To praiſe Gods name let euery Prince be glad:
                  To perſecute the truth let all men ſhunne,
                  By vertuous waies great honor may be wonne.
                  But he who doth to vices vile incline,
                  May be compar'd vnto a filthie ſwine.
               
               
                  Who doth not loue the plaine nor pleaſant way,
                  He cannot feare to ſleepe amidſt the greene,
                  But in the mire he doth delight to lay:
                  So Princes ſuch as vile and vidious beene,
                  Do tumble aye amidſta ſinke of ſinne,
                  Whoſe names on earth, whoſe ſoules in hel remaine
                  In infamie, the other pincht with paine.
               
               
                  Let them that ſeeke for euerlaſting fame,
                  Tread in the ſteps that I before haue trod,
                  And he who would auoid reprochfull ſhame,
                  And flee the ſmart of Plutoes ruthfull rod,
                  Let him not ceaſe to learne the law of God,
                  Which only law mans ſtumbling ſteps doth guide:
                  Who walkes therein, his feete can neuer ſlide.
               
            
            
               HOW VORTIGER DESTROYED THE YONG KING CONSTANTINE, and how hee obtained the Crowne: and how after many miſeries, he was miſerablie burnt in his Castle, by the brethren of Conſtantine, Anno Dom. 446.
               
                  
                     BY quiet peace of Ianus iollitie,
                  Their happie hauens ſome with forewinds haue,
                  By wrackfull warre of Mars his crueltie,
                  With much adoe ſome get the Goale they craue,
                  But ſubtill ſleights and fetches bolſtred braue,
                  My hapleſſe hand did hit with leuelled line,
                  The aimed marke, the more miſhap was mine.
               
               
                  
                  By gifts of grace ſome men haue happy hap,
                  By bleſſed birth to Kingdomes borne ſome be:
                  Succeſſion ſets ſome men in Fortunes lap,
                  By wiſedome, wit, and prudent policie:
                  Some clime aloft by truſtleſſe treacherie:
                  And courage doth a multitude aduance,
                  Drifts finely filde they did my ſtate inhance.
               
               
                  I Vortiger by birth was borne a Lord,
                  King Conſtantine his Coſin did me call,
                  I cride amaine, and clapt his crowne abord,
                  And for a time til Fortune forſt my fall,
                  With reſtleſſe bliſſe I ſate in ſtately ſtall:
                  But men of warre of much more might then I,
                  For my deſert my carefull corps did fry.
               
               
                  As furions force of fiery flaſhing fame,
                  With Cinders brought my body to decay,
                  So ſmuldering ſmokes of euerlaſting ſhame
                  Choakt my renowne, and wipte my fflame away.
                  What may I more of my miſfortune ſay?
                  I ſigh to ſee, I ſilent ccaſe to tell
                  What me deſtroid, and drownd my ſoule in hel.
               
               
                  Here to repeat the parts that I haue plaid,
                  Were to vnrippe a truſſe of trumpery,
                  For me to ſhew how I aloft was ſtaid,
                  Were to erect a ſchoole of Trechery:
                  Silence is beſt, let no man learne by me
                  Nor by my meanes, how they by wicked waies,
                  From low eſtate, aloft themſelues may raiſe.
               
               
                  As good men can by wicked workes beware,
                  So wicked men by wicked workes be wiſe,
                  If ill men read my deedes which wicked were,
                  They by my meanes will compaſſe their ſurmiſe:
                  For wicked workers daily doe deuiſe,
                  To make examples vile and vitious,
                  To ſtand in ſtead, to ſerue their lawleſſe luſt.
               
               
                  
                  The Serpent thence his venim vile doth draw,
                  From whence the Bee her hony ſweet doth get,
                  Leaud liuers learne to breake the written law,
                  By that, whereby good men do learne much wit.
                  For wicked men each fetch is thought moſt fit,
                  To ſerue their turne: therefore I count it beſt,
                  To leaue my faults and follies vnconfeſt.
               
               
                  Giue leaue therefore good Memory, I may
                  Not heere repeate my tedious Tragedie,
                  Inquirie, let me now depart away.
                  My Commonweale ſubuerted was by me,
                  I leaudly liu'd, and di'd in miſerie,
                  And for my faults I felt diſdainfull ſmart,
                  Let this ſuffice, and let me now depart.
               
               
                  With that he ſeem'd as one that would away,
                  But Memory (ſtay ſtay thy ſteps, quoth ſhe)
                  Let wicked men procure their owne decay,
                  We recke it not, if warned once they be.
                  Let that ſuffice, and let thy miſerie
                  Make iuſt report, how vaine, and vile a thing
                  It is, to liue as a vſurping King.
               
               
                  Sith needs I muſt repented faults forerunne
                  Repeat, and tell the fall and foile I felt,
                  Patience perforce, to ſpeake ſhame bids me ſhunne,
                  To thinke thereof doth make my heart to melt.
                  But ſith I needs muſt ſhew how heere I delt,
                  I am content to tell the truth of all,
                  Let wiſe men learne to ſtand, which reade my fall.
               
               
                  For firſt I cauſde the yong King Constantine,
                  
                  Of faithleſſe Scots and Picts to make his guard,
                  They by my meanes did kill their King in fine,
                  For which, with ſpeed I ſent them all to ward,,
                  And hang'd them all, their cauſe was neuer heard:
                  So I who firſt did cauſe them kill their King,
                  To ſtop their mouthes, the mall to death did bring.
               
               
                  
                  Where Rancor rules, where hatreds heate is hot,
                  The hurtleſſe men with trouble be turmoil'd:
                  Where malice may ſend forth her Cannon ſhot,
                  There might is right, there reaſons rules are foil'd.
                  For ruthfull Rancor euermore hath boyl'd
                  With griping griefe: her ſmuldring ſmokes of ſpite
                  Would gladly choke all iuſtice, law, and right.
               
               
                  So might, not right, did thruſt me to the Throne,
                  I ſixteene yeares did weare the royall Crowne,
                  In all which time with griefe I aye did grone,
                  As one who felt the fall from high renowne.
                  My Noble men deuiſde to thruſt me downe
                  In all this time, and many did proteſt,
                  I laid the King in his vntimely cheſt.
               
               
                  At laſt, my foes my friends were made, and I
                  Had quiet peace, and liu'd a happie King:
                  Yea, God who rules the haughtie heauen a high,
                  Inricht my Realme with foyſon of each thing,
                  Abundant ſtore did make my people ſing.
                  As they of yore were preſt with penurie,
                  So now they hate their great fertilitie.
               
               
                  My people had of corne and oyle ſuch ſtore,
                  That countrie men of tillage left the toile,
                  The rich man fed no better then the poore,
                  For all did reape the fatneſſe of the ſoile,
                  No man for meate nor money then did toile,
                  But all reioyce with ioyfull Iubilie,
                  And all were ſouſt with ſinfull gluttonie.
               
               
                  As clouds diſſolu'd faire Phoebus doth deface,
                  So plague my plentie dim'd with darke diſeaſe:
                  For whil'ſt my Realme in riot ran her race,
                  They plai'd, not prayed, and did their God diſpleaſe.
                  For which they drown'd in ſorowes ſurging ſeas,
                  Like rotten ſheepe by thouſands di'd ſo thicke,
                  The dead could not be buried by the quicke.
               
               
                  
                  When thus the plague my people did oppreſſe,
                  That few were left aliue within my land,
                  The barbarons Picts, with ſpeede themſelues addreſt,
                  Knowing their time, they raiſde a mightie band,
                  They knew right ſoone, how here my ſtate did ſtand.
                  And to reuenge the wrong that earſt I wrought,
                  They ment to bring both me and mine to nought.
               
               
                  See how abuſe breeds blake and bitter bale,
                  Miſuſe doth make of plenty, lothſome lacke,
                  Amidſt his bliſſe with wo it makes man wale,
                  Onely abuſe doth worke mans wretched wracke:
                  Amidſt my ioyes, from ioy it beat me backe.
                  For I and mine miſuſde our preſent bleſſe,
                  Which brought both me and mine to wretchedneſſe.
               
               
                  We firſt miſuſde our preſent pleaſant plentie,
                  For which we whipt in thrall with ſcourges three,
                  Had Peſtilence, which made my kingdome emptie,
                  It did deſtroy my men of ech degree,
                  Then fainting Famine plaide her Tragedy,
                  
                     Bellona then that beaſtly bloody Queene,
                  Did blow her Trumpe to daſh my courage cleane.
               
               
                  When ſickeneſſe had conſumde my ſubiects quite,
                  The Picts with pride did haſte to ſpoile my land,
                  I had no men, nor meanes with them to fight,
                  For which I ſent and did obtaine a band
                  Of Saxons, ſuch as did the Picts withſtand.
                  Whoſe helpe that I when need requir'd might haue,
                  I gaue them Kent, a countrey paſſing braue.
               
               
                  Theſe Saxons were a crew of warrelike wights,
                  They liu'd by ſpoile, and had no biding place,
                  They were of truth a troupe of Martial knights,
                  Which ſeru'd for pay where Mars extold his Mace.
                  
                     Saxons indeed they were of royal race,
                  They Angli hight, a ſtocke of worthy fame,
                  Of them this realme of England tooke her name.
               
               
                  
                  Theſe Angli brought the Britaines to the bay,
                  We Welchmen call'd, to Wales they did vs driue,
                  They brought ſixe ſorts of Saxons to decay,
                  And got the Goale for which they long did ſtriue.
                  Of other ſtockes they left not one aliue,
                  They all this Realme did plant with Angli then,
                  And term'd themſelues of Angli, Engliſhmen.
               
               
                  But how they brought this enterpriſe about,
                  Marke well the ſequell which I ſhall recite:
                  
                     Hengestus he the Chiefetaine of the rout,
                  A ſuttle Sir, an vndermining wight,
                  To ſeed my vaines he tooke a great delight.
                  His craftie head did deeme it the beſt way,
                  With pleaſant baits to make my crowne his pray.
               
               
                  He me his King inuited to a feaſt,
                  A feaſt in faith, which forſt my finall fall:
                  Where Cupids curſe conſtrain'd me like a beaſt,
                  From Pallas Prince to giue the golden Ball.
                  For Venus vants to Helene threw my thrall,
                  Whoſe heauenly hue, whoſe beauty freſh and faire
                  Was burniſht bright like Phoebus in the aire.
               
               
                  I being ſet at Bacchus banquetting,
                  His daughter deckt with Natures Tapiſtrie,
                  And trimly trickt with euery other thing,
                  Which might delight a louers fantaſie:
                  Why ſhould mans mind to loue thus ſubiect be?
                  I had a wife, a paſſing princely peece,
                  Which far did paſſe that gallant Girle of Greece.
               
               
                  Yet from my wife (the worthieſt Queene aliue,)
                  My fancies fell, I loth'd her louely bed:
                  How I Hengestus daughter might atchieue
                  Was all my care, I did this Damſell wed,
                  My wife diuorſt, I had her in the ſted.
                  Her louely lookes, her pretie pleaſant cheare,
                  Made me eſteeme her only loue moſt deare.
               
               
                  
                  I wore the crowne, her wil did rule the reſt,
                  And her demaund I neuer did deny:
                  What ſhe allow'd I did eſteeme that beſt.
                  Which when her Father Hengeſt did eſpie,
                  He had the pray for which he long did prie.
                  He made his hay whilſt weather faier was,
                  And by her meanes he brought it thus to paſſe:
               
               
                  That Britaines we with toile ſhould till the ground,
                  They Saxons would defend our wealth with warre:
                  Which granted once, they did inhabit round
                  About my realme, and might both make and marre.
                  New Saxons in my realme arriued were,
                  By meanes whereof my Britaines did ſuſpect
                  The Saxons ſleights, and did their deedes detect.
               
               
                  Then they good men to me their king complaind,
                  Theſe men, quoth they, from vs our realme wil win,
                  Except they from our frontiers be refraind.
                  Which when they told, my wife ſhe was within,
                  O huſband deare, they be (ſaide ſhe) my kin,
                  Ceaſe of thy force thy faithful dreades to feare,
                  They meane no hurt, by Ioue the iuſt I ſweare.
               
               
                  So I eſteemed not my ſubiects health,
                  That I might ſtill my Ladies loue enioy,
                  They view'd me careleſſe of my common wealth,
                  To ſaue themſelues they meant me to annoy,
                  Mine eldeſt ſonne a proper prety boy,
                  They made their king, and me for my deſart,
                  They did depriue: with paine which pincht my hart.
               
               
                  Then Vortiger my ſonne and king purſude
                  The Saxons ſore, and did amaze them much,
                  For which my wife his mother lawe indude
                  With diuelliſh ſpite, againſt the youth did grutch,
                  She him deſtroi'd, her good ſucceſſe was ſuch:
                  When he ſeuen yeares had raign'd with great renowne,
                  With poyſon ſhe depriu'd him of his crowne.
               
               
                  
                  I to obtaine the ſeate from whence I fell,
                  With ſacred oath I ſolemnely did ſweare,
                  To end the worke, which was begun ſo well,
                  And to ſubdue the Saxons euery where.
                  The Britaines to my Kingly crowne did reare
                  Me quickly then, I at the firſt, by might
                  Defaſte my foes in euery fray and fight.
               
               
                  Then lothſome Luck did turne her whirling wheele,
                  With treaſon truſt intrapt did me betray,
                  Hatefull Miſhap ſhe had me by the heele,
                  And clapt me cloſe in dungeon of decay,
                  To Hengest now I muſt a ranſome pay.
                  And if I lou'd my life and libertie,
                  I needs muſt grant all he doth aske of me.
               
               
                  For changed chance of Mars his warres, hath made
                  Me of a King a Captaines priſoner,
                  To whom there muſt now fower Shires be paide,
                  Northfolke, Southfolk, Southſex and Kent they were,
                  Me to releaſe from out my caue of care.
                  Which being done, I led my life in doubt,
                  And fled for feare to Wales with all my rout.
               
               
                  Whereas I found a place that pleaſde me much,
                  The ſituation ſeem'd ſo paſſing ſtrong,
                  The world me thought might not annoy it much,
                  A caſtle there I built: it were too long
                  Heere to repeate, ſilence ſhall do no wrong
                  To Marlain, he who wonders there hath wrought,
                  If ancient writ to vs the truth hath taught.
               
               
                  When I had built my Princely bower there,
                  In bloodie fields I meant no more to ſtriue:
                  But true report did daſh my preſent cheere.
                  In Totneſſe hauen two brethren did arriue,
                  Which quickly would from that my fort me driue,
                  The brethren both of Constantine the King,
                  
                     Peccaui they did meane to make me ſing.
               
               
                  
                  From worſe to worſe, ſeldome is better ſeene,
                  Our preſent ioyes hereafter thralles do thret,
                  And he who now doth flouriſh freſh and greene,
                  Muſt fade and fall as Hyems froſts do fret
                  Dame Floraes fields, or as the raine with wet
                  In dropping daies the pleaſant plains doth drowne,
                  So ruthfull men bereaue vs of renowne.
               
               
                  Men may therefore like Marmaids euer mourne,
                  The ſhining Sunne who do ſo much delight,
                  That aye they waile like Furies quite forlorne.
                  When Sol doth ſhine, when Titans beames be bright,
                  They feare the ſtormes that may hereafter light,
                  They weepe becauſe they muſt the Sunne forgo,
                  When ſtormes do fall, they waile their preſent wo.
               
               
                  So mortall man with malice all beſted,
                  When good ſucceſſe doth ſound a bleſſed blaſt,
                  With briniſh teares then may they eate their bread.
                  For happie daies from man doth flee as faſt
                  As powders force from peece doth pellet caſt,
                  And troubles tedious time with paſeleſſe ſtay,
                  Once wonne (alas) will neuer walke away.
               
               
                  How I in maze of trouble heere did toile,
                  Iudge you which ſee me trauiſe in the ſame,
                  And how I was inforſt to finall foile,
                  Not now, for now although it doth me ſhame,
                  I will declare, how I was fri'd with flame.
                  For Ambroſe he and 
                        Ʋter Pendragon,
                  
                  My caſtle burnt, me and my men each one.
               
               
                  Then Ambroſe with his brothers crowne was crown'd,
                  Which I from him had reaft againſt all right.
                  So now you ſee vpon what ſlipperie ground
                  They ſtand, which do extoll themſelues by might,
                  Their wandring feete do walke as in the night,
                  Their ſtumbling ſteps their guiltie minds do feare,
                  They daily ſee the blocke of bale appeare.
               
               
                  
                  With ſcalding ſighes they do themſelues conſume,
                  For feare to fall doth yeeld none other fruit,
                  They rage with wrath, they daily fret and fume,
                  Ruthfull reuenge them alwaies hath in ſute,
                  And right in time makes might both mum and mute:
                  For that which might by ſecret meanes hath wrought,
                  By tract of time to open ſhew is brought.
               
               
                  Vſurpers then do reape their right reward,
                  The foile once felt, they feele how vile and vaine
                  It is, to be to high degrees prefer'd
                  By lawleſſe meanes they find what pinching paine,
                  Amid'ſt the minds of ſuch men do remaine,
                  They alwaies throng'd with cruell thretting thrall,
                  Do feed vpon none other food but gall.
               
               
                  A proofe whereof a plat, a paterne plaine,
                  The ruthfull race I 
                        Ʋortiger haue run,
                  Deſciphers ſo, that man may ſee how vaine
                  A thing it is his former Fate to ſhun:
                  Honor obtain'd (alas) what haue we won?
                  A hidious heape of cruell carking care,
                  Which to conſume mans life doth neuer ſpare.
               
               Thomas Blener Haſſet.
            
            
               HOW VTER PENDRAGON WAS INAMOVRED ON the wife of Gorolus Duke of Cornewall, whom he ſlew, and after was poiſoned by the Saxons, Anno Dom. 500.
               
                  
                     WE leade our liues by fancies fond delight,
                  For kingdomes ſome do buſie much their braine,
                  But Cupids curſe that wretched little wight,
                  That blinded boy vnto my pinching paine,
                  Dub'd me a Knight of daintie Venus traine,
                  Where beames of Beautie brought me by and by,
                  To caſt my care to pleaſe my Ladies eye.
               
               
                  
                  O Beautie braue, thy gladſome glittering gleames,
                  With ſmiling cheare and wildie winking eyes,
                  Doth drowne with dole amidſt the ſurging ſtreames
                  Of deepe deſpaire, the wights which be moſt wiſe.
                  Aye me, my wit, my pen cannot deuiſe
                  Of Beautie braue to make a true diſcourſe,
                  To thinke thereof I feele my ſelfe the worſe.
               
               
                  I Pendragon of Britaine crowned King,
                  The fretting force of Beauties hatefull hew,
                  Thoſe frying flames I felt, that hatefull ſting,
                  That wounds my fame, which now too late I rew,
                  Whil'ſt with delight I did thy vanting view,
                  I like the Hauke which ſoares in good eſtate,
                  Did ſpie a Stale, I ſtoopt, and tooke a Mate.
               
               
                  For at what time the Saxons did aſſaile
                  My Britaine ſtate, and tooke each man a ſhare,
                  My kingdome they euen for their beſt auaile,
                  Did then diuide: for which with carking care
                  Them thence to driue, I did my powre prepare.
                  And being come to Cornewall with my band,
                  I ment to haue Duke Gorolus helping hand.
               
               
                  There in the Church I ſet to ſacrifice,
                  Thoſe holy vowes, which victories require:
                  Euen whil'ſt I did with all my heart deuiſe,
                  How to ſubdue my foes with ſword and ſpeare,
                  Euen then there did this peereleſſe Pearle appeare,
                  Duke Gorolus wife, whoſe gallant gate and grace,
                  Stealing mine heart, my honor did deface.
               
               
                  When Vortiger my brother did oppreſſe,
                  In exile then my youthfull yeares were ſpent,
                  At my returne his fault he did confeſſe,
                  And from his crowne the crowne in haſte I ſent.
                  Then my delight was in the dierie dent
                  Of wrackfull warre, but now transform'd I ſtand,
                  The ancient Oke muſt grow now like a wand.
               
               
                  
                  I maruail'd much how Syrens ſongs might pleaſe,
                  But now I muſe that Circes forcerie,
                  Doth not from euery man bereaue his eaſe.
                  
                     Calipſoes cups with poiſoned treacherie,
                  Cannot ſo much abridge mans libertie,
                  As Syrens ſongs, and Circes ſuttle art,
                  Whoſe chaunting charmes inwrapt with wo my heart.
               
               
                  
                     Vlyſſes ſayling by the perillous place,
                  Where theſe to pleaſe the paſſers by, did play,
                  Where Lady Loue doth vant with gariſh grace,
                  Her daintie Damſels gallant Girles, and gay,
                  Inticing trulles, they cauſde the Greeke to ſay,
                  With cables come and tie me to this Maſt,
                  Leſt I my ſelfe to pleaſures Court me caſt.
               
               
                  Muſe not therefore though feature fine of face,
                  Though comely corps, and trim inticing cheere,
                  Made me obey Sir Cupids mightie Mace:
                  The force whereof Vlyſſes wiſe did feare.
                  He ſail'd aloofe, he from theſe bankes did beare
                  His ſhaking ſhip, but other many moe
                  Did there arriue, and weau'd the web of woe.
               
               
                  There Salomon did reape the crop of care,
                  There Dauid lou'd as I, Vrias wife,
                  There Samſon ſtrong was ſnarled in the ſnare,
                  There Paris liu'd, euen there he loſt his life,
                  There Helens hate, brought Troy her finall ſtrife,
                  
                     Alcides he the mightie Hercules
                  
                  There to arriue, did find it dangerous.
               
               
                  I learn'd with loſſe of my renowne at laſt,
                  That he who doth delight in lawleſſe loue,
                  Muſt play the foole ere all the parts be paſt,
                  And taſte the ſauce prepar'd for his behoue.
                  Let men take heed how they their fancies moue,
                  Let man beware where he doth caſt his eie,
                  The limed bird doth proue in vaine to flie.
               
               
                  
                  O ancient Rome, thou did'ſtordaine of yore,
                  That women ſhould no banquetting frequent,
                  At Rome ſhe was eſteem'd a harlot whore,
                  If from her houſe without her veile ſhe went,
                  Which lawes no doubt were made to good intent,
                  For why the beames of beauties ſanguin'd ſight,
                  Like Baſiliske doth ſpoile the gazing wight.
               
               
                  Therefore the maids, and Roman matrons all,
                  A ſhadowing veile before their face did weare,
                  Their heauenly hue did throw no man to thrall,
                  They were content with plaine and decent geare,
                  They huft it not with painted friſled heare.
                  The married wife, the matron, and the maid,
                  They of their veiles were glad and well apaid.
               
               
                  If women thus had walked in my time,
                  I had not ſtoopt vnto that painted lure,
                  Which did intice me to commit the crime,
                  Which to the pearch of leaudneſſe ti'd me ſure,
                  For her diſport my Ladie could procure
                  The wretched wings of this my muting mind,
                  Reſtleſſe to ſeeke her emptie fiſt to find.
               
               
                  I thus arriu'd in Pleaſures curſed court,
                  I lothed Mars, I hated Mercurie,
                  
                  It was me thought a paſſing pleaſant ſport,
                  Leauing the fields at Bacchus brauerie,
                  Sometime to ſit vpon my miſtreſſe knee,
                  Where that I might be at my pleaſure plaſte,
                  I ſent the Duke away to warres in haſte.
               
               
                  You which haue plaid with pleaſures banding balles,
                  You know the life which lingring louers lead,
                  You know how ſweet it is to ſcale the walles
                  Of her good will, who liu'd in feare and dread,
                  You know right well how well thoſe wights haue ſped,
                  Who haue at laſt by drifts of long delay,
                  Their hoped meed, and wiſhed pleaſant pray.
               
               
                  
                  Vnconquered beautie whence had'ſt thou that power
                  To make ſtout Vter ſtoope to his owne ſhame,
                  That neuer ſtoopt to foes? why for that flower
                  Of ſweete delight in Igren that faire Dame
                  Did I forgoe the golden flower of fame?
                  Victorious beautie and baſe yeelding luſt
                  Did caſt great 
                        Ʋters conqueſts in the duſt.
               
               
                  Yet no ſuch blame as writers do record
                  Do I deſerue for this vnhappie deed:
                  Proud Gorolus the bright-cheekt Igrens Lord
                  Receiu'd no wrong but his owne merits meed,
                  When in the field I made his heart to bleed,
                  If thoughts of treaſon merit death and ſhame,
                  His trecherous deeds did well deſerue the ſame.
               
               
                  His graceleſſe treaſon he in act did ſhow
                  For when I ſent him to Nathaliod hight
                  In bloodie field againſt the Saxon foe,
                  He ſwolne in heart with enuie and deſpight
                  Of his aſſociates good did leaue the fight,
                  And leauing ſtout Nathaliod for a pray
                  Vnto the foes, from field he fled away.
               
               
                  By which enforc'd I was with Mars to riſe
                  From Venus bed, and arme me for the field,
                  Where like a ſtorme in thunder clad from skies
                  Vpon my foes I fell, they could not ſhield
                  Themſelues from death, few ſcap't that did not yeeld.
                  
                     Occa and Oſſa both I downe did bring,
                  And led them captiue like a conquering King.
               
               
                  Againe I then gan thinke vpon my loue
                  Vpon mine Igren deare, againſt whoſe Lord
                  I finding cauſe, for that he late did proue
                  Faithleſſe to me, did with my luſt accord
                  Gainſt him, as 'againſt my foe to draw my ſword,
                  Whom by his caſtle called Dunilioc,
                  I ſlew with blade in battailes bloodie ſtroke.
               
               
                  
                  Then did I take mine Igren as mine owne
                  And crown'd her Queene in my Emperiall chaire,
                  On whom great Arthur I begot anone.
                  And after him my Anna hight the faire,
                  In ſeeming bliſſe I long liu'd void of care,
                  For thrice nine yeares with Igren I did raigne,
                  And 'gainſt the Saxons did my ſtate maintaine.
               
               
                  But for the rape of Gorolus his wife
                  The heauens did powre downe vengeance on my head,
                  I by vntimely death did end my life,
                  My ſaid ſoule hence enforc'd by poiſon fled,
                  By Saxons wrought, who often wiſh'd me dead,
                  And left behind for all my deeds of fame
                  Iuſt cauſe for writers pens to ſpeake my ſhame.
               
               
                  Learne they which liue in high or low degree,
                  To flee the foile which I by folly felt:
                  Let them refraine thoſe loftie Dames to ſee,
                  They know how loftie lookes with me haue delt,
                  You ſee how ſight did make my honor melt.
                  Let all men know, mans heart did neuer rue
                  The thing which he with ſight did neuer view.
               
               
                  But how may men the ſight of Beautie ſhun
                  In England, at this preſent diſmall day?
                  All void of veiles (like Layes) where Ladies run
                  And rome about at euery feaſt and play,
                  They wandring walke in euery ſtreete and way:
                  With loftie luring lookes they bounſing braue,
                  The higheſt place in all mens ſight muſt haue.
               
               
                  With pride they pranke to pleaſe the wandring eye,
                  With gariſh grace they ſmile, they iet, they ieſt:
                  O Engliſh Dames, your lightneſſe verily,
                  The Curtizans of Rome do much deteſt,
                  In cloſets cloſe to liue they count it beſt.
                  They giue not grace to euery wandring wight,
                  Your ſmiling cheere doth euery man delight.
               
               
                  
                  The Poets gods Saturne, and Iupiter,
                  
                  To Beauties becke their highneſſe did obay,
                  
                     Pluto of hell did plead at Beauties bar,
                  And Phillis cauſde Demophoon to ſtay:
                  
                     Paſiphäe a Bull brought to the bay.
                  So gods and diuels, both men and beaſts, they all
                  By womens wiles are ſlaues to Beauties thrall.
               
               
                  What gaine is got by light and wanton waies?
                  You reape reproch, a guerdon got thereby:
                  Men by your meanes do cauſe their owne decay,
                  And you your ſelues all ſouſt in ſinne muſt die.
                  Refraine therefore to pleaſe mans gazing eie,
                  Let men likewiſe the baited hookes refraine
                  Of luring lookes, their vanting vowes be vaine.
               
               Thomas Blener Haſſet.
            
            
               HOW CADWALLADER THE LAST KING OF THE Britaines was expelled by the Saxons, went to Rome, and there liued in a religious houſe.
               
               
                  YOu mourning Muſes all, where euer you remaine,
               Aſſiſt my ſobbing ſoule this driery tale to tell:
               You furious Furies fierce of Lymbo Lake below,
               Helpe to vnlade my breſt of all the bale it beares:
               And you who felt the fall from honors high renowne:
               From graues you grizlie ghoſts ſend forth, to helpe me mourne.
               O Pallas, giue thou place, that mourning Clio may
               On Lute lamenting, ſound and ſing my dolefull dumps.
               Let riming meetered lines and pleaſant muſike ceaſe:
               Let Satyres ſolemne ſound ſend forth the fall I felt:
               And when the truth of all my Tragedie is knowne,
               Let them that liue then learne, all things muſt haue an end,
               The Perſian Monarch and the Medes it downe did fall,
               That of Aſſyria, in tract of time did end:
               
                  
Yea Alexanders force in fight ſubdu'd them both,
               And brought the world ſo wide into one Monarchie.
               What though the fretting force of Fate did him diſmay?
               He felt at laſt the foile, his vanting was in vaine,
               He dead, the world it was diuided as before.
               The Roman Emperie came tumbling downe at laſt.
               And where is Troy, and Greece, and mightie Macedon?
               They flouriſht for a time like this my little Ile:
               The Soldion brought them downe, and did their ſtates deſtroy:
               Euen ſo the Saxons brought the Britaines to the bay,
               Euen theſe mine eyes did ſee, that hatefull hidious ſight,
               Theſe feeble hands, when long they labour'd had in vaine,
               Did yeeld their intereſt: then thus I did complaine:
               Who can refraine the force of mightie mounting ſeas?
               When billowes make a breach and beate the bankes adowne,
               Doth not the ſaltiſh ſurge then beat the bankes adowne?
               Then man may not withſtand the rigor of their rage.
               But wiſdome would haue kept the waues within their bounds:
               Counſell doth come too late, when hope of helpe is paſt.
               Such was my filthie fate, my leaud and lothſome lucke:
               I ſought a ſalue to cure and helpe the helpeleſſe wound.
               For long before my time, ſeuen Kings were ſetled heere,
               The Saxons ſuch as dwelt by Eaſt, Sibertus rul'd,
               The Angles in the Eaſt, Redwallus rul'd as King,
               Then Ethelbert was King of all the coaſt of Kent,
               In Southſex Ethelwolfus wore the regall crowne:
               Then Quincillinus was a Saxon King by Weſt,
               Of Martia in the mid'ſt King Penda was the Prince,
               And Edwin in Northumberland did rule and raigne,
               How did my Grandſire grand renowned Arthur he
               Theſe ſeuen deſtroy with deadly field of wrackfull warre?
               But Mordred made the meane, that brought them in againe:
               
                  
                     Ʋortiporus with warre almoſt conſum'd them all.
               Then Malgo he with peace reſtor'd againe their ſtate,
               
                  Cariticus the ſinne of ciuill ſtriſe did loue,
               For which Gurmundus did the Britaines much annoy.
               Then Cadwin out of Wales King Etheldred did ſpoile,
               
                  Cadwalline then did force King Penda to a foile,
               
                  
And I Cadwallader at laſt did preſſe in place,
               Then Lothar king of Kent in warre that wretch I ſlue.
               And Ethiwolne the king of South ſaxons I ſpoilde,
               The other fiue did me inuade with cruel fight,
               With whom in diuers warres, I diuerſly did ſpeed.
               Somtime Bellona blew a bleſſed blaſt for me,
               And changed chance ſomtime did force my men to flee.
               Whilſt thus I wag'd my warres in ſecret ſilent night,
               The very voice of God, it thus to me did ſpeake:
               Thou ſtriu'ſt againſt the ſtreame, the tide doth beate thee back,
               Strike thou thy ſailes, take ancor hold, els muſt thou feele a wrack.
               Which ſaying did indeed amaze me more by much,
               Then all the force that man againſt my will might bend:
               For who the will of God with weapons may reſiſt?
               And when as ſinne hath ſold a countrey to decay,
               Then praier muſt preuaile, for weapons will not help.
               And when the end is come, when all the glaſſe is runne,
               Who can reſiſt the force of Fate and deſtinies?
               Who things forerun to fall from falling can refraine?
               It paſſeth mortall might to bring ſuch things about.
               Let man content himſelfe to do what beſt he may,
               By trying too too much, no man his God may tempt,
               But mortall man muſt thinke that God the beſt doth know,
               Who can depreſſe to duſt and raiſe when beſt him pleaſe.
               And as I thus amidſt my muſings did remaine,
               I did reſigne my crowne, and deem'd al honours vaine.
               And though it greeu'd me much to feele the fall I ſelt,
               Yet was I well content, I could not as I would:
               For which I left my land, my people, and my place.
               The Saxons they obtain'd the wage for which they war'd.
               When I three yeares had raign'd, without one day of reſt,
               Euen then in mourning robes at Rome I did arriue,
               And there contemning all the world, and worldly things,
               I made my ſelfe a Monke, (ceaſe Memory to muſe)
               A Monke I made my ſelfe, thou knoweſt it paſſing plaine:
               Amongſt the Friers there, I led my lingring life.
               And til my dying day I daily did deuiſe,
               How by my meanes it might to all the world be knowne.
               
                  
That mortall fleſh is fraile, and euery thing muſt fade:
               And euen amongſt thoſe things which Nature doth create,
               Nothing ſo vile as man amongſt the reſt is found,
               Which made Heraclitus with ceaſleſſe ſighes to waile,
               He to his dying day did nothing els but weepe,
               Affirming all the world vnder the heauen, to be
               A path of penitence, maze of miſery.
               What is the life of man but care and daily toile,
               Bearing alwaies about a burthen of miſhappes?
               All his delights repentance daily doth purſue:
               Nothing but death doth bring him peace and quiet reſt.
               Yet that which brings him bliſſe, he moſt of all doth hate,
               Which made Democritus with mirth to ſpend his daies;
               He laughing aie, did mocke the madneſſe of mankinde,
               Whoſe loue is long to liue, and feareth much to die:
               Death reaues vs from diſeaſe, Death ends the feare of death.
               When Midas did demaund Silenus, what was beſt
               For mortall man to wiſh, the Satyr thus did ſay,
               Not to bee borne, if borne, not long our liues to lead,
               For life I moſt doe lothe, and death I leaſt doe dread.
               And how did Timon leade with ſauage beaſts his life?
               How did that Hermite poore, his lothſome life deteſt?
               Affirming with the wiſe Aurelius Emperour,
               That if a man ſhould make a true diſcourſe of all
               The wretched woes he felt, from birth to dying day,
               The feeble fleſh would faint to feele ſo ſharpe a fight,
               The hart would quake to heare Dame Fortunes ſharpe aſſaults.
               And I Cadwallader a king, can make report,
               That nothing may content the minde of mortall man:
               The more my ſelfe did eate, the hungrier ay I was,
               The more I dranke, the more thirſt did me ſtil diſtreſſe.
               The more I ſlept, the more I ſluggiſh did remaine,
               The more I reſted me, the more I wearied was,
               The more of wealth I had, the more I did deſire,
               The more I ſtill did ſeeke, the leſſe I aye did finde.
               And to conclude, I found I neuer could obtaine
               The thing, but in the end it cauſde me to complaine:
               My preſent good ſucceſſe, did threaten thrall to come;
               
                  
And changing chance did ſtill with ſorow me conſume,
               For which my royall robes, my crowne I laid aſide;
               Meaning to proue by proofe the paines of pouertie,
               Which pouertie I felt all riches to exceede,
               It beareth much more bliſſe, then high and courtly ſtate,
               
                  Codrus and Irus poore for wealth did farre ſurpaſſe
               
                  Midas and Croeſus king, for wealth who did ſurpaſſe.
               And I amongſt my mates the Romiſh Friers, felt
               More ioy and leſſe annoy, then erſt in Britaine braue.
               For there I doubted ſtill, the Saxons ſubtile ſleights,
               I feared there the fall from royall regall ſeat:
               But here at Rome I liu'd not fearing force of foe,
               I had for mine eſtate, what I could wiſh or craue,
               And this I there did finde: they of the Clergie be,
               Of all the men that liue the leaſt in miſery.
               For all men liue in care, they careleſſe do remaine.
               Like buzzing Drones they eate the hony of the Bee,
               They only do excell for fine felicitie:
               The king muſt wage his warres, he hath no quiet day,
               The noble man muſt rule with care the common-weale,
               The Countreyman muſt toile to till the barren ſoile,
               With care the Merchant man the ſurging ſeas muſt ſaile,
               With trickling droppes of ſweat the handcrafts man doth thriue▪
               
               With hand as hard as boord the woorkeman eates his bread,
               The ſouldier in the field with paine doth get his pay,
               The ſeruing man muſt ſerue and crouch with cap and knee,
               The Lawyer he muſt pleade and trudge from bench to barre,
               Who Phyſicke doth profeſſe, he is not void of care:
               But Churchmen they be bleſt, they turne a leafe or two,
               They ſometime ſing a Pſalme, and for the people pray,
               For which they honour haue, and ſit in higheſt place,
               What can they wiſh or ſeeke, that is not hard at hand?
               They labour not at all, they know no kind of paine,
               No danger doth with dread their happy liues diſtreſſe,
               Ceaſe you therefore to muſe what madneſſe made me leaue
               The Court and courtly pompe of wearing royal crowne,
               No madneſſe did that deed, but wiſedome wiſht it ſo,
               I gaind thereby the bliſſe which few before me felt.
               
                  
I nine yeares led my life, and neuer felt annoy.
               And certainely if now I might bee king againe,
               Refuſing all that pompe, I would become a prieſt,
               A Deacon, or a Deane, Prebend, or Miniſter.
               For theſe men leade their liues with liuings two or three:
               Some haue their ſubſtitutes in Vniuerſities,
               Some leade the braueſt liues that any man may haue,
               They feede vpon the fleece, they force not of the flocke:
               Three houres in the yeere, with beaſtly boſomde ſtuffe
               They ſpend, and that is all that law of them requires.
               Muſe not though many thruſt and ſhoulder for degrees,
               For happy man is he, who hath a Preachers ſees.
               But let me now returne vnto my Romiſh rout,
               Who fed like Bacon fat, did nought but play and pray.
               With whom for nine yeares ſpace, when I my life had led,
               I ſong my Requiem, and paid the earth her fee.
               Then in Saint Peters Church at Rome they did me lay,
               Booted and ſpurd, euen as you ſee me here this day.
               So now you haue the whole of all my Tragedie.
               Of Brutus blood the laſt I liu'd that rul'd as king:
               My Britaines driuen to Wales they Welchmen then were cal'd,
               And I at Rome their king, a mumbling Monke inſtal'd.
               The Saxons had the day, for which they longed long.
               They England cal'd the Ile, of Brute which tooke her name.
               Some men be borne to bliſſe, and ſome to hatefull hap:
               Who would haue thought, that I in warre a raging king,
               Should by the force of Fate, at Rome haue dide a Monke?
               Let all the world then know, that nothing is ſo ſure,
               That can afford and ſay, I thus wil aye endure.
               For that which ſeemeth beſt, is ſooneſt brought to naught,
               Which plainly doth appeare by that which I haue taught.
               The worthieſt in the world, princes, philoſophers,
               Will teach that I haue taught, and proue it paſſing plaine.
               
                  Paulus Aemilius did die but wretchedly:
               And was not Scipio euen to his dying day
               Conſtraind, to helpe his need, the painfull plow to ply?
               
                  Caeſar and Silla both, did not they taſte the whippe?
               And made not Hannibal a miſerable end?
               
                  
And how was Socrates before his time deſtroy'd,
               And Anaxagoras impriſoned long with paine?
               For cruell beaſtly coyne diuine Plato was ſold,
               And Aristotle ſent to exile, where he di'd:
               And ſo was Solon ſage, and that Lycurgus wiſe,
               And many more, which heere I could at large repeat.
               But let theſe few ſuffice to teach for certaine truth,
               That all the men that liue, are ſubiects all to ruth.
               And ſeeing ſo it is, then let them learne the meane,
               That if the barke do breake, they ſafe may ſwimme to land.
               Thomas Blener Haſſet.
            
            
               HOW SIGEBERT FOR HIS WICKED LIFE was thruſt from his Throne, and miſerablie ſlaine by a Heardſman, Anno Dom. 755.
               
                  
                     TWo parts in one a Heardſman heere muſt play,
                  My tale muſt tend each Princes life to mend,
                  And this my talke moſt plainly muſt diſplay,
                  How far a ſubiect may himſelfe defend
                  Againſt his Liege, his Soueraigne Lord and King,
                  If his default his Commonweale doth bring
                  To miſerie: therefore a little while
                  Attend, and know the tenour of my ſtile.
               
               
                  A ſubiect I of baſe and low degree,
                  This headleſſe corps of life I did depriue,
                  (King Sigebert it was) with crueltie.
                  Whoſe luſt was law, whil'ſt he was heere aliue,
                  To feele my force it was his deſtinie:
                  Then crueltie I wrackt with crueltie,
                  And to reuenge the wrong that earſt he wrought,
                  With loſſe of life his lawleſſe luſt he bought.
               
               
                  
                  This Sigebert the Saxons rulde by Weſt,
                  Their ancient lawes he at his liſt did change,
                  For which his Commons did him much deteſt.
                  The Duke of Cornwall would not let him range
                  Thus at his will, but wiſht him like a friend,
                  To mend his faults, or els his life to end.
                  Then he in rage this Duke my maſters life,
                  His cruel hands bereau'd with bloodie knife.
               
               
                  A lawleſſe life to lawleſſe death doth hale,
                  When witleſſe will, wil paſſe the power of may:
                  Then ill miſhap doth drowne in dolours dale
                  The peruerſe Prince, whoſe wit doth beare the ſway.
                  Iuſt Abels blood to God for vengeance cald,
                  For blood with blood the Bloodſheader is thrald,
                  And him whom here before you I preſent,
                  For ſheading blood, my blade his life hath hent.
               
               
                  As he three yeares his people did oppreſſe,
                  Then they whoſe backe that burden could not beare,
                  With one conſent they did his ſtate diſtreſſe,
                  To reaue him of his Crowne they did not feare,
                  They him depoſde from honour and renowne:
                  His hatefull hap ſo frowardly did frowne,
                  That he who had a kingdome but of late,
                  Forlorne he now muſt beg from gate to gate.
               
               
                  Do nothing muſe at his deſerued hap,
                  For many more as he their liues haue led:
                  
                     Ioues vengeance iuſt ſuch wretches doth inwrap
                  With change moſt ſtrange, when he their blood will ſhed.
                  Of Dionyſe of Syracuſia,
                  Of Neroes death, of Phalaris decay,
                  Who liſt to reade, he paſſing plaine ſhall finde,
                  That he of heauen their ſorrow hath aſſignde.
               
               
                  
                  And out of doubt God did ordaine the fall
                  Of him, whom here I headleſſe haue in hand,
                  Who wandring in a wood amidſt his thrall
                  I met by chance, of whom I did demand
                  His name, and place: who thus replide with feare?
                  O friend, I am for meate now ſtaruen wel neare,
                  Giue me therfore I thee beſeech and pray
                  Some meate, to keepe my carcaſe from decay.
               
               
                  Some Pilgrim poore, or waifaring man him ſtraight
                  Liudg'd, and gaue him what my ſcrippe would yeeld;
                  And whilſt we both thus on a banke did baite,
                  From ſighes and ſobbes himſelfe he could not wield,
                  Which made me aske againe his name and place,
                  But ſilent he did mourne with frowning face:
                  Yet at the laſt by vrging to and fro,
                  He thus declar'd the cauſe of all his woe.
               
               
                  O miſer I, more wretch then thee by much,
                  I neuer could compare with thine eſtate.
                  This heard of Swine againſt thee neuer grutch;
                  I kept a heard, which did their Heardſman hate,
                  A hateful heard of murmuring men I meane,
                  Which did depriue me of mine honour cleane.
                  And now I leade my lothſome life you ſee,
                  Impal'd amidſt a maze of miſery.
               
               
                  With changed chance (aye me) I chaſed am,
                  And frowning Fate ſuch ſorrow hath aſſignd,
                  That lothing life, moſt like a quiet Lambe,
                  My naked necke to blocke of bale I bind.
                  With cruell knife (O care) come ſhread my twiſt,
                  So ſhall my ſoule by corps decay be bliſt.
                  But ſith that Care nor Fate wil doe this deed,
                  Doe thou the ſame I thee beſeech, with ſpeed.
               
               
                  
                  Firſt hatefull hope with flattering face did fawne,
                  With dread when deepe deſpaier would me haue drownd,
                  Then changed chance did checke me with the pawne
                  Of wofull want, when good ſucceſſe did ſound
                  A bleſſed blaſt: and now (to tell the truth)
                  I haue the mate, by raging Rooke of truth.
                  Lo thus I liue, which daily wiſh to die:
                  And life (alas) doth make my miſerie.
               
               
                  If lothſome life (of this my corps the king)
                  Doth moue one way, the Biſhop bids me backe:
                  If to that point, the Queene me backe doth bring,
                  On th' other ſide, the Knight doth work my wracke,
                  The other points with Pawnes be all poſſeſt,
                  And here the Rooke of ruth doth reaue my reſt.
                  And beeing brought into this ſtrange eſtate,
                  I do confeſſe my ſelfe to haue a mate.
               
               
                  Sith ſorow ſo hath ſeaſde vpon my bones,
                  That now too late I do lament my loſſe,
                  And ſith no meanes may turne my gaſtfull grones
                  To ioyfull glie, ſith trouble ſtill doth toſſe
                  Me to and fro, in waltring waues of woe:
                  Death is my friend, and life I count my foe:
                  Which death though once my feeble fleſh did feare,
                  Yet now I faine would feele his murdring ſpeare.
               
               
                  In gurging gulfe of theſe ſuch ſurging ſeas,
                  My poorer ſoule who drownd doth death requeſt,
                  I wretched wight haue ſought mine owne diſeaſe,
                  By mine owne meanes my ſtate it was diſtreſt.
                  For whilſt I meant to make my luſt a law,
                  Iuſtice me from my high eſtate did draw.
                  So that I find, and feele it now with paine,
                  All worldly pompe, al honour is but vaine.
               
               
                  
                  Which honour I to fiery flames compare,
                  For when they flaſh and flouriſh moſt of all,
                  Then ſuddainely their flamings quenched are.
                  For proofe whereof, to minde now let vs call
                  
                     Antigonus, and Ptolemeus Great,
                  
                     Caeſar, and Mithridate, we may repeat,
                  With Darius, and great Antiochus,
                  
                  
                     Cambiſes eke, and conquering Pyrrhus.
                  
               
               
                  And I the laſt might firſt haue had my place,
                  They all as I with flaming fierie ſhow
                  Were quenched quite: Dame Fortune did deface,
                  Yea hatefull hap, euen then did ouerthrow
                  Vs moſt, when moſt we had our hearts deſire:
                  When moſt we flouriſht like the flames of fire,
                  Euen then the ſeas of ſorow did preuaile,
                  And made vs weare a blacke lamenting ſaile.
               
               
                  And heere before my death, I will repeate
                  To thee the thing which I of late did dreame,
                  That thou and all the world may ſee, how great
                  A care it is to rule a royall realme.
                  My dreame ſhal ſhew, that bliſſe doth not conſiſt
                  In wealth nor want: but he alone is bleſt,
                  Who is content with his aſſigned fate,
                  And neuer ſtriues to clime to higher ſtate.
               
               
                  When ſeemely Sol had reſt his glittering gleames,
                  And night the earth did with her darkeneſſe vaile,
                  Dame Cinthia then with her bright burniſht beames,
                  The ſhadowed ſhades of darkeneſſe did aſſaile,
                  Then Somnus cauſ'd my ſenſes all to quaile.
                  On carefull couch then being laid to reſt,
                  With doubtfull dreames I ſtrangely was diſtreſt.
               
               
                  
                  In cottage cold where care me thought did keepe,
                  With naked need and want of wherewithall:
                  Where pouertie next beggers doore did creepe,
                  And where expences were ſo paſſing ſmall,
                  That all men deem'd that man forethrong'd with thrall,
                  Which there did dwell, euen there from bondage free,
                  I view'd a man all void of miſerie.
               
               
                  And whil'ſt I muſde how he in bliue of bliſſe
                  Could lead his life amid'ſt that caue of care,
                  From Princely Court proceeded ere I wiſt,
                  A man, with whom there might no man compare.
                  His wealth, his wit, his courage were ſo rare,
                  That none before nor ſince were like to him:
                  Yet he me thought in waues of woe din ſwim.
               
               
                  This man had all that men could wiſh or craue
                  For happie ſtate, yet nought he had in deed:
                  The other, he had nought that men would haue,
                  Yet had he all, beleeue it as thy Creed.
                  This ſaying of that happie man I reade,
                  That hauing nought, yet all things ſo I haue,
                  That hauing nought, I nothing more do craue.
               
               
                  The King me thought with all his Courtly traine,
                  Paſt to the place where pouertie did dwell,
                  With frowning face and with a troubled braine,
                  With woe and want, his vexed veines did ſwell,
                  With mirth and ioy the poore man did excell.
                  And being come vnto his houſe ymade
                  Of one poore hogſhead, thus to him he ſaid:
               
               
                  
                     Diogenes, thou lead'ſt a lothſome life,
                  Me thinke thou might'ſt much better ſpend thy time
                  Within my Court, both thou and eke thy wife:
                  Thou by that meanes to high eſtate maiſt clime:
                  I haue the wealth, and thou art void of crime,
                  And loe, before thy face I heere am preſt
                  To giue thee that, which thou ſhalt now requeſt.
               
               
                  
                  Stand backe (Sir King) thy vaunting vowes be vaine,
                  I nothing recke thy promiſe, goods, nor land,
                  And Titans ſtately ſtreames would me ſuſtaine
                  With heate, if thou from this my doore wouldſt ſtand:
                  Thou takſt away much more then thy commaund
                  Can giue againe: thy gifts ſo vile I deeme,
                  That none but fooles ſuch follies do eſteeme.
               
               
                  With conqueſt thou haſt wone the world ſo wide,
                  And yet thou canſt not win thy wandring wil:
                  Thou wouldeſt win an other world beſide:
                  But tuſh, that fact doth farre ſurpaſſe thy skill.
                  Thou neuer wilt of Conqueſt haue thy fill,
                  Til death with daunting dart hath conquer'd thee,
                  Then muſt thou leaue behind, thy Monarchie.
               
               
                  With great aſſaults my ſelfe I haue ſubdude,
                  In all reſpects, I haue my hearts deſire,
                  With a contented minde I am endude,
                  To higher ſtate I neuer wil aſpire.
                  More like a Prince then any poore Eſquire,
                  I leade my life: and ſith my ſtate is ſuch,
                  Aske thou of me, for I can giue thee much.
               
               
                  All daſht with dread mee thought in fuming heate
                  He ſaid, departing thence in haſt with ſpeede,
                  If I were not Alexander the Great,
                  I would become Diogenes indeed,
                  Who leades his life all void of wofull dread.
                  He hath the wealth which I cannot obtaine,
                  I haue the wealth which wiſe men do diſdaine.
               
               
                  I liue in feare, I languiſh all in dread,
                  Wealth is my woe, the cauſer of my care,
                  With feare of death I am ſo ill beſtead,
                  That reſtleſſe I much like the hunted Hare,
                  Or as the canuiſt Kite, doth feare the ſnare.
                  Ten hundred cares haue brought me to the baie,
                  Ten thouſand ſnares for this my life men laie.
               
               
                  
                  When Philip he of Macedon the King,
                  One Realme me left, I could not be content,
                  Deſier prickt mee to an other thing,
                  To win the world it was my whole intent,
                  Which done, an other world to win I ment.
                  When leaſt I had, then moſt I had of bleſſe,
                  Now, all the world, and all vnquietneſſe.
               
               
                  No woe to want of contentation;
                  No wealth to want of riches and renowne,
                  For this is ſeene in euery nation,
                  The higheſt trees be ſooneſt blowen downe:
                  Ten kings do die before one clubbiſh Clowne.
                  
                     Diogenes in quiet Tunne doth reſt,
                  When Caeſar is with carking care diſtreſt.
               
               
                  Wherewith me thought he was departed quite,
                  And Morpheus that ſluggiſh God of ſleepe,
                  Did leaue my limmes, wherewith I ſtood vpright,
                  Deuiſing long what profit I could reape
                  Of this my dreame, which plainly did expreſſe
                  That neither want nor wealth doth make mans bleſſe;
                  Who hath the meane with a contented minde,
                  Moſt perfect bliſſe his God hath him aſſignde.
               
               
                  But I, who liu'd a crowned King of late,
                  And now am forc'd of thee to beg my bread,
                  I cannot be content with this eſtate,
                  I lothe to liue, I would I wretch were dead:
                  Deſpaier ſhe doth feede me with decay,
                  And patience is fled and flowne away.
                  Doe thou therefore O Heardſman play thy part,
                  Take thou this blade, and thruſt it to my hart.
               
               
                  
                  O Sir, I ſaid, the gods defend that I
                  Should cauſeleſſe kill a man in miſerie,
                  Tell me thy name and place, then by and by
                  I will prouide for thine aduerſitie.
                  Then he repli'd, my name is Sigebert,
                  
                  I am the man which wrought thy maſters ſmart:
                  I rul'd of late this Realme euen at my liſt,
                  Take thou reuenge with that thy friendly fiſt.
               
               
                  And well content: I will reuenge with ſpeed
                  The death of him whom cauſeleſſe thou did'ſt kill.
                  King Sigebert, and art thou he indeed?
                  Sith he thou art, diſpatch and make thy will;
                  For to my Lord this day I will preſent
                  Thy head: therefore thy former ſaults repent,
                  Thou ſeeſt the blocke on which thy life muſt end,
                  Call thou for grace that God may mercie ſend.
               
               
                  Wherewith he kneeling by the blocke of bale,
                  Diſpatch (quoth he) and do that friendly deed:
                  O welcome death, and farewell Fortune fraile,
                  Diſpatch good friend, diſpatch my life with ſpeed.
                  Wherewith, on blocke he ſtretcht his neck outright,
                  And ſaid no more, but praying me to ſmite,
                  I gaue the ſtroke which ended all his care,
                  A bloodie ſtroke, which did my death prepare.
               
               
                  For I who hopte to haue ſome great reward
                  For killing of my Maſters fathers foe:
                  Was hanged ſtraight, my cauſe was neuer heard,
                  Such was my chance and well deſerued woe.
                  For when my Lord had heard me tell the tale,
                  How I his King and mine did there aſſaile,
                  His frowning face did put me in great feare,
                  He ſigh'd and ſob'd, and ſaid as you ſhall heare.
               
               
                  
                  O Caitiffe vile, O Impe of Satans ſeed,
                  And haſt thou kill'd our Soueraigne Lord and King?
                  His due deſert deſerueth death indeed,
                  Yet what made thee to do ſo vile a thing?
                  What though he did my father cauſeleſſe kill?
                  What though he rul'd the Realme with lawleſſe will?
                  Shall we therefore, with cruell bloodie knife,
                  Depriue our Lord and King of vitall life?
               
               
                  O wicked deed, may ſubiects falſe ſurmiſe,
                  With murthering minds their Gouernour reſiſt?
                  That may not be: for Tully wondrous wiſe,
                  
                     Plato, in whom true knowledge doth conſiſt,
                  They both agreed that no man ought to kill
                  A Tyrant, though he hath him at this will.
                  Yet thou (thou wretch) this bloody deed haſt done,
                  The like was neuer ſeene vnder the Sun.
               
               
                  When God will plague the people for their ſin,
                  Them then to ſcourge he doth a Tyrant ſend:
                  We ſhould therefore that ſubiects be, begin
                  With earneſt mind our former ſaults t'amend:
                  Which if we do, it is to great availe,
                  Mans force is fond, fighting cannot prcuaile.
                  And he who doth reſiſt the Magiſtrate,
                  Reſiſteth God, repenting all too late.
               
               
                  If ſubiects be by peruerſe Prince oppreſt,
                  They then muſt pray that God the change may make:
                  Which God no doubt rebellion doth deteſt,
                  No ſubiect may his ſword or armour take
                  Againſt his Prince, whom God hath placed there.
                  Yet hath this wretch all void of ſubiects feare,
                  Deſtroy'd a King whom God did thruſt from throne:
                  Alas poore King, thy death I do bemone.
               
               
                  
                  But he who hath thy lingring life deſtroi'd,
                  Shall be deſtroi'd, and find it paſſing plaine,
                  That no man may a Princes life annoy.
                  Although the Prince deſiers to be ſlaine,
                  Yet ſubiects muſt from ſheading blood refraine.
                  From which, ſeeing that this wretch could not abſtaine,
                  Let him be hang'd as I before decreed,
                  A iuſt reward for his ſo vile a deed.
               
               
                  Then I forthwith to end my life was led,
                  I hopte to haue preferment for my deed,
                  I was prefer'd, and hang'd all ſaue the head:
                  Did euer man the like example read?
                  Not one I thinke: therefore good Memorie,
                  In regiſter inrole thou this for me,
                  That they who liue and reade the fall I felt,
                  May find how fate moſt ſtrangely with me delt.
               
               
                  Yet my deſert no doubt did death deſerue,
                  Though hatred did not make me kill my King,
                  Yet lucre leaud did force my feete to ſwerue,
                  That hatefull hap, me to this bale did bring.
                  Let them then learne that heedleſſe liue by hope,
                  Her hatefull heſts will bring them to the rope:
                  And happie he, who void of hope can lead
                  A quiet life, all void of Fortunes dread.
               
               
                  
                     Perillus he who made the Bull of braſſe,
                  Like him I hopte to haue ſome great reward,
                  But he in braſen belly broyled was,
                  And to a skarfe of hemp I was prefer'd.
                  So they that meane by others harmes to riſe,
                  Their dying day ſhall end with dolefull cries.
                  And heere I end, approuing that moſt true,
                  From wicked workes no goodneſſe can enſue.
               
               Thomas Blener Haſſet.
            
            
               
               HOW LADIE EBBE DID FLEA HER NOSE AND VPPER lippe away, to ſaue her Virginitie, Anno Dom. 870.
               
                  
                     DO nothing muſe at my deformed face,
                  For Nature it in perfect mould did make:
                  And when your wits haue weighed well the caſe,
                  You will commend me much for vertues ſake.
                  With theſe my hands which from my face did take
                  Mine ouer-lippe, and eke my ſeemely noſe,
                  So to auoid the rage of all my foes.
               
               
                  For I by birth a Princes daughter borne,
                  An Abbieſſe by my profeſſion,
                  Of which eſtate I neuer thought it ſcorne,
                  It greatly did delight me to be one,
                  Which might erect diuine religion.
                  At Collingam I tooke this charge in hand,
                  And fiftie more of chaſte Dianaes band.
               
               
                  All Ladies borne by birth of high degree,
                  Which there did vow with me their liues to leade,
                  And to auoid carnall fragilitie,
                  We all did vow as you right well may reade,
                  With ſingle liues to liue in feare and dread
                  Of God our Lord, ſo to refraine the vice
                  Of fleſhly luſt, which doth to ſinne intice.
               
               
                  Then did the Danes the Saxon ſtate inuade,
                  And they who did the Britaine ſtate deſtroy,
                  To ſue for grace were glad and well apaid,
                  So ſtrangely did the Danes vs then annoy,
                  That Saxons like the men of broyling Troy,
                  Amaz'd, they gaz'd, not knowing what was beſt,
                  So ſtraitly were the Saxons then diſtreſt.
               
               
                  
                  Theſe dreadfull Danes they had no feare of God,
                  But ſauage, they did make their luſt a law,
                  Whom God did ſend for a reuenging rod,
                  To make vs Saxons liue in feare and awe
                  Of him, who did from ſeruile bondage draw
                  Vs out, and made vs liue at libertie,
                  When as we ſeru'd with cruell ſlauerie.
               
               
                  Not much vnlike the murmuring Iſraelites,
                  Sometime we ſeru'd our Lord with feare and dread,
                  In trouble we imploi'd our whole delights,
                  To faſt and pray: but when we quiet were,
                  We reſtleſſe led our liues, all void of care,
                  Forgetting him who did in each diſtreſſe,
                  With helping hand vs bleſſe with good ſucceſſe.
               
               
                  See heere the fruit of health and good ſucceſſe,
                  It maketh man both proud and inſolent:
                  In health we hate the God who hath vs bleſt,
                  Trouble doth make vs mortall men repent
                  Our former faults: in ſickneſſe we be bent
                  To faſt and pray, and in aduerſitie,
                  To pray to God, is mans felicitie.
               
               
                  And for this fault abuſing this our bleſſe,
                  The Danes with ruth our Realme did ouerrunne,
                  Their wrath inwrapt vs all in wretchedneſſe,
                  There was no ſin from which thoſe men did ſhunne.
                  By them the Commonweale was quite vndone.
                  They did deſtroy the ſtate of euery towne,
                  They Churches burnt, they pluckt the Abbies downe.
               
               
                  Yet not content, vs Nunnes they did annoy,
                  O cruell deed, our belts they did vnbind,
                  With rapine they did rauiſh and deſtroy,
                  Deflowring all that euer they could find.
                  I ſeeing then what ſorrow was aſſign'd
                  To me and mine, my vowed virgins I
                  Did call, then thus I ſpake with weeping eye.
               
               
                  
                  Alas alas my louing Ladies all,
                  Theſe hard miſhaps do preſſe vs too too neere:
                  What ſhall we do, how may we ſcape the thrall
                  Which hath deſtroyd the Nunries euery where?
                  Alas, my feeble fleſh doth quake for feare:
                  Alas, how ſhall we ſcape their cruelties,
                  Which thus be plaſte amidſt extremities?
               
               
                  For if we do their hatefull heſts denie,
                  Then dreadfull death ſhall preſentlie inſue:
                  And if we grant vnto their villanie,
                  Our ſinfull ſoules in hell that deed ſhall rue.
                  Beleeue me then my Ladies, this is true,
                  Much better 'twere for vs to die with fame,
                  Then long to liue, with euerlaſting ſhame.
               
               
                  And for becauſe the faces forme doth moue
                  With beauties beames and comely countenance,
                  The minde of man to luſt and lawleſſe loue,
                  I haue deuiſ'd, my honour to aduance,
                  With face deform'd to try my hard miſchance:
                  For theſe my hands from this my face ſhall rip
                  Euen with this knife, my noſe and ouerlip.
               
               
                  They which will flie reprochfull infamie,
                  To do the like will them beſeeme the beſt,
                  You ſhall preſerue your vow'd virginitie
                  Thereby, and liue perhaps with quiet reſt.
                  My daughters deare, giue eare vnto my heſt.
                  Wherewith, with Raſors ſharp I firſt, then they,
                  Each one her noſe, and lip did flea away.
               
               
                  Whilſt thus we liu'd deform'd to outward ſhow,
                  Yet veſſels garniſht gay before Gods ſight,
                  The Danes did vs inuade, who ſtraight did know
                  Our feate, them to defeate of their delight:
                  For which they wrackt on vs their wicked ſpight.
                  With fiery flames they burnt our Nunnerie,
                  And vs therein: O wretched crueltie!
               
               
                  
                  The eare of man the like hath neuer heard,
                  No penne, nor tongue the like hath euer told,
                  Had euer man a hart that was ſo hard,
                  That with his yron breſt durſt be ſo bold,
                  To do the like againſt the Femine kind?
                  Not one in faith that euer I could heare,
                  But theſe all void of mercy, loue, and feare.
               
               
                  Thus we content to leaue this preſent life,
                  In hope to haue hereafters better bleſſe,
                  Were brent and broild, and ſo did ſtint the ſtrife
                  Which might haue made vs liue in wretchedneſſe:
                  We gainde therby a heauenly happineſſe.
                  Which happineſſe they doubtleſſe ſhall obtaine,
                  Which do from ſinne and wickedneſſe abſtaine.
               
               Thomas Blener Haſſet
            
            
               HOW KING EGELRED FOR HIS WICKEDNESSE WAS diuerſly diſtreſſed by the Danes, and laſtly died for ſorrow, Anno Dom. 1016.
               
                  
                     THe minde and not the Man doth make or marre,
                  For as the ſtearne doth guide the Argocy:
                  So by their mindes all men they guided are.
                  From out the mind proceedeth fantaſie,
                  All outward acts, vertue or vanitie,
                  Not from the man, but from the minde proceede:
                  The mind doth make the man to do each deed.
               
               
                  For Phalaris with beaſtly bloudy mind,
                  And Nero did in murther much delight,
                  To mercy Antoninus was inclin'd,
                  
                     Midas for gold extended all his might.
                  For worldly pompe how did Pompeius fight?
                  The mounting minde of Alexander, made
                  Him win the world, his fame can neuer fade.
               
               
                  
                  How did the minde moue Calicratides,
                  
                  
                     Xerxes, Cyrus, and Argantonius?
                  
                  
                     Philip of Macedon, Theramines,
                  
                  
                     Aiax, Iaſon, and Aurelianus,
                  
                  
                     Achilles, and the old king Priamus,
                  
                  
                     Hector, and Hercules, with falſe Sino,
                  
                  Their minds did make them weaue the web of wo.
               
               
                  The twig doth bend as Boreas blaſts doe blow,
                  So man doth walke euen as his mind doth moue:
                  Then happie he who hath a mind to know
                  Such things as be the beſt for his behoue:
                  No doubt the mind which vertuous acts doth loue,
                  Doth make a man euen Caeſar to ſurpaſſe
                  For noble deeds, who Prince of proweſſe was.
               
               
                  But he who hath his mind to miſchiefe bent,
                  All his delight from vertue doth decline,
                  Like me too late he ſhall his faults repent,
                  His ſinfull ſoule ſhall feele the fall in fine
                  That I haue felt: which makes me to repine
                  Againſt my mind: for Nature did her part,
                  My mind enclin'd to ill, did ſpoile my hart.
               
               
                  What though I were of comely perſonage?
                  Iointly my ioints were ioin'd with perfect ſhape,
                  Adorned eke with ſo ſweet a viſage,
                  That neuer yet from Natures hands did ſcape
                  A worke ymade of ſuch a perfect ſhape:
                  But what of that? theſe gifts for want of grace,
                  Deformed quite the feature of my face.
               
               
                  For why, my mind to ruthfull ruine bent,
                  I did delight in lothſome lecherie:
                  I neuer did my odious deeds repent,
                  In drunkenneſſe, in extreme crueltie,
                  I did delight in all impietie.
                  As for delight in princely exerciſe,
                  The feates of armes I did them moſt deſpiſe.
               
               
                  
                  By meanes whereof my ſubiects did me hate,
                  And forraine foes, to burne my Realme were bold:
                  With warre the Danes did alter ſtraight the ſtate.
                  Firſt Fortune did my common-weale vnfold,
                  Then peſtilence did make my courage cold:
                  And laſt of all, my foes the dreadfull Danes
                  Did make me pay them tribute for their paines.
               
               
                  Euen now the Realme of England did decay:
                  For when the Danes their tribute had conſum'd,
                  Forthwith they made vs greater ſummes to pay.
                  From ten to fifteene thouſand they preſum'd
                  Of pounds to make vs pay: ſo I redeem'd
                  With money bags my carefull common-wealth,
                  The onely meanes reſerued for my health.
               
               
                  When thus the want of courage on my part
                  Had giuen my foes ſo ſure a footing here,
                  And when diſeaſe with her deſtroying dart
                  Had wipte away my ſubiects euery where:
                  Euen then too late my wiſemen did appeere,
                  Whom heretofore I alwayes did deteſt
                  Their counſaile graue, at laſt they thus expreſt.
               
               
                  O Egelred the fruite of fearefulneſſe,
                  Of riot thou the right reward doſt reape:
                  But if thou wilt auoid this wretchedneſſe,
                  Be wiſe, and looke about before you leape.
                  Of hatefull haps you ſee a hideous heape
                  Before your face, therefore in time giue eare,
                  And wiſely waigh the words which thou ſhalt heare.
               
               
                  That noble Duke Richard of Normandy,
                  A Siſter hath, whom thee we wiſh to wed,
                  By meanes whereof from this captiuity
                  We may be brought, and that without bloodſhed.
                  For why theſe Danes theſe Normans ſo do dread,
                  That if from thence an ayd we can procure,
                  Thy foes no doubt can neuer long indure.
               
               
                  
                  The mayd ſhe may a Princes fancie pleaſe,
                  Her brother is a man of great renowne:
                  This way O King may make thy ſubiects eaſe,
                  It may reſtore the freedome of thy Crowne:
                  This onely way will bring thy fomen downe.
                  If thou thy Crowne and common-weale doſt loue,
                  Do thou the thing ſo much for thy behoue.
               
               
                  So by their meanes I maried the maid,
                  She Emma hight, the floure of Normandie,
                  Of whom I was ſo glad and well apaid,
                  That all the world with my proſperitie
                  Could not compare: and in that iollitie
                  I did deuiſe by traines of ſecret treaſon,
                  To bring the Danes to death, in a good ſeaſon.
               
               
                  I did a feaſt through all my Realme proclame,
                  At which both Danes and Engliſhmen did meete,
                  Then ſecretly my friends and I did frame,
                  That Engliſhmen the Danes ſhould friendly greete,
                  And at the feaſt that they ſhould do their feate.
                  And that they might the better worke their will,
                  They thus were plaſt according vnto skill.
               
               
                  Two before one, and three before fiue,
                  Here two, and there two, and foure then beliue:
                  Here one, and there one, and three at a caſt,
                  Then one, and twice two, and one at the laſt.
               
               
                  They mingled thus, the watch word wiſely giuen,
                  And Engliſhmen with weapons well beſtead,
                  The Danes amidſt their cups were ſhauen and ſhriuen:
                  Fiue hundred thouſand in one day were dead.
                  Now note the end of blood ſo heaſtly ſhead:
                  For Swane the king of Denmarke did arriue,
                  He for reuenge did me to Richard driue.
               
               
                  
                  Marke here how lawleſſe polices preuaile,
                  Their good ſucceſſe do promiſe preſent paine.
                  What? May mans vaine deuices ought auaile?
                  Diſhoneſt deeds no honour can obtaine,
                  Al murthering Maſſacres be vile and vaine,
                  Such ſuttle ſlights haue neuer good ſucceſſe;
                  The proofe whereof with paine I here expreſſe:
               
               
                  For Swane with ſword and fire did here deſtroy,
                  Both man and beaſt, and euery earthly thing,
                  He did that noble London much annoy,
                  He won the Realme and was the Engliſh king.
                  When tract of time him to his beare did bring,
                  
                     Canutus then his ſonne did him ſucceed,
                  Whom to diſplace I did diſpatch with ſpeed.
               
               
                  My brother Richard Duke of Normandy,
                  Of Normans gaue to me a goodly band,
                  By help of whom Canutus forſt to flee,
                  I got againe the kingdome of England,
                  But out (alas) what thing may firmely ſtand,
                  Whoſe vnder-prop is of ſo little might?
                  That want of ſtrength doth let things drop downright.
               
               
                  
                     Canutus did from Denmarke now returne,
                  The wrathfull wight appointed paſſing ſtrong,
                  My ſubiects ſlue, my Cities he did burne;
                  Which when I heard I liu'd not very long,
                  My fainting heart was thronged with a throng
                  Of cares, which broke it in my fearfull breſt,
                  And ſo at laſt death brought my bones to reſt.
               
               
                  Twice tenne and eight I ranne my ruthfull race,
                  And then in Pauls my curſed corps was laid,
                  
                     Canutus did my common-weale deface,
                  The Danes were kings, my kingdome was decaid,
                  This world is fraile, and euery thing muſt fade,
                  But alwaies that which wanteth gouernment,
                  That firſt doth feele the force of dangers dent.
               
               Thomas Blener Haſſet
            
            
               
               HOW EDRICVS EARLE OF MERCIA, DESTROYED THE VALIANT KING EDMVND IRON
                     ſide, in hope of aduancement, and how he was rewarded, Anno Dom. 1018.
               
                  
                     YOu helliſh hags of Limbo Lake below,
                  Which daily do my curſed corps torment,
                  Come forth, come forth, come forth, (I ſay) and ſhew
                  How I on earth my diſmall daies haue ſpent.
                  And wil you not you wretched wights aſſent
                  To helpe me here to tell that drierie tale,
                  Which may amongſt men liuing much preuaile?
               
               
                  O curſed ghoſt condemn'd to endleſſe thrall,
                  Sith they refuſe to aid thee in this need,
                  Do thou declare and tel the truth af all,
                  That men aliue my wretched works may read,
                  And ſee the fruite of ſuttle Satans ſeed,
                  Auoiding vice, and fancies fond delight,
                  Note well my tale, the truth I ſhall recite.
               
               
                  When Etheldred had giuen Canutus place,
                  
                     Edmund his ſonne ſurnamed Ironſide,
                  
                  Deuiſing how he might his foe deface,
                  By wrath of warre the cauſe they did decide:
                  And in the end the Realme they did diuide.
                  
                     Edmund had halfe, Canutus had the reſt,
                  Then they with peace and quietneſſe were bleſt.
               
               
                  O blind beleefe, O hope of higher hope,
                  Why did you moue my minde to meditate,
                  How I in woe king Edmund might in wrap,
                  And how I might depreſſe my kings eſtate?
                  Thou blind beleefe, thou breeder of debate,
                  I wanting grace did let thee moue my mind,
                  Cauſeleſſe to kil a courteous king, and kinde,
               
               
                  
                  He being kild, I to Canutus went
                  To whom I ſayd, See here a faithfull friend,
                  I for thy loue with bloody blade haue hent,
                  And brought my King to his vntimely end:
                  Thou by that meanes ſhalt rule thy realme with reſt,
                  My friendly 
                        •
                     iſt with happie good ſucceſſe,
                  Hath thee inricht with bliſſe and happineſſe.
               
               
                  Haſt thou (quoth he) deſtroy'd thy ſoueraigne King?
                  Thou faithleſſe ſawning friend, for loue of me?
                  Thou verlet vile, and could'ſt thou doe the thing
                  The which might more a bridge my libertie?
                  O heinous act! O bloodie crueltie
                  But ſith that loue did moue thee doe that deede,
                  Thou for thy paines ſhalt be preferd with ſpeede.
               
               
                  Wherewith in haſte he to the hangman ſaid,
                  Let this mans head the higheſt place obtaine
                  On London walles: wherewith I neuer ſtaid,
                  But on a block my neck was cut in twaine,
                  In all mens ſight, my head did long remaine.
                  See here what wit the grape of hope doth yeeld,
                  See on what ſand ſuch buſie braines do build.
               
               
                  O hatefull thing that fancies fond delight,
                  The ſenſe of mortall man ſhould ſenſeleſſe make:
                  When vices vaunts with vertues deeds dare fight,
                  Then doth the ſoule the happie heauens forſake:
                  Then man makes haſte to Plutoes lothſome lake.
                  Why ſhould man loue that ſugred ſowre ſweet,
                  Which wiſedoms lore to lothe hath thought moſt meet?
               
               Thomas Blener Haſſet.
            
            
               
               HOW KING HAROLD RAIGNING BVT NINE MONETHS, had continuall warre with the Danes, with the Norway King, with his brother TOSTIVS, and was at last ſlaine in battell by William the Conquerer, An. Dom. 1095.
               
                  
                     WOuld he haue warre, and we to warre proclame?
                  O Baſtand Duke, and doſt thou dare to fight?
                  My Noble men, come forth, and purchaſe fame.
                  Ciue me my ſword, let me defend my right.
                  Steppe forth with ſpeed my Martiall men of might:
                  With Bowes and Billes, let vs their courſe reſtraine:
                  And teach them that their vanting vowes be vaine.
               
               
                  But that we may with wiſdome wiſely worke,
                  It vs behoues in Normandie to fight
                  With him, and not to let his ſouldiers lurke
                  Heere in my Realme, we ſhall thereby atchiue
                  No noble act, though hence we him do driue.
                  But if we deale with him in Normandie,
                  We ſhall receiue renowne and victorie.
               
               
                  It is the beſt with forren foes to fight
                  Abroad, as did the haughtie Hannibal,
                  
                  And not at home to feele their hatefull ſpight.
                  Of all the reſt it is the greateſt thrall,
                  That foes arriu'd ſhould ſpoile our ſubiects all:
                  And for a truth this alwaies hath been found,
                  He ſpeedeth beſt which fights on forren ground.
               
               
                  My men of warre were muſtred out of hand,
                  But all my haſte was then of none auaile:
                  My brother Tostius with his rebell band,
                  In euery place my ſubiects did aſſaile,
                  And euery where did cauſe their hearts to quaile.
                  Whoſe wretched ſtate from farther ſpoile to ſhield,
                  I by my power did force him flie the field.
               
               
                  
                  He fled to Norway whence a cloud did riſe
                  That did obſcure the ſhine of my content,
                  When loe the Norman Duke did then deuiſe,
                  If I to yeeld my Scepter would aſſent,
                  For which betwixt vs to and fro there went
                  Deſpightfull letters, which I will recite,
                  Wherein he claimes, and I defend my right.
               
               
                  
                     
                        WILLIAM DVKE OF NORMANDIE, AND RIGHT heire to the Engliſh Crowne, to Harold the Vſurper.
                        
                     
                     
                        THough birthright cannot cauſe thee yeeld to me my Crowne,
                     
                     
                        Yet haue thou ſome respect of honor and renowne,
                     
                     
                        For thou by oath did'st ſweare to yeeld to me my right,
                     
                     
                        When as I thee prefer'd, and ſtal'd thee there by might.
                     
                     
                        Mine vncle Edward he, thy fathers faithfull friend
                     
                     
                        Gaue me his Crowne, and thou thereto did'st condeſcend,
                     
                     
                        Yet now thou wouldest faine defeate me of my right,
                     
                     
                        And proue thy ſelfe forſworne of former promiſe plight.
                     
                     
                        Shall Harold haue his hest: ſhall Godwines ſonne be guide?
                     
                     
                        Shall William want his will, and haue his right deni'd?
                     
                     
                        Well Harold, if thou canst with warres determine ſo,
                     
                     
                        I am content: if not, prouide, I am thy foe.
                     
                     
                        My ſonnes and all my kinne ſhall neuer ſtint to ſtriue,
                     
                     
                        To plucke thee from thy place, whil'st one is left aliue:
                     
                     
                        But if thou wilt bewiſe, to me my right reſigne,
                     
                     
                        And thou ſhalt haue the place belonging to thy line.
                     
                     
                        If not, with fire and ſword I meane thy Realme to ſpoile,
                     
                     
                        I neuer thence will ſtart till I haue forst thy foile.
                     
                     
                        And now thou know'st my will, determine for the best,
                     
                     
                        Thou maist haue warres, and if thou wilt, thou maist haue rest.
                     
                     
                        WILLIAM Duke of Normandy.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  THeſe letters were of little might, to make
                  My manly mind to grant him his requeſt,
                  For which I did to Fortune me betake,
                  To wage new warres with him I deem'd it beſt,
                  So from his fiſt his threatning blade to wreſt.
                  But ſee the force of Fortunes changing cheare,
                  Another cloud before me did appeare.
               
               
                  My brother Tostius who from me was fled,
                  Did now returne, and brought the Norway King:
                  They did deuiſe to haue from me my head,
                  Which made me to indite another thing
                  Vnto the Duke, then plaine and true meaning.
                  I gaue him hope of that I neuer ment,
                  Theſe were the lines which to the Duke I ſent.
               
               
                  
                     
                        HAROLD THE ENGLISH KING, TO THEE WILLIAM Duke of Normandy.
                     
                     HArold the Engliſh King, thee William Duke doth greete.
                     
                     
                        Thy letter being read, I haue not thought it meete,
                     
                     
                        Without a Parlament to do ſo great a thing,
                     
                     
                        As of a forren Duke, to make an Engliſh King:
                     
                     
                        But if my three estates will follow my aduice,
                     
                     
                        Thou ſhalt receiue the Crowne, and beare away the price.
                     
                     
                        Therefore delay a time, thou ſhortly ſhalt receiue
                     
                     
                        With full conſent the thing, which now thou ſeek'st to haue.
                     
                     
                        HAROLD.
                     
                  
               
               
                  I Arm'd in haſte all danger to auoid,
                  For why, I heard my brother Tostius traine,
                  Two of my Earles had in the North deſtroy'd,
                  And many a thouſand men he there had ſlaine:
                  But when we met, his triumph was in vaine.
                  For I and mine the Norway King there kilte,
                  And I my ſelfe my brothers blood there ſpilte.
               
               
                  
                  Now when the Duke my friendly lines had read,
                  And heard how I my men did muſter new,
                  There lies a Snake within this greene graſſe bed,
                  Quoth he, therefore come forth my warlike crew,
                  We will not ſtay to ſee what ſhall enſue.
                  By long delayes, from forren coaſts he may
                  Procure an aide, to ſcourge vs with decay.
               
               
                  But when he heard with whom I had to deale,
                  Well done (quoth he) let him go beate the buſh,
                  I and my men to the lurch line will ſteale,
                  And plucke the Net euen at the preſent puſh,
                  And one of them we with decay will cruſh.
                  For he who doth the victor there remaine,
                  Shall neuer reſt, till he hath dealt with twaine.
               
               
                  So I in vaine who had the victorie,
                  Within few daies was forſt againe to fight,
                  My ſtrength halfe ſpoil'd, my wounded men were wearie,
                  His campe was comne vnwares within my ſight,
                  There was no hope to flee by day nor night.
                  I Harold then, a Harauld ſent in haſte,
                  To know the plot where he his campe had plaſte.
               
               
                  He ſent me word, my ifs and ands were vaine,
                  And that he knew the drifts of my delay,
                  For which he ſaid he would yet once againe
                  Make triall, who ſhould beare the crowne away.
                  If I would yeeld, he ſaid his men ſhould ſtay,
                  If not, he then was preſent preſently,
                  To trie the cauſe by Mars his crueltie.
               
               
                  Which when I heard, and ſaw him march amaine,
                  His Trumpets did defie me to my face,
                  In haſte I did appoint my very traine,
                  And ſouldier-like I all my men did place,
                  I neuer ſu'd, nor pray'd, nor gapte for grace.
                  For hauing plaſte my men in battellray,
                  I with loude voice to them theſe words did ſay.
               
               
                  
                  My mates, in armes ſee heere the laſt aſſault,
                  Win now the field, and be you euer bleſt.
                  This Baſtard baſe borne Duke, ſhall he exalt
                  Himſelfe ſo high? giue eare vnto my heſt,
                  This day no doubt we ſhall haue quiet reſt:
                  For good ſucceſſe ſhall ſet vs free from feare,
                  Or hatefull hap ſhall bring vs to our beare.
               
               
                  Euen heere at hand his power doth appeare,
                  March forth my men, we muſt no longer ſtay:
                  Let euery man abandon fainting feare,
                  And I as guide will lead you on your way.
                  Euen I my ſelfe the formoſt in the fray,
                  Will teach you how you ſhall abate his pride.
                  Fight fight my men, your King ſhall be your guide.
               
               
                  His Croſ-bow men my Archers did aſſaile
                  With three to one, yet were they all too weake:
                  And when his forlorne hope could not preuaile,
                  Them to aſſiſt his Horſemen out did breake,
                  Three troopes I ſent on them the wrath to wreake,
                  And by and by the battels both did ioyne,
                  With many a thruſt, and many a bloodie foine.
               
               
                  Of three maine battels he his armie made,
                  I had but one, and one did deale with three:
                  Of which the firſt by me were quite diſmaide,
                  The other two they did diſcomfort me,
                  Not yeelding, but in yeelding blowes we be
                  (With loſſe of life) conſtrain'd at laſt to yeeld
                  The crowne, the kingdome, and the foughten field.
               
               
                  Note now the lot which on my limmes did light,
                  Nine monthes no more, I wore the Engliſh Crowne,
                  In euery month I in the field did fight,
                  In euery fight, I wonne a freſh renowne,
                  Yet at the laſt my ſtrength was beaten downe,
                  And heere before you, now I do proteſt,
                  I neuer had one day of quiet reſt.
               
               
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
               
            
         
         
            
               
               To the Reader.
               
                  HAuing hitherto continued the ſtorie (gentle Reader) from the firſt entrance of Brute into this Iland, with the falles of ſuch Princes, as were neuer before this time in one volume compriſed, I now proceed with the reſt, which take their beginning from the Conqueſt, whoſe pen-men being many and diuers, all diuerſlie affected in the method of this their Mirror, I purpoſe only to follow the intended ſcope of that moſt honorable perſonage, who, by how much he did ſurpaſſe the reſt in the eminence of his noble condition, by ſo much he hath exceeded them all in the excellencie of his heroicall ſtile, which with a golden pen he hath limmed out to posteritie in that worthy obiect of his minde, the Tragedie of the Duke of Buckingham, and in his preface then intituled Master Sackuils induction. This worthie Preſident of learning, intending to perfect all this ſtorie himſelfe from the Conquest, being called to a more ſerious expence of his time in the great State-affaires of his most royall Ladie and Soueraigne, left the diſpoſe thereof to M. Baldwine, M. Ferrers and others, the compoſers of theſe Tragedies, who continuing their methode which was by way of dialogue or interlocution betwixt euery Tragedie, gaue it onely place before the Duke of Buckinghams complaint, which order I ſince hauing altered, haue placed the Induction in the beginning, with euery Tragedie following according to ſucceſsion and the iust computation of time, which before was not obſerued; and lest any one thinke me enuious of others deſerts, I haue ſubſcribed

the names of all ſuch as I could heare of, vnder ſuch Tragedies as each one particularlie hath written; which at the request of the Printer, I haue briefely peruſed as the former. In which (friendly Reader) if I haue done amiſſe, I craue pardon for my ouerſight, hoping if paines will in ſtead of penance pacifie thee, to yeeld thee ſatisfaction and content in my additions following, to which I refer thee.
               
                  R. N.
               
            
            
               
               Mr. SACKVILS INDVCTION.
               
                  
                     THe wrathfull winter haſtning on apace,
                  With bluſtring blaſts had all ybard the treene,
                  And old Saturnus with his froſty face
                  With chilling cold had pearſt the tender greene:
                  The mantles rent, wherein enwrapped beene
                  The gladſome groues that now lay ouerthrowne,
                  The tapets torne, and euery tree downe blowne.
               
               
                  The ſoile that erſt ſo ſeemly was to ſeene,
                  Was all deſpoyled of her beauties hew,
                  And ſoote freſh flowers (wherewith the ſummers Queene
                  Had clad the earth) now Boreas blaſts downe blew.
                  And ſmall fowles flocking, in their fong did rew
                  The winters wrath, wherewith ech thing defaſte,
                  In woefull wiſe bewaild the ſummer paſt.
               
               
                  Hawthorne had loſt his motley liuery,
                  The naked twigs were ſhiuering all for cold;
                  And dropping downe the teares abundantly,
                  Ech thing (me thought) with weeping eye me told
                  The cruell ſeaſon, bidding mee with hold
                  My ſelfe within, for I was gotten out
                  Into the fields, whereas I walkt about.
               
               
                  When loe the night with miſtie mantels ſpred
                  Gan darke the day, and dim the azure skies,
                  And Venus in her meſſage Hermes ſped
                  To bloudy Mars, to will him not to riſe,
                  While ſhe her ſelfe approcht in ſpeedy wiſe:
                  And Virgo hiding her diſdainfull breſt,
                  With Thetis now had laid her downe to reſt.
               
               
                  
                  Whiles Scorpio dreading Sagittarius dart,
                  Whoſe bowe preſt bent in fight, the ſtring had ſlipt,
                  Downe ſlide into the Ocean floud apart.
                  The Beare that in the Iriſh ſeas had dipt
                  His grizly feet, with ſpeed from thence he whipt:
                  For Thetis haſting from the Virgins bed,
                  Purſude the Beare, that ere ſhe came was fled.
               
               
                  And Phaeton now neere reaching to his race
                  With gliſtring beames, gold ſtreaming where they bent,
                  Was preſt to enter in his reſting place.
                  
                     Erythius that in the cart firſt went,
                  Had euen now attain'd his iourneys ſtent:
                  And faſt declining hid away his head,
                  While Titan coucht him in his purple bed.
               
               
                  And pale-fac'd Cinthea with her borowed light,
                  Beginning to ſupplie her brothers place,
                  Was paſt the Nooneſteed ſixe degrees in ſight,
                  When ſparkling ſtarres amid the heauens face,
                  With twinkling light ſhone on the earth apace,
                  That while they brought about the nights black chare,
                  The darke had dim'd the day ere I was ware.
               
               
                  And ſorrowing I to ſee the ſummer flowers,
                  The liuely greene, the luſty leaſe forlorne:
                  The ſturdie trees ſo ſhattred with the ſhowers,
                  The fields ſo fade that floriſht ſo beforne,
                  It taught me well all earthly things be borne
                  To dye the death, for nought long time may laſt,
                  The ſummers beautie yeelds to winters blaſt.
               
               
                  Then looking vpward to the heauens leames
                  With nights bright ſtarres thick powdred euery where,
                  Which erſt ſo gliſtred with the golden ſtreames,
                  That chearfull Phoebus ſpred downe from his ſphere,
                  Beholding darke oppreſſing day ſo neere.
                  The ſudden ſight reduced to my mind,
                  The ſundry changes that in earth we find.
               
               
                  
                  That muſing on this worldly wealth in thought,
                  Which coms and goes more faſter then we ſee
                  The flickering flame that with the fire is wrought,
                  My buſie minde preſented vnto me
                  Such fall of Peeres as in the realme had be:
                  That oft I wiſht ſome would their woes deſcriue,
                  To warne the reſt whom Fortune left aliue.
               
               
                  And ſtrait forth ſtalking with redoubled pace,
                  For that I ſaw the night drew on ſo faſt,
                  In black all clad there fell before my face
                  A piteous wight, whom woe had all forewaſt,
                  Forth on her eyes the cryſtall teares out braſt,
                  And ſighing ſore her hands ſhe wrung and fold,
                  Tare all her haire that ruth was to behold.
               
               
                  Her body ſmall forwithered and foreſpent,
                  As is the ſtalke that ſummers drought oppreſt,
                  Her wealked face with woeful teares be ſprent,
                  Her colour pale (at it ſeemed her beſt)
                  In woe and plaint repoſed was her reſt.
                  And as the ſtone that drops of water weares,
                  So dented were her cheekes with fall of teares.
               
               
                  Her eies full ſwollen with flowing ſtreames aflote,
                  Where with her lookes throwne vp full piteouſly,
                  Her forceleſſe hands together oft ſhe ſmote,
                  With dolefull ſhrikes, that eckoed in the skye:
                  Whoſe plaint ſuch ſighs did ſtraight accompany,
                  That in my doome was neuer man did ſee
                  A wight but halfe ſo woe begone as ſhee.
               
               
                  I ſtood agaſt, beholding all her plight,
                  Tweene dread and dolour ſo diſtraind in hart,
                  That while my haires vpſtarted with the ſight,
                  The teares outſtreamd for ſorow of her ſmart:
                  But when I ſaw no end that could appart
                  The deadly dole, which ſhee ſo ſore did make,
                  With dolefull voice then thus to her I ſpake:
               
               
                  
                  Vnwrap thy woes what euer wight thou bee,
                  And ſtint in time to ſpill thy ſelfe with plaint,
                  Tell what thou art, and whence, for well I ſee
                  Thou canſt not dure with ſorrow thus attaint.
                  And with that word of ſorrow all forfaint,
                  She looked vp, and proſtrate as ſhe lay,
                  With piteous ſound, lo thus ſhe gan to ſay:
               
               
                  Alas, I wretch whom thus thou ſeeſt diſtrain'd
                  With waſting woes that neuer ſhall aſlake,
                  
                     Sorrow I am, in endleſſe torments pain'd
                  Among the Furies in th' infernall lake:
                  Where Pluto God of Hell ſo grizly black
                  Doth hold his throne, and Laetheus deadly taſt
                  Doth reue remembrance of each thing forepaſt:
               
               
                  Whence come I am, the drery deſtiny
                  And luckleſſe lot for to bemone of thoſe,
                  Whom Fortune in this maze of miſery,
                  Of wretched chance, moſt wofull Mirors choſe,
                  That when thou ſeeſt how lightly they did loſe
                  Their pomp, their power, and that they thought moſt ſure,
                  Thou mayſt ſoone deeme no earthly ioy may dure.
               
               
                  Whoſe rufull voice no ſooner had out-brayed
                  Thoſe wofull words, wherewith ſhe ſorrowed ſo:
                  But out alas, ſhe ſhright and neuer ſtayed,
                  Fell downe, and all to daſht her ſelfe for wo.
                  The cold pale dread my limmes gan ouergo;
                  And I ſo ſorrowed at her ſorrowes eft,
                  That what with griefe and feare my wits were reft.
               
               
                  I ſtretcht my ſelfe, and ſtraight my heart reuiues,
                  That dread and dolour earſt did ſo appale,
                  Like him that with the ſeruent feuer ſtriues,
                  When ſickneſſe ſeekes his caſtell health to ſcale,
                  With gathred ſprites ſo forſt I feare t'auale.
                  And rearing her with anguiſh all foredone,
                  My ſprits return'd, and then I thus begon:
               
               
                  
                  
                     Sorrow, alas ſith Sorrow is thy name,
                  And that to thee this drere doth well pertaiue,
                  In vaine it were to ſeeke to ceaſe the ſame:
                  But as a man himſelfe with ſorrow ſlaine,
                  So I alas doe comfort thee in paine,
                  That here in ſorrow art foreſunke ſo deepe,
                  That at thy ſight I can but ſigh and weepe.
               
               
                  I had no ſooner ſpoken of a ſtike,
                  But that the ſtorme ſo rumbled in her breſt,
                  As Eolus could neuer rore the like,
                  And ſhowres downe rain'd from her eyes ſo faſt,
                  That all bedreint the place, till at the laſt
                  Well eaſed they the dolour of her mind,
                  As rage of raine doth ſwage the ſtormie wind.
               
               
                  For forth ſhe paſed in her fearefull tale:
                  Come, come (quoth ſhe) and ſee what I ſhall ſhow:
                  Come heare the plaining, and the bitter bale
                  Of worthy men, by Fortunes ouerthrow:
                  Come thou and ſee them rewing all in row.
                  They were but ſhades that erſt in mind thou rold:
                  Come, come with me, thine eyes ſhall them behold.
               
               
                  What could theſe words but make me more agaſt,
                  To heare her tell whereon I muſ'd while ere?
                  So was I maz'd therewith: till at the laſt,
                  Muſing vpon her words, and what they were,
                  All ſuddainly well leſſoned was my feare:
                  For to my mind returned how ſhe teld
                  Both what ſhe was, and where her wun ſhe held.
               
               
                  Whereby I knew that ſhe a Goddeſſe was,
                  And therewithall reſorted to my mind
                  My thought, that late preſented me the glas
                  Of brittle ſtate, of cares that here we find,
                  Of thouſand woes to ſilly men aſſignd:
                  And how ſhe now bid me come and behold,
                  To ſee with eye that earſt in thought I told.
               
               
                  
                  Flat downe I fell, and with all reuerence
                  Adored her, perceiuing now that ſhee
                  A Goddeſſe ſent by godly prouidence,
                  In earthly ſhape thus ſhew'd her ſelfe to me,
                  To waile and rue this worlds vncertainty:
                  And while I honourd thus her Godheads might,
                  With plaining voice theſe words to me ſhe ſhright:
               
               
                  I ſhall thee guide firſt to the grieſly lake,
                  And thence vnto the bliſfull place of reſt,
                  Where thou ſhalt ſee and heare the plaint they make,
                  That whilome here bare ſwinge among the beſt.
                  This ſhalt thou ſee, but great is the vnreſt
                  That thou muſt bide, before thou canſt attaine
                  Vnto the dreadfull place where theſe remaine.
               
               
                  And with theſe words as I vpraiſed ſtood,
                  And gan to follow her that ſtraight forth paſte,
                  Ere I was ware, into a deſert wood
                  We now were come: where hand in hand imbraſte
                  She led the way, and through the thicke ſo traſte,
                  As but I had bene guided by her might,
                  It was no way for any mortall wight.
               
               
                  But loe, while thus amid the deſert darke,
                  We paſſed on with ſteps and pace vnmeete,
                  A rumbling rore confuſ'd with howle and barke
                  Of Dogs, ſhooke all the ground vnder our feete,
                  And ſtrooke the din within our eares ſo deepe,
                  As halfe diſtraught vnto the ground I fell,
                  Beſought returne, and not to viſit hell.
               
               
                  But ſhe forthwith vplifting mee a pace
                  Remou'd my dread, and with a ſtedfaſt minde,
                  Bad me come on, for here was now the place,
                  The place where we our trauailes end ſhould finde.
                  Wherewith I roſe, and to the place aſſingde
                  Aſtond I ſtalkt, when ſtraight we approched neere
                  The dreadfull place, that you will dread to heare:
               
               
                  
                  And hideous hole all vaſte, withouten ſhape,
                  Of endleſſe depth, orewhelm'd with ragged ſtone,
                  With ougly mouth, and grieſly iawes doth gape,
                  And to our ſight confounds it ſelfe in one.
                  Heere entred we, and yeeding forth, anone
                  A dreadfull lothly lake we might diſcerne
                  As blacke as pitch, that cleped is Auerne.
               
               
                  A deadly gulfe where nought but rubbiſh growes,
                  With foule black ſwelth in thickned lumps that lies,
                  Which vp in th' aire ſuch ſtinking vapors throwes
                  That ouer there, may flie no fowle but dies,
                  Choakt with the noyſome lauours that ariſe.
                  Hither we come, whence forth we ſtill did pace,
                  In dreadfull feare amid the dreadfull place:
               
               
                  And firſt within the porch and iawes of hell
                  Sate deepe Remorſe of conſcience, all beſprent
                  With teares: and to her ſelfe oft would ſhe tell
                  Her wretchedneſſe, and curſing neuer ſtent
                  To ſob and ſigh: but euer thus lament,
                  With thoughtfull care, as ſhe that all in vaine
                  Would weare and waſte continually in paine.
               
               
                  Her eyes vnſtedfaſt rolling here and there,
                  Whurl'd on each place, as place that vengeance brought,
                  So was her mind continually in feare,
                  Toſſed and tormented with tedious thought
                  Of thoſe deteſted crimes which ſhe had wrought:
                  With dreadfull cheere and lookes throwne to the skie,
                  Wiſhing for death, and yet ſhe could not die.
               
               
                  Next ſaw we Dread, all trembling how he ſhooke,
                  With foote vncertaine profered here and there,
                  Benum'd of ſpeech, and with a ghaſtly looke
                  Searcht euery place all pale and dead for feare,
                  His cap borne vp with ſtaring of his heare,
                  Soyn'd and amaz'd at his owne ſhade for dreed,
                  And fearing greater dangers then was need.
               
               
                  
                  And next within the entrie of this lake
                  Sate fell Reuenge gnaſhing her teeth for ire,
                  Deuiſing meanes how ſhe may vengeance take,
                  Neuer in reſt till ſhe haue her deſire:
                  But frets within ſo farforth with the fire
                  Of wreaking flames, that now determines ſhe
                  To die by death, or veng'd by death to be.
               
               
                  When fell Reuenge with bloudie foule pretence
                  Had ſhew'd her ſelfe as next in order ſet,
                  With trembling limbes we ſoftly parted thence,
                  Till in our eyes another ſight we met:
                  When from my heart a ſigh forthwith I fet,
                  Ruing alas vpon the wofull plight
                  Of Miſerie, that next appear'd in ſight.
               
               
                  His face was leane, and ſomedeale pin'd away,
                  And eke his hands conſumed to the bone,
                  But what his bodie was I cannot ſay,
                  For on his carkas rayment had he none,
                  Saue clouts and patches pieced one by one,
                  With ſtaffe in hand, and ſcrip on ſhoulder caſt,
                  His chiefe defence againſt the winters blaſt.
               
               
                  His food for moſt, was wilde fruits of the tree,
                  Vnleſſe ſometime ſome crums fell to his ſhare,
                  Which in his wallet long God workepthe,
                  As one the which full daintily would faire.
                  His drinke the running ſtreame: his cup the bare
                  Of his palme cloſde, his bed the hard cold ground.
                  To this poore life was Miſerie ybound.
               
               
                  Whoſe wretched ſtate when we had well beheld,
                  With tender ruth on him and on his feeres,
                  In thoughtfull cares, forth then our pace we held:
                  And by and by, another ſhape appeeres
                  Of greedie Care, ſtill bruſhing vp the breers,
                  His knuckles knob'd, his fleſh deepe dented in,
                  With tawed hands, and hard ytanned skin.
               
               
                  
                  The morrow gray no ſooner hath begun
                  To ſpread his light euen peeping in our eyes,
                  When he is vp and to his worke yrun.
                  But let the nights blacke miſtie mantles riſe,
                  And with foule darke neuer ſo much diſguiſe
                  The faire bright day, yet ceaſeth he no while,
                  But hath his candles to prolong his toile.
               
               
                  By him lay heauie Sleepe coſin of Death
                  Flat on the ground, and ſtill as any ſtone,
                  A very corps, ſaue yeelding forth a breath.
                  Small keepe tooke he whom Fortune frowned on,
                  Or whom ſhe lifted vp into the throne
                  Of high renowne, but as a liuing death,
                  So dead aliue, of life he drew the breath.
               
               
                  The bodies reſt, the quiet of the hart,
                  The trauailes eaſe, the ſtill nights feere was he.
                  And of our life in earth the better part,
                  Reuer of ſight, and yet in whom we ſee
                  Things oft that tide, and oft that neuer bee.
                  Without reſpect eſteeming equally
                  King Croeſus pompe, and Irus pouertie.
               
               
                  And next in order ſad Old Age we found,
                  His beard all hoare, his eyes hollow and blind,
                  With drouping cheere ſtill poring on the ground,
                  As on the place where nature him aſſign'd
                  To reſt, when that the ſiſters had vntwin'd
                  His vitall thred, and ended with their knife
                  The fleeting courſe of faſt declining life.
               
               
                  There heard we him with broke and hollow plaint
                  Rew with himſelfe his end approching faſt,
                  And all for nought his wretched mind torment,
                  With ſweete remembrance of his pleaſures paſt,
                  And freſh delites of luſtie youth forewaſt.
                  Recounting which, how would he ſob and ſhreek?
                  And to be yong againe of Ioue beſeeke.
               
               
                  
                  But and the cruell fates ſo fixed be,
                  That time forepaſt cannot returne againe,
                  This one requeſt of Ioue yet prayed he:
                  That in ſuch withred plight, and wretched paine,
                  As eld (accompanied with lothſome traine)
                  Had brought on him, all were it woe and griefe,
                  He might a while yet linger forth his life,
               
               
                  And not ſo ſoone deſcend into the pit:
                  Where Death, when he the mortall corps hath ſlaine,
                  With wretchleſſe hand in graue doth couer it,
                  Thereafter neuer to enioy againe
                  The gladſome light, but in the ground ylaine,
                  In depth of darkneſſe waſte and weare to nought,
                  As he had nere into the world been brought.
               
               
                  But who had ſeene him, ſobbing how he ſtood
                  Vnto himſelfe, and how he would bemone
                  His youth forepaſt, as though it wrought him good
                  To talke of youth, all were his youth foregone,
                  He would haue muſde and maruail'd much whereon
                  This wretched Age ſhould life deſire ſo faine.
                  And knowes ful wel life doth but length his paine.
               
               
                  Crookebackt he was, tooth ſhaken, and blere eyde,
                  Went on three feete, and ſometime crept on foure,
                  With old lame bones, that ratled by his ſide,
                  His ſcalpe all pil'd, and he with eld forlore:
                  His withred fiſt ſtill knocking at Deaths dore,
                  Fumbling and driueling as he drawes his breath,
                  For briefe, the ſhape and meſſenger of Death.
               
               
                  And faſt by him pale Maladie was plaſte,
                  Sore ſicke in bed, her colour all foregone,
                  Bereft of ſtomacke, ſauour, and of taſte,
                  Ne could ſhe brooke no meate but broths alone.
                  Her breath corrupt, her keepers euery one
                  Abhorring her, her ſickneſſe paſt recure,
                  Deteſting phyſicke, and all phyſickes cure.
               
               
                  
                  But oh the dolefull ſight that then we ſee,
                  We turn'd our looke, and on the other ſide
                  A grieſly ſhape of Famine mought we ſee,
                  With greedie lookes, and gaping mouth that cried,
                  And roar'd for meate as ſhe ſhould there haue died,
                  Her bodie thin, and bare as any bone,
                  Whereto was left nought but the caſe alone.
               
               
                  And that alas was gnawne on euery where,
                  All full of holes, that I ne mought refraine
                  From teares, to ſee how ſhe her armes could teare,
                  And with her teeth gnaſh on the bones in vaine:
                  When all for nought ſhe faine would ſo ſuſtaine
                  Her ſtaruen corps, that rather ſeem'd a ſhade,
                  Then any ſubſtance of a creature made.
               
               
                  Great was her force, whom ſtonewall could not ſtay,
                  Her tearing nailes ſnatching at all ſhe ſaw:
                  With gaping iawes, that by no meanes ymay
                  Be ſatisfi'd from hunger of her mawe,
                  But eates her ſelfe as ſhe that hath no law:
                  Gnawing, alas, her carcaſe all in vaine,
                  Where you may count each ſinew, bone, and vaine.
               
               
                  On her while we thus firmely fixt our eyes,
                  That bled for ruth of ſuch a driety ſight,
                  Loe ſuddenly ſhe ſhrinkt in ſo huge wiſe,
                  As made hell gates to ſhiuer with the might.
                  Wherewith a dart we ſaw how it did light
                  Right on her breſt, and therewithall pale Death
                  Enthrilling it to reaue her of her breath.
               
               
                  And by and by a dumbe dead corps we ſaw,
                  Heauie and cold, the ſhape of death aright,
                  That dants all earthly creatures to his law:
                  Againſt whoſe force in vaine it is to fight.
                  Ne Peeres, ne Princes, nor no mortall wight,
                  No Towne, ne Realmes, Cities, ne ſtrongeſt Tower,
                  But all perforce muſt yeeld vnto his power.
               
               
                  
                  His dart anon out of the corps he tooke,
                  And in his hand (a dreadfull ſight to ſee)
                  With great triumph eftſoones the ſame he ſhooke,
                  That moſt of all my feares affrayed mee.
                  His bodie dight with nought but bones perdie,
                  The naked ſhape of man there ſaw I plaine,
                  All ſaue the fleſh, the ſinow, and the vaine.
               
               
                  Laſtly ſtood Warre in glittering armes yelad,
                  With viſage grim, ſterne looks, and blackely hewed,
                  In his right hand a naked ſword he had,
                  That to the hilts was all with blood embrued:
                  And in his left (that King and kingdomes rued)
                  Famine and fire he held, and therewithall
                  He raced townes, and threw downe towers and all.
               
               
                  Cities he ſackt, and Realmes that whilome flowred
                  In honor, glorie, and rule aboue the beſt
                  He ouerwhelm'd, and all their fame deuoured,
                  Conſum'd, deſtroy'd, waſted and neuer ceaſt,
                  Till he their wealth, their name and all oppreſt.
                  His face forehew'd with wounds, and by his ſide
                  There hung his targ, with gaſhes deepe and wide.
               
               
                  In midſt of which, depainted there we found
                  Deadly Debate, all full of ſnakie heare,
                  That with a bloodie fillet was ybound,
                  Out breathing nought but diſcord euery where.
                  And round about were portrai'd heere and there
                  The hugie hoſts, Darius and his power,
                  His Kings, Princes, his Peeres, and all his flower;
               
               
                  Whom great Macedo vanquiſht there in ſight,
                  With deepe ſlaughter, deſpoiling all his pride,
                  Pierſt through his Realmes, and danted all his might.
                  Duke Hannibal beheld I there beſide,
                  In Cannas field, victor how he did ride,
                  And wofull Romans that in vaine withſtood,
                  And Conſul Paulus couered all in blood.
               
               
                  
                  Yet ſaw I more the fight at Traſimene,
                  And Treberie field, and eke when Hannibal
                  
                  And worthie Scipio, laſt in armes were ſene
                  Before Carthago gate, to trie for all
                  The worlds Empire, to whom it ſhould befall.
                  There ſaw I Pompey, and Caeſar clad in armes,
                  Their hoſts allied and all their ciuill harmes,
               
               
                  With Conquerers hands forbath'd in their owne blood,
                  And Caeſar weeping ouer Pompeyes head.
                  Yet ſaw I Scilla and Marius where they ſtood,
                  Their great crueltie, and the deepe bloodſhead
                  Of friends: Cyrus I ſaw and his hoſt dead,
                  And how the Queene with great deſpite hath flong
                  His head in blood of them ſhe ouercome.
               
               
                  
                     Xerxes the Perſian King yet ſaw I there,
                  With his huge hoſt that dranke the riuers drie,
                  Diſmounted hilles, and made the vales vprere,
                  His hoſt and all yet ſaw I ſlaine perdie.
                  Thebes I ſaw all rac'd how it did lie
                  In heapes of ſtones, and Tyrus put to ſpoile,
                  With walles and towers flat euened with the ſoile.
               
               
                  But Troy alas (me thought) aboue them all,
                  It made mine eyes in very teares conſume:
                  When I beheld the wofull werd befall,
                  That by the wrathfull will of God was come:
                  And Ioues vnmoued ſentence and foredoome
                  On Priam King, and on his towne ſo bent,
                  I could not lin, but I muſt there lament.
               
               
                  And that the more, fith deſt'ny was ſo ſterne
                  As force perforce, there might no force auaile,
                  But ſhe muſt fall: and by her fall we learne,
                  That cities, towers, wealth, world, and all ſhall quaile.
                  No manhood, might, nor nothing mought preuaile,
                  All were there preſt full many a Prince and Peere,
                  And many a Knight that ſold his death full deere.
               
               
                  
                  Not worthie Hector worthieſt of them all,
                  Her hope, her ioy, his force is now for nought:
                  O Troy, Troy, there is no boote but bale,
                  The hugie horſe within thy walles is brought:
                  Thy turrets fall, thy Knights that whilome fought
                  In armes amid the field, are ſlaine in bed,
                  Thy gods defil'd, and all thy honor dead.
               
               
                  The flames vpriſing, and cruelly they creepe
                  From wall to roofe, till all to cinders waſt,
                  Some fire the houſes where the wretches ſleepe,
                  Some ruſh in heere, ſome run in there as faſt.
                  In euery where or ſword or fire they taſt.
                  The wals are torne, the towers whurl'd to the ground,
                  There is no miſchiefe but may there be found.
               
               
                  
                     Caſſandra yet there ſaw I how they haled
                  From Pallis houſe, with ſpercled treſſe vndone,
                  Her wriſts faſt bound, and with Greekes rout empaled:
                  And Priam eke in vaine how he did runne
                  To armes, whom Pyrrhus with deſpite hath done
                  To cruel death, and bath'd him in the baine
                  Of his ſonnes blood before the altar ſlaine.
               
               
                  But how can I deſcribe the dolefull ſight,
                  That in the ſhield ſo liuely faire did ſhine?
                  Sith in this world I thinke was neuer wight
                  Could haue ſet forth the halfe, not halfe ſo fine.
                  I can no more but tell how there is ſeene
                  Faire Ilium fall in burning red gledes downe,
                  And from the ſoile great Troy Neptunus towne.
               
               
                  Here from when ſcarce I could mine eyes withdraw
                  That fil'd with teares as doth the ſpringing well,
                  We paſſed on ſo far forth till we ſaw
                  Rude Acheron, a lothſome lake to tell,
                  That boyles and bubs vp ſwelth as blacke as hell,
                  Where grieſlie Charon at their fixed tide
                  Still ferries ghoſts vnto the farther ſide.
               
               
                  
                  The aged God no ſooner Sorrow ſpied,
                  But haſting ſtraight vnto the bancke apace,
                  With hollow call vnto the rout he cried,
                  To ſwarue apart, and giue the Goddeſſe place.
                  Straight it was done, when to the ſhoare we pace,
                  Where hand in hand as wee then linked faſt,
                  Within the boate wee are together plaſte.
               
               
                  And forth we lanch full fraughted to the brinke,
                  When with th' vnwonted waight, the ruſty keele
                  Began to cracke as if the ſame ſhould ſinke.
                  We hoiſe vp maſt and ſaile, that in a while
                  We fet the ſhoare, where ſcarſely we had while
                  For to arriue, but that we heard anone
                  A three ſound barke confounded all in one.
               
               
                  We had not long forth paſt, but that we ſaw
                  Blacke Cerberus the hideous hound of hell,
                  With briſtles reard, and with a three mouth'd Iaw,
                  Foredinning th' aire with his horrible yell.
                  Out of the deepe darke caue where he did dwell,
                  The Goddeſſe ſtraight he knew, and by and by
                  He peaſt and couched, while that we paſt by.
               
               
                  Thence come we to the horrour and the hell,
                  The large greate Kingdomes, and the dreadful raigne
                  Of Pluto in his throne where he did dwell,
                  The wide waſte places, and the hugie plaine:
                  The wailings, ſhrikes, and ſundry ſorts of paine:
                  The ſighs, the ſobs, the deepe and deadly groane,
                  Earth, aire, and all reſounding plaint and moane.
               
               
                  Thence did we paſſe the three-fold emperie
                  To th' vtmoſt bounds, where Radamanthus raignes,
                  Where proud folke waile there woefull miſerie,
                  Where dreadfull din of thouſand dragging chaines,
                  And balefull ſhriekes of ghoſts in deadly paines
                  Tortur'd eternally are heard moſt brim
                  Through ſilent ſhades of night ſo darke and dim.
               
               
                  
                  From hence vpon our way we forward paſſe,
                  And through the groues and vncoth paths we goe,
                  Which leade vnto the Cyclops walles of braſſe:
                  And where that maine-broad flood for aye doth floe,
                  Which parts the gladſome fields from place of woe,
                  Whence none ſhall euer paſſe t' Elizium plaine,
                  Or from Elizium euer turne againe.
               
               
                  With Sorrow for my guide, as there I ſtood,
                  A troope of men the moſt in armes bedight,
                  In tumult cluſterd 'bout both ſides the flood:
                  'Mongſt whom, who were ordaind t'eternall night,
                  Or who to bliſſefull peace and ſweet delight
                  I wot not well, it ſeem'd that they were all
                  Such as by deaths vntimely ſtroke did fall.
               
               
                  Some headleſſe were, ſome body, face and hands,
                  With ſhamefull wounds deſpoil'd in euery part:
                  Some ſtrangled, ſome that dide in captiue bands,
                  Some ſmothred, drown'd, ſome ſtricken through the hart
                  With fatall ſteele, all drown'd in deadly ſmart:
                  Of haſtned death, with ſhrikes, ſobs, ſighs and teares,
                  Did tell the woes of their forepaſſed yeares.
               
               
                  We ſtaid vs ſtraight, and with a rufull feare,
                  Beheld this heauie ſight, while from mine eies
                  The vapored teares downe ſtilled here and there,
                  And Sorrow eke in far more wofull wiſe,
                  Tooke on with plaint, vp heauing to the skies
                  Her wretched hands, that with her cry the rout
                  Gan all in heapes to ſwarme vs round about.
               
               
                  Loe here (quoth Sorrow) Princes of renowne,
                  That whilome ſate on top of Fortunes wheele,
                  Now laid full low, like wretches whurled downe
                  Euen with one frowne, that ſtaid but with a ſmile.
                  And now behold the thing that thou erewhile
                  Saw only in thought, and what thou now ſhalt heare,
                  Recount the ſame to Keſar, King, and Peere.
               
               
                  
                  Then firſt came Henry Duke of Buckingham,
                  
                  His cloake of blacke all pild and quite forworne,
                  Wringing his hands, and Fortune oft doth blame,
                  Which of a Duke hath made him now her skorne.
                  With gaſtly lookes as one in maner lorne:
                  Oft ſpred his armes, ſtretcht hands he ioines as faſt
                  With rufull cheare, and vapored eyes vpcaſt.
               
               
                  His cloake he rent, his manly breſt he beat,
                  His haire all torne about the place it lay,
                  My heart ſo molt to ſee his griefe ſo great,
                  As feelingly me thought it dropt away:
                  His eyes they whurld about withouten ſtay.
                  With ſtormy ſighes the place did ſo complaine,
                  As if his heart at each had burſt in twaine.
               
               
                  Thrice he began to tell his dolefull tale,
                  And thrice the ſighs did ſwallow vp his voice:
                  At each of which he ſhriked ſo withall,
                  As though the heauens riued with the noiſe:
                  Till at the laſt recouering his voice,
                  Supping the teares that all his breſt beraind,
                  On cruell Fortune weeping thus he plaind.
               
               FINIS.
            
            
               HOW THE TWO ROgers, ſurnamed Mortimers, for their ſundry vices, ended their liues vnfortunately, the one, An. 1329. the other, 1387.
               
                  
                     AMong the riders of the rolling wheele
                  That loſt their holds, Baldwine forget not mee,
                  Whoſe fatall thred falſe Fortune needs would reele,
                  Ere it were twiſted by the ſiſters three:
                  All folke be fraile, their bliſſes brittle bee:
                  For proofe whereof, although none other were,
                  Suffice may I, Sir Roger Mortimer.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Not he that was in Edwards dayes the third,
                  Whom Fortune brought to boote and eft to bale,
                  With loue of whom, the king ſo much ſhe ſturd,
                  That none but he was heard in any tale:
                  And whiles ſhe ſmooth blew on this pleaſant gale,
                  He was created Earle of March, alas,
                  Whence enuy ſprang which his deſtruction was.
               
               
                  For wealth breeds wrath, in ſuch as wealth doe want,
                  Pride folly breeds in ſuch as it poſſeſſe,
                  Among a thouſand ſhall you find one skant,
                  That can in wealth his lofty heart repreſſe,
                  Which in this Earle due proofe did plaine expreſſe:
                  For whereas he was ſomewhat haut before,
                  His high degree hath made him now much more.
               
               
                  For now alone he ruleth as him luſt,
                  Ne recks for reade, ſaue of king Edwards mother:
                  Which forced enuy foulder out the ruſt,
                  That in mens hearts before did lie and ſmother.
                  The Peeres, the people, th' one as well as th' other,
                  Againſt him made ſo hainous a complaint,
                  That for a traytour he was ſoone attaint.
               
               
                  Then all ſuch faults as were forgot afore,
                  They skowre afreſh, and ſomwhat to them adde:
                  For enuy ſtill hath eloquence in ſtore,
                  When Fortune bids to worſe things meanly bad.
                  Fiue hainous crimes againſt him ſoone were had,
                  Firſt that he caus'd the King to yeeld the Scot,
                  To make a peace, townes that were from him got:
               
               
                  And therewithall the Charter call'd Ragman,
                  
                  That of the Scots he bribed priuy gaine,
                  That through his meanes ſir Edward of Carnaruan
                  In Barkely Caſtle traiterouſly was ſlaine:
                  That with his Princes mother he had laine,
                  And finally, with polling at his pleaſure,
                  Had rob'd the King and Commons of their treaſure.
               
               
                  
                  For theſe things loe which erſt were out of mind
                  He was condemn'd, and hanged at the laſt,
                  In whom Dame Fortune fully ſhewed her kind,
                  For whom ſhe heaues ſhe hurleth downe as faſt.
                  If men to come, would learne by other paſt,
                  My coſin then might cauſe them ſet aſide
                  High climing, bribing, murdering, luſt, and pride.
               
               
                  The finall cauſe why I this proceſſe tell,
                  Is that I may be knowen from this the other,
                  My like in name, vnlike mee though he fell,
                  Which was I thinke my grandfire or his brother:
                  To count my kin, dame Philip was my mother,
                  Daughter and heire of douty Lionell,
                  
                  The third King Edwards ſonne, as ſtories tell.
               
               
                  My father hight ſir Edmund Mortimer,
                  
                  True Earle of March, whence I was after Earle,
                  By iuſt deſcent theſe two my parents were,
                  Of which the one of Knighthood bare the fearle,
                  Of womanhood the other was the pearle:
                  Through their deſert ſo cal'd of euery wight,
                  Till death them tooke, and left mee in their right.
               
               
                  For why th' attainter of the elder Roger,
                  
                  (Whoſe ſhamefull death I told you but oflate)
                  Was found to bee vniuſt, and paſſed ouer,
                  Againſt the law, by thoſe that bare him hate:
                  For where by law each one of free eſtate
                  Should perſonally be heard ere iudgement paſſe,
                  They bard him this, where through deſtroid he was.
               
               
                  Wherefore by doome of court in Parliament,
                  When we had prou'd our Coſin ordered thus,
                  The King, the Lords, and Commons of aſſent
                  His lawleſſe death vnlawfull did diſcuſſe:
                  And both to bloud and good reſtored vs.
                  A preſide at moſt worthy, ſhewed, and left,
                  Lords liues to ſaue, that lawleſſe might bee reft.
               
               
                  
                  While Fortune vnto me her grace did deigne,
                  King Richards grace the ſecond of that name,
                  (Whoſe looſer life did ſoone abridge his reigne,)
                  Made me his mate in earneſt and in game:
                  The Lords themſelues ſo well allow'd the ſame,
                  That through my titles duely comming downe,
                  I was made heire apparent to the Crowne.
               
               
                  Who then but I was euery where eſteemd,
                  Well was the man that might with me acquaint,
                  Whom I allow'd, as Lords the people deemd,
                  To whatſoeuer folly had me bent,
                  To like it well the people did aſſent:
                  To mee as Prince attended great and ſmall,
                  I hopte a day would come to pay for all.
               
               
                  But ſeldome ioy continueth trouble void,
                  In greateſt charge cares greateſt doe enſue,
                  The moſt poſſeſt are euer moſt annoid,
                  In largeſt ſeas ſore tempeſts lightly brue,
                  The freſheſt colours ſooneſt fade the hue,
                  In thickeſt place is made the deepeſt wound,
                  True proofe whereof my ſelf too ſoone haue found.
               
               
                  For whilſt faire Fortune Iuld mee in her lap,
                  And gaue me gifts more then I did require,
                  The ſubtile dame behind mee ſet a trap,
                  Whereby to daſh and lay all in the mire:
                  The Iriſh men againſt mee did conſpire,
                  My lands of Vlſter from me to haue reft,
                  Which heritage my mother had mee left.
               
               
                  And whiles I there, to ſet all things in ſtay,
                  (Omit my toiles and trouble thitherward)
                  Among mine owne with my retinue lay,
                  The wilder men whom I did not regard,
                  (And had therefore the reckles mans reward)
                  When leaſt I thought, ſet on mee in ſuch number,
                  That from my corps my life they rent aſunder.
               
               
                  
                  Nought might auaile my courage nor my force,
                  Nor ſtrength of men which were (alas) too few:
                  The cruell folke aſſaulted ſo my horſe,
                  That all my helps in peeces they to hew.
                  Our bloud diſtaines the ground as drops of dew,
                  Nought might preuaile to flie nor yet to yeeld,
                  For whom they take they murder in the field.
               
               
                  They know no law of Armes, nor none will learne,
                  They make not warre (as other doe) a play:
                  The Lord, the boy, the Gallowglas, the Kerne,
                  Yeeld or not yeeld, whom ſo they take they ſlay.
                  They ſaue no foes for ranſome nor for pay:
                  Their chiefeſt boote is th' aduerſaries head,
                  They end not w
                        •••
                     e till th' enemie be dead.
               
               
                  Amongſt theſe men or rather ſauage beaſts
                  I loſt my life, by cruell murder ſlaine:
                  And therefore Baldwine note thou well my geaſts,
                  And warne all Princes raſhnes to refraine:
                  Bid them beware their foes when they doe faine,
                  Nor yet preſume vnequally to ſtriue:
                  Had I thus done, I had been left aliue.
               
               
                  But I deſpis'd the naked Iriſh men,
                  And, for they flew, I feared them the leſſe:
                  I thought one man enough to match with ten,
                  And through this careleſſe vnaduiſednes
                  I was deſtroid, and all my men I geſſe,
                  At vnawares aſſaulted by our fone,
                  Which were in number forty to vs one.
               
               
                  See here the ſtay of fortunate eſtate,
                  The vaine aſſurance of this brittle life:
                  For I but yong-proclamed Prince of late,
                  Right fortunate in children and in wife,
                  Loſt all at once by ſtroke of bloudy knife:
                  Whereby aſſur'd let men themſelues aſſure,
                  That wealth and life are doubtfull to endure.
               
               FINIS.
            
            
               
               THE FALL OF ROBERT Treſilian chiefe Iuſtice of England, and other his fellowes, for miſconſtruing the Lawes, and expounding them to ſerue the Princes affections, Anno 1388.
               
                  
                     IN the ſad regiſter of miſchiefe and miſhap,
                  
                     Baldwine we beſeech thee with our names to begin,
                  Whom vnfriendly Fortune did train vnto a trap,
                  When as wee thought our ſtate moſt ſtable to haue bin.
                  So lightly leeſe they all, which all do weene to win.
                  Learne by vs ye Lawyers and Iudges of this Land,
                  Vpright and vncorrupt in doome alway to ſtand.
               
               
                  And print ye this preſident to remaine for euer,
                  Enroll and record it in Tables made of Braſſe,
                  Engraue it in Marble that may be raced neuer,
                  Where Iudges of the Law may ſee, as in a Glaſſe,
                  What guerdon is for guile, and what our wages was,
                  Who for our Princes will, corrupt with meed and awe,
                  Gainſt Iuſtice wretchedly did wreſt the ſenſe of Lawe.
               
               
                  A change more new or ſtrange when was there euer ſeene,
                  Then Iudges from the Bench to come downe to the Barre,
                  And Counſellours that were moſt nigh to King and Queene
                  Exiled their Countrie, from Court and Counſell farre?
                  But ſuch is Fortunes play, which can both make and marre,
                  Exalting to moſt high that was before moſt low,
                  And turning taile againe, the loftie downe to throw.
               
               
                  And ſuch as late afore, could ſtoutly ſpeake and plead
                  Both in Court and Countrey, careleſſe of the triall,
                  As mummers mute do ſtand without aduice or read,
                  All to ſeeke of ſhifting, by trauerſe or deniall,
                  Which haue ſeene the day, when, for a golden Ryall,
                  By finenes and cunning, could haue made blacke ſeeme white,
                  And moſt extorted wrong to haue appeared right.
               
               
                  
                  Whilſt thus on bench aboue we had the higheſt place,
                  Our reaſons were too ſtrong, for any to confute:
                  But when at barre beneath, we came to plead our caſe,
                  Our wits were in the wane, our pleading very brute.
                  Hard it is for priſoners with Iudges to diſpute:
                  When all men againſt one, and none for one ſhall ſpeake,
                  Who weenes himſelf moſt wiſe, may chance be too too weake.
               
               
                  To you therefore that ſit, theſe few words will I ſay,
                  That no man ſits ſo ſure, but he may haply ſtand:
                  Wherefore whilſt you haue place, and beare the ſwing and ſway,
                  By fauour without force, let points of Law be skand.
                  Pity the poore priſoner that holdeth vp his hand,
                  Ne lade him not with law, who leaſt of law hath knowne,
                  Remember ere ye die, the caſe may be your owne.
               
               
                  Behold me one vnfortunate amongſt this flocke,
                  
                     Treſilian cald ſometime chiefe Iuſtice of this Land,
                  A gentleman by birth, no ſtaine was in my ſtocke,
                  
                     Locketon, Holte, Belknap; with other of my band,
                  Which the Law and Iuſtice had wholly in our hand,
                  Vnder the ſecond Richarda Prince of greate ſtate,
                  To whom and vs alſo, blind Fortune gaue the mate.
               
               
                  In all our Common Lawes our skill was ſo profound,
                  Our credit and autority ſuch and ſo high eſteemd,
                  That what wee did conclude, was taken for a ground,
                  Allowed was for Law what ſo to vs beſt ſeemd,
                  Both life, death, lands, and goods, and all by vs was deemd:
                  Whereby with eaſie paine, great gaine we did in fet,
                  And euery thing was fiſh, that came vnto our net.
               
               
                  At Seſſions and Siſes, we bare the ſtroke and ſway,
                  In patents and commiſſion, of Quorum ſtill chiefe:
                  So that to whether ſide ſoeuer we did way,
                  Were it by right or wrong, it paſt without repriefe.
                  The true man we let hang ſome whiles to ſaue a thiefe,
                  Of Gold, and of Siluer, our hands were neuer empty,
                  Offices, Farmes, and Fees, fell to vs in great plenty.
               
               
                  
                  But what thing may ſuffice vnto the greedie man?
                  The more he hath in hold, the more he doth deſire:
                  Happie and twice happie is he, that wiſely can
                  Content himſelfe with that, which reaſon doth require,
                  And moileth for no more then for his needfull hire:
                  But greedineſſe of mind doth ſeldome keepe the ſiſe,
                  To whom enough and more doth neuer well ſuffice.
               
               
                  For like as dropſie patients drinke and ſtill be drie,
                  Whoſe vnſtanch'ſt greedie thirſt no liquor can allay,
                  And drinke they nere ſo much, yet thirſt they by and by;
                  So catchers and ſnatchers do toile both night and day,
                  Not needie, but greedie, ſtill prolling for their pray.
                  O endleſſe thirſt of gold, corrupter of all lawes,
                  What miſchiefe is on mould whereof thou art not cauſe?
               
               
                  Thou madeſt vs forget the ſaith of our profeſſion,
                  When Sergeants we were ſworne to ſerue the common law,
                  Which was, that in no point we ſhould make digreſſion
                  From approued principles, in ſencence nor in ſawe:
                  But we vnhappie wights without all dread and awe
                  Of the Iudge eternall, for worlds vaine promotion,
                  More to man then God did beare our whole deuotion.
               
               
                  The Lawes we did interpret and ſtatutes of the Land,
                  Not truly by the text, but newly by a gloſe:
                  And words that were moſt plaine, when they by vs were skand,
                  We turned by conſtruction to a Welchmans hoſe,
                  Whereby many a one both life and land did loſe:
                  Yet this we made our meane to mount aloft on mules,
                  And ſeruing times and turnes, peruerted lawes and rules.
               
               
                  Thus climing and contending alway to the top,
                  From high vnto higher, and then to be moſt hie,
                  The hony dew of Fortune ſo faſt on vs did drop,
                  That of King Richards counſell we came to be moſt nie:
                  Whoſe fauour to attaine we were full fine and flie.
                  Alway to his profit where any thing might ſound,
                  That way (all were it wrong) the lawes we did expound.
               
               
                  
                  So working Law like waxe, the ſubiect was not ſure
                  Of life, of land, nor goods, but at the Princes will,
                  Which cauſed his kingdome the ſhorter time to dure:
                  For claiming power abſolute both to ſaue and ſpill,
                  The Prince thereby preſumed his people for to pill,
                  And ſet his luſts for Law, and will had reaſons place,
                  No more but hang and draw, there was no better grace.
               
               
                  Thus the King outleaping the limits of his Law,
                  Not raigning but raging, as youth did him entice,
                  Wiſe and worthie perſons from Court did daily draw,
                  Sage counſell ſet at naught, proud vanters were in price,
                  And royſters bare the rule, which waſted all in vice:
                  Of riot and exceſſe, grew ſcarcitie and lacke,
                  Of lacking came taxing, and ſo went wealth to wracke.
               
               
                  The Barons of the Land not bearing this abuſe,
                  Conſpiring with the Commons aſſembled by aſſent,
                  And ſeeing neither reaſon nor treatie could induce
                  The King in any thing his rigour to relent,
                  Maugre his Kingly might they call'd a Parlament,
                  Franke and free for all men without checke to debate
                  As well for weale publique, as for the Princes ſtate.
               
               
                  In this high aſſemblie, great things were proponed
                  Touching the Princes ſtate, his regaltie and crowne,
                  By reaſon that the King (which much was to be moued)
                  Without regard at all of honor or renowne,
                  Miſled by ill aduice, had turn'd all vpſide downe,
                  For ſuretie of whoſe ſtate, them thought it did behoue
                  His Counſellours corrupt by reaſon to remoue:
               
               
                  Among whom, Robert Veer, call'd Duke of Ireland,
                  With Michael Delapole of Suffolke new made Earle,
                  Of Yorke alſo then Archbiſhop, diſpatcht out of hand,
                  With Brembre of London a full vncurteous churle:
                  Some learned in the Law in exile they did hurle:
                  But I poore Treſilian (becauſe I was the chiefe)
                  Was damned to the gallowes moſt vilely as a thiefe.
               
               
                  
                  Lo the fine of falſhood, ſtipend of corruption,
                  The fee of double fraud, the fruits it doth procure:
                  Yee Iudges vpon earth, let our iuſt punition
                  Teach you to ſhake off bribes, and keepe your hands ſtill pure.
                  Riches and promotion be vaine things and vnſure,
                  The fauour of a Prince is an vntruſtie ſtay,
                  But Iuſtice hath a fee that ſhall remaine alway.
               
               
                  What glorie can be greater before God or man,
                  Then by paths of Iuſtice in iudgement to proceed?
                  So duely and ſo truly the Lawes for to ſcan,
                  That right may take his place without regard or meed.
                  Set apart all flatterie and vaine worldly dreed,
                  Set God before your eyes, the moſt iuſt Iudge ſupreme,
                  Remember well your reckoning at the day extreme.
               
               
                  Abandon all affray, be ſoothfaſt in your ſawes,
                  Be conſtant and careleſſe of mortals diſpleaſure,
                  With eyes ſhut and hands cloſe you ſhould pronounce the lawes.
                  Eſteeme not worldly goods, thinke there is a treaſure
                  More worth then gold a thouſand times in valure,
                  Repoſed for all ſuch as righteouſneſſe enſue,
                  Whereof you cannot faile, the promiſe made is true.
               
               
                  If Iudges in our daies would ponder well in mind
                  The fatall fall of vs, for wreſting Law and right,
                  Such ſtatutes as touch life ſhould not be thus defin'd.
                  By ſenſes conſtrained, againſt true meaning quite,
                  As well they might affirme the blacke for to be white:
                  Wherefore we wiſh they would our act and end compare,
                  And weighing well the caſe, they will we truſt beware.
               
               G. Ferrers.
            
            
               
               HOW SIR THOMAS OF WOODSTOCKE DVKE OF Gloceſter, vncle to King Richard the ſecond, was vnlawfully murdered, An. Dom. 1397.
               
                  
                     WHoſe ſtate ſtabliſht is, in ſeeming moſt ſure,
                  And ſo far from danger of Fortunes blaſts,
                  As by the compaſſe of mans coniecture,
                  No braſen piller may be fixt more faſt:
                  Yet wanting the ſtay of prudent forecaſt,
                  When froward Fortune liſt for to frowne,
                  May in a moment turne vpſide downe.
               
               
                  In proofe whereof, O Baldwine, take paine,
                  To hearken a while to Thomas of Woodſtocke,
                  Addreſſe in preſence his fate to complaine,
                  In the forlorne hope of Engliſh flocke:
                  Extract by deſcent from the royall ſtocke,
                  Sonne to King Edward, third of that name,
                  And ſecond to none in glorie and fame.
               
               
                  This noble father to maintaine my ſtate,
                  With Buckingham Earledome did me indow,
                  Both Nature and Fortune to me were great,
                  Denying me nought which they might allow:
                  Their ſundrie graces in me did ſo flow,
                  As beautie, ſtrength, high fauour and fame,
                  Who may of God more wiſh then the ſame?
               
               
                  Brothers we were to the number of ſeuen,
                  I being the ſixt, and yongeſt but one:
                  A more royall race was not vnder heauen,
                  More ſtout or more ſtately of ſtomacke and perſon,
                  Princes all peereleſſe in each condition:
                  Namely Sir Edward, call'd the blacke Prince,
                  When had England the like before or ſince?
               
               
                  
                  But what of all this, any man t'aſſure,
                  In ſtate vncarefull of Fortunes variance?
                  Sith daily and hourely we ſee it in vre,
                  That where moſt cauſe is of affiance,
                  Euen there is found moſt weake aſſurance.
                  Let none truſt Fortune, but follow reaſon:
                  For often we ſee in truſt is treaſon.
               
               
                  This prouerbe in proofe ouer true I tried,
                  Finding high treaſon in place of high truſt:
                  And moſt fault of faith where I moſt affied,
                  Being, by them that ſhould haue been iuſt,
                  Trayterouſly entrapt, ere I could miſtruſt.
                  Ah wretched world what it is to truſt thee,
                  Let them that will learne now hearken to mee.
               
               
                  After King Edward the thirds deceaſe,
                  Succeeded my nephew Richard to raigne,
                  Who for his glorie and honors encreaſe,
                  With princely wages did me entertaine,
                  Againſt the Frenchmen to be his Chieftaine.
                  So paſſing the ſeas with royall puiſſance,
                  With God and S. George I inuaded France.
               
               
                  Waſting the countrie with ſword and with fire,
                  Ouerturning townes, high caſtles and towers,
                  Like Mars god of warre enflamed with ire
                  I forced the Frenchmen t' abandon their bowers:
                  Where euer we marcht I wan at all howers,
                  In ſuch wiſe viſiting both citie and village,
                  That alway my ſouldiers were laden with pillage.
               
               
                  With honor and triumph was my returne,
                  Was none more ioyous then yong King Richard:
                  
                  Who minding more highly my ſtate to adorne,
                  With Gloceſter Dukedome did me reward:
                  And after in mariage I was prefer'd
                  To a daughter of Bohun an Earle honorable,
                  By whom I was of England high Conſtable.
               
               
                  
                  Thus hoyſed high on Fortunes wheele,
                  As one on a ſtage attending a play,
                  See'th not on which ſide the ſcaffold doth reele,
                  Till timber and poles and all flie away:
                  So fared it by me: for day by day,
                  As honor encreaſed I looked ſtill higher,
                  Not ſeeing the danger of my fond deſier.
               
               
                  For Fortunes floud thus running with full ſtreame,
                  And I a Duke deſcended of great Kings,
                  Conſtable of England, chiefe officer of the Realme,
                  Abuſed with deſperance in theſe vaine things,
                  I went without feete, and flew without wings,
                  Preſuming ſo far vpon my high ſtate,
                  That dread ſet apart, my Prince I would mate.
               
               
                  For whereas Kings haue counſell of their choice,
                  To whom they referre the rule of their Land,
                  With certaine familiars in whom to reioyce,
                  For pleaſure or profit, as the caſe ſhall ſtand,
                  I not bearing this, would needs take in hand,
                  Maugre his will, thoſe perſons to diſgrace,
                  And for to ſettle others in their place.
               
               
                  But as an old booke ſaith, who will aſſay
                  About the Cats necke to hang on a bell,
                  Had firſt need to cut the Cats clawes away,
                  Leſt if the Cat be curſt, and not tam'd well,
                  She with her nailes may claw him to the fell:
                  So putting the bell about the Cats necke,
                  I vnaduiſed caught a cruell checke.
               
               
                  Reade well the ſentence of the Rat renown'd,
                  Which Pierce the plowman deſcribes in his dreame,
                  And whoſo hath wit the ſenſe to expound,
                  Shall find that to curbe the Prince of a Reame,
                  Is euen (as who ſaith) to ſtriue with the ſtreame:
                  Note this all ſubiects, and conſtrue it well,
                  And buſie not your braines 'bout the Cats bell.
               
               
                  
                  But in that yee be Lieges learne t'obay,
                  Submitting your willes to your Princes Lawes:
                  It fits not a ſubiect t'haue his owne way,
                  Remember this prouerbe of the Cats clawes:
                  For Princes like Lions haue long large pawes
                  That reach at randon, and whom they once twitch,
                  They claw to the bone before the skin itch.
               
               
                  But to my purpoſe, I being once bent,
                  Towards the atchieuing of my attemptate,
                  Foure bould Barons were of mine aſſent,
                  By oath and alliance faſtly confederate:
                  Firſt Henrie of Derby an Earle of eſtate,
                  
                     Richard of Arundell, and Thomas of Warwicke,
                  With Mowbray the Marſhall, a man moſt warlike.
               
               
                  At Ratecote Bridge aſſembled our band,
                  The Commons in cluſters came to vs that day
                  To dant Robert Veere, then Duke of Ireland,
                  By whom King Richard was ruled alway:
                  We put him to flight, and brake his array,
                  Then maugre the King, his leaue or aſſent,
                  We by our power did call a Parlament.
               
               
                  Where not in Robes, but with our Baſlards bright,
                  We came to parle of the publique weale,
                  Confirming our quarell with maine and might,
                  With ſwords and no words we tried our appeale,
                  In ſtead of reaſon declaring out zeale,
                  And whom ſo we knew, with the King in grace,
                  We plainly depriued of power and place.
               
               
                  Some with ſhort proceſſe were baniſht the Land,
                  Some executed with capitall paine,
                  Whereof whoſo liſt, the whole t'vnderſtand,
                  In the Parlament roll it appeareth plaine,
                  And further how ſtoutly we did the King ſtraine,
                  The rule of his Realme wholly to reſigne,
                  To the order of thoſe, whom we did aſſigne.
               
               
                  
                  But note the ſequele of ſuch preſumption,
                  After we had theſe miracles wrought,
                  The King inflamed with in dignation,
                  That to ſuch bondage he ſhould be brought,
                  Suppreſſing the ire of his inward thought,
                  Studied nought elſe but how that he might
                  Be highly reuenged of this high deſpite.
               
               
                  Aggreeu'd was alſo this latter offence,
                  With former matter his ire to renue:
                  For once at Windſore I brought to his preſence
                  The Maior of London with all his retinue,
                  To aske a reckoning of the Realmes reuenue:
                  And the ſouldiers of Breſt by me were made bold,
                  Their wages to claime when the towne was ſold.
               
               
                  Theſe griefes remembred with all the remnant,
                  Hourded in his hart hate out of meaſure,
                  Yet openly in ſhew made he no femblant,
                  By word or by deed to beare diſpleaſure:
                  But loue dayes diſſembled do neuer indure,
                  And whoſo truſteth a foe reconcild,
                  Is for the moſt part alwaies beguild.
               
               
                  For as fire ill quencht will vp at a ſtart,
                  And ſores not well ſalued doe breake out of new,
                  So hatred hidden in an irefull hart,
                  Where it hath had long ſeaſon to brew,
                  Vpon euery occaſion doth eaſily renew:
                  Not failing at laſt, if it be not let,
                  To pay large vſury beſides the due det.
               
               
                  Euen ſo it fared by this friendſhip fained,
                  Outwardly ſound, and inwardly rotten:
                  For when the Kings fauour in ſeeming was gained,
                  All old diſpleaſures forgiuen and forgotten,
                  Euen then at a ſuddaine the ſhaft was ſhotten,
                  Which pierced my heart void of miſtruſt;
                  Alas that a Prince ſhould be ſo vniuſt.
               
               
                  
                  For lying at Plaſhey my ſelfe to repoſe,
                  By reaſon of ſickneſſe which held me full ſore,
                  The King eſpying me apart from thoſe,
                  With whom I confedered in band before,
                  Thought it not meete to tract the time more,
                  But glad to take me at ſuch auantage,
                  Came to ſalute me with friendly viſage.
               
               
                  Who hauing a band bound to his bent,
                  By colour of kindneſſe to viſite his Eame,
                  Tooke time to accompliſh his cruell intent:
                  And in a ſmall veſſell downe by the ſtreame,
                  Conueid me to Calis out of the Realme,
                  Where without proceſſe or doome of my Peeres,
                  Not nature but murder abridged my yeeres.
               
               
                  This act was odious to God and to man,
                  Yet rigour to cloake in habit of reaſon,
                  By craftie compaſſe deuiſe they can,
                  Articles nine of right hainous treaſon:
                  But doome after death is ſure out of ſeaſon,
                  For who euer ſaw ſo ſtrange a preſident,
                  As execution done before iudgement.
               
               
                  Thus hate harboured in depth of minde,
                  By ſought occaſion burſt out of new,
                  And cruelty abuſed the law of kinde,
                  When that the Nephue the Vncle flew.
                  Alas King Richard, ſore mayſt thou rue,
                  Which by this fact preparedſt the way
                  Of thy hard deſtiny to haſten the day.
               
               
                  For bloud axeth bloud as guerdon due,
                  And vengeance for vengeance is iuſt reward:
                  O righteous God thy iudgements are true:
                  For looke what meaſure we other award,
                  The ſame for vs againe is prepar'd.
                  Take heed ye Princes by examples paſt,
                  Bloud will haue bloud, either firſt or laſt.
               
               G. Ferrers.
            
            
               
               HOW THE LORD MOWbrey, promoted by King Richard the ſecond to the ſtate of a Duke, was by him baniſhed the Realme the yeare of Chriſt, 1398. and after died miſerablie in exile.
               
               
                  
                     THough ſorrow and ſhame abaſh me to rehearſe
                  My lothſome life, and death of due deſerued,
                  Yet that the paines thereof may other pearce
                  To leaue the like, leſt they be likewiſe ſerued:
                  Ah Baldwine marke, and ſee how that I ſwerued.
                  Diſſembling, enuy, and flattery, bane that bee,
                  Of all their hoſtes, haue ſhew'd their power on mee.
               
               
                  I blame not Fortune, though ſhe did her part,
                  And true it is ſhe can do little harme:
                  She guideth goods, ſhe hampreth not the heart,
                  A minde well bent, is ſafe from euery charme.
                  Vice, only vice, with her ſtout ſtrengthleſſe arme,
                  Doth cauſe the heart from good to ill encline,
                  Which I, alas, doe finde too true by mine.
               
               
                  For where by birth I came of noble race,
                  The Mowbreys heire, a famous houſe and old,
                  Fortune I thanke, gaue me ſo good a grace,
                  That of my Prince I had what ſo I would:
                  Yet neither was to other greatly hold.
                  For I thought flattery wrong'd his want on youth,
                  And his fond truſt augmented my vntruth.
               
               
                  He made me firſt the Earle of Notingham,
                  And Marſhall of the Realme, in which eſtate
                  The Peeres and people iointly to me came,
                  With ſore complaint, againſt them that of late
                  Bad officers had brought the King in hate,
                  By making ſale of Iuſtice, right, and Lawe,
                  And liuing naught, without all dread or awe.
               
               
                  
                  I gaue them aid theſe euils to redreſſe,
                  And went to London with an army ſtrong,
                  And cauſ'd the King, againſt his will oppreſſe
                  By cruell death, all ſuch as led him wrong:
                  The Lord chiefe Iuſtice ſuffered theſe among,
                  So did the Steward of his houſehold head,
                  The Chancellor ſcapte, for he afore had fled.
               
               
                  Theſe wicked men thus from the King remou'd,
                  Who beſt vs pleaſ'd ſucceeded in their place:
                  For which both King and Commons much vs lou'd,
                  But chiefly I with all ſtood high in grace.
                  The King enſu'd my rede in euery caſe,
                  Whence ſelfe-loue bred: for glory maketh prowd,
                  And pride aye ſeeks alone to be allow'd.
               
               
                  Wherefore to th' end I might alone inioy
                  The Kings good will, I made his luſt my lawe:
                  And where of late I labour'd to deſtroy
                  Such flattering folke, as thereto ſtood in awe,
                  Now learned I among the reſt to clawe:
                  For pride is ſuch, if it be kindly caught,
                  As ſtroyeth good, and ſtirres vp euery naught.
               
               
                  Pride pricketh men to flatter for the pray,
                  Toppreſſe and poll for maint'nance of the ſame,
                  To malice ſuch as match vneths it may:
                  And to be briefe, pride doth the heart inflame,
                  To fire what miſchiefe any fraud may frame,
                  And ſtill at length the euils by it wrought
                  Confound the worker, and bring him to nought.
               
               
                  Behold in me due proofe of euery part:
                  For pride firſt forced me my Prince to flatter
                  So much, that whatſoeuer pleaſ'd his heart
                  Were't nere ſo ill, I thought a lawfull matter,
                  Which cauſd the Lords afreſh againſt him clatter:
                  Becauſe he had his holds beyond ſea ſold,
                  And ſeene his ſouldiers of their wages pold.
               
               
                  
                  Though vnto all theſe ils I were a frend,
                  Yet ſuch was luck that each man deemed no:
                  The Duke of Gloceſter for me did ſend,
                  With other Lords, whoſe hearts did bleede for woe,
                  To ſee the Realme ſo faſt to ruine goe.
                  In fault whereof, they ſaid the two Dukes were,
                  The one of Yorke, the other Lancaſter.
               
               
                  On whoſe remoue from being about the King
                  We all agreed, and ſware a ſolemne oth,
                  And whilſt the reſt prouided for this thing,
                  I flatterer I, to win the praiſe of troth,
                  Wretch that I was, brake faith and promiſe both:
                  For I bewraied to th' King their whole intent,
                  For which vnwares they all were tane and ſhent.
               
               
                  Thus was the warder of the Common weale,
                  The Duke of Gloſter guiltleſſe made away,
                  With other moe, more wretch I ſo to deale,
                  Who through vntruth their truſt did ill betray:
                  Yet by this meanes obtained I may pray,
                  Of King and Dukes I found for this ſuch fauour,
                  As made me Duke of Northfolke for my labour.
               
               
                  But ſee how pride and enuy iointly runne,
                  Becauſe my Prince did more than me prefer,
                  Sir Henry Bolenbroke, the eldeſt ſonne
                  Of Iohn of Gaunt, the Duke of Lancaſter,
                  Proud I that would alone be blaſing ſtarre,
                  Enuide this Duke, for nought ſaue that the ſhine
                  Of his deſerts did gliſter more then mine.
               
               
                  To th' end therefore his light ſhould be the leſſe,
                  I ſlily ſought all ſhifts to put him out:
                  But as the poize that would the palme repreſſe,
                  Doth cauſe the bowes ſpred larger round about;
                  So ſpite and enuy cauſeth glory ſprout,
                  And aye the more the top is ouertrod,
                  The deeper doth the ſound roote ſpred abrode.
               
               
                  
                  For when this Henry Duke of Herford ſaw,
                  What ſpoile the King made of the noble bloud,
                  And that without all Iuſtice, cauſe, or lawe,
                  To ſuffer him, he thought not ſure nor good:
                  Wherefore to me twofaced in one hood,
                  As touching this, he fully brake his minde,
                  As to his friend that ſhould remedy finde.
               
               
                  But I, although I knew my Prince did ill,
                  So that my harte abhorred ſore the ſame,
                  Yet miſchiefe ſo through malice led my will,
                  To bring this Duke from honour vnto ſhame,
                  And toward my ſelfe, my ſoueraigne to enflame,
                  That I bewraied his word vnto the King,
                  Not as a read, but as a hainous thing.
               
               
                  Thus where my duty bound me to haue told
                  My Prince his fault, and wild him to refraine,
                  Through flattery loe, I did his ill vphold,
                  Which turnd at length both him and me to paine:
                  Woe, woe to Kings whoſe counſailours doe faine,
                  Woe, woe to Realmes where ſuch are put in truſt,
                  As leaue the Law, to ſerue the Princes luſt.
               
               
                  And woe to him that by his flattering reed,
                  Maintaines a Prince in any kind of vice:
                  Woe worth him eke for enuy, pride or meed,
                  That miſreports an honeſt enterpriſe.
                  Becauſe I beaſt in all theſe points was nice,
                  The plagues of all together on me light,
                  And due for ill, ill doers doth acquite.
               
               
                  For when the Duke was charged with my plaint,
                  He flat denied that any part was true,
                  And claimd by armes to anſwere his attaint,
                  And I by vſe that warlike feates well knew,
                  To his deſire incontinently drew:
                  Wherewith the King did ſeeme right well content,
                  As one that paſt not much with whom it went.
               
               
                  
                  At time and place appointed we appeard,
                  At all points armd to proue our quarels iuſt,
                  And when our friends on each part had vs cheard,
                  And that the Heralds bad vs doe our luſt,
                  With ſpeare in reſt we tooke a courſe to iuſt:
                  But ere our horſes had run halfe their way,
                  A ſhout was made, the King commanded ſtay.
               
               
                  And for t'auoid the ſheading of our bloud
                  With ſhame and death, which one muſt needes haue had,
                  The King through counſaile of the Lords thought good
                  To baniſh both, which iudgment ſtraight was rad;
                  No maruell then though both were wroth and ſad,
                  But chiefly I that was exilde for aye,
                  My enmie ſtrang'd but for a ten yeares day.
               
               
                  The date expir'd, when by this dolefull dome
                  I ſhould depart, to liue in baniſht band,
                  On paine of death to England not to come,
                  I went my way: the King ſeaſde in his hand
                  Mine offices, my honours, goods and land,
                  To pay the due (as openly he told)
                  Of mighty ſummes, which I had from him pol'd.
               
               
                  See, Baldwine, ſee, the ſolary of ſinne,
                  Marke with that meed vile vices are rewarded:
                  Through enuy I did loſe both kith and kinne,
                  And for my flattering plaint ſo well regarded,
                  Exile and ſhame are iuſtly me awarded:
                  My wife and heire lacke lands and lawfull right,
                  And me their Lord made Dame Dianaes Knight.
               
               
                  If theſe miſhaps at home bee not enough,
                  Adioine to them my ſorowes in exile:
                  I went to Almaine firſt, a Land right rough,
                  In which I found ſuch churliſh folke and vile,
                  As made me lothe my life ech other while:
                  There lo I learnd what is to be a geſt
                  Abroad, and what to liue at home in reſt.
               
               
                  
                  For they eſteeme no one man more then each,
                  They vſe as well the lackey as the Lord,
                  And like their maners churliſh in their ſpeech,
                  Their lodging hard, their boord to be abhor'd:
                  Their pleyted garments therewith well accord,
                  All iag'd and frounſt, with diuers colours deckt,
                  They ſweare, they curſe, and drinke till they be fleckt.
               
               
                  They hate all ſuch as theſe their manners hate,
                  Which reaſon would no wiſe man ſhould allow:
                  With theſe I dwelt, lamenting mine eſtate,
                  Till at the length they had got knowledge, how
                  I was exil'd, becauſe I did auow
                  A falſe complaint againſt my truſtie friend,
                  For which they nam'd me traytour ſtill vnhend:
               
               
                  That what for ſhame and what for wearines
                  I ſtole from thence, and went to Venice towne,
                  Whereas I found more eaſe and friendlines,
                  But greater griefe: for now the great renowne
                  Of Bolenbroke whom I would haue put downe,
                  Was waxt ſo great in Britaine and in France,
                  That Vencie through, each man did him aduance.
               
               
                  Thus loe his glorie grew through great deſpite,
                  And I thereby encreaſed in defame:
                  Thus enuie euer doth her moſt acquite
                  With trouble, anguiſh, ſorow, ſmart and ſhame,
                  But ſets the vertues of her foe in flame:
                  Like water waues which clenſe the muddie ſtone,
                  And ſoyles themſelues by beating thereupon.
               
               
                  Or ere I had ſoiourn'd there a yeare,
                  Strange tidings came he was to England gone,
                  Had tane the King, and that which touch'd him neare,
                  Impriſoned him with other of his fone,
                  And made him yeeld him vp his Crowne and throne:
                  When I theſe things for true by ſearch had tried,
                  Griefe gripte me ſo, I pin'd away and died.
               
               
                  
                  Note heere the end of pride, ſee flatteries fine,
                  Marke the reward of enuie and complaint,
                  And warne all people from them to decline,
                  Leſt likely fault do find the like attaint.
                  Let this my life to them be a reſtraint:
                  By others harmes who liſteth take no heed,
                  Shall by his owne learne other better reed.
               
               T. Churchyard.
            
            
               HOW KING RICHARD THE SECOND WAS FOR HIS euill gouernance depoſed from his ſeate, in the yeare 1399. and murdered in priſon the yeare following.
               
               
                  
                     HAppie is the Prince, that hath in wealth the grace
                  To follow vertue, keeping vices vnder;
                  But woe to him whoſe will hath wiſdomes place:
                  For whoſo renteth right and law aſunder,
                  On him at length all the world ſhall wonder.
                  High birth, choice fortune, force, nor Princely mace,
                  Can warrant King or Keyſer from the caſe.
               
               
                  Behold my hap, ſee how the ſilly rout
                  On me do gaze, and each to other ſay:
                  See where he lieth, but late that was ſo ſtout,
                  Lo how the power, the pride, and rich aray
                  Of mightie Rulers lightly fade away.
                  The King which erſt kept all the Realme in doubt,
                  The verieſt raſcall now dare checke and flout.
               
               
                  Me thinke I heare the people thus deuiſe:
                  Wherefore Baldwine, ſith thou wilt declare
                  How Princes fell, to make the liuing wiſe,
                  My lawleſſe life in no point ſee thou ſpare,
                  But paint it out, that Rulers may beware
                  Good counſell, law, or vertue to deſpiſe,
                  For Realmes haue rules, and Rulers haue a ſiſe.
               
               
                  
                  I was a King, who ruled all by luſt,
                  Forcing but light of Iuſtice, right, or Law,
                  Putting alwaies flatterers falſe in truſt,
                  Enſuing ſuch as could my vices claw,
                  By faithfull counſell paſſing not an haw,
                  As pleaſure prickt, ſo needs obey I muſt,
                  Hauing delight to feed and ſerue the guſt:
               
               
                  Which to maintaine, my people were ſore pol'd
                  With Fines, Fifteenes, and loanes by way of preſt,
                  Blanke Charters, oaths, and ſhifts not knowne of old,
                  For which the Commons did me ſore deteſt.
                  I alſo ſold the noble towne of Breſt,
                  My fault wherein becauſe mine vncle told,
                  I found the meanes that he to death was ſold.
               
               
                  None aide I lackt in any wicked deed,
                  For gaping Gulles whom I promoted had
                  Would further all in hope of higher meed.
                  There can no King imagine ought ſo bad,
                  But ſhall find ſome that will performe it glad:
                  For ſickneſſe ſeldome doth ſo ſwiftly breed,
                  As humours ill do grow the griefe to feed.
               
               
                  My life and death the truth of this hath tri'd:
                  For while I fought in Ireland with my foes,
                  Mine vncle Edmund whom I left to guide
                  My Realme at home, rebelliouſly aroſe
                  
                     Percies to helpe, which plied my depoſe:
                  And call'd from France Earle Bolenbroke, whom I
                  Exiled had for ten yeares there to lie.
               
               
                  For comming backe this ſudden ſtur to ſtay,
                  The Earle of Worſter whom I truſted moſt,
                  (Whiles I in Wales at Flint my caſtle lay,
                  Both to refreſh and multiplie mine hoſt)
                  There in my hall, in ſight of leaſt and moſt,
                  His ſtaffe did breake, which was my houſhold ſtay,
                  Bad each make ſhift, and rode himſelfe away.
               
               
                  
                  My Steward falſe thus being fled and gone,
                  My ſeruants ſlie ſhranke off on euery ſide,
                  Then caught I was and led vnto my fone,
                  Who for their Prince no Palace did prouide,
                  But priſon ſtrong, where Henrie puft with pride
                  Cauſde me reſigne my Kingly ſtate and throne,
                  And ſo forſaken left and poſt alone.
               
               
                  Yet ſome conſpir'd their new King to put downe,
                  And to that end a ſolemne oath they ſwore,
                  To render me my royall ſeate and Crowne,
                  Whereof themſelues depriued me before.
                  But late medcines can helpe no ſothbind ſore:
                  When ſwelling flouds haue ouerflowen the towne,
                  Too late it is to ſaue them that ſhall drowne:
               
               
                  For though the Peeres ſet Henrie in his ſtate,
                  Yet could they not diſplace him thence againe:
                  And where they ſoone depriued me of late,
                  They could reſtore me by no manner paine.
                  Things hardly mend, but may be mar'd amaine,
                  And when a man is fallen in froward fate,
                  Still miſchiefes light one on anothers pate.
               
               
                  For when the King did know that for my cauſe,
                  His Lords in maske would kill him on a night,
                  To daſh all doubts he tooke no farther pauſe,
                  But Pierce of Exton a cruell murdering Knight
                  To Pomfret caſtle ſent him armed bright,
                  Who cauſeleſſe kill'd me there againſt all lawes,
                  Thus lawleſſe life to lawleſſe death aye drawes.
               
               G. Ferrers.
            
            
               
               HOW OWEN GLENDOVR SEDVCED BY FALSE PROPHESIES, tooke vpon him to be Prince of Wales, and was by Henrie Prince of England chaſed to the Mountaines, where he miſerablie died for lacke of food, An. 1401.
               
                  
                     I Pray thee Baldwine ſith thou doeſt entend
                  To ſhew the fall of ſuch as climbe too hie,
                  Remember me, whoſe miſerable end
                  May teach a man his vicious life to flie.
                  Oh Fortune, Fortune, out on thee I crie:
                  My liuely corps thou haſt made leane and ſlender,
                  For lacke of food, whoſe name was Owen Glendour.
                  
               
               
                  A Welchman borne, and of the Troian blood,
                  But ill brought vp, whereby full well I find,
                  That neither birth nor linage make vs good,
                  Though it be true that Cat will after kind.
                  Fleſh gendreth fleſh, but not the ſoule or mind,
                  They gender not, but foulely do degender,
                  When men to vice from vertue them ſurrender.
               
               
                  Each thing by nature tendeth to the ſame
                  Whereof it came, and is diſpoſed like:
                  Downe ſinkes the mould, vp mounts the fierie flame,
                  With horne the Hart, with hoofe the Horſe doth ſtrike,
                  The Wolfe doth ſpoile, the ſuttle Foxe doth pike,
                  And to conclude, no fiſh, fleſh, fowle or plant,
                  Of their true dame the propertie doth want.
               
               
                  But as for men, ſith ſeuerally they haue
                  A mind, whoſe maners are by learning made,
                  Good bringing vp all only doth them ſaue
                  In honeſt acts, which with their parents fade:
                  So that true gentrie ſtandeth in the trade
                  Of vertuouslife, not in the fleſhly line:
                  For blood is brute, but gentrie is diuine.
               
               
                  
                  Experience doth cauſe me thus to ſay,
                  And that the rather for my countrimen,
                  Which vaunt and boaſt themſelues aboue the day,
                  If they may ſtraine their ſtocke from worthie men:
                  Which let be true, are they the better then?
                  Nay farre the worſe, if ſo they be not good,
                  For why, they ſtaine the beautie of their blood.
               
               
                  How would we mocke the burden-bearing mule,
                  If he would brag he were an horſes ſon,
                  To preſſe his pride (might nothing elſe him rule)
                  His boaſts to proue no more but bid him run:
                  The horſe for ſwiftneſſe hath his glorie won.
                  The braging mule could nere the more aſpier,
                  Though he ſhould proue that Pegas was his ſier.
               
               
                  Each man may crake of that which was his owne,
                  Our parents good is theirs, and no whit ours:
                  Who therefore will of noble birth be knowne,
                  Or ſhine in vertue like his anceſtours,
                  Gentrie conſiſteth not in lands and towers:
                  He is a churle though all the world were his,
                  Yea Arthurs heire if that he liue amis.
               
               
                  For vertuous life a Gentleman doth make
                  Of her poſſeſſour, all be he poore as Iob,
                  
                  Yea though no name of elders he can take:
                  For proofe take Merlin fathered by an Hob.
                  But who ſo ſets his mind to ſpoile and rob,
                  Although he come by due deſcent from Brute,
                  
                  He is a churle, vngentle, vile, and brute.
               
               
                  Well, thus did I for want of better wit,
                  Becauſe my parents naughtly brought me vp:
                  For Gentlemen (they ſaid) was nought ſo fit,
                  As to attaſt by bold attempts the cup
                  Of conqueſts wine, whereof I thought to ſup:
                  And therefore bent my ſelfe to rob and riue,
                  And whom I could of lands and goods depriue.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Henrie the fourth did then vſurpe the Crowne,
                  Deſpoil'd the King, with Mortimer the heire:
                  For which his ſubiects ſought to put him downe,
                  And I while Fortune offered me ſo faire,
                  Did what I might his honor to appaire:
                  And tooke on me to be the Prince of Wales,
                  Entiſte thereto by Propheſies and tales.
               
               
                  For which, ſuch mates as wait vpon the ſpoile,
                  From euery part of Wales vnto me drew:
                  For loytering youth vntaught in any toile,
                  Are readie aye all miſchiefe to enſue.
                  Through helpe of theſe ſo great my glorie grew,
                  That I defied my King through loftie heart,
                  And made ſharpe warre on all that tooke his part.
               
               
                  See lucke, I tooke Lord Raynold Gray of Rithen,
                  And him enforſt my daughter to eſpouſe,
                  And ſo perforce I held him ſtill, and ſithen
                  In Wigmore land through battell rigorous,
                  I caught the right heire of the crowned houſe,
                  The Earle of March Sir Edmund Mortimor,
                  
                  And in a dungeon kept him priſoner.
               
               
                  Then all the Marches longing vnto Wales,
                  By Seuerne Weſt I did inuade and burne:
                  Deſtroyed the townes in mountaines and in vales,
                  And rich in ſpoiles did home ward ſafe returne:
                  Was none ſo bold durſt once againſt me ſpurne.
                  Thus proſperouſly doth Fortune forward call,
                  Thoſe whom ſhe minds to giue the ſoreſt fall.
               
               
                  When ſame had brought theſe tidings to the King,
                  (Although the Scots then vexed him right ſore)
                  A mightie armie 'gainſt me he did bring:
                  Where of the French King being warn'd afore,
                  Who mortall hate againſt King Henrie bore,
                  To grieue our foe he quickly to me ſent
                  Twelue thouſand Frenchmen, vnto the fight all bent.
               
               
                  
                  A part of them led by the Earle of March,
                  Lord Iames of Burbon, a renowned Knight,
                  Withheld by winds to Wales-ward forth to march,
                  Tooke land at Plimmouth priuily on night:
                  And when he had done all he durſt or might,
                  After that many of his men were ſlaine,
                  He ſtole to ſhip and ſailed home againe.
               
               
                  Twelue thouſand moe in Milford did arriue,
                  And came to me then lying at Denbigh:
                  With armed Welchmen thouſands double fiue,
                  With whom we went to Worceſter well nigh,
                  And there encampt vs on a mount on high,
                  T'abide the King, who ſhortly after came,
                  And pitched downe his field, hard by the ſame.
               
               
                  There eight daies long our hoſts lay face to face,
                  And neither others power durſt aſſaile:
                  But they ſo ſtopt the paſſages the ſpace,
                  That vitailes could not come to our auaile,
                  Where through conſtrain'd our hearts began to faile,
                  So that the Frenchmen ſhranke away by night,
                  And I with mine to'th mountaines took our flight.
               
               
                  The King purſued greatly to his coſt,
                  From hilles to woods, from woods to valleyes plaine:
                  And by the way his men and ſtuffe he loſt.
                  And when he ſaw he gained nought but paine,
                  He blew retreate and gate him home againe:
                  Then with my power I boldly came abroad,
                  Taken in my countrey for a very god.
               
               
                  Immediately there fell a iolly iarre
                  Betweene the King and Percies worthie blouds,
                  Which grew at laſt vnto a deadly warre:
                  For like as drops engender mightie flouds,
                  And little ſeeds ſprout forth great leaues and buds;
                  Euen ſo ſmall ſtriſes, if they be ſuffered run,
                  Breed wrath and warre, and death or they be don.
               
               
                  
                  The King would haue the ranſome of ſuch Scots
                  As theſe the Percies tane had in the field:
                  But ſee how ſtrongly Lucre knits her knots,
                  The King will haue, the Percies will not yeeld,
                  Deſire of goods ſome craues, but granteth ſeeld:
                  Oh curſed goods, deſire of you hath wrought
                  All wickednes, that hath or can bee thought.
               
               
                  The Percies deemd it meeter for the King,
                  To haue redeemd their Coſin Mortimer,
                  
                  Who in his quarell all his power did bring
                  To fight with mee, that tooke him priſoner,
                  Than of their pray to rob his ſouldier:
                  And therefore will'd him ſee ſome meane were found,
                  To quite forth him whom I kept vily bound.
               
               
                  Becauſe the King miſliked their requeſt,
                  They came themſelues and did accord with mee,
                  Complaining how the Kingdome was oppreſt
                  By Henries rule: wherefore wee did agree
                  To plucke him downe, and part the Realme in three:
                  The north part theirs, Wales holy to be mine,
                  The reſt, to reſt to th' Earle of Marches line.
               
               
                  And for to ſet vs hereon more agog,
                  A Prophet came (a vengeance take them all)
                  Affirming Henry to be Gogmagog,
                  Whom Merline doth a Mould warpe euer call,
                  Accurſt of God that muſt be brought in thrall
                  By a Wolfe, a Dragon, and a Lion ſtrong,
                  Which ſhould diuide his Kingdome them among.
               
               
                  This crafty dreamer made vs three ſuch beaſts,
                  To thinke wee were the foreſaid beaſtes, indeed:
                  And for that cauſe our badges and our creaſts
                  Wee ſearched out, which ſcarſly well agreed:
                  Howbeit the Herolds apt at ſuch a need,
                  Drew downe ſuch iſſues from old anceſters,
                  As prou'd theſe enſignes to bee ſurely ours.
               
               
                  
                  Yee crafty Welehmen, wherefore doe ye mocke,
                  The Noble men thus with your ſained rimes?
                  Ye Noble men, why flie yee not the flocke
                  Of ſuch as haue ſeduc'd ſo many times?
                  Falſe Propheſies are plagues for diuers crimes,
                  Which God doth let the diuelliſh ſort deuiſe,
                  To trouble ſuch as are not godly wiſe.
               
               
                  And that appeard by vs three beaſts indeed,
                  Through falſe perſwaſion highly borne in hand,
                  That in our feate we could not chuſe but ſpeed,
                  To kill the King and to enioy his Land:
                  For which exploit we bound our ſelues in band,
                  To ſtand contented ech man with his part,
                  So folly did aſſure our fooliſh hart.
               
               
                  But ſuch, they ſay, as fiſh before the net,
                  Shall ſeldome ſurfet of the pray they take:
                  Of things to come the haps bee ſo vnſet,
                  That none but fooles may warrant of them make:
                  The full aſſur'd ſucceſſe doth oft forſake.
                  For Fortune findeth none ſo fit to flout,
                  As careleſſe ſots, which caſt no kinde of doubt.
               
               
                  How ſaiſt thou Henry Hotſpur, doe I lie,
                  For thou right manly gau'ſt the King a field,
                  And there waſt ſlaine becauſe thou wouldſt not flie:
                  Thine vncle Thomas Percy forſt to yeeld,
                  Did caſt his head (a wonder ſeene but ſeeld)
                  From Shrewsbury towne to'th top of London Bridge.
                  Loe thus fond hope did both their liues abridge.
               
               
                  When Henry this great victory had wonne,
                  Deſtroid the Percies, put their power to flight,
                  He did appoint Prince Henry his eldeſt ſonne,
                  With all his power to meete me if he might:
                  But I diſcomfit through my partners fight,
                  Had not the heart to meete him face to face,
                  But fled away, and he purſu'd the chaſe.
               
               
                  
                  Now Baldwine marke, for I cald Prince of Wales,
                  And made beleeue I ſhould be he indeed,
                  Was made to fly among the hilles and dales,
                  Where all my men forſooke me at my need.
                  Who truſteth loiterers ſeeld hath luckly ſpeed:
                  And when the Captaines courage doth him faile,
                  His ſouldiers harts a little thing may quaile.
               
               
                  And ſo Prince Henry chaſed me, that loe
                  I found no place wherein I might abide:
                  For as the dogges purſue the ſilly Doe,
                  The brache behinde, the houndes on euery ſide,
                  So traſte they me among the mountaines wide:
                  Whereby I found I was the hartles hare,
                  And not the beaſt the prophet did declare.
               
               
                  And at the laſt: like as the little roach,
                  Muſt elſe be eat, or leape vpon the ſhore
                  When as the hungry picketell doth approach,
                  And there find death which it eſcapt before:
                  So double death aſſaulted me ſo ſore
                  That either I muſt vnto mine enmy yeeld,
                  Or ſtarue for hunger in the barraine feeld.
               
               
                  Here ſhame and paine a while were at a ſtrife,
                  Paine bad me yeeld, ſhame bad me rather faſt:
                  The one bad ſpare, the other bad ſpend my life,
                  But ſhame (ſhame haue it) ouercame at laſt.
                  Then hunger gnew, that doth the ſtone wall braſt,
                  And made me eate both grauel, durt, and mud,
                  And laſt of all, my dung, my fleſh, and bloud.
               
               
                  This was mine end too horrible to heare,
                  Yet good enough for life that was ſo ill,
                  Where by O Baldwine warne all men to beare
                  Their youth ſuch loue, to bring them vp in skill.
                  Bid Princes fly falſe prophets lying bill,
                  And not preſume to climbe aboue their ſtates:
                  For they bee faults that foile men, not their fates.
               
               Th. Phaer.
            
            
               
               HOW HENRY PERCY Earle of NORTHVMBERLAND, was for his couetous and traiterous attempt put to death at Yorke, Anno 1407.
               
                  
                     O Morall Senec true finde I thy ſaying,
                  That neither kinne, riches, ſtrength, or fauour
                  Are free from Fortune, but are aie decaying:
                  No worldly wealth is ought ſaue doubtfull labour,
                  Mans life in Earth is like vnto a tabour,
                  Which now to mirth doth mildly men prouoke
                  And ſtraight to warre, with a more ſturdy ſtroke.
               
               
                  All this full true I Percy finde by proofe,
                  Which whilom was Earle of Northumberland.
                  And therefore Baldwine for our peeres behoofe,
                  To note mens falles ſith thou haſt tane in hand,
                  I would thou ſhould my ſtate well vnderſtand:
                  For few there were that were ſo much redoubted,
                  Whom double Fortune lifted vp and louted.
               
               
                  As for my kinne their nobleneſſe is knowen,
                  My valiant acts were folly for to praiſe,
                  Where through our foes ſo oft were ouerthrowen,
                  That who but I was doubted in my daies:
                  And that King Richard found at all aſſaies?
                  For neuer foes rebelled in his raigne,
                  But through my force were either caught or ſlaine.
               
               
                  A brother I had was Earle of Worceſter,
                  Alwaies in office and fauour with the King,
                  And by my wife Dame Elenor Mortimer,
                  
                  A ſonne I had which ſo the foes did ſting,
                  That being yong, and but a very ſpring,
                  
                     Henry Hotſpur they gaue him vnto name,
                  And though I ſay it, he did deſerue the ſame.
               
               
                  
                  We three triumphed in King Richards time,
                  Till Fortune ought both him and vs a ſpite:
                  But chiefly mee, whom cleere from any crime,
                  My King did baniſh from his fauour quite,
                  Proclaiming mee a moſt diſloyall Knight:
                  Where through falſe ſlander forced mee to bee,
                  That which before I did moſt deadly flee.
               
               
                  Let men beware, how they true folke defame,
                  Or threaten on them the blame of vices nought,
                  For infamy breedeth wrath, wreke followeth ſhame:
                  Eke open ſlander often times hath brought
                  That to effect, that erſt was neuer thought.
                  To bee miſdeem'd men ſuffer in a ſort,
                  But none can beare the griefe of miſreport.
               
               
                  Becauſe my King did ſhame mee wrongfully,
                  I hated him and ſoone became his foe:
                  And while he did at warre in Ireland lie,
                  I did conſpire to turne his weale to woe:
                  And through the Duke of Yorke and other moe,
                  All royall power from him wee quickly tooke,
                  And gaue the ſame to Henry Bolenbrooke.
                  
               
               
                  Neither did we this onely for this cauſe,
                  But to ſay truth, force draue vs to the ſame:
                  For he deſpiſing God and all his lawes,
                  Slew whom hee would, made ſinne a very game:
                  And ſeeing nor age nor conſell could him tame,
                  We thought it well done for the Kingdomes ſake,
                  To leaue his rule, that did all rule for ſake.
               
               
                  But when Sir Henry had attaind his place,
                  Hee ſtraight became in all points worſe then he,
                  Deſtroied the Peeres, and ſlew King Richards grace,
                  Againſt his oth made to the Lords and me.
                  And ſeeking quarrels how to diſagree,
                  He ſhameleſly requir'd me and my ſonne
                  To yeeld him foes which we in field had wonne.
               
               
                  
                  My nephew alſo Edmund Mortimer,
                  
                  The very heire apparent to the crowne,
                  Whom Owen Glendour held as priſoner,
                  With chaines faſt bound in dungeon deepe caſt downe,
                  He would not ranſome, but did felly frowne,
                  'Gainſt Mortimer and me which for him ſpake,
                  And him proclaimed traytour for our ſake.
               
               
                  Thus foule deſpite did cauſe vs to conſpire,
                  To put him downe, as we did Richard erſt,
                  And that we might this matter ſet on fire,
                  From Owens Iaile, our coſin we remerſt,
                  And vnto Glendour all our griefes rehearſt,
                  Who made a bond with Mortimer and mee,
                  To priue the King and part the Realme in three.
               
               
                  But when King Henrie heard of this deuice,
                  To Owen Glendour he ſped him very quicke,
                  Minding by force to ſtop our enterpriſe:
                  And as the diuell would, then fell I ſicke,
                  Howbeit my brother and ſonne more politicke
                  Then proſperous, with an hoſt from Scotland brought,
                  Encountred him at Shrewesbury where they fought.
               
               
                  The one was tane and kill'd, the other ſlaine,
                  And ſhortly after was Owen put to flight:
                  By meanes whereof I forced was to faine,
                  That I knew nothing of the former fight.
                  Fraud oft auailes more then doth ſturdie might:
                  For by my faining I brought him in beliefe,
                  I knew not that wherein my part was chiefe.
               
               
                  And while the King thus tooke me for his friend,
                  I ſought all meanes my former wrong to wreake,
                  Which that I might bring to the ſooner end,
                  To the Biſhop of Yorke I did the matter breake,
                  And to th' Earle Marſhall likewiſe did I ſpeake,
                  Whoſe father was through Henries cauſe exiled,
                  The Biſhops brother with trayterous death defiled.
               
               
                  
                  Theſe ſtraight aſſented to do what they could,
                  So did the Lord Hastings, and Lord Faueonbridge:
                  
                  Which altogether promiſed they would
                  Set all their power the Kings daies to abridge.
                  But ſee the ſpite, before the birds were flidge
                  The King had word, and ſeaſed on the neſt,
                  Whereby alas my friends were all oppreſt.
               
               
                  The bloodie tyrant brought them all to end,
                  Excepted me, which into Scotland fled,
                  To George of Dunbar th' Earle of March, my friend,
                  Who in my cauſe with many more made head:
                  And when on hope of greater aid I fed,
                  Both at the Frenchmen and the Flemmings hand,
                  And could get none, I tooke ſuch as I fand.
               
               
                  And with the helpe of George my very friend,
                  I did inuade Northumberland full bold,
                  Whereas the folke drew to me ſtill on end,
                  Bent to death my partie to vphold:
                  Through helpe of theſe, full many a fort and hold,
                  The which the King right manfully had man'd,
                  I eaſely wonne, and ſeaſed in my hand.
               
               
                  Not ſo content (for vengeance draue me on)
                  I entred Yorkſhire, there to waſte and ſpoile:
                  But ere I had far in the countrie gone
                  The Shiriffe thereof, Raph Rokesbie did aſſoile
                  My troubled hoſt of much part of our toile:
                  For he aſſaulting freſhly tooke through power,
                  Me and Lord Bardolph both at Bramham moore.
               
               
                  And thence conueyed vs to the towne of Yorke,
                  Vntill he knew what was the Kings intent:
                  There loe Lord Bardolph kinder then the Storke,
                  Did loſe his head, which was to London ſent,
                  With whom for friendſhip mine in like caſe went:
                  This was my hap, my fortune, or my faut,
                  This life I led and thus I came to naught.
               
               
                  
                  Wherefore good Baldwine will the Peeres take heed
                  Of ſlander, malice, and conſpiracie,
                  Of couetiſe, whence all the reſt proceed:
                  For couetiſe ioynt with contumacie,
                  Doth cauſe all miſchiefe in mens hearts to breed.
                  And therefore this to eſperance my word,
                  Who cauſeth bloodſhed ſhall not ſcape the ſword.
               
            
            
               HOW RICHARD PLANTAGENET EARLE OF CAMBRIDGE INTENding the Kings deſtruction, was put to death at Southhampton, Anno Dom. 1415.
               
                  
                     HAſte maketh waſte, hath commonly been ſaid,
                  And ſecret miſchiefe ſelde hath luckie ſpeed:
                  A murdering mind with proper poyze is way'd,
                  All this is true, I find it in my creed.
                  And therefore Baldwine warne all ſtates take heed,
                  How they conſpire another to betrap,
                  Leſt miſchiefe ment, light in the miners lap.
               
               
                  For I Lord Richard heire Plantagenet
                  
                  Was Earle of Cambridge and right fortunate,
                  If I had had the grace my wit to ſet,
                  To haue content me with mine owne eſtate:
                  But O falſe honors, breeders of debate,
                  The loue of you our leaud hearts doth allure,
                  To loſe our ſelues by ſeeking you vnſure.
               
               
                  Becauſe my brother Edmund Mortimer
                  
                  Whoſe eldeſt ſiſter was my wedded wife,
                  I meane that Edmund that was priſoner
                  In Wales ſo long, through Owens buſie ſtrife,
                  Becauſe I ſay that after Edmunds life,
                  His rights and titles muſt by law be mine,
                  For he ne had, nor could encreaſe his line,
               
               
                  
                  Becauſe the right of Realme and Crowne was ours,
                  I ſearched meanes to helpe him thereunto:
                  And where the Henries held it by their powers,
                  I ſought a ſhift their tenures to vndoe,
                  Which being force, ſith force or ſleight muſt doe,
                  I void of might, becauſe their power was ſtrong,
                  Set priuie fleight againſt their open wrong.
               
               
                  But ſith the death of moſt part of my kin
                  Did daſh my hope, throughout the fathers daies
                  I let it ſlip, and thought it beſt begin,
                  When as the ſonne ſhould dread leaſt ſuch aſſayes:
                  For force through ſpeed, ſleight ſpeedeth through delayes,
                  And ſeeld doth treaſon time ſo fitly find,
                  As when all dangers moſt be out of mind.
               
               
                  Wherefore while Henrie of that name the fiſt,
                  Prepar'd his armie to go conquer France,
                  Lord Scroope and I thought to attempt a drift
                  To put him downe, my brother to aduance:
                  But wer't Gods will, my lucke or his good chance,
                  The King wiſt wholly whereabout we went,
                  The night before to ſhipward he him bent.
               
               
                  Then were we ſtraight as traytours apprehended,
                  Our purpoſe ſpi'd, the cauſe thereof was hid,
                  And therefore loe a falſe cauſe we pretended,
                  Where through my brother was from danger rid:
                  We ſaid for hire of French Kings coine, we did
                  Behight to kill the King: and thus with ſhame
                  We ſtain'd our ſelues, to ſaue our friend from blame.
               
               
                  When we had thus confeſt ſo foule a treaſon,
                  That we deſeru'd, we ſuffered by the law.
                  See Baldwine, ſee, and note as it is reaſon
                  How wicked deeds to wofull ends do draw.
                  All force doth faile, no craft is worth a ſtraw
                  To attaine things loſt, and therefore let them go,
                  For might rules right, and will though truth ſay no.
               
               W. Baldwine.
            
            
               
               HOW THOMAS MONTAGVE EARLE OF SALISBVrie in the middeſt of his glorie, was chanceably ſlaine at Orleaunce with a piece of Ordinance, the third of Nouember, Anno Dom. 1428.
               
                  
                     WHat fooles be we to truſt vnto our ſtrength,
                  Our wit, our courage, or our noble fame,
                  Which time it ſelfe muſt needs deuour at length,
                  Though froward Fortune could not foile the ſame?
                  But ſeeing this Goddeſſe guideth all the game,
                  Which ſtill to change doth ſet her only luſt,
                  Why toile we ſo for things ſo hard to truſt?
               
               
                  A goodly thing we deeme of good report,
                  Which noble hearts do ſeeke by courſe of kind:
                  But ſeeing the date ſo doubtfull and ſo ſhort,
                  The way ſo rough whereby we do it find,
                  I cannot chuſe but praiſe the Princely mind
                  That preaſeth for it, though we find oppreſt,
                  By foule defame, thoſe that deſerue it beſt.
               
               
                  Concerning whom, marke, Baldwine, what I ſay,
                  I meane the vertuous hindred of their brute,
                  Among which number recken well I may
                  My valiant father Iohn Lord Montacute,
                  
                  Who loſt his life I iudge through iuſt purſute,
                  I ſay the cauſe and not the caſuall ſpeed
                  Is to be waighed, in euery kind of deed.
               
               
                  This rule obſeru'd, how many ſhall we find
                  For vertues ſake with infamie oppreſt?
                  How ſome againe through helpe of Fortune blind,
                  For ill attempts atchieu'd, with honor bleſt?
                  Succeſſe is worſt oft times when cauſe is beſt:
                  Therefore ſay I: God ſend them ſory haps,
                  That iudge the cauſes by their afterclaps.
               
               
                  
                  The end indeed is Iudge of euery thing,
                  Which is the cauſe or latter point of time:
                  The firſt true verdict at the firſt may bring,
                  The laſt is ſlow, or ſlipper as the ſlime,
                  Oft changing names of innocence and crime.
                  Duke Thomas death was Iuſtice two yeares long,
                  And euer ſince, ſore tyrannie and wrong.
               
               
                  Wherefore I pray thee, Baldwine, weigh the cauſe,
                  And praiſe my father as he doth deſerue:
                  Becauſe Earle Henry, King againſt all lawes,
                  Endeuoured King Richard for to ſtarue
                  In iayle, wherby the regall Crowne might ſwarue
                  Out of the line to which it then was due,
                  (Whereby God knowes what euill might enſue.)
               
               
                  My Lord Iohn Holland Duke of Exceſter,
                  Which was deare coſin to this wretched King,
                  Did moue my Sire, and th' Earle of Gloceſter,
                  With other Lords to ponder well the thing:
                  Who ſeeing the miſchiefe that began to ſpring,
                  Did all conſent this Henry to depoſe,
                  And to reſtore King Richard to the Roſe.
               
               
                  And while they did deuiſe a prety traine,
                  Whereby to bring their purpoſe well about,
                  Which was in maske this Henry to haue ſlaine,
                  The Duke of Aumerle blew their counſaile out:
                  Yet was their purpoſe good, there is no doubt.
                  What cauſe can be more worthy for a Knight,
                  Than ſaue his King, and helpe true heires to right?
               
               
                  For this with them my father was deſtroid,
                  And buried in the dunghill of defame.
                  Thus euill chance, their glory did auoid,
                  Whereas their cauſe doth claime eternall fame.
                  When deeds therefore vnluckily doe frame,
                  Men ought not iudge the authors to be naught,
                  For right through might is often ouerraught.
               
               
                  
                  And God doth ſuffer that it ſhould be ſo,
                  But why, my wit is feeble to deciſe,
                  Except it be to heape vp wrath and we
                  On wicked heads that iniuries deuiſe.
                  The cauſe why miſchiefs many times ariſe,
                  And light on them that would mens wrongs redreſſe,
                  Is for the rancour that they beare I geſſe.
               
               
                  God hateth rigour though it further right,
                  For ſinne is ſinne, how euer it be vſed:
                  And therefore ſuffereth ſhame and death to light,
                  To puniſh vice, though it bee well abuſed.
                  Who furthereth right is not therby excuſed,
                  If through the ſame he doe ſome other wrong:
                  To euery vice due guerdon doth belong.
               
               
                  What preach I now? I am a man of warre,
                  And that my lims I dare ſay doth profeſſe,
                  Of cured wounds beſet with many a skarre,
                  My broken iaw vnheald can ſay no leſſe.
                  O Fortune, Fortune cauſe of all diſtreſſe,
                  My father had great cauſe thy fraud to curſe,
                  But much more I, abuſed ten times worſe.
               
               
                  Thou neuer flatteredſt him in all thy life,
                  But me thou dandledſt like thy darling deare:
                  Thy gifts I found in euery corner rife,
                  Where ere I went I met thy ſmiling cheare:
                  Which was not for a day or for a yeare,
                  But through the raigne of three right worthy Kings,
                  I found thee forward in all kind of things.
               
               
                  The while King Henry conquered in France
                  I ſued the warres and ſtill found victory,
                  In all aſſaults, ſo happy was my chance,
                  Holds yeeld or won did make my enemies ſory:
                  Dame Prudence eke augmented ſo my glory,
                  That in all treaties euer I was one,
                  When weighty matters were agreed vpon.
               
               
                  
                  But when this King this mightie conquerour,
                  Through death vnripe was both his Realmes bereſt,
                  His ſilly infant did receiue his power,
                  Poore little babe full yong in cradle left,
                  Where Crowne and Scepter hurt him with the heft,
                  Whoſe worthie vncles had the gouernance,
                  The one at home, the other abroad in France.
               
               
                  And I which was in peace and warre well skilled,
                  With both theſe Rulers greatly was eſteemed:
                  Bare rule at home as often as they willed,
                  And fought in France when they it needfull deemed,
                  And euery where ſo good my ſeruice ſeemed,
                  That Engliſh men to me great loue did beare,
                  Our foes the French, my force fulfill'd with feare.
               
               
                  I alwaies thought it fitly for a Prince,
                  And ſuch as haue the regiment of Realmes,
                  His ſubiects hearts with mildnes to conuince,
                  With Iuſtice mixt, auoiding all extreames.
                  For like as Phoebus with his cheerefull beames,
                  Doth freſhly force the fragrant flowres to floriſh,
                  So rulers mildneſſe ſubiects loue doth noriſh.
               
               
                  This found I true: for through my milde behauiour,
                  Their hearts I had with me to liue and die,
                  And in their ſpeech be wrayer of their fauour,
                  They call'd me ſtill good Earle of Salisburie,
                  The Lords confeſſe the Commons did not lie.
                  For vertuous life, free heart, and lowly mind,
                  With high and low ſhall alwaies fauour find.
               
               
                  Which vertues, chiefe become a man of warre,
                  Whereof in France I found experience:
                  For in aſſaults due mildnes paſſeth farre
                  All rigour, force, and ſturdie violence:
                  For men will ſtoutly ſticke to their defence,
                  When cruell Captaines couet after ſpoile,
                  And ſo enforſt, oft giue their foes the foile.
               
               
                  
                  But when they know they ſhall be friendly vſed,
                  They hazard not their heads but rather yeeld:
                  For this my offers neuer were refuſed
                  Of any towne, or ſurely very ſeeld.
                  But force and furies fit be for the field,
                  And there indeed I vſed ſo the ſame,
                  My foes would flie if they but heard my name.
               
               
                  For when Lord Steward and Earle Vantadors
                  
                  Had cruelly beſieged Crauant towne,
                  Which he had won, and kept long time before,
                  Which lieth in Awxer on the Riuer Youne,
                  To raiſe the ſiege the Regent ſent me downe:
                  Whereas I vſde all rigour that I might,
                  I killed all that were not ſau'd by flight.
               
               
                  When th' Earle of Bedford then in France Lord Regent
                  Knew in what ſort I had remoued the ſiege,
                  In Brye and Champaine he made me Vicegerent,
                  And Lieutenant for him and for my Liege:
                  Which cauſde me go to Brye, and there beſiege
                  Mountaguillon with twentie weekes aſſaut,
                  Which at the laſt was yeelded me for naught.
               
               
                  And for the Duke of Britaines brother Arthur,
                  
                  Both Earle of Richmond and of Yuerie,
                  Againſt his oath from vs had made departure,
                  To Charles the Dolphin our chiefe enemie,
                  I with the Regent went to Normandie,
                  To take his towne of Yuerie, which of ſpight,
                  Did to vs daily all the harme they might.
               
               
                  They at the firſt compounded by a day
                  To yeeld, if reſcues did not come before,
                  And while in hope to fight, we at it lay,
                  The Dolphin gathered men two thouſand ſcore,
                  With Earles, with Lords and Captaines iolly ſtore:
                  Of which the Duke of Alanſon was guide,
                  And ſent them downe to ſee if we would bide.
               
               
                  
                  But they left vs, and downe to Vernoile went,
                  And made their vaunt they had our armie ſlaine,
                  And through that lie, that towne from vs they hent,
                  Which ſhortly after turned to their paine:
                  For there both armies met vpon the plaine:
                  And we eight thouſand whom they flew before,
                  Did kill of them, ten thouſand men and more.
               
               
                  When we had taken Vernoile thus againe,
                  To driue the treacherous Dolphin out of France,
                  The Regent ſent me t' Aniow and to Mayne,
                  Where I beſieg'd the warlike towne of Mawns.
                  There Lord of Toyſers, Baldwins valiance
                  Did well appeare, which would not yeeld the towne,
                  Till all the Towres and walles were battered downe.
               
               
                  But heere now Baldwine, take it in good part,
                  Though that I brought this Baldwine there to yeeld,
                  The Lion fierce for all his noble heart,
                  Being ouermatch'd, is forſt to flie the field.
                  If Mars himſelfe there had been with his ſhield,
                  And in my ſtormes had ſtoutly me withſtood,
                  He ſhould haue yeeld, or elſe haue ſhed my blood.
               
               
                  This worthie Knight both hardie, ſtout, and wiſe,
                  Wrought well his feat: as time and place require,
                  When Fortune failes, it is the beſt aduiſe
                  To ſtrike the ſaile leſt all lie in the mire.
                  This haue I ſaid to th' end thou take no ire,
                  For though no cauſe be found, ſo nature frames,
                  Men haue a zeale to ſuch as beare their names.
               
               
                  But to returne, in Mayne wan I at length,
                  Such townes and ſorts as might or helpe or hurt,
                  I manned Mayne, and Suzans towne of ſtrength,
                  Fort Barnard, Thanceaur, and S. Cales the curt,
                  With Lile ſues Bolton, ſtanding in the durt:
                  Eke Gwerland, Suze, Loupeland and Mount ſure,
                  
                  With Malycorne, theſe wan I and kept full ſure.
               
               
                  
                  Beſides all this I tooke neere fortie holds,
                  But thoſe I raced euen with the ground:
                  And for theſe deeds, as ſillie ſheepe in folds
                  Do ſhrinke for feare at euery little ſound,
                  So fled my foes before my face full round:
                  Was none ſo hardie durſt abide the fight,
                  So Mars and Fortune furthered me their Knight.
               
               
                  I tell no lie, ſo gaſtfull grew my name,
                  That it alone diſcomfited an hoſt:
                  The boldeſt Frenchmen well confeſſe the ſame,
                  Elſe will the towne which they like cowards loſt.
                  For when they ſieged Beauron with great boaſt,
                  Being fortie thouſand well arm'd in field,
                  Fiue hundred men enforced them to yeeld.
               
               
                  For while the Frenchmen freſh aſſaulted ſtill,
                  Our Engliſhmen came boldly forth at night,
                  Crying Saint George, Saliſbury, kill, kill,
                  And offered freſhly with their foes to fight,
                  And they as Frenchly tooke themſelues to flight.
                  Suppoſing ſurely that I had been there,
                  See how my name did put them all in feare.
               
               
                  Thus was the Dolphins power diſcomfited,
                  Foure thouſand ſlaine, their Campetane as it ſtood,
                  Whereby our towne and ſouldiers profited,
                  For there were vitailes plentifull and good:
                  This while was I in England by the rood,
                  T'appeaſe a ſtrife that was right foule befall,
                  Betweene Duke Humfrey and the Cardinall.
               
               
                  The Duke of Exeter ſoone after died,
                  Which of the King at home had gouernance,
                  Whoſe roome the Earle of Warwicke then ſupplied,
                  And I tooke his and ſped me into France.
                  Where in good hope to conquer Orliance,
                  With much adoe I got the Regents aid,
                  And marched forth, and ſiege about it laid.
               
               
                  
                  But in the way I tooke the towne of Yaine,
                  Where murdered were for ſtoutnes many a man:
                  But Baugencey I tooke with little paine,
                  For which to ſhew them fauour I began:
                  This cauſde the townes of Mewne and Iargeman,
                  That ſtood on Loyer, to profer me the keyes,
                  Ere I came neere them, welnigh by two daies.
               
               
                  See heere how Fortune froward can allure,
                  What baits ſhe layeth to bring men to their ends:
                  Who hauing hap like this, but hopeth ſure,
                  To bring to bale what euer he entends?
                  But ſoone is ſower the ſweet that Fortune ſends:
                  When hope and hap, when health and wealth is higheſt,
                  Then woe and wracke, diſeaſe, and need be nigheſt.
               
               
                  For while I, ſuing this ſo good ſucceſſe,
                  Laid ſiege to Orliaunce on the Riuer ſide,
                  The Baſtard (Cuckold Cawnies ſonne I geſſe,
                  Tho thought the Dukes) who had the towne in guide
                  Came fiercely forth, when he his time eſpi'd,
                  To raiſe the ſiege, but was bet backe againe,
                  And hard purſued both to his loſſe and paine.
               
               
                  For there we wan the Bulwarke on the bridge,
                  With a mightie tower ſtanding faſt thereby.
                  Ah curſed tower that didſt my daies abridge,
                  Would God thou had'ſt been further either I:
                  For in this tower a chamber ſtands on hie,
                  From which a man may view through all the towne
                  By certaine windowes iron grated downe.
               
               
                  Where on a day, now Baldwine note mine end,
                  I ſtood in viewing where the towne was weake,
                  And as I buſily talked with my friend,
                  Shot from the towne, which all the grate did breake,
                  A pellet came and droue a mightie fleake
                  Againſt my face, and tare away my cheeke,
                  For paine whereof I died within a weeke.
               
               
                  
                  See Baldwine, ſee the moſt vncertaine glorie,
                  How ſudden miſchiefe daſheth all to duſt,
                  And warne all Princes by my broken ſtorie,
                  The happieſt fortune chiefly to miſtruſt.
                  Was neuer man that alway had his luſt:
                  Then mortall fooles, in fancie more then mad,
                  Which hope to haue that neuer any had.
               
               W. Baldwine.
            
            
               HOW DAME ELEANOR COBHAM DVCHESSE OF GLOCESTER, FOR PRACtiſing of Witchcraft and Sorcery, ſuffred open penance, and after was baniſhed the Realme into the Ile of Man.
               
               
                  
                     IF a poore Ladie damned in exile
                  Amongſt Princes may be allowed place,
                  Then gentle Baldwine ſtay thy pen a while,
                  And of pure pitie ponder well my caſe,
                  How I a Ducheſſe, deſtitute of grace
                  Haue found by proofe, as many haue and ſhall
                  The prouerbe true, that pride will haue a fall.
               
               
                  A noble Prince extract of royall blood,
                  
                     Humfrey ſometime protector of this Land
                  Of Gloceſter Duke, for vertue call'd (the good)
                  When I but baſe beneath his ſtate did ſtand,
                  Vouchſaft with me to ioyne in wedlockes band,
                  Hauing in Court no name of high degree,
                  But Eleanor Cobham as parents left to mee,
               
               
                  And though by blith of noble race I was,
                  Of Barons blood, yet was I thought vnfit,
                  So high to match, yet ſo it came to paſſe,
                  Whether by grace, good fortune, or by wit,
                  Dame Venus lures ſo in mine eyes did ſit,
                  As this great Prince without reſpect of ſtate,
                  Did worthie me to be his wedded mate.
               
               
                  
                  His wife I was, and he my true husband,
                  Though for a while he had the company
                  Of Lady Iaquet Dutcheſſe of Holland,
                  Being an heire of ample patrimony,
                  But that fell out to be no matrimonie:
                  For after warre, long ſute in law and ſtrife,
                  She proued was the Duke of Brabants wife.
               
               
                  Thus of a Damſell Dutcheſſe I became,
                  My ſtate and place aduanced next the Queene,
                  Whereby me thought I felt no ground but ſwam,
                  For in the Court mine equall was not ſeene,
                  And ſo poſſeſt with pleaſure of the ſpleene,
                  The ſparkes of pride ſo kindled in my breſt,
                  As I in Court would ſhine aboue the reſt.
               
               
                  Such gifts of nature God in me had graft
                  Of ſhape and forme, with other graces mo,
                  That by the ſhot of Cupids fiery ſhaft,
                  Which to the heart of this great Prince did go,
                  This mightie Duke with loue was kindled ſo,
                  As he abaſing th' height of his degree,
                  Set his whole heart, to loue and honor mee.
               
               
                  Grudge whoſo would, to him I was moſt deere,
                  Aboue all Dames aduanced in degree,
                  (The Queene except) no Princeſſe was my peere,
                  But gaue me place, and Lords with cap and knee
                  Did all honor and reuerence vnto mee.
                  Thus hoiſted high vpon the rolling wheele,
                  I ſate ſo ſure, me though I could not reele.
               
               
                  And weening leaſt that Fortune hath a turne,
                  I look'd aloft, and would not looke alow,
                  The brands of pride ſo in my breſt did burne
                  As the hot ſparkes, burſt forth in open ſhow,
                  And more and more the fire began to glow
                  Without quenching, and daily did encreaſe,
                  Till Fortunes blaſts with ſhame did make it ceaſe.
               
               
                  
                  For (as tis ſaid) pride paſſeth on afore,
                  And ſhame followes, for iuſt reward and meed:
                  Would God Ladies, both now and euermore,
                  Of my hard hap, which ſhall the ſtorie reede,
                  Would beare in mind, and truſt it as their Creed,
                  That pride of heart is a moſt hatefull vice,
                  And low lineſſe, a pearle of paſſing price:
               
               
                  Namely in Queenes, and Ladies of eſtate,
                  Within whoſe minds all meeknes ſhould abound,
                  Since high diſdaine doth alwaies purchaſe hate,
                  Being a vice, that moſt part doth redound
                  To their reproch, in whom the ſame is found,
                  And ſeldome gets good fauour or good fame,
                  But is at laſt knit vp with worldly ſhame.
               
               
                  The proofe whereof I found moſt true indeed,
                  That pride afore, hath ſhame to wait behind.
                  Let no man doubt, in whom this vice doth breed,
                  But ſhame for pride by iuſtice is aſſign'd,
                  Which I well found, for truly in my mind
                  Was neuer none, whom pride did more enflame,
                  Nor neuer none receiued greater ſhame.
               
               
                  For not content to be a Dutcheſſe great,
                  I longed ſore to beare the name of Queene,
                  Aſpiring ſtill vnto an higher ſeat,
                  And with that hope my ſelfe did ouerweene,
                  Since there was none, which that time was betweene
                  
                     Henrie the King, and my good Duke his Eame
                  Heire to the crowne and kingdome of this Realme.
               
               
                  So neare to be, was cauſe of my vaine hope
                  And long await when this faire hap would fall;
                  My ſtudies all were tending to that ſcope,
                  Alas, the while to counſell I did call
                  Such as would ſeeme, by skill coniecturall
                  Of art Magique and wicked Sorcerie,
                  For to diuine the Princes deſtinie.
               
               
                  
                  Among which ſort of thoſe that bare moſt fame
                  There was a Beldame call'd the Witch of Ey,
                  Old mother Madge her neighbours did her name,
                  Which wrought wonders in countries by here-ſay,
                  Furies and feends her charming would obay.
                  And dead corps from graue ſhe could vpreare,
                  Such an Inchantreſſe that time had no peere.
               
               
                  Two Prieſts alſo, the one hight Bolenbroke,
                  
                  The other Suthwel, Clerkes in coniuration,
                  Theſe two Chaplaines were they that vndertooke
                  To caſt and calke the Kings true conſtellation,
                  And then to iudge by deepeſt diuination
                  Of things to come, and who ſhould next ſucceed
                  To Englands Crowne, all this was true indeed.
               
               
                  And further ſure they neuer did proceed,
                  Though I confeſſe that this attempt was ill,
                  But for my part, for any thing in deed
                  Wrought or elſe thought, by any kind of skill,
                  God is my iudge I neuer had the will,
                  By any inchantment, Sorcerie, or charme,
                  Or otherwiſe, to worke my Princes harme.
               
               
                  Yet neretheleſſe, when this caſe came to light,
                  By ſecret ſpies to Caiphas our Cardinall,
                  Who long in heart had borne a priuie ſpight
                  To my good Duke his nephew naturall,
                  Glad of the chance ſo fitly forth to fall,
                  His long hid hate, with Iuſtice to color,
                  Vſed this caſe with moſt extreame rigor,
               
               
                  And cauſed me with my complices all,
                  To be cited by proceſſe peremptorie,
                  Before Iudges, in place Iudiciall,
                  Whereas Caiphas, ſitting in his glorie,
                  Would not allow my anſwere dilatorie,
                  Ne Doctor or Proctor to alledge the lawes,
                  But forced me to plead in mine owne cauſe.
               
               
                  
                  The Kings counſell were called to the caſe,
                  (My huſband then ſhut out for the ſeaſon)
                  In whoſe abſence I found but little grace,
                  For Lawyers turned our offence to treaſon:
                  And ſo with rigor, without ruth or reaſon,
                  Sentence was giuen, that I for the ſame
                  Should doe penance, and ſuffer open ſhame.
               
               
                  Nay the like ſhame had neuer wight I weene,
                  Duches, Lady, ne Damſel of degree,
                  As I that was a Princeſſe, next the Queene,
                  Wife to a Prince, and none ſo great as hee,
                  A Kings vncle, Protector of his countrey,
                  With Taper burning, ſhrouded in a ſheete
                  Three dayes a row, to paſſe the open ſtreete,
               
               
                  Barelegd, and bare foote, to all the worlds wonder,
                  Yea, and as though ſuch ſhame did not ſuffiſe,
                  With more deſpite then to part aſunder
                  Me and my Duke, which Traitors did deuiſe
                  By Statute lawe, in moſt vnlawfull wiſe,
                  Firſt ſending me with ſhame into exile,
                  Then murdring him by trechery and guile.
               
               
                  Yea and beſides this cruell baniſhment
                  Far from all friends to comfort mee in care,
                  And huſbands death, there was by Parliament
                  Ordaind for me a meſſe of courſer fare.
                  For they to bring me to beggers ſtate moſt bare,
                  By the ſame act from mee did then withdraw
                  Such right of dower, as widowes haue by law.
               
               
                  Death (as t'is ſaid) doth ſet all things at reſt,
                  Which fell not ſo in mine vnhappy caſe:
                  For ſince my death, mine enmies made a Ieſt
                  In minſtrels rimes, mine honour to deface.
                  And then to bring my name in more diſgrace,
                  A ſong was made in manner of a laic,
                  Which old wiues ſing of mee vnto this day.
               
               
                  
                  Yet with theſe ſpites their malice could not end,
                  For ſhortly after, my ſorowes to renue,
                  My loiall Lord, which neuer did offend,
                  VVas cald in haſte, the cauſe he litle knew,
                  To a Parlement, without ſommons due,
                  VVhereas his death was cruelly contriued,
                  And I his wife of earthly ioyes depriued.
               
               
                  For all the while my Duke had life and breath,
                  So long I ſtood in hope of my reſtore:
                  But when I heard of his moſt cauſles death,
                  Then the beſt ſalue for my recureles ſore
                  VVas to deſpaire of cure for euermore,
                  And as I could, my carefull heart to cure
                  VVith patience, moſt painfull to endure.
               
               
                  O Traitors fell, which in your hearts could find,
                  Like feends of hell, the guiltles to betray,
                  But ye chiefly his kinſmen moſt vnkind,
                  VVhich gaue conſent to make him ſo away,
                  That vnto God, with all my heart I pray,
                  Vengeance may light on him that cauſed all,
                  
                     Beaufort I meane, that curſed Cardinall.
               
               
                  VVhich baſtard Prieſt of th' houſe of Lancaſter,
                  Sonne to Duke Iohn, ſurnamed Iohn of Gaunt,
                  
                  VVas firſt create Biſhop of VVincheſter,
                  For no learning whereof he might well vaunt,
                  Ne for vertue, which he did neuer haunt,
                  But for his Gold and ſummes that were not ſmall
                  Paid to the Pope, was made a Cardinall.
               
               
                  Proud Lucifer, which from the heauens on high
                  Downe to the pit of hell below was caſt,
                  And being once an Angell bright in sky,
                  For his pride in hell is chained faſt
                  In deepe darkenes that euermore ſhall laſt,
                  More haut of heart was not before his fall,
                  Then was this proud and pompous Cardinall:
               
               
                  
                  VVhoſe life, good Baldwine, paint out in his pickle,
                  A and blaſe this Baal and Belligod moſt blind,
                  An hypocrite, all faithles, falſe and fickle,
                  A wicked wretch, a kinſman moſt vnkind,
                  A Diuell incarnate, all diuelliſhly enclind,
                  And (to diſcharge my conſcience all at once)
                  The Diuell him gnaw both body, bloud and bones.
               
               
                  The ſpitefull Prieſt would needes make me a VVitch,
                  As would to God I had been for his ſake,
                  I would haue clawd him where he did not itch,
                  I would haue plaid the Lady of the Lake,
                  And as Merline was, cloſde him in a brake,
                  Ye a Meridian to lull him by day light,
                  And a night mare to ride on him by night.
               
               
                  The fiery feends with feuers hot and frenzy,
                  The Airy hegges with ſtench and carren ſauoures,
                  The watry ghoſts with gowtes and with dropſy,
                  The earthly Goblines, with Aches at all houres,
                  Furies and Fairies, with all infernall powers
                  I would haue ſtird from the darke dungeon
                  Of hell Centre, as deepe as Demagorgon.
               
               
                  Or had I now the skill of dame Erichto,
                  
                  Whoſe dreadfull charmes (as Lucan doth expreſſe)
                  All feends did feare, ſo far forth as Prince Pluto
                  
                  VVas at her call for dread of more diſtreſſe,
                  Then would I ſend of helhownds more and leſſe
                  A legion at leaſt, at him to cry and yell,
                  And with that charme, herrie him downe to hell.
               
               
                  VVhich need not, for ſure I thinke that he
                  VVho here in earth leades Epicurus life,
                  As farre from God as poſſible may be,
                  VVith whom all ſinne and vices are moſt rife,
                  Vſing at will both widow, maid, and wife,
                  But that ſome Diuell his body doth poſſeſſe,
                  His life is ſuch, as men can iudge no leſſe.
               
               
                  
                  And God forgiue my wrath and wreakefull mind,
                  Such is my hate to that moſt wicked wretch,
                  Die when he ſhall, in heart I could well finde
                  Out of the graue his corps againe to fetch,
                  And racke his limmes as long as they would ſtretch,
                  And take delight to liſten euery day
                  How he could ſing a maſſe of welaway.
               
               
                  The Ile of Man was the appointed place
                  To penance me for euer in exile,
                  Thither in haſte they poſted me apace,
                  And doubting ſcape, they pind me in a Pile
                  Cloſe by my ſelfe in care, alas the while
                  There felt I firſt poore priſoners hungry fare,
                  Much want, things skant, and ſtone walles hard and bare.
               
               
                  The change was ſtrange, from ſilke and cloth of gold
                  To rugged frize my carcas for to cloath,
                  From Princes fare, and dainties hot and cold,
                  To rotten fiſh, and meates that one would loath,
                  The diet and dreſſing were much alike boath,
                  Bedding and lodging were all alike fine,
                  Such Downe it was as ſerued well for ſwine.
               
               
                  Neither doe I mine owne caſe thus complaine,
                  Which I confeſſe came partly by deſert:
                  The only cauſe which doubleth all my paine,
                  And which moſt neere goeth now vnto my heart,
                  Is that my fault did finally reuert
                  To him that was leaſt guilty of the ſame,
                  Whoſe death it was, though I abode the ſhame.
               
               
                  VVhoſe fatall fall when I doe call to minde,
                  And how by me his miſchiefe firſt began,
                  So oft I cry on Fortune moſt vnkinde,
                  And my miſhap moſt vtterly doe banne,
                  That euer I to ſuch a noble man,
                  Who from my crime was innocent and cleare,
                  Should be a cauſe to buy his loue ſo deare.
               
               
                  
                  Oh to my heart how grieuous is the wound,
                  Calling to mind this diſmall deadly caſe:
                  I would I had been doluen vnder ground
                  When he firſt ſaw or looked on my face,
                  Or tooke delight in any kind of grace
                  Seeming in me, that him did ſtir or moue
                  To fancie me, or ſet his heart to loue.
               
               
                  Farewell Greenewich my Palace of delight,
                  Where I was wont to ſee the Chriſtall ſtreames
                  Of royall Thames, moſt pleaſant to my ſight:
                  And farewell Kent, right famous in all Realmes,
                  A thouſand times I mind you in my dreames,
                  And when I wake moſt griefe it is to mee,
                  That neuer more againe I ſhall you ſee.
               
               
                  In the night time when I ſhould take my reſt
                  I weepe, I waile, I wet my bed with teares,
                  And when dead ſleepe my ſpirits hath oppreſt,
                  Troubled with dreames I fantaſie vaine feares,
                  Mine husbands voice then ringeth at mine eares
                  Crying for helpe, O ſaue me from the death,
                  Theſe villaines heere do ſeeke to ſtop my breath.
               
               
                  Yea and ſometimes me thinkes his drerie ghoſt
                  Appeares in ſight, and ſhewes me in what wiſe
                  Thoſe fell tyrants with torments had emboſt
                  His winde and breath, to abuſe peoples eyes,
                  So as no doubt or queſtion ſhould ariſe
                  Among rude folke which little vnderſtand,
                  But that his death came only by Gods hand.
               
               
                  I plaine in vaine, where eares be none to heare
                  But roring ſeas, and bluſtering of the winde,
                  And of redreſſe am nere a whit the neare,
                  But with waſte words to feed my mournfull minde,
                  Wiſhing full oft the Parcas had vntwinde
                  My vitall ſtrings, or Atropoſe with knife
                  Had cut the line of my moſt wretched life.
               
               
                  
                  Oh that Neptune, and Aeolus alſo,
                  Th' one god of Seas, the other of weather,
                  Ere mine arriuall into that Ile of woe
                  Had ſunke the ſhip wherein I ſailed thither,
                  (The ſhipmen ſaued) ſo as I together
                  With my good Duke, might haue been dead afore
                  Fortune had wroken her heart vpon vs ſo ſore.
               
               
                  Or elſe that God when my firſt paſſage was
                  Into exile along Saint Albons towne
                  Had neuer let me further for to paſſe,
                  But in the ſtreet with death had ſtrucke me downe:
                  Then had I ſped of my deſired bowne
                  That my poore corps might there haue lien with his
                  Both in one graue, and ſo haue gone to bliſſe.
               
               
                  But I alas, the greater is my griefe
                  Am paſt that hope to haue my ſepulture
                  Neere vnto him, which was to me moſt leefe,
                  But in an Ile and countrie moſt obſcure,
                  To pine in paine whilſt my poore life will dure,
                  And being dead, all honorleſſe to lie
                  In ſimple graue, as other poore that die.
               
               
                  My tale is told, and time it is to ceaſe
                  Of troubles paſt, all which haue had their end:
                  My graue I truſt ſhall purchaſe me ſuch peace
                  In ſuch a world where no wight doth contend
                  For higher place, whereto all fleſh ſhall wend:
                  And ſo I end, vſing one word for all
                  As I began, that pride will haue a fall.
               
               G. Ferrers.
            
            
               
               HOW HVMFREY PLANTAGENET DVKE OF GLOCESTER. Protector of England, during the minoritie of his Nephew King Henry the ſixt, (commonly called the good Duke) by practiſe of enemies was brought to confuſion.
               
               
                  
                     AS higheſt hilles with tempeſts been moſt touched,
                  And tops of trees moſt ſubiect vnto winde,
                  And as great towers with ſtone ſtrongly couched
                  Haue heauie falles when they be vndermin'd:
                  Euen ſo by proofe in worldly things we find,
                  That ſuch as climbe the top of high degree
                  From feare of falling neuer can be free.
               
               
                  To proue this true, good Baldwine hearken heere,
                  See and behold me Humfrey hight by name,
                  Englands Protector, Duke of Gloceſter,
                  Who in the ſixt King Henries rule with fame,
                  Twice ten yeares kept the troubled State in frame:
                  Note well the cauſe of my vnhappie caſe,
                  And'mongſt thy mirrours let the ſame haue place.
               
               
                  In their moſt weale, let men beware miſhap,
                  And not to ſleepe in ſlumbring ſickerneſſe,
                  Whilſt Fortune falſe doth lull them in her lap
                  Drowned in dreames of brittle bleſſedneſſe,
                  But then to feare her freakes and fickleneſſe,
                  Accounting ſtill the higher they aſcend,
                  More nigh to be to danger in the end.
               
               
                  And that vaine truſt in blood or royall race,
                  Abuſe them not with blind ſecuritie
                  To truſt their ſtate, but weighing well my caſe,
                  When ſhe moſt ſmiles to haue in memorie
                  My ſudden fall, who in moſt certaintie
                  Hauing moſt ſtaies which men in ſtate maintaine,
                  Haue found the ſame vntruſtie and moſt vaine.
               
               
                  
                  Better then I none may the ſame approue,
                  Who truſting all in height of high eſtate,
                  To bite on fawning flatteries bait did loue,
                  Which neuer Prince could baniſh from his gate,
                  Did little thinke on ſuch a ſudden mate,
                  Not heeding, leſſe dreading, all vnaware,
                  By foes leaſt fear'd was trapt in ſuddaine ſnare.
               
               
                  If noble birth or high autority,
                  Number of friends, kinred or alliance,
                  If wiſdome, learning, worldly policy
                  Mought haue ben ſtaiers to Fortunes variance,
                  None ſtood more ſtrong, in worldly countenance,
                  For all theſe helpes had I to high degree,
                  And yet in fine they all beguiled mee.
               
               
                  Of Henry fourth by name, fourth ſonne I was,
                  Brother to Henry fift of that ſame name,
                  To the ſixt Henrie vncle; but alas,
                  What cauſe had I to build vpon the ſame?
                  Or for vaine glory, to aduance my fame,
                  My ſelfe to call in records and writings,
                  The brother, ſonne, and vncle vnto Kings?
               
               
                  This was my boaſt, which laſtly was my bane,
                  Yet not this boaſt was it that brought me downe:
                  The very cauſe which made my weale to wane
                  So neere of kin that I was to the Crowne,
                  That was the rock that made my ſhip to drowne.
                  A rule there is not failing, but moſt ſure,
                  Kingdome no kin doth know, ne can indure.
               
               
                  When the fift Henry by his valiancie
                  Wan by conqueſt the roiall Realme of France,
                  And of two Kingdomes made one Monarchy
                  Before his death, for better obeiſance,
                  To his yong ſonne, not ripe to gouernance,
                  Protector of England I was by teſtament,
                  And Iohn my brother in France made Regent.
               
               
                  
                  To whom if God had lent a longer life,
                  Our houſe t'haue kept from ſtormes of inward ſtrife,
                  Or it had been the Lord Almighties will,
                  
                     Plantagenet in ſtate had ſtanden ſtill.
                  But deadly diſcord which all ſtates do ſpill
                  Bred by deſire of high domination,
                  Brought our whole houſe to plaine deſolation.
               
               
                  It is for truth in an hiſtory found
                  That Henry Plantagenet firſt of our name,
                  Who called was, King Henry the ſecond
                  Sonne of Dame Maude, the Empreſſe of high fame,
                  Would oft report, that his ancient Grandame,
                  Though ſeeming in ſhape a woman naturall,
                  Was a Feend of the kind that (Succubae) ſome call.
               
               
                  Which old fable, ſo long time told before,
                  When this Kings ſonnes againſt him did rebell,
                  He cald to minde, and being greeued ſore,
                  Loe! now (quoth he) I ſee and proue full well
                  The ſtory true, which folk of old did tell,
                  That from a feend deſcended all our race,
                  And now my children verify the caſe.
               
               
                  Whereof to leaue a long memoriall
                  In minde of man for euermore to reſt,
                  A Picture he made and hung it in his Hall
                  Of a Pellicane ſitting on his neſt,
                  With foure yong birds, three pecking at his breſt
                  With bloudy beakes, and furder did deuiſe,
                  The yongeſt bird to pecke the fathers eyes.
               
               
                  Meaning hereby his rebell Children three,
                  
                     Henry and Richard, bet him on the breaſt:
                  
                     (Ieffrey onely from that offence was free)
                  
                     Henry died of Englands Crowne poſſeſt:
                  
                     Richard liued his father to moleſt,
                  
                     Iohn the yongeſt pect his fathers eye,
                  Whoſe deeds vnkinde the ſooner made him die.
               
               
                  
                  This King (ſome write) in his ſicknes laſt
                  Said, as it were by way of prophecie,
                  How that the Diuell a Darnell graine had caſt
                  Among his kin, to encreaſe enmity,
                  Which ſhould remaine in their poſterity
                  Till miſchiefe and murder had ſpent them all,
                  Not leauing one to piſſe againſt the wall.
               
               
                  And yet from him in order did ſucceed
                  In England here of crowned Kings fourteene
                  Of that ſurname, and of that line and ſeed,
                  With Dukes and Earles, and many a noble Queene,
                  The number ſuch as all the world would weene
                  So many impes could neuer ſo be ſpent,
                  But ſome heire male ſhould be of that deſcent.
               
               
                  Which to be true if any ſtand in doubt,
                  Becauſe I meane not further to digreſſe,
                  Let him purſue the hiſtories throughout
                  Of Engliſh Kings whom practiſe did oppreſſe,
                  And he ſhall find the cauſe of their diſtreſſe
                  From firſt to laſt, vnkindly to begin
                  Alwaies by thoſe that next were of the kin.
               
               
                  Was not Richard, of whom I ſpake before,
                  A rebell plaine vntill his father died,
                  And Iohn likewiſe an enmy euermore
                  To Richard againe, and for a rebell tried?
                  After whoſe death, it cannot be denied,
                  Againſt all right this Iohn moſt cruelly
                  His brothers children cauſed for to die.
               
               
                  
                     Arthur and Iſabell (I meane) that were
                  
                     Ieffreies children then duke of Britaine
                  
                     Henries third ſonne, by one degree more neere
                  Then was this Iohn, as ſtories ſhew moſt plaine,
                  Which two children were famiſht or els ſlaine
                  By Iohn their Eame cald Saunzterre by name,
                  Of whoſe foule act all countries ſpeake great ſhame.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Edward and Richard, ſecond both by name
                  Kings of this Land, fell downe by fatall fate:
                  What was the cauſe that Princes of ſuch fame
                  Did leeſe at laſt their honour, life, and ſtate?
                  Nothing at all, but diſcord and debate,
                  Which when it haps in kinred or in bloud,
                  
                     Erynnis rage was neuer halfe ſo wood.
               
               
                  Be ſure therefore ye Kings and Princes all
                  That concord in Kingdoms is chiefe aſſurance,
                  And that your families doe neuer fall
                  But where diſcord doth lead the doubtfull dance
                  With buſie brawles, and turnes of variance:
                  Where malice is minſtrel, the pipe ill report,
                  The maske miſchiefe, and ſo ends the ſport.
               
               
                  But now to come to my purpoſe againe,
                  VVhilſt I my charge applied in England,
                  My brother in France long time did remaine,
                  Cardinal Beauford tooke proudly in hand
                  In cauſes publique againſt me to ſtand,
                  VVho of great malice ſo much as he might
                  Sought in all things to doe me deſpite.
               
               
                  VVhich proud prelate to me was baſtard Eame,
                  Sonne to Duke Iohn of Gaunt as they did faine,
                  VVho being made high Chancellour of the Realme,
                  Not like a Prieſt, but like a Prince did raigne,
                  Nothing wanting which might his pride maintaine,
                  Biſhop beſides of VVincheſter he was,
                  And Cardinall of Rome, which Angels brought to paſſe.
               
               
                  Not Gods Angels, but Angels of old Gold
                  Lift him aloft, in whom no cauſe there was
                  By iuſt deſert ſo high to be extold,
                  (Riches except) whereby this golden aſſe
                  At home and abroad all matters brought to paſſe:
                  Namely at Rome, hauing no meane but that
                  To purchaſe there his crimz in Cardinall hat,
               
               
                  
                  Which thing the King my father him forbad
                  Plainly ſaying, that he could not abide
                  Within his Realme a ſubiect to be had
                  His Princes peere, yet ſuch was this mans pride,
                  That he forth with after my father di'd,
                  (The King then yong) obtained of the Pope
                  That honor high, which erſt he could not hope.
               
               
                  Whoſe proud attempts becauſe that I withſtood,
                  My bound dutie the better to acquite,
                  This holy father waxed well neere wood,
                  Of meere malice deuiſing day and night
                  To worke to me diſhonor and deſpight,
                  Whereby there fell betweene vs ſuch a iarre,
                  As in this land was like a ciuill warre.
               
               
                  My brother Iohn, which lay this while in France,
                  Heard of this hurle, and paſt the ſeas in haſte,
                  By whoſe trauell this troubleſome diſtance
                  Ceaſed a while, but neretheleſſe in waſte:
                  For rooted hate will hardly be diſplaſte
                  Out of high hearts, and namely where debate,
                  Happeneth amongſt great perſons of eſtate.
               
               
                  For like as a match doth lie and ſmoulder
                  Long time before it commeth to the traine:
                  But yet when fire hath caught in the poulder,
                  No art is able the flames to reſtraine:
                  Euen ſo the ſparkes of enuie and diſdaine,
                  Out of the ſmoke burſt forth in ſuch a flame,
                  That France and England yet may rue the ſame.
               
               
                  So when of two Realmes the regiment royall,
                  Betweene brothers was parted equally,
                  One placed in France for affaires Martiall,
                  And I at home for ciuill policie:
                  To ſerue the ſtate, we both did ſo applie,
                  As honor and ſame to both did encreaſe,
                  To him for the warre, to me for the peace.
               
               
                  
                  Whence enuie ſprang, and ſpecially becauſe
                  This proud prelate could not abide a Peere
                  Within the land to rule the ſtate by lawes,
                  Wherefore ſifting my life and acts moſt neere,
                  He neuer ceaſt, vntill, as you ſhall heare,
                  By practiſe foule of him and his allies,
                  My death was wrought in moſt vnworthie wiſe.
               
               
                  And firſt he ſought my doings to defame,
                  By rumors falſe, which he and his did ſow:
                  Letters and billes to my reproch and ſhame
                  He did deuiſe, and all about beſtow,
                  Whereby my troth in doubt ſhould daily grow,
                  In England firſt, and afterward in France,
                  Mouing all meanes to bring me to miſchance.
               
               
                  One quarell was, that where by common law
                  Murder and theft been puniſht all alike,
                  So as manſlayers, which bloodie blades do draw,
                  Suffer no more then he that doth but pike,
                  Me thought the ſame no order politike,
                  In ſetting paines to make no difference,
                  Betweene the leſſer and greater offence.
               
               
                  I being ſeene ſomewhat in ciuill law,
                  The rules thereof reputed much bitter.
                  Wherefore to keepe offenders more in awe,
                  Like as the fault was ſmaller or greater,
                  So ſet I paines more eaſier or bitter,
                  Weghing the qualitie of euery offence,
                  And ſo according pronounced ſentence.
               
               
                  Among'ſt my other Delicta Iuuentutis,
                  
                  Whil'ſt rage of youth my reaſon did ſubdue,
                  I muſt confeſſe as the very truth is,
                  Driuen by deſire fond fancies to enſue,
                  A thing I did, whereof great trouble grew,
                  Abuſing one to my no ſmall rebuke,
                  Which wife was then to Iohn of Brabant Duke.
               
               
                  
                  Called ſhe was Ladie Iaquet the faire,
                  Delitefull in loue like Helene of Troy:
                  To the Duke of Bauier ſole daughter and heire,
                  Her did I marrie to my great annoy:
                  Yet for a time, this dame I did enioy,
                  With her whole lands, withholding them by force,
                  Till Martin the Pope, betweene vs made diuorce.
               
               
                  Yet all theſe blaſts not able were to moue
                  The anchor ſtrong, whereby my ſhip did ſtay,
                  Some other ſhift to ſeeke him did behoue,
                  Whereto ere long ill Fortune made the way,
                  Which finally was cauſe of my decay
                  And cruell death, contriued by my foes,
                  Which fell out thus, as now I ſhall diſcloſe.
               
               
                  
                     Eleanor my wife, my Ducheſſe only deare,
                  I know not how, but as the nature is
                  Of women all, aye curious to enquire
                  Of things to come (though I confeſſe in this
                  Her fault not ſmall) and that ſhe did amiſſe,
                  By witches skill, which Sorcerie ſome call,
                  Would know of things which after ſhould befall.
               
               
                  And for that cauſe made her ſelfe acquainted
                  With mother Madge, called the witch of Eye,
                  And with a Clerke that after was attainted,
                  
                     Bolenbroke he hight, that learned was that way,
                  With other moe, which famous were that day,
                  As well in Science called Mathematicall,
                  As alſo in Magicke skill ſupernaturall.
               
               
                  Theſe cunning folkes ſhe ſet on worke to know
                  The time how long the King ſhould liue and raigne,
                  Some by the Starres, and ſome by feends below,
                  Some by witchcraft ſought knowledge to attaine,
                  With like fancies, friuolous, fond and vaine,
                  Whereof though I knew leaſt of any man,
                  Yet by that meane my miſchiefe firſt began.
               
               
                  
                  Yet beſides this there was a greater thing,
                  How ſhe in waxe by counſell of the witch,
                  An Image made, crowned like a King,
                  With ſword in hand, in ſhape and likeneſſe ſich
                  As was the King, which daily they did pitch
                  Againſt a fire, that as the waxe did melt,
                  So ſhould his life conſume away vnfelt.
               
               
                  My Ducheſſe thus accuſed of this crime,
                  As ſhe that ſhould ſuch practiſe firſt begin,
                  My part was then to yeeld vnto the time,
                  Giuing her leaue to deale alone therein.
                  And ſince the cauſe concerned deadly ſinne,
                  Which to the Clergie only doth pertaine,
                  To deale therein I plainly did refraine.
               
               
                  And ſuffered them her perſon to aſcite
                  Into their Courts, to anſwere and appeare,
                  Which to my heart was ſure the greateſt ſpite
                  That could be wrought, and touched me moſt neare,
                  To ſee my wife, and Ladie leefe and deare,
                  To my reproch, and plaine before my face,
                  Entreated ſo, as one of ſort moſt baſe.
               
               
                  The Clergie then examining her cauſe,
                  Conuinced her, as guiltie in the ſame,
                  And ſentence gaue according to their lawes,
                  That ſhe and they whom I before did name
                  Should ſuffer death, or elſe ſome open ſhame:
                  Of which penance my wife by ſentence had
                  To ſuffer ſhame, of both the two more bad.
               
               
                  And firſt ſhe muſt by daies together three,
                  Through London ſtreets paſſe all along in ſight
                  Bareleg'd and barefoot, that all the world might ſee,
                  Bearing in hand a burning taper bright,
                  And not content with this extreame deſpight,
                  To worke me woe in all they may or can,
                  Exil'd ſhe was into the Ile of Man.
               
               
                  
                  This heinous crime and open worldly ſhame,
                  With ſuch rigour ſhewed vnto my wife,
                  Was a fine fetch further things to frame,
                  And nothing elſe but a preparatiue
                  Firſt from office, and finally from life
                  Me to depriue, and ſo paſſing further,
                  What law could not, to execute by murther.
               
               
                  Which by ſlie drifts, and windlaces aloofe,
                  They brought about, perſwading firſt the Queene,
                  That in effect it was the Kings reproofe,
                  And hers alſo, to be exempted cleane
                  From princely rule, or that it ſhould be ſeene
                  A King of yeares ſtill gouerned to bee
                  Like a pupill, that nothing could foreſee.
               
               
                  The danger more, conſidering the King
                  Was without child, I being his next heire
                  To rule the Realme, as Prince in euery thing
                  Without reſtraint, and all the ſway to beare.
                  With peoples loue, whereby it was to feare
                  That my haut heart, vnbridled in deſire,
                  Time would preuent, and to the Crowne aſpire.
               
               
                  Theſe with ſuch like were put into her head,
                  Who of herſelfe was thereto ſoone enclin'd,
                  Other there were that this ill humour fed,
                  To neither part that had good will or mind,
                  The Duke of Yorke our coſin moſt vnkind,
                  Who keeping cloſe a title to the Crowne,
                  Lancaſters houſe did labour to pull downe.
               
               
                  The ſtay whereof he tooke to ſtand in me,
                  Seeing the King of courage nothing ſtout,
                  Neither of wit great perill to foreſee,
                  So for purpoſe, if he could bring about
                  Me to diſplace, then did he little doubt
                  To gaine the Goale, for which he droue the ball,
                  The Crowne (I meane) to catch ere it ſhould fall.
               
               
                  
                  This hope made him againſt me to conſpire
                  With thoſe which foes were to each other late,
                  The Queene did weene to win her whole deſire,
                  Which was to rule the King and all the State
                  If I were rid, whom therefore ſhe did hate,
                  Forecaſting not, when that was brought to paſſe,
                  How weake of friends the King her husband was.
               
               
                  The Dukes two, of Exceſter, and Buckingham,
                  With the Marquiſe Dorſet therein did agree,
                  But namely the Marquiſe of Suffolke William,
                  
                  Contriuer chiefe of this conſpiracie,
                  With other moe, that ſate ſtill and did ſee
                  Their mortall foes on me to whet their kniues,
                  Which turn'd at laſt to loſſe of all their liues.
               
               
                  But vaine deſire of ſoueraingtie and rule,
                  Which otherwiſe (Ambition) hath no name,
                  So ſtir'd the Queene, that wilfull as a Mule,
                  Headlong ſhe runnes from ſmoke into the flame,
                  Driuing a drift, which after did ſo frame,
                  As ſhe, the King, with all their line and race,
                  Depriued were of honor, life, and place.
               
               
                  So for purpoſe ſhe thought it very good,
                  With former foes in friendſhip to confeder,
                  The Duke of Yorke and other of his blood,
                  With Neuils all, knit were then all together,
                  And Delapoole, friend afore to neither:
                  The Cardinall alſo came within this liſt,
                  As Herode and Pilate to iudge Ieſus Chriſt.
               
               
                  This curſed league too late diſcouered was
                  By Bayards blind, that linked in the line,
                  The Queene and Cardinall brought it ſo to paſſe,
                  With Marquiſe Suffolke maſter of this mine,
                  Whoſe ill aduice was counted very fine,
                  With other moe which finely could diſguiſe,
                  With falſe viſours my miſchiefe to deuiſe.
               
               
                  
                  Concluding thus they point without delay
                  Parliament to hold, in ſome vnhaunted place,
                  Far from London, out of the common way,
                  Where few or none ſhould vnderſtand the caſe,
                  But whom the Queene and Cardinall did embrace:
                  And ſo for place they choſe Saint Edmundſburie,
                  
                  Since when (ſome ſay) England was neuer merrie.
               
               
                  Summons was ſent this company to call,
                  Which made me muſe, that in ſo great a caſe
                  I ſhould no whit of counſell be at all,
                  Who yet had rule, and next the King in place,
                  Me thought nothing my ſtate could more diſgrace
                  Then to beare name, and in effect to be
                  A Cypher in Algrim, as all men might ſee.
               
               
                  And though iuſt cauſe I had for to ſuſpect
                  The time and place appointed by my foes,
                  And that my friends moſt plainly did detect
                  The ſubtill traine, and practiſe of all thoſe
                  Which againſt me great treaſons did ſuppoſe,
                  Yet truſt of truth with a conſcience cleare
                  Gaue me good heart, in that place to appeare.
               
               
                  Vpon which truſt with more haſte then good ſpeed,
                  Forward I went to that vnluckie place
                  Dutie to ſhew, and no whit was in dread
                  Of any traine, but bold to ſhew my face
                  As a true man, yet ſo fell out the caſe
                  That after trauell ſeeking for repoſe,
                  An armed band my lodging did encloſe.
               
               
                  The Vicount Beaumount, who for the time ſupplied
                  The office of high Conſtable of the Land,
                  Was with the Queene and Cardinall allied,
                  By whoſe ſupport he ſtoutly tooke in hand
                  My lodging to enter with an armed band,
                  And for high treaſon my perſon did arreſt,
                  And laid me that night where him ſeemed beſt.
               
               
                  
                  Then ſhaking and quaking, for dread of a dreame,
                  Halfe waked all naked in bed as I lay,
                  What time ſtrake the chime of mine houre extreame,
                  Oppreſt was my reſt with mortall affray,
                  My foes did vncloſe, I know not which way
                  My chamber dores, and boldly in brake,
                  And had me faſt before I could wake.
               
               
                  Thou lookeſt now, that of my ſecret murther,
                  I ſhould at large the maner how declare,
                  I pray thee Baldwine aske of me no further,
                  For ſpeaking plaine, it came ſo at vnware,
                  As I my ſelfe, which caught was in the ſnare,
                  Scarcely am able the circumſtance to ſhew,
                  Which was kept cloſe, and knowne but vnto few.
               
               
                  But be thou ſure by violence it was,
                  And no whit bred by ſickneſſe or diſeaſe,
                  That felt it well before my life did paſſe,
                  For when theſe wolues my bodie once did ſeaſe,
                  Vſed I was but ſmally to mine eaſe,
                  With torments ſtrong which went ſo neere the quicke,
                  As made me die before that I was ſicke.
               
               
                  A Palſie (they ſaid) my vitall ſpirits oppreſt,
                  Bred by exceſſe of melancholie blacke,
                  This for excuſe to lay, them ſeemed beſt,
                  Leſt my true friends the cauſe might further racke,
                  And ſo perhaps diſcouer the whole packe
                  Of my falſe foes, whom they might well ſuſpect
                  For cauſes great, which after tooke effect.
               
               
                  Dead was I found by ſuch as beſt did know
                  The maner how the ſame was brought to paſſe,
                  And then my corps was ſet out for a ſhow,
                  By view whereof nothing perceiued was:
                  Whereby the world may ſee as in a glaſſe,
                  Th' vnſure ſtate of them that ſtand moſt hie,
                  Which then dread leaſt, when danger is moſt nie.
               
               
                  
                  And alſo ſee what danger they are in,
                  Which next their King are to ſucceed in place:
                  Since Kings moſt part be iealous of their kin,
                  Whom I aduiſe, forewarned by my caſe,
                  To beare low ſaile, and not too much embrace
                  The peoples loue: for as Senec ſaith truly:
                  
                     O quàm funestus est fauor populi.
                  
               
               G. Ferrers.
            
            
               HOW LORD WILLIAM DELAPOLE Duke of Suffolke was worthily baniſhed, for abuſing his King, and cauſing the deſtruction of the good Duke Humfrey, Anno Dom. 1450.
               
                  
                     HEauie is the hap whereto all men be bound,
                  I meane the death, which no eſtate may flie:
                  But to be baniſht, headed, and then drown'd
                  In ſinke of ſhame from top of honors hie,
                  Was neuer man ſo ſeru'd I thinke but I.
                  Wherefore Baldwine amongſt the reſt by right,
                  I claime of thee my wofull caſe to write.
               
               
                  My only life in all points may ſuffice,
                  To ſhew how baſe all baits of Fortune be,
                  Which thaw like yee, through heate of enuies eyes,
                  Of vicious deeds which much poſſeſſed me.
                  Good hap with vice, long time cannot agree,
                  Which bring beſt Fortunes to the baſeſt fall,
                  And happieſt hap to enuie to be thrall.
               
               
                  Called I was William De la Poole,
                  
                  Of Suffolke Duke in Queene Margarets daies,
                  That found the meane Duke Humfreys blood to coole,
                  Whoſe worthie acts deſerue eternall praiſe,
                  Whereby I note that Fortune cannot raiſe
                  Any aloft, without ſome others wracke:
                  Flouds drowne no fields before they finde bracke.
               
               
                  
                  But as the waters which doe breake the walles
                  Doe loſe their courſe they had within the ſhore,
                  And daily rotting ſtinke within their ſtalles,
                  For fault of mouing which they found before:
                  Euen ſo the ſtate that ouer high is bore,
                  Doth loſe the life of peoples loue it had,
                  And rots it ſelfe vntill it fall to bad.
               
               
                  For while I was but Earle, ech man was glad
                  To ſay and doe the beſt by me they might:
                  And Fortune euer ſince I was a lad,
                  Did ſmile vpon me with a chearefull ſight,
                  For when my King had doubed me a Knight
                  And ſent me forth to ſerue at warre in France,
                  My luckly ſpeed mine honour did enhance.
               
               
                  Where, to omit the many feates I wrought
                  Vnder others guide, I do remember one,
                  Which with my ſouldiers valiantly was fought,
                  None other Captaine ſaue my ſelfe alone,
                  I meane not now th' apprinze of Pucell Ione
                  In which attempt my trauaile was not ſmall,
                  Though Burgoyne Duke had then the praiſe of all.
               
               
                  The ſiege of Awmarie is the feat I praiſe:
                  A ſtrong built Towne, with caſtels, walles, and vaults,
                  With men and weapon armd at all aſſaies:
                  To which I gaue nigh fiue times fiue aſſaults,
                  Till at the laſt they yeelded it for naughts.
                  Yet Lord Ramburs moſt like a valiant Knight,
                  Defended it as long as ere he might.
               
               
                  But what preuailed it theſe townes to winne,
                  Which ſhortly after muſt be loſt againe?
                  Whereby I ſee there is more glory in
                  The keeping things, then is in their attaine:
                  To get and keepe not, is but loſſe and paine.
                  Therfore ought mē prouide to ſaue their winnings
                  In all attempts, elſe loſe they their beginnings.
               
               
                  
                  Becauſe we could not keepe the townes we won,
                  For they were more then we might eaſily weeld,
                  One yeare vndid what we in ten had done:
                  Enuie at home, treaſon abroad, did yeeld
                  King Charles his Realme of France, made barren field:
                  For bloodie warres had waſted all encreaſe,
                  Which caus'd the Pope help need to ſue for peace.
               
               
                  So that in Touraine at the towne of Tours
                  Duke Charles and other for their Prince appered,
                  So did Lord Roſſe and I then Earle, for ours:
                  And when we ſhewed wherein each other dered,
                  We ſought out meanes all quarels to haue clered,
                  Wherein the Lords of Germanie, of Spaine,
                  Of Hungarie, and Denmarke, tooke great paine.
               
               
                  But ſith we could no finall peace induce,
                  For neither would the others couenants heare,
                  For eighteene months we did conclude a truce:
                  And while as friends we lay together there,
                  Becauſe my warrant did me therein beare,
                  To make a perfit peace and through accord,
                  I ſought a mariage for my ſoueraigne Lord.
               
               
                  And for the French Kings daughters were too ſmall,
                  I fancied moſt Dame Margaret his niece,
                  A louely Ladie beautifull and tall,
                  Faire ſpoken, pleaſant, and a Princely piece,
                  In wit and learning matchleſſe hence to Greece,
                  Duke Rayners heire of Aniow, King by ſtile
                  Of Naples, Ieruſalem, and Sicil Ile.
               
               
                  But ere I could the grant of her attaine,
                  All that our King had of her fathers lands,
                  As Maunts the towne, the countie whole of Maine,
                  And moſt of Aniow duchie in our hands,
                  I did releaſe him by aſſured bands.
                  And as for do wire with her none I ſought,
                  I thought no peace could be too deerely bought.
               
               
                  
                  And when this mariage throwly was agreed
                  Although my King was glad of ſuch a make,
                  His vncle Humfrey hated it indeed,
                  Becauſe thereby his precontract he brake,
                  Made with the heire of the Earle of Arminacke,
                  A noble maid with ſtore of goods endowed,
                  Which more then this with loſſe the Duke allowed.
               
               
                  But loue and beautie in the King ſo wrought,
                  That neither gaine or promiſe he regarded,
                  But ſet his vncles counſell ſtill at nought:
                  And for my paines I highly was awarded.
                  Thus vertue ſtarues, but luſtfood muſt be larded.
                  For I made Marqueſſe went to France againe,
                  And brought this bride vnto my Soueraigne.
               
               
                  At home becauſe Duke Humfrey aye repined,
                  Calling their match aduoutrie (as it was)
                  The Queene did moue me, erſt thereto enclined,
                  To helpe to bring him to his Requiem maſſe,
                  Which ſith it could for no crime come to paſſe,
                  His life and doings were ſo right and clere,
                  Through priuy murder we brought him to his bere.
               
               
                  Thus righteouſneſſe brought Humfrey to rebuke,
                  Becauſe he would no wickedneſſe allow,
                  But for my doings I was made a Duke.
                  So Fortune can both bend and ſmooth her brow
                  On whom ſhe liſt, not paſſing why or how.
                  O Lord how high, how ſoone ſhe did me raiſe,
                  How faſt ſhe fill'd me both with prayes and praiſe!
               
               
                  The Lords and Commons both of like aſſent,
                  Beſought my ſoueraigne kneeling on their knees,
                  For to record my deeds in the Parlament,
                  As deeds deſeruing euerlaſting fees.
                  In which attempt they did no labour leeſe,
                  For they ſet not my praiſe ſo faſt in flame,
                  As he was readie to reward the ſame.
               
               
                  
                  But note the end: my deeds ſo worthie deemed
                  Of King, of Lords, and Commons all together,
                  Were ſhortly after treaſons falſe eſteemed,
                  And all men curſt Queene Margets comming lither:
                  For Charles the French King in his feats not lither,
                  When we had rendred Rayner, Maunts, and Maine,
                  Found meane to win all Normandie againe.
               
               
                  This made the people curſe the mariage,
                  Eſteeming it the cauſe of euery loſſe:
                  Wherefore at me with open mouth they rage,
                  Affirming me t'haue brought the Realme to moſſe:
                  When King and Queene ſaw things thus go acroſſe,
                  To quiet all a Parlament they called,
                  And cauſed me in priſon to be thralled.
               
               
                  And ſhortly after brought me forth abrode,
                  Which made the Commons more then double wood:
                  And ſome with weapons would haue laid on lode,
                  If their grand Captaine Blewberd in his mood
                  Had not in time with wiſdome been withſtood:
                  But though that he and more were executed,
                  The people ſtill their worſt againſt me bruted.
               
               
                  And ſo applied the Parliament with billes,
                  Of hainous wrongs and open traiterous crimes,
                  That King and Queene were forſt againſt their willes,
                  From place to place t'adiourne it diuers times.
                  For Princes power is like the ſandie ſlimes,
                  Which muſt perforce giue place vnto the waue,
                  Or ſue the windie ſourges when they raue.
               
               
                  Their life was not more deare to them then I,
                  Which made them ſearch all ſhifts to ſaue me ſtill,
                  But aye my foes ſuch faults did on me trie,
                  That to preſerue me from a worſer ill,
                  The King was faine full ſore againſt his will,
                  For fiue yeares ſpace to ſend me in exile,
                  In hope to haue reſtor'd me in a while.
               
               
                  
                  But marke how vengeance waiteth vpon vice,
                  To ſhun this ſtorme, in ſayling towards France,
                  A Pirats Barke, that was of little price,
                  Encountred me vpon the feas by chance,
                  Whoſe Captaine there tooke me as in a trance,
                  Let paſſe my ſhips, with all their frait and load,
                  And led me backe againe to Douer road.
               
               
                  Where vnto me recounting all my faults,
                  As murthering of Duke Humfrey in his bed,
                  And how I had brought all the Realme to naughts,
                  Cauſing the King vnlawfully to wed,
                  There was no grace but I muſt loſe my head.
                  Wherefore he made me ſhriue me in his bote,
                  And on the brinke my necke in two he ſmote.
               
               
                  This was mine end: which was by reaſon due
                  To me, and ſuch as others deaths procure.
                  Therefore be bold to write, for it is true,
                  That whoſo doth ſuch practiſe put in vre,
                  Of due reward at laſt ſhall be moſt ſure,
                  For God is iuſt, whoſe ſtroke delayed long,
                  Doth light at laſt with paine more ſharpe and ſtrong.
               
               W. Baldwine.
            
            
               HOW IACK CADE NAMING HIMSELFE MORTIMER, TRAYTEROVSLY rebelling againſt his King, in Iune, Anno 1450. was for his treaſons and cruell doings worthilie puniſhed.
               
               
                  
                     SHall I it Fortune call, or my froward folly,
                  That rais'd me vp and laid me downe below?
                  Or was it courage that made me ſo iolly,
                  Which of the ſtarres and bodies greement grow?
                  What ere it were this one point ſure I know,
                  Which ſhall be meete for euery man to marke:
                  Our luſt and willes our euils chiefely warke.
               
               
                  
                  It may be well that Planets doe encline,
                  And our complexions moue our mindes to ill,
                  But ſuch is reaſon, that they bring to fine
                  No worke vnayded of our luſt and will:
                  For heauen and earth are ſubiect both to skill.
                  The will of God rul'th all it is ſo ſtrong,
                  Man may by skill guide things that to him long.
               
               
                  Though luſt be ſtout, and will enclin'd to nought,
                  This forſt by mixture, that by heauens courſe,
                  Yet through the grace God hath in reaſon rought
                  And giuen man, no luſt nor will to courſe,
                  But may be ſtaied or ſwaged of the ſourſe,
                  So that it ſhall in nothing force the minde
                  To worke our woe, or leaue the proper kind.
               
               
                  But though this grace be giuen to ſome man
                  To rule the will, and keepe the mind aloft,
                  Yet few there be'mongſt men that vſe it can,
                  Theſe worldly pleaſures tickle vs ſo oft:
                  The ſpirit weake, and will ſtrong, fleſh is ſoft,
                  And yeeldes it ſelfe to pleaſure that it loueth,
                  And hales the mind to that it moſt reproueth.
               
               
                  Now if this hap whereby we yeeld our mind
                  To luſt and will, be Fortune as we name her,
                  Then is ſhe iuſtly called falſe and blind,
                  And no reproch can be too much to blame her:
                  Yet is the ſhame our owne when ſo we ſhame her,
                  For ſure this hap if it be rightly knowne,
                  Comes of our ſelues, and ſo the blame our owne.
               
               
                  For whoſo liueth in the ſchoole of skill,
                  And medleth not with any worlds affaires,
                  Forſaketh pomps and honors, that doe ſpill
                  The minds recourſe to Graces quiet ſtaires,
                  His ſtate no Fortune by no meane appaires:
                  For Fortune is the only foe of thoſe
                  Which to the world their wretched willes diſpoſe.
               
               
                  
                  Among which fooles (marke Baldwine) I am one,
                  That would not ſtay my ſelfe in mine eſtate:
                  I thought to rule but to obay to none,
                  And therefore fell I with my King at bate.
                  And to the end I might him better mate,
                  
                     Iohn Mortimer I cauſ'd my ſelfe be called,
                  Whoſe kingly bloud the Henries nigh had thrall'd.
               
               
                  This ſhift I vs'd the people to perſwade
                  To leaue their Prince, on my ſide more to ſticke,
                  Whereas indeed my fathers name was Cade,
                  
                  Whoſe noble ſtocke was neuer worth a ſticke,
                  But touching wit I was both ripe and quicke,
                  Had ſtrength of limmes large ſtature, comely face,
                  Which made men weene my linage were not baſe.
               
               
                  And ſeeing ſtoutnes ſtucke by men in Kent,
                  Whoſe valiant hearts refuſe none enterpriſe,
                  With falſe perſwaſions ſtraight to them I went,
                  And ſaid they ſuffered too great iniuries:
                  By meane whereof I cauſed them to riſe,
                  And battaile-wiſe to come to Blacke Heath plaine,
                  And thence their griefes vnto the King complaine.
               
               
                  Who being deafe (as men ſay) on that eare,
                  For we deſired releaſe of ſubſidies,
                  Refuſed roughly our requeſts to heare,
                  And came againſt vs as his enemies:
                  But we to ſtay him ſought out ſubtilties,
                  Remou'd our Campe, and backe to Senock went,
                  After whom the Staffords with their power were ſent.
               
               
                  See here how Fortune ſetting vs a flote,
                  Brought to our nets a portion of our pray.
                  For why, the Staffords with their army hote,
                  Aſſailed vs at Senocke where we lay:
                  From whence aliue they parted not away.
                  Which when the Kings retinue vnderſtood,
                  They all affirm'd my quarell to be good.
               
               
                  
                  Which caus'd the King and Queene whom all did hate,
                  To raiſe their campe, and ſuddenly depart:
                  And that they might the peoples grudge abate,
                  T'impriſon ſome full ſore againſt their hart.
                  Lord Saye was one, whom I made after ſmart,
                  For when the Staffords and their hoſt was ſlaine,
                  To Black-heath field I marched backe againe.
               
               
                  And where the King would nothing heare before,
                  Now was he glad to ſend to know my mind:
                  And I thereby enflamed much the more,
                  Refuſ'd his grants, ſo folly made me blind,
                  For this he flew and left Lord Scales behind,
                  To helpe the Towne and ſtrenghten London Tower,
                  Towards which I marched forward with my power:
               
               
                  And found there all things at mine owne deſire:
                  I entred London, did there what I liſt.
                  The Treaſurer, Lord Saye, I did conſpire
                  To haue condemned: whereof when I miſt,
                  (For he by law my malice did reſiſt)
                  By force I tooke him in Guildhall from th' heape,
                  And headed him before the croſſe in Cheape.
               
               
                  His ſonne in law Iames Cromer Shrief of Kent
                  I caught at Mile-end where as then he lay,
                  Beheaded him and on a pole I ſent
                  His head to London where his fathers lay.
                  With theſe two heads I made a prety play,
                  For pight on poles I bare them through the ſtreet,
                  And for my ſport made ech kiſſe other ſweet.
               
               
                  Then brake I priſons, let forth whom I wold,
                  And vs'd the City as it had been mine:
                  Tooke from the Merchants money, ware and gold
                  From ſome by force, from other ſome by fine.
                  This at the length did cauſe them to repine,
                  So that Lord Scales conſenting with the Maire,
                  For bad vs to their City to repaire.
               
               
                  
                  For all this while mine hoſt in Southwarke lay,
                  Who when they knew our paſſage was denied,
                  Came boldly to the bridge and made a fray,
                  For in we would, the townesmen vs defied:
                  But when with ſtrokes we had the matter tried,
                  We wan the bridge and ſet much part on fire,
                  This done to Southwarke backe we did retire.
               
               
                  The morow after came the Chancellour,
                  With generall pardon for my men, halfe gone,
                  Which heard and read, the reſt within an houre,
                  Shranke all away each man to ſhift for one.
                  And when I ſaw they left me poſt alone,
                  I did diſguiſe me like a Knight of the poſt,
                  And into Suſſex, rode all hope was loſt.
               
               
                  And there I lurked till that curſed coyne,
                  That reſtleſſe begle ſought and found me out,
                  For ſtraight the King by promiſe did enioyne
                  A thouſand marke to whomſoeuer mought
                  Apprend my corps, which made them ſeeke about:
                  Among the which one Alexander Iden
                  
                  Found out the hole, wherein the Foxe was hidden.
               
               
                  But ere I fell, I put him to his trumps,
                  For yeeld I would not while my hands would hold,
                  But hope of money made him ſtir his ſtumps,
                  And to aſſault me valiantly and bold.
                  Two houres and more our combat was not cold,
                  Till at the laſt he lent me ſuch a ſtroke,
                  That downe I fell and neuer after ſpoke.
               
               
                  Then was my carcaſe caried like a hog,
                  To Southwarke borow where it lay a night,
                  The next day drawne to Newgate like a dog,
                  All men reioycing at the rufull ſight:
                  Then were on poles my perboil'd quarters pight,
                  And ſet aloft for vermine to deuour,
                  Meete graue for rebels that reſiſt the power.
               
               
                  
                  Full little know we wretches what we do,
                  When we preſume our Princes to reſiſt.
                  We warre with God, againſt his glorie to,
                  That placeth in his office whom he liſt:
                  Therefore was neuer traytour yet but miſt
                  The marke he ſhot, and came to ſhamefull end,
                  Nor neuer ſhall till God be forſt to bend.
               
               
                  God hath ordain'd the power, all Princes be
                  His Lieutenants or deputies in Realmes,
                  Againſt their foes therefore fighteth he,
                  And as his enmies driues them to extreames,
                  Their wiſe deuices proue but doltiſh dreames.
                  No ſubiect ought for any kind of cauſe
                  To force the Prince, but yeeld him to the lawes.
               
               
                  Wherefore O Baldwine warne men follow reaſon,
                  Subdue their willes, and be not Fortunes ſlaues,
                  A ſhamefull end doth euer follow treaſon,
                  There is no truſt in rebels, raſcall knaues,
                  In Fortune leſſe, which worketh as the waues:
                  From whoſe aſſaults who liſteth to ſtand free
                  Muſt follow skill, and ſo contented bee.
               
               W. Baldwine.
            
            
               THE TRAGEDIE OF EDMVND DVKE OF SOMMERSET, SLAINE IN THE FIRST battaile at Saint Albanes, the 23. day of May, in the 32. yeare of Henrie the ſixt, Anno Dom. 1454.
               
                  
                     SOme I ſuppoſe are borne vnfortunate,
                  Elſe good endeuours could not ill ſucceed,
                  What ſhall I call it? ill fortune or fate,
                  That ſome mens attempts haue neuer good ſpeed,
                  Their trauell thankleſſe, all bootleſſe their heed,
                  Where other vnlike in working or skill,
                  Out wreſtle the world, and weald it at will.
               
               
                  
                  Of the firſt number I count my ſelfe one,
                  To all miſhap I weene predeſtinate,
                  Beleeue me Baldwine there be few or none,
                  To whom Fortune was euer more ingrate.
                  Make thou therefore my life a caueate,
                  That whoſe with force will worke againſt kind,
                  Saileth (as who ſaith) againſt the ſtreame and winde.
               
               
                  For I of Sommerſet Duke Edmund hight,
                  Extract by deſcent from Lancaſter line,
                  Were it by follie, or Fortunes deſpite,
                  Or by ill aſpect of ſome crooked ſigne,
                  Of mine attempts could neuer ſee good fine:
                  What ſo I began did ſeldome well end:
                  God from ſuch Fortune all good men defend.
               
               
                  Where I thought to ſaue, moſt part I did ſpill,
                  For good hap with me was alway at warre.
                  The linage of Yorke whom I bare ſo ill,
                  By my ſpite became bright as the morning ſtar.
                  Thus ſome whiles men make when faine they would mar,
                  The more ye lop trees, the greater they grow,
                  The more ye ſtop ſtreames, the higher they flow.
               
               
                  Maugre my ſpite, his ſame grew the more,
                  And mine, as the Moone in the wane, waxt leſſe:
                  For hauing the place which he had before,
                  Gouernour of France, needs I muſt confeſſe,
                  That loſt was Normandie without redreſſe,
                  Yet wrought I alwaies that wit might contriue,
                  But what doth it boote with the ſtreame to ſtriue?
               
               
                  Borne was I neither to warre ne to peace,
                  For Mars was maligne to all my whole trade:
                  My birth I beleeue was in Ioues decreaſe,
                  When Cancer in his courſe being retrograde,
                  Declined from Sol to Saturnus ſhade,
                  Where aſpects were good, oppoſites did marre,
                  So grew mine vnhap both in peace and warre.
               
               
                  
                  A ſtrange natiuitie in calculation,
                  As all my liues courſe did after well declare,
                  Whereof in briefe to make relation,
                  That other by me may learne to beware,
                  Ouerlight credence was cauſe of my care,
                  And want of foreſight in giuing aſſent
                  To condemne Humfrey that Duke innocent.
               
               
                  
                     Humfrey I meane that was the Protectour,
                  Duke of Gloceſter of the royall blood,
                  So long as he was Englands directour,
                  King Henries title to the Crowne was good.
                  This Prince as a piller moſt ſtedfaſtly ſtood,
                  Or like a prop ſet vnder a vine,
                  In ſtate to vphold all Lancaſters line.
               
               
                  O heedleſſe truſt, vnware of harme to come,
                  O malice headlong ſwift to ſerue fond will,
                  Did euer madneſſe man ſo much benome
                  Of prudent forecaſt, reaſon, wit, and skill,
                  As me blind Bayard conſenting to ſpill
                  The blood of my coſin, my refuge and ſtay,
                  To my deſtruction making open way?
               
               
                  So long as the Duke bare the ſtroke and ſway,
                  So long no Rebels quarels durſt begin:
                  But when the poſt was pulled once away,
                  Which ſtood to vphold the King and his kin,
                  Yorke and his banders proudly preaſed in
                  To challenge the Crowne by title of right,
                  Beginning with law and ending with might.
               
               
                  Abroad went bruits in countrey and towne
                  That Yorke of England was the heire true,
                  And how Henrie had vſurped the Crowne
                  Againſt all right, which all the Realme might rue.
                  The people then embracing titles new,
                  Irkeſome of preſent and longing for change,
                  Aſſented ſoone becauſe they loue to range.
               
               
                  
                  True is the text which wee in ſcripture read,
                  
                     Va terra illi, cuius rex eſt puer,
                  
                  Woe to that land whereof a child is head,
                  Whether child or childiſh, the caſe is one ſure:
                  Where Kings bee yong, we dayly ſee in vre,
                  The people awleſſe, by weakenes of their head,
                  Leade their liues lawleſſe, hauing none to dread.
               
               
                  And no leſſe true is this text againe,
                  
                     Beata terra cuius rex eſt nobilis,
                  
                  Bleſt is the land where a ſtout King doth raine,
                  Where in good peace ech man poſſeſſeth his,
                  Where ill men feare to fault or do amiſſe,
                  Where a ſtout Prince is preſt, with ſword in hand,
                  At home and abroad his enemies to withſtand.
               
               
                  In caſe King Henry had beene ſuch a one,
                  Hardy and ſtout as his fathers afore,
                  Long mought he haue ſate in the royall throne,
                  Without any feare of common vprore.
                  But dayly his weakeneſſe ſhewed more and more,
                  Which boldneſſe gaue to the aduerſary band,
                  To ſpoile him at laſt both of life and land.
               
               
                  His humble heart was nothing vnknowen,
                  To the gallants of Yorke and their retinue:
                  A ground lying low is ſoone ouerflowen,
                  And ſhored houſes cannot long continue:
                  Ioints cannot knit where as is no ſinew.
                  And ſo a Prince, not dread as well as loued,
                  Is from his place by practiſe ſoone remoued.
               
               
                  Well mought I ſee, had I not wanted braine,
                  The worke begun to vndermine the ſtate,
                  When the chiefe linke was looſed from the chaine,
                  And that ſome durſt vpon bloud royall grate.
                  How tickle a hold had I of mine eſtate?
                  When the chiefe poſt lay flat vpon the flore,
                  Mought not I thinke my ſtaffe then next the dore?
               
               
                  
                  So mought I alſo dame Margaret the Queene,
                  By meane of whom this miſchiefe firſt began,
                  Did ſhe (trow ye) her ſelfe not ouer weene
                  Death to procure to that moſt worthy man?
                  Which ſhe and hers afterward mought well ban,
                  On whom did hang (as I before haue ſaid)
                  Her husbands life, his honour and his ayd.
               
               
                  For whilſt he liued which was our ſtable ſtay,
                  
                     Yorke and his impes were kept as vnder yoke,
                  But when the Piller remoued was away,
                  Then burſt out flame, that late before was ſmoke,
                  The traytour couert then caſt off his cloke,
                  And from his den came forth in open light,
                  With titles blind which he ſet forth for right.
               
               
                  But this to bring about, him firſt behoued
                  The King and his kin aſunder for to ſet:
                  Who being perforce or practiſe remoued,
                  Then had they avoided the principall let,
                  Which kept the ſought pray ſo long from the net:
                  The next point after, was, themſelues to place
                  In rule aboue the reſt, next vnto his Grace.
               
               
                  Therefore was I firſt whom they put out of place,
                  No cauſe pretending but the common-weale,
                  The Crowne of England was the very caſe,
                  Why to the Commons they burned ſo in zeale.
                  My faults were clokes their practiſe to conceale,
                  In counſaile hearing conſider the intent,
                  For in pretence of truth treaſon oft is ment.
               
               
                  So their pretence was only to remoue
                  Counſaile corrupt from place about the King.
                  But O ye Princes, you it doth behoue
                  This caſe to conſtrue as no fained thing,
                  That neuer traytour did ſubdue his King,
                  But for his plat, ere he could ſurder wade,
                  Againſt his friends the quarell firſt hee made.
               
               
                  
                  And if by hap he could ſo bring about,
                  Them to ſubdue at his owne wiſh and will,
                  Then would hee wax ſo arrogant and ſtout,
                  That no reaſon his outrage might fulfill,
                  But to proceed vpon his purpoſe ſtill
                  Til King and counſaile brought were in one caſe:
                  Such is their folly to rebels to giue place.
               
               
                  So for the fiſh caſting forth a net,
                  The next point was in driuing out the plat,
                  Commons to cauſe in rage to fume and fret,
                  And to rebell, I cannot tell for what,
                  Requiring redreſſe of this and of that:
                  Who if they ſpeed, the ſtander at receit
                  Graſp will the pray, for which he doth await.
               
               
                  Then by ſurmiſe of ſome thing pretended,
                  Such to diſplace as they may well ſuſpect,
                  Like to withſtand their miſchiefe intended,
                  And in their roomes their banders to elect,
                  The aduerſe party proudly to reiect,
                  And then with reports the ſimple to abuſe,
                  And when theſe helps faile, open force to vſe.
               
               
                  So this Dukes traines were couert and not ſeene,
                  Which ment no leſſe, that he moſt pretended,
                  Like to a Serpent couert vnder greene,
                  To the weale publique ſeemed wholly bended:
                  Zealous hee was, and would haue all things mended,
                  But by that mendment nothing els he ment
                  But to be King, to that marke was his bent.
               
               
                  For had he beene plaine, as he ment indeed,
                  
                     Henry to depoſe from the royall place,
                  His haſte had been waſte, and much worſe his ſpeed,
                  The King then ſtanding in his peoples grace.
                  This Duke therefore ſet forth a goodly face,
                  As one that ment no quarell for the Crowne,
                  Such as bare rule he only would put downe.
               
               
                  
                  But all for nought ſo long as I bare ſtroke
                  Serued theſe drifts, and proued all vaine:
                  The beſt help then was people to prouoke,
                  To make commotion and vprores amaine:
                  Which to appeaſe the King himſelfe was faine,
                  From Blacke Heath in Kent to ſend me to the Tower,
                  Such was the force of rebels in that hower.
               
               
                  The troublous ſtorme yet therewith was not ceaſed,
                  For Yorke was bent his purpoſe to purſue,
                  Who ſeing how ſpeedily I was releaſed,
                  And ill ſucceſſe of ſufferance to enſue:
                  Then like Iudas vnto his Lord vntrue,
                  Eſteeming time loſt any longer to defarre,
                  By Warwickes ayd proclaimed open warre.
               
               
                  At S. Albanes towne both our hoſtes did meete,
                  Which to try a field was no equall place,
                  Forſt we were to fight in euery lane and ſtreete,
                  No feare of foes could make me ſhun the place:
                  There I and Warwicke fronted face to face,
                  At an Inne dore, the Caſtle was the ſigne,
                  Where with a ſword was cut my fatall line.
               
               
                  Oft was I warned to come in Caſtle none,
                  Hauing no miſtruſt of any common ſigne,
                  I did imagine a Caſtle built with ſtone,
                  For of no Inne I could the ſame diuine:
                  In Prophets skill my wit was neuer fine,
                  A foole is he that ſuch vaine dreames doth dred,
                  And more foole he that will by them be led.
               
               
                  My life I loſt in that vnluckly place,
                  With many Lords that leaned to my part:
                  The ſtout Earle Percy had no better grace,
                  
                     Clyfford couragious could not ſhun the dart,
                  
                     Buckingham heir was at this mortall mart,
                  
                     Babthorp th' Atturney with his skill in law,
                  In pleading heere appeared very raw.
               
               
                  
                  King Henrie thus diſarmed of his bands,
                  His friends and followers wanting aſſiſtence,
                  Was made a prey vnto his enemies hands,
                  Depriued of power and Princely reuerence,
                  And as a pupill void of all experience,
                  Innocent plaine, and ſimplie witted,
                  Was as a Lambe vnto the Wolfe committed.
               
               
                  A Parliament then was called with ſpeed,
                  A Parliament? nay, a plaine conſpiracie,
                  When againſt right it was decreed,
                  That after the death of the ſixt Henrie.
                  
                  Yorke ſhould ſucceed vnto the regaltie,
                  And in his life the charge and protection,
                  Of King and Realme at the Dukes direction.
               
               
                  And thus was Yorke declared Protectour,
                  Protectour ſaid I? nay, Proditor plaine:
                  A rancke rebell the Princes directour,
                  A vaſſall to leade his Lord and Soueraigne.
                  What honeſt heart would not conceiue diſdaine
                  To ſee the foot ſurmount aboue the head?
                  A monſter is in ſpite of nature bred.
               
               
                  Some happily heere will moue a farther doubt,
                  And as for Yorkes part alledge an elder right:
                  O braineleſſe heads that ſo run in and out.
                  When length of time a ſtate hath firmely pight,
                  And good accord hath put all ſtrife to flight,
                  Were it not better ſuch titles ſtill to ſleepe,
                  Then all a Realme about the triall weepe?
               
               
                  From the female came Yorke, and all his ſeed,
                  And we of Lancaster from the heire male,
                  Of whom three Kings in order did ſucceed,
                  By iuſt deſcent: this is no fained tale.
                  Who would haue thought that any ſtorme or gale
                  Our ſhip could ſhake, hauing ſuch anker hold?
                  None I thinke ſure, vnleſſe that God ſo would.
               
               
                  
                  After this hurle the King was faine to flee
                  Northward in poſt, for ſuccour and releefe!
                  O bleſſed God how ſtrange it was to ſee,
                  A rightfull Prince purſued as a theefe:
                  To thee O England, what can be more repreefe?
                  Then to purſue thy Prince with armed hand,
                  What greater ſhame may be to any land?
               
               
                  Traytours did triumph, true men lay in duſt,
                  Reuing and robbing roifled euery where,
                  VVill ſtood for skill, and law obeyed luſt,
                  Might trode downe right, of King there was no feare,
                  The title was tried only by ſhield and ſpeare.
                  All which vnhaps that they were not foreſeene,
                  
                     Suffolke was in fault, who ruled King and Queene.
               
               
                  Some heere perhaps, do looke I ſhould accuſe
                  My ſelfe of ſleight, or ſubtiltie vniuſt,
                  VVherein I ſhould my Princes eares abuſe
                  Againſt the Duke, to bring him in miſtruſt:
                  Some part whereof, though needs confeſſe I muſt,
                  My fault only conſiſted in conſent,
                  Leaning to my foes, whereof I do repent.
               
               
                  If I at firſt when brands began to ſmoke,
                  The ſparkes to quench by any way had ſought,
                  Neuer had England felt this mortall ſtroke,
                  VVhich now too late lamenting helpeth nought.
                  Two points of wit, too dearely haue I bought,
                  The firſt, that better is timely to foreſee,
                  Then after ouer late a counſellour to bee.
               
               
                  The ſecond is, not eaſily to aſſent
                  To aduice giuen againſt thy faithfull friend,
                  But of the ſpeaker ponder the intent,
                  The meaning full, the point, and finall end.
                  A Saint in ſhew, in proofe is found a Feend,
                  The ſubtill man the ſimple to abuſe,
                  Much pleaſant ſpeech and eloquence doth vſe.
               
               
                  
                  And ſo was I abus'd and other moe
                  By Suffolkes ſleights, who ſought to pleaſe the Queene,
                  Forecaſting not the miſerie and woe
                  VVhich therefore came, and ſoone was after ſeene:
                  VVith gloſing tongue he made vs fooles to weene,
                  That Humfrey did to Englands Crowne aſpire,
                  VVhich to preuent, his death they did conſpire.
               
               
                  VVhat ſhould I more of mine vnhaps declare,
                  VVhereof my death at laſt hath made an end?
                  Not I alone was void of all this care,
                  Some beſides me there were that did offend.
                  None I accuſe, nor yet my ſelfe defend,
                  Faults I know I had, as none liues without,
                  My chiefe fault was folly, I put thee out of doubt.
               
               
                  Folly was the chiefe, the naughtie time was next,
                  VVhich made my Fortune ſubiect to the chiefe:
                  If England then with ſtrife had not been vext,
                  Glorie might haue growen whereas enſued griefe.
                  Yet one thing is my comfort and reliefe,
                  Conſtant I was in my Princes quarrell
                  To die or liue, and ſpared for no parrell.
               
               
                  VVhat though Fortune enuious was my foe?
                  A noble heart ought not the ſooner yeeld,
                  Nor ſhrinke abacke for any weale or woe,
                  But for his Prince lie bleeding in the feeld:
                  If priuie ſpight at any time me helde,
                  The price is paid: and grieuous is my guerdon,
                  As for the reſt me God (I truſt) will pardon.
               
               G. Ferrers.
            
            
               
               HOW RICHARD PLANTAGENET DVKE OF YORKE, was ſlaine through his ouer raſh boldnes, and his ſonne the Earle of Rutland, for his lacke of valiance, An. Dom. 1460.
               
                  
                     TRuſt not in chance, in whom was neuer truſt,
                  Of fooliſh men that haue no better grace,
                  All reſt, renowne and deeds lie in the duſt,
                  Of all the ſort that ſue her ſlipper trace.
                  What meaneſt thou Baldwine for to hide thy face?
                  Thou needeſt not feare although I miſſe my head,
                  Nor yet to mourne for this my ſonne is dead.
               
               
                  The cauſe why thus I lead him in my hand,
                  His skin with blood and teares ſo ſore beſtain'd,
                  Is that thou maiſt the better vnderſtand,
                  How hardly Fortune hath for vs ordain'd,
                  In whom her loue and hate be whole contain'd.
                  For I am Richard Prince Plantagenet,
                  
                  The Duke of Yorke in royall race beget.
               
               
                  From Lionel the third begotten ſonne
                  Of Kingly Edward by deſcent I came
                  From Philip hight his heire we firſt begun
                  The crowne as due to vs by right to clame:
                  And in the end we did obtaine the ſame,
                  She was ſole heire by due deſcent of line,
                  Whereby her rights and titles all were mine.
               
               
                  But marke me now, I pray thee Baldwine marke,
                  And ſee how force oft ouerbeareth right:
                  Way how vſurpers tyrannouſly warke,
                  To keepe by murther that they get by might,
                  And note what troublous dangers do alight
                  On ſuch as ſeeke to repoſſeſſe their owne,
                  And how through rigour, right is ouerthrowne.
               
               
                  
                  The Duke of Herford, Henrie Bolenbroke,
                  
                  Of whom Duke Mowbray told thee now of late,
                  When void of cauſe he had King Richard toke:
                  He murdered him, vſurped his eſtate,
                  Without all right or title, ſauing hate
                  Of others rule, or loue to rule alone:
                  Theſe two excepted, title had he none.
               
               
                  The Realme and Crowne was Edmund Mortimers,
                  
                  Whoſe father Roger was King Richards heire:
                  Which cauſed Henrie and the Lancasters
                  
                  To ſeeke all ſhift our houſholds to appaire,
                  For ſure he was to ſit beſide the chaire,
                  Were we of power to claime our lawfull right,
                  Againſt vs therefore he did all he might.
               
               
                  His curſed ſonne enſued his cruell path,
                  And kept my guiltleſſe coſin ſtrait in durance:
                  For whom my father hard entreated hath.
                  But liuing hopeleſſe of his liues aſſurance,
                  He thought it beſt by politike procurance,
                  To ſlay the King, and ſo reſtore his friend:
                  Which brought himſelfe to an infamous end.
               
               
                  For when King Henrie of that name the fift,
                  Had tane my father in his conſpiracie,
                  He from Sir Edmund all the blame to ſhift,
                  Was faine to ſay the French King Charles his alley
                  Had hired him this trayterous act to trie,
                  For which condemned ſhortly he was ſlaine,
                  In helping right this was my fathers gaine.
               
               
                  Thus when the linage of the Mortimers
                  
                  Was made away by his vſurping line,
                  Some hang'd, ſome ſlaine, ſome pined priſoners,
                  Becauſe the Crowne by right of law was mine,
                  They gan as faſt againſt me to repine,
                  In feare alwaies leſt I ſhould ſtir ſome ſtrife,
                  For guiltie hearts haue neuer quiet life,
               
               
                  
                  Yet at the laſt in Henries dayes the ſixt,
                  I was reſtored to my fathers lands,
                  Made Duke of Yorke: where through my mind I fixt
                  To get the Crowne and Kingdome in my hands,
                  For aide wherein I knit aſſured bands
                  With Neuils ſtocke, whoſe daughter was my make,
                  Who for no woe would euer me forſake.
               
               
                  O Lord what hap had I through mariage,
                  Foure goodly boyes in youth my wife ſhe bore,
                  Right valiant men and prudent for their age,
                  Such brethren ſhee had and nephues in ſtore
                  As none had erſt, nor any ſhall haue more:
                  The Earle of Salisbury, and his ſonne of Warwicke,
                  Were matchleſſe men from Barbary to Barwicke.
               
               
                  Through helpe of whom and Fortunes louely looke,
                  I vndertooke to claime my lawfull right,
                  And to abaſh ſuch as againſt me tooke,
                  I raiſed power at all points preſt to fight:
                  Of whom the chiefe that chiefly bare me ſpight,
                  Was Sommerſet the Duke, whom to annoy
                  I alway ſought, through ſpite, ſpite to deſtroy.
               
               
                  And maugre him, ſo choice lo was my chance,
                  Yea though the Queene that all rul'd tooke his part,
                  I twice bare rule in Normandy and France,
                  And laſt Lieutenant in Ireland, where my hart
                  Found remedy for euery kinde of ſmart.
                  For through the loue my doings there did breed,
                  I had their helpe at all times in my need.
               
               
                  This ſpitefull Duke, his ſilly King and Queene,
                  With armed hoſts I thrice met in the field,
                  The firſt vnſought through treaty made betweene,
                  The ſecond ioind, wherein the King did yeeld,
                  The Duke was ſlaine, the Queene enforſt to ſhield
                  Her ſelfe by flight. The third the Queene did fight,
                  Where I was ſlaine being ouer matcht by might.
               
               
                  
                  Before this laſt were other battailes three:
                  The firſt the Earle of Salisbury led alone,
                  And fought on Bloreheath, and got victory:
                  In the next I with kinſfolke euery one.
                  But ſeeing our ſouldiers ſtale vnto our fone,
                  We warely brake our company on a night,
                  Diſſolu'd our hoſt, and tooke our ſelues to flight.
               
               
                  This Boy and I in Ireland did vs ſaue,
                  Mine eldeſt ſonne with Warwicke and his father
                  To Calais got, whence by the read I gaue
                  They came againe to London, and did gather
                  An other hoſt, whereof I ſpake no rather:
                  And met our foes, flewe many a Lord and Knight,
                  And took the King and draue the Queene to flight.
               
               
                  This done I came to England all in haſte,
                  To make a claime vnto the Realme and Crowne:
                  And in the houſe while parliament did laſt,
                  I in the Kings ſeate boldly ſate me downe,
                  And claimed it, whereat the Lords did frowne,
                  But what for that? I did ſo well proceed,
                  That all at laſt confeſt it mine indeed.
               
               
                  But ſith the King had raigned now ſo long,
                  They would he ſhould continue till he died,
                  And to the end that then none did me wrong,
                  In ech place heire apparant they me cried.
                  But ſith the Queene and others this denied,
                  I ſped me towards the North where then ſhee lay,
                  In minde by force to cauſe her to obay.
               
               
                  Whereof ſhe warnd prepard a mighty powre,
                  And ere that mine were altogether ready,
                  Came ſwift to Sandale and beſieged my bowre:
                  Where like a beaſt I was ſo raſh and heady,
                  That out I would, there could be no remedy,
                  With ſcant fiue thouſand ſouldiers, to aſſaile
                  Foure times ſo many, encampt to moſt auaile.
               
               
                  
                  And ſo was ſlaine at firſt: and while my child
                  Scarce twelue yeare old, ſought ſecretly to part,
                  That cruell Clifford, Lord, nay Lorell wilde
                  While th' infant wept, and prayed him rue his ſmart,
                  Knowing what he was, with dagger cloue his heart:
                  This done, he came to th' campe where I lay dead,
                  Deſpoil'd my corps and cut away my head.
               
               
                  Which with a painted paper Crowne thereon,
                  He for a preſent ſent vnto the Queene:
                  And ſhe for ſpite commanded it anon
                  To Yorke faſt by: where, that it might be ſeene,
                  They placed it where other traytours beene.
                  This miſchiefe Fortune did me after death.
                  Such was my life, and ſuch my loſſe ofbreath.
               
               
                  Wherefore ſee Baldwine that thou ſet it forth,
                  To th' end the fraud of Fortune may be knowen,
                  That eke all Princes well may weigh the worth
                  Of things, for which the ſeeds of warre be ſowen:
                  No ſtate ſo ſure but ſoone is ouerthrowen.
                  No worldly good can counterpoize the priſe,
                  Of halfe the paines that may thereof ariſe.
               
               
                  Better it were to loſe a piece of right,
                  Then limbes and life in ſtriuing for the ſame:
                  It is not force of friendſhip nor of might,
                  But God that cauſeth things to fro or frame,
                  Not wit but lucke doth wield the winners game.
                  Wherefore if we our follies would refraine,
                  Time would redreſſe all wrongs we void of paine.
               
               
                  Wherefore warne Princes not to wade in war
                  For any cauſe except the Realmes defence:
                  Their troublous titles are vnworthie far
                  The blood, the life, the ſpoile of innocence:
                  Of friends, of foes behold my foule expence,
                  And neuer the neere: beſt therefore tarie time,
                  So right ſhall raigne, and quiet calme each crime.
               
            
            
               
               HOW THE LORD CLIFFORD FOR HIS STRANGE and abominable crueltie, came to as ſtrange and ſudden a death, Anno, 1461.
               
                  
                     OPen confeſſion asketh open penance,
                  And wiſdome would a man his ſhame to hide:
                  Yet ſith forgiuenes commeth through repentance,
                  I thinke it beſt that men their crimes aſcride,
                  For nought ſo ſecret but at length is ſpide:
                  For couer fire, and it will neuer linne
                  Till it breake forth, in like caſe ſhame and ſinne.
               
               
                  As for my ſelfe my faults be out ſo plaine,
                  And publiſhed abroad in euery place,
                  That though I would I cannot hide a graine.
                  All care is bootleſſe in a cureleſſe caſe,
                  To learne by others griefe ſome haue the grace:
                  And therefore Baldwine write my wretched fall,
                  The briefe whereof I briefely vtter ſhall.
               
               
                  I am the ſame that ſlue Duke Richards child,
                  The louely babe that begged life with teares:
                  Whereby mine honor foully I defil'd.
                  Poore ſilly Lambes the Lion neuer teares:
                  The feeble mouſe may lie among the beares:
                  But wrath of man his rancour to requite,
                  Forgets all reaſon, ruth, and vertue quite.
               
               
                  I meane by rancour the parentall wreake
                  Surnam'd a vertue (as the vicious ſay)
                  But little know the wicked what they ſpeake,
                  In boldning vs our enmies kin to ſlay.
                  To puniſh ſin is good, it is no nay.
                  They wreake not ſinne, but merit wreake for ſinne,
                  That wreake the fathers fault vpon his kinne.
               
               
                  
                  Becauſe my father Lord Iohn Clyfford died,
                  Slaine at Saint Albanes, in his Princes aide,
                  Againſt the Duke my heart for malice fried,
                  So that I could from wrecke no way be ſtayed,
                  But to auenge my fathers death, aſſay'd
                  All meanes I might the Duke of Yorke t'annoy,
                  And all his kin and friends for to deſtroy.
               
               
                  This made me with my bloodie dagger wound
                  His guiltleſſe ſonne, that neuer 'gainſt me ſtor'd:
                  His fathers bodie lying dead on ground
                  To pierce with ſpeare, eke with my cruell ſword
                  To part his necke, and with his head to bord
                  Enueſted with a royall paper crowne,
                  From place to place to beare it vp and downe.
               
               
                  But crueltie can neuer ſcape the ſcourge
                  Of ſhame, of horror, or of ſudden death.
                  Repentance ſelfe that other ſinnes may purge
                  Doth flie from this, ſo ſore the ſoule it ſlayeth.
                  Deſpaire diſſolues the tyrants bitter breath:
                  For ſudden vengeance ſuddenly alights
                  On cruell deeds, to quite their cruell ſpights.
               
               
                  This find I true, for as I lay in ſtale
                  To fight with this Duke Richards eldeſt ſon,
                  I was deſtroy'd not far from Dintingdale,
                  For as I would my gorget haue vndone
                  T'euent the heat that had me nigh vndone,
                  An headleſſe arrow ſtrake me through the throte,
                  Where through my ſoule forſooke his filthie cote.
               
               
                  Was this a chance? no ſure, Gods iuſt award,
                  Wherein due iuſtice plainly doth appeare:
                  An headleſſe arrow paid me my reward,
                  For heading Richard lying on his beare,
                  And as I would his child in no wiſe heare,
                  So ſudden death bereft my tongue the power
                  To aske for pardon at my dying hower.
               
               
                  
                  Wherefore, good Baldwine, warne the bloodie ſort,
                  To leaue their wrath, their rigour to refraine:
                  Tell cruell Iudges horror is the port
                  Through which they ſaile to ſhame and ſudden paine:
                  Hell halleth tyrants downe to death amaine.
                  Was neuer yet nor ſhall be cruell deed
                  Left vnrewarded with as cruell meed.
               
            
            
               THE INFAMOVS END OF THE LORD TIPTOFT EARLE OF WORceſter, for cruelly executing his Princes butcherly commandements. Anno Dom. 1470.
               
                  
                     THe glorious man is not ſo loth to lurke,
                  As the infamous glad to lie vnknowen:
                  Which makes me Baldwine, diſallow thy worke,
                  Where Princes faults ſo openly be blowen.
                  I ſpeake not this alonly for mine owne
                  Which were my Princes (if that they were any)
                  But for my Peeres in number very many.
               
               
                  Or might report vprightly vſe her tongue,
                  It would leſſe grieue vs to augment the matter.
                  But ſure I am thou ſhalt be forſt among,
                  To wrench the truth the liuing for to flatter:
                  And other whiles in points vnknowen to ſmatter.
                  For time nere was, nor nere I thinke ſhall bee
                  That truth vnſhent ſhould ſpeake in all things free.
               
               
                  This doth appeare (I dare ſay) by my ſtorie,
                  Which diuers writers diuerſly declare:
                  But ſtorie writers ought for neither glorie,
                  Feare, nor fauour, truth of things to ſpare.
                  But ſtill it fares as alway it did fare,
                  Affections, feare, or doubts that daily brue,
                  Do cauſe that ſtories neuer can be true.
               
               
                  
                  Vnfruitfull Fabian followed the face
                  Of time and deedes, but let the cauſes ſlip:
                  Which Hall hath added, but with double grace,
                  For feare I thinke leſt trouble might him trip:
                  For this or that (ſaith he) he felt the whip.
                  Thus ſtory writers leaue the cauſes out,
                  Or ſo rehearſe them as they were in dout.
               
               
                  But ſeing cauſes are the chiefeſt things
                  That ſhould be noted of the ſtory writers,
                  That men may learne what ends all cauſes brings,
                  They be vnworthy name of Chroniclers
                  That leaue them cleane out of their regiſters,
                  Or doubtfully report them: for the fruite
                  Of reading ſtories ſtandeth in the ſuite.
               
               
                  And therefore Baldwine either ſpeake vpright
                  Of our affaires, or touch them not at all:
                  As for my ſelfe I way all things ſo light,
                  That nought I paſſe how men report my fall.
                  The truth whereof yet plainly ſhew I ſhall,
                  That thou maiſt write and others thereby reed,
                  What things I did whereof they ſhould take heed.
               
               
                  Thou heardſt of Tiptofts Earles of Worceſter,
                  I am that Lord that liu'd in Edwards daies
                  The fourth, and was his friend and counſailour,
                  And butcher too, as common rumor ſaies.
                  But peoples voice is neither ſhame nor praiſe:
                  For whom they would aliue deuour today,
                  Tomorow dead they'ill worſhip what they may.
               
               
                  But though the peoples verdit go by chance,
                  Yet was there cauſe to call me as they did:
                  For I enforſt by meane of gouernance,
                  Did execute what ere my King did bid,
                  From blame herein my ſelfe I cannot rid:
                  But ſie vpon the wretched ſtate that muſt
                  Defame it ſelfe to ſerue the Princes luſt.
               
               
                  
                  The chiefeſt crime wherewith men doe me charge,
                  Is death of th' Earle of Deſmunds noble ſonnes,
                  Of which the Kings charge doth me cleere diſcharge,
                  By ſtrait commandement and iniunctions:
                  Th' effect whereof ſo rigorouſly runnes,
                  That or I muſt procure to ſee them dead,
                  Or for contempt as guiltie loſe my head.
               
               
                  What would mine foemen doe in ſuch a caſe,
                  Obay the King or proper death procure?
                  They may well ſay their fancy for a face,
                  But life is ſweet, and loue hard to recure.
                  They would haue done as I did, I am ſure:
                  For ſeldom will a wealthy man at eaſe
                  For others cauſe his Prince in ought diſpleaſe.
               
               
                  How much leſſe I, which was Lieutenant than
                  In th' Iriſh Iſle, preferred by the King:
                  But who for loue or dread of any man
                  Conſents t'accompliſh any wicked thing,
                  Although chiefe fault thereof from other ſpring,
                  Shall not eſcape Gods vengeance for his deed,
                  Who ſcuſeth none that dare do ill for dreed.
               
               
                  This in my King and me may well appeere,
                  Which for our faults did not eſcape the ſcourge:
                  For when we thought our ſtate moſt ſure and clere,
                  The wind of Warwicke blew vp ſuch a ſourge,
                  As from the Realme and Crowne the King did pourge,
                  And me both from mine office, friends, and wife,
                  From good report, from honeſt death and life.
               
               
                  For th' Earle of Warwicke through a cancard grudge
                  Which to King Edward cauſeleſſe he did beare,
                  Out of his Realme by force did make him trudge,
                  And ſet King Henry againe vpon his chaire.
                  And then all ſuch as Edwards louers were
                  As traytours tane, were grieuouſly oppreſt,
                  But chiefly I, becauſe I lou'd him beſt.
               
               
                  
                  And, for my goods and liuings were not ſmall,
                  The gapers for them bare the world in hand
                  For ten yeares ſpace, that I was cauſe of all
                  The executions done within the land.
                  For this did ſuch as did not vnderſtand
                  Mine enmies drift, thinke all reports were true:
                  And ſo did hate me worſe then any Iew.
               
               
                  For ſeldome ſhall a ruler loſe his life,
                  Before falſe rumours openly be ſpread:
                  Whereby this prouerbe is as true as rife,
                  That rulers rumours hunt about a head,
                  Frowne Fortune once all good report is fled:
                  For preſent ſhew doth make the many blind,
                  And ſuch as ſee dare not diſcloſe their mind.
               
               
                  Through this was I King Edwards butcher named,
                  And bare the ſhame of all his cruell deeds:
                  I cleare me not, I worthily was blamed,
                  Though force was ſuch I muſt obey him needs.
                  With higheſt rulers ſeldome well it ſpeeds,
                  For they be euer neereſt to the nip,
                  And fault who ſhall, for all feele they the whip.
               
               
                  For when I was by Parliament attainted,
                  King Edwards euils all were counted mine.
                  No truth auailed, ſo lies were faſt and painted,
                  Which made the people at my life repine,
                  Crying Crucifige, kill that butchers line:
                  That when I ſhould haue gone to Blockham feaſt,
                  I could not paſſe, ſo ſore they on me preaſt.
               
               
                  And had not been the officers ſo ſtrong,
                  I thinke they would haue eaten me aliue,
                  Howbeit hardly haled from the throng,
                  I was in Fleet faſt ſhrouded by the Shriue.
                  Thus one daies life their maliee did me giue:
                  Which when they knew, for ſpite the next day after
                  They kept them calme, ſo ſuffered I the ſlaughter.
               
               
                  
                  Now tell me Baldwine, what fault doſt thou find
                  In me, that iuſtly ſhould ſuch death deſerue?
                  None ſure, except deſire of honor blind,
                  Which made me ſeeke in offices to ſerue:
                  What mind ſo good that honors make not ſwerue?
                  So maiſt thou fee it only was my ſtate
                  That caus'd my death, and brought me ſo in hate.
               
               
                  Warne therefore all men wiſely to beware,
                  What offices they enterpriſe to beare:
                  The higheſt alway moſt maligned are,
                  Of peoples grudge, and Princes hate in feare.
                  For Princes faults his faultors all men teare.
                  Which to auoid, let none ſuch office take,
                  Saue he that can for right his Prince forſake.
               
            
            
               HOW SIR RICHARD NEVILL EARLE OF WARWICKE, AND HIS BROTHER IOHN Lord Marquiſe Montacute, through their too much boldnes were ſlaine at Barnet, the 14. of Aprill, Anno 1471.
               
                  
                     AMong the heauie heape of happie Knights
                  VVhom Fortune ſtal'd vpon her ſtayleſſe ſtage,
                  Oft hoiſt on high, oft pight in wretched plights,
                  Behold me, Baldwine, A perſe of my age,
                  Lord Richard Neuill, Earle by mariage
                  Of VVarwicke Duchie, of Sarum by deſcent,
                  Which erſt my father through his mariage hent.
               
               
                  VVould'ſt thou behold falſe Fortune in her kind?
                  Note well my ſelfe, ſo ſhalt thou ſee her naked:
                  Full faire before, but too too foule behind,
                  Moſt drowſie ſtill when moſt ſhe ſeemes awaked:
                  My fame and ſhame her ſhift full oft hath ſhaked,
                  By enterchange alow and vp aloft,
                  The Lyſard like that changeth hue full oft.
               
               
                  
                  For while the Duke of Yorke in life remaind
                  Mine vncle deare, I was his happy hand:
                  In all attempts my purpoſe I attaind,
                  Though King and Queene and moſt Lords of the land
                  With all their power did often me withſtand:
                  For God gaue Fortune, and my good behauiour
                  Did from their Prince ſteale me the peoples fauour.
               
               
                  So that through me in fields right manly fought,
                  By force mine vncle tooke King Henry twice:
                  As for my coſin Edward I ſo wrought,
                  When both our fires were ſlaine through raſh aduice,
                  That he atchieu'd his fathers enterpriſe:
                  For into Scotland King and Queene we chaſed,
                  By meane whereof the Kingdome he embraced.
               
               
                  Which after he had held in quiet peace,
                  (For ſhortly after was King Henry take,
                  And put in hold) his power to encreaſe,
                  I went to France and match him with a make,
                  The French Kinges daughter, whom hee did forſake:
                  For while with paine I brought this ſute to paſſe,
                  He to a widow raſhly wedded was.
               
               
                  This made the French King ſhrewdly to miſtruſt,
                  That all my treaties had but ill pretence,
                  And when I ſaw my King ſo bent to luſt,
                  That with his faith he paſt not to diſpence,
                  Which is a Princes honours chiefe defence:
                  I could not reſt till I had found a meane
                  To mend his miſſe, or els to marre him cleane.
               
               
                  I me allied with his brother George,
                  
                  Incenſing him his brother to maligne,
                  Through many a tale I did againſt him forge:
                  So that through power that we from Calais bring
                  And found at home, we fraied ſo the King,
                  That he did flie to Freeſelandward amaine,
                  Whereby King Henry had the Crowne againe.
               
               
                  
                  Then put we th' Earle of Worceſter to death,
                  King Edwards friend, a man loe foule defamed:
                  And in the while came Edward into breath.
                  For with the Duke of Burgoine ſo he framed,
                  That with the power that he to him had named,
                  Vnlooked for he came to England ſtreight,
                  And got to Yorke, and tooke the towne by ſleight.
               
               
                  And after through the ſufferance of my brother,
                  Which like a beaſt occaſion foulely loſt,
                  He came to London ſafe with many other,
                  And tooke the towne to good King Henries coſt:
                  Who was through him from poſt to piller toſt,
                  Till th' Earle of Oxford, I and other more,
                  Aſſembled power his freedome to reſtore.
               
               
                  Whereof King Edward warned came with ſpeed,
                  And camped with his hoſt in Barnet towne,
                  Where we right fierce encountred him indeed
                  On Eaſter day right earely on the downe:
                  There many a man was ſlaine and ſtricken downe
                  On either ſide, and neither part did gaine,
                  Till that I and my brother both were ſlaine.
               
               
                  For we to heart our ouermatched men,
                  Forſooke our ſteeds, and in the thickeſt throng
                  Ran preaſing forth on foot, and fought ſo then
                  That downe we draue them were they nere ſo ſtrong:
                  But we ere lucke had laſted very long
                  With force and number were ſo foulely cloyed,
                  And reſcue fail'd, that quite we were deſtroyed.
               
               
                  Now tell me, Baldwine, haſt thou heard or read
                  Of any man that did as I haue done?
                  That in his time ſo many armies led,
                  And victorie at euery voyage won?
                  Haſt thou ere heard of ſubiect vnder ſun,
                  That plac'd and bac'd his Soueraignes ſo oft
                  By enterchange, now low, and then aloft?
               
               
                  
                  Perchance thou think'ſt my doings were not ſuch
                  As I and other do affirme they were:
                  And in thy mind I ſee thou muſeſt much
                  What meanes I vs'd, that ſhould me ſo prefer:
                  Wherein becauſe I will thou ſhalt not erre,
                  The truth of all I will at large recite,
                  The ſhort is this: I was no Hypocrite.
               
               
                  I neuer did nor ſaid ſaue what I ment,
                  The commonweale was ſtill my chiefeſt care:
                  To priuate gaine or good was I nere bent,
                  I neuer paſt vpon delicious fare.
                  Of needfull food my boord was neuer bare,
                  No creditour did curſe me day by day,
                  I vſed plainneſſe, euer pitch and pay.
               
               
                  I heard poore ſouldiers and poore workemen whine
                  Becauſe their duties were not truly pai'd:
                  Againe I ſaw how people did repine
                  At thoſe through whom their payment was delai'd:
                  And proofe did oft aſſure (as Scripture ſaid)
                  That God doth wreake the wretched peoples greeues,
                  I ſaw the polles cut off from polling theeues.
               
               
                  This made me alway iuſtly for to deale,
                  Which when the people plainly vnderſtood,
                  Becauſe they ſaw me mind the Commonweale,
                  They ſtill endeuoured how to do me good,
                  Readie to ſpend their ſubſtance, life, and blood,
                  In any cauſe whereto I did them moue:
                  For ſure they were it was for their behoue.
               
               
                  And ſo it was. For when the Realme decayed
                  By ſuch as good King Henrie ſore abuſed,
                  To mend the ſtate I gaue his enemies aide:
                  But when King Edward ſinfull prankes ſtill vſed,
                  And would not mend, I likewiſe him refuſed,
                  And holpe King Henrie, better of the twaine,
                  And in his quarell (iuſt I thinke) was ſlaine.
               
               
                  
                  And therefore Baldwine teach by proofe of mee,
                  That ſuch as couet peoples loue to get,
                  Muſt ſee their works and words in all agree,
                  Liue liberally and keepe them out of det,
                  On Commonwealth let all their care be ſet:
                  For vpright dealing, debts paid, poore ſuſtained,
                  Is meane whereby all hearts are throwly gained.
               
            
            
               HOW KING HENRIE THE SIXT, A VERTVOVS PRINCE, WAS, AFter many other miſeries, cruelly murdered in the Tower of London the 22. of May, Anno, 1471.
               
                  
                     IF euer wofull wight had cauſe to rue his ſtate,
                  Or by his ruefull plight to moue men mone his fate,
                  My piteous plaint may preaſe my miſhap to rehearſe,
                  Wherof the leaſt moſt lightly heard, the hardeſt hart may pierce.
               
               
                  What heart ſo hard can heare of innocence oppreſt
                  By fraud in worldly goods, but melteth in the breſt?
                  When guiltleſſe men be ſpoil'd, impriſoned for their owne,
                  Who waileth not their wretched caſe to whom ye caſe is knowen?
               
               
                  The Lion lickes the ſores of ſilly wounded ſheepe,
                  The dead mans corps may cauſe the Crocodile to weepe,
                  The waues that waſte the rockes refreſh the rotten reeds,
                  Such ruth the wracke of innocence in cruell creatures breeds.
               
               
                  What heart is then ſo hard, but will for pitie bleed,
                  To heare ſo cruell lucke ſo cleare a life ſucceed?
                  To ſee a ſilly ſoule with woe and ſorrow ſounſt,
                  A King depriu'd, in priſon pent, to death with daggers dounſt.
               
               
                  Would God the day of birth had brought me to my bere,
                  Then had I neuer felt the change of Fortunes chere:
                  Would God the graue had gript me in her greedie wombe,
                  When crowne in cradle made me King with oile of holy thombe.
               
               
                  
                  Would God the rufull tombe had been my royall throne,
                  So ſhould no Kingly charge haue made me make my mone:
                  O that my ſoule had flowen to heauen with the ioy,
                  When one ſort cried, God ſaue the King, another, 
                        Ʋiue le Roy.
                  
               
               
                  So had I not been waſht in waues of worldly wo,
                  My minde to quiet bent, had not been toſſed ſo:
                  My frends had been aliue: my ſubiects not oppreſt:
                  But death or cruell deſtiny denied me this reſt.
               
               
                  Alas what ſhould we count the cauſe of wretches cares,
                  The ſtarres do ſtirre them vp, Aſtronomy declares:
                  Our humors ſaith the leach, the double true diuines
                  To'th will of God, or ill of man, the doubtfull cauſe aſſignes.
               
               
                  Such doltiſh heads as dreame that all things driue by haps,
                  Count lacke of former care for cauſe of after claps,
                  Attributing to man a power fro God bereft,
                  Abuſing vs, and robbing him through their moſt wicked theft.
               
               
                  But God doth guide the world, and euery hap by skill,
                  Our wit and willing power are poized by his will:
                  What wit moſt wiſely wards, & will moſt deadly vrkes
                  Though all our power would preſſe it down, doth daſh our wareſt workes.
               
               
                  Then deſtiny, our ſinne, Gods will or elſe his wreake
                  Doe worke our wretched woes, for humours be too weake,
                  Except we take them ſo as they prouoke to ſinne,
                  For through our luſt by humours fed all vicious deeds beginne.
               
               
                  So ſinne and they be one, both working like effect,
                  And cauſe the wrath of God to wreake the ſoule infect,
                  Thus wrath and wreake diuine, mans ſinnes and humours ill
                  Concurre in one, though in a ſort, ech doth a courſe fulfill.
               
               
                  If likewiſe ſuch as ſay the welkin Fortune warkes,
                  Take Fortune for our fate and Starres thereof the markes,
                  Then deſtiny with fate and Gods will all be one:
                  But if they meane it otherwiſe, skath cauſers skies be none.
               
               
                  
                  Thus of our heauy haps chiefe cauſes be but twaine,
                  Whereon the reſt depend, and vnder put remaine:
                  The chiefe the will diuine, cald deſtiny and fate,
                  The other ſinne through humours holpe, which God doth highly hate.
               
               
                  The firſt appointeth paine for good mens exerciſe,
                  The ſecond doth deſerue due puniſhment for vice:
                  This witneſſeth the wrath, and that the loue of God,
                  The good for loue, the bad for ſinne God beateth with his rod.
               
               
                  Although my ſundry ſinnes doe place me with the worſt,
                  My haps yet cauſe me hope to be among the firſt:
                  The eye that ſearcheth all and ſeeth euery thought,
                  Is Iudge how ſore I hated ſinne, and after vertue ſought.
               
               
                  The ſolace of my ſoule my chiefeſt pleaſure was,
                  Of worldly pomp, of fame, or game I did not paſſe:
                  My Kingdomes nor my Crowne I priſed not a crum:
                  In Heauen were my riches heapt, to which I ſought to come.
               
               
                  Yet were my ſorowes ſuch as neuer man had like,
                  So diuers ſtormes at once, ſo often did me ſtrike:
                  But why, God knowes, not I, except it were for this,
                  To ſhew by paterne of a Prince, how brittle honour is.
               
               
                  Our kingdomes are but cares, our ſtate deuoid of ſtay,
                  Our riches ready ſnares, to haſten our decay:
                  Our pleaſures priuy pricks our vices to prouoke,
                  Our pompe a pumpe, our fame a flame, our power a ſmouldring ſmoke.
               
               
                  I ſpeake not but by proofe, and that may many rue,
                  My life doth cry it out, my death doth try it true:
                  Whereof I will in briefe rehearſe the heauy hap,
                  That Baldwine in his woefull warpe, my wretchedneſſe may wrap.
               
               
                  In Windſore borne I was, and bare my fathers name,
                  Who wonne by warre all France to his eternall fame,
                  And left to me the crowne, to be receiu'd in peace
                  Through mariage made with Charles his heire vpon his lifes deceaſe.
               
               
                  
                  Which ſhortly did enſue, yet died my father furſt,
                  And both the Realmes were mine ere I a yeare were nurſt:
                  Which as they fell too ſoone, ſo faded they as faſt.
                  For Charles and Edward got them both or forty yeares were paſt.
               
               
                  This Charles was eldeſt ſonne of Charles my father in law,
                  To whom as heire of France, the Frenchmen did them draw,
                  But Edward was the heire of Richard Duke of Yorke,
                  The heire of Roger Mortimer, ſlaine by the kerne of Korke.
               
               
                  Before I came to age Charles had recouered France,
                  And kild my men of warre, ſo happy was his chance:
                  And through a mad contract I made with Raynerds daughter
                  I gaue and loſt all Normandy, the cauſe of many a ſlaughter.
               
               
                  Firſt of mine vncle Humfrey, abhorring ſore this act,
                  Becauſe I thereby brake a better precontract:
                  Then of the flattering Duke that firſt the mariage made,
                  The iuſt reward of ſuch as dare their Princes ill perſwade.
               
               
                  And I poore ſilly wretch abode the brunt of all,
                  My mariage luſt ſo ſweet was mixt with bitter gall.
                  My wife was wiſe and good, had ſhe ben rightly ſought,
                  But our vnlawfull getting it, may make a good thing nought.
               
               
                  Wherefore warne men beware how they iuſt promiſe breake,
                  Leſt proofe of painfull plagues doe cauſe them waile the wreake,
                  Aduiſe well ere they grant, but what they grant performe:
                  For God will plague all doublenes although we feele no worme.
               
               
                  I falſly borne in hand, beleeued I did well,
                  But all things bee not true that learned men doe tell:
                  My clergie ſaid a Prince was to no promiſe bound,
                  Whoſe words to be no goſpell tho, I to my griefe haue found.
               
               
                  For after mariage ioind Queene Margaret and me,
                  For one miſhap afore, I dayly met with three:
                  Of Normandy and France Charles got away my Crowne,
                  The Duke of Yorke and other ſought at home to put me downe.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Bellona rang the bell at home and all abroad,
                  With whoſe miſhaps amaine fell Fortune did me load:
                  In France I loſt my forts, at home the foughten field,
                  My kinred ſlaine, my friends oppreſt, my ſelfe enforſt to yeeld.
               
               
                  Duke Richard tooke me twice, and forſt me to reſine
                  My Crowne and titles due vnto my fathers line:
                  And kept mee as a ward, did all things as him liſt,
                  Till that my wife through bloudy ſword had tane me from his fiſt.
               
               
                  But though we ſlew the Duke my ſorowes did not ſlake,
                  But like to Hydraes head ſtill more and more awake:
                  For Edward through the aid of Warwicke and his brother
                  From one field draue me to the Scots, and toke me in another.
               
               
                  Then went my friends to wrack, for Edward ware the Crowne,
                  For which for nine yeares ſpace his priſon held me downe:
                  Yet thence through Warwickes worke I was againe releaſt.
                  And Edward driuen fro the realme to ſeeke his friends by Eaſt.
               
               
                  But what preuaileth paine or prouidence of man
                  To helpe him to good hap, whom deſtiny doth ban?
                  Who moileth to remoue the rocke out of the mud,
                  Shall mire himſelfe, and hardly ſcape the ſwelling of the flud.
               
               
                  This all my friends haue found, and I haue felt it ſo,
                  Ordain'd to be the touch of wretchedneſſe and woe:
                  For ere I had a yeare poſſeſt my ſeat againe,
                  I loſt both it and liberty, my helpers all were ſlaine.
               
               
                  For Edward firſt by ſtelth and ſith by gathred ſtrength
                  Arriu'd, and got to Yorke and London at the length:
                  Tooke me and tied me vp, yet Warwicke was ſo ſtout,
                  He came with power to Barnet field, in hope to helpe me out,
               
               
                  And there alas was ſlaine, with many a worthy knight.
                  O Lord that euer ſuch luck ſhould hap in helping right:
                  Laſt came my wife and ſonne, that long lay in exile,
                  Defied the King, and fought a field, I may bewaile the while.
               
               
                  
                  For there mine only ſonne, not thirteene yeares of age,
                  Was tane, and murdred ſtraight by Edward in his rage:
                  And ſhortly I my ſelfe to ſtint all further ſtrife,
                  Stab'd with his brothers bloodie blade in priſon loſt my life.
               
               
                  Lo heere the heauie haps which hapned me by heape,
                  See heere the pleaſant fruits that many Princes reape,
                  The painfull plagues of thoſe that breake their lawfull bands,
                  Their meed which may and will not ſaue their friends from bloodie hands.
               
               
                  God grant my woful haps, too grieuous to rehearce,
                  May teach all States to know how deepely dangers pierce,
                  How fraile all honors are, how brittle worldly bliſſe,
                  That warned through my fearefull fate they feare to do amiſſe.
               
            
            
               HOW GEORGE PLANTAGENET THIRD SONNE OF THE DVKE OF Yorke, was by his brother King Edward wrongfully impriſoned, and by his brother Richard miſerably murdered, the 11. of Ianuarie, An. Dom. 1478.
               
                  
                     THe fowle is foule men ſay, that files the neſt.
                  Which makes me loth to ſpeak now, might I chuſe,
                  But ſeeing time vnburdened hath her breſt,
                  And fame blowne vp the blaſt of all abuſe,
                  My ſilence rather might my life accuſe
                  Then ſhroud our ſhame, though faine I would it ſo,
                  For truth will out, although the world ſay no.
               
               
                  And therefore Baldwine I do thee beſeech
                  To pauſe a while vpon my heauie plaint,
                  And vnneth though I vtter ſpeedie ſpeech,
                  No fault of wit nor folly makes me faint:
                  No headie drinkes haue giuen my tongue attaint
                  Through quaffing craft: Yet wine my wits confound,
                  Not that I dranke, but wherein I was drown'd.
               
               
                  
                  What Prince I am although I need not ſhew,
                  Becauſe my wine bewrayes me by the ſmell:
                  For neuer man was ſouſt in Bacchus dew
                  To death but I, through Fortunes rigour fell:
                  Yet that thou maiſt my ſtorie better tell,
                  I will declare as briefely as I may,
                  My wealth, my woe, and cauſers of decay.
               
               
                  The famous houſe ſurnam'd Plantagenet,
                  
                  Whereat Dame Fortune frowardly did frowne,
                  While Bolenbroke vniuſtly ſought to ſet
                  His Lord King Richard quite beſide the Crowne,
                  Though many a day it wanted due renowne,
                  God ſo prefer'd by prouidence and grace,
                  That lawfull heires did neuer faile the race.
               
               
                  For Lionel King Edwards eldeſt child,
                  Both Eame and heire to Richard iſſuleſſe,
                  Begot faire Philip hight, whom vndefil'd
                  The Earle of March eſpous'd, and God did bleſſe
                  With fruit aſſign'd the kingdome to poſſeſſe:
                  I meane Sir Roger Mortimer, whoſe heire
                  The Earle of Cambridge maried Anne the faire.
               
               
                  This Earle of Cambridge Richard clept by name,
                  Was ſonne to Edmund Langley Duke of Yorke:
                  Which Edmund was fift brother to the ſame
                  Duke Lionel, that all this line doth korke:
                  Of which two houſes ioyned in a forke,
                  My father Richard Prince Plantagenet
                  
                  True Duke of Yorke was lawfull heire beget.
               
               
                  Who tooke to wife as ye ſhall vnderſtand
                  A mayden of a noble houſe and old,
                  
                     Ralph Neuils daughter Earle of Weſtmerland,
                  Whoſe ſonne Earle Richard was, a Baron bold,
                  And had the right of Salisbury in hold,
                  Through mariage made with good Earle Thomas heire,
                  Whoſe earned praiſes neuer ſhall appaire.
               
               
                  
                  The Duke my father had by this his wife
                  Foure ſonnes, of whom the eldeſt Edward hight,
                  The ſecond Edmund, who did loſe his life,
                  At Wakefield ſlaine by Clyfford cruell Knight,
                  I George am third, of Clarence Duke by right:
                  The fourth borne to the miſchiefe of vs all,
                  Was Gloceſters Duke, whom men did Richard call.
               
               
                  VVhen as our fire in ſute of right was ſlaine,
                  (VVhoſe life and death himſelfe declared earſt)
                  My brother Edward plied his cauſe amaine,
                  And got the Crowne as Warwicke hath rehearſt:
                  The pride whereof ſo deepe his ſtomacke pearſt
                  That he forgot his friends, deſpis'd his kin,
                  Of oath or office paſſing not a pin.
               
               
                  VVhich made the Earle of Warwicke to maligne
                  My brothers ſtate, and to attempt a way
                  To bring from priſon Henrie ſillie King,
                  To helpe him to the kingdome if he may,
                  And knowing me to be the chiefeſt ſtay
                  My brother had, he did me vndermine
                  To cauſe me to his treaſons to encline.
               
               
                  VVhereto I was prepared long before,
                  My brother had been to me ſo vnkind:
                  For ſure no canker fretteth fleſh ſo ſore,
                  As vnkind dealing doth a louing mind.
                  Loues ſtrongeſt bands vnkindnes doth vnbind,
                  It moueth loue to malice, zeale to hate,
                  Chiefe friends to foes, and brethren to debate.
               
               
                  And though the Earle of Warwicke ſubtill fire
                  Perceiu'd I bare a grudge againſt my brother,
                  Yet toward his feate to ſet me more on fire,
                  He kindled vp one firebrand with another:
                  For knowing fancie was the forcing rother
                  VVhich ſtirreth youth to any kind of ſtrife,
                  He offered me his daughter to my wife.
               
               
                  
                  Where through and with his craftie filed tongue,
                  He ſtole my heart that erſt vnſteadie was:
                  For I was witleſſe, wanton, fond and yongue,
                  Whole bent to pleaſure, brittle as the glaſſe:
                  I cannot lie, In vino veritas.
                  
                  I did eſteeme the beautie of my bride
                  Aboue my ſelfe and all the world beſide.
               
               
                  Theſe fond affections ioynt with lacke of skill,
                  (Which trap the heart, and blind the eyes of youth,
                  And pricke the mind to practiſe any ill)
                  So tickled me, that void of kindly truth,
                  (Which if it want all wretchedneſſe enſueth)
                  I ſtinted not to perſecute my brother,
                  Till time he left his kingdome to another.
               
               
                  Thus carnall loue did quench the loue of kind,
                  Till luſt were loſt through fancie fully fed:
                  But when at length I came vnto my mind,
                  I ſaw how leaudly lightnes had me led,
                  To ſeeke with paine the perill of my head:
                  For had King Henrie once been ſetled ſure,
                  I was aſſur'd my daies could not endure.
               
               
                  And therefore though I bound my ſelfe with oath
                  To helpe King Henrie all that ere I might,
                  Yet at the treatie of my brethren both,
                  Which reaſon granted to require but right,
                  I left his part, whereby he periſht quite:
                  And reconcil'd me to my brethren twaine,
                  And ſo came Edward to the Crowne againe.
               
               
                  This made my fire in law to fret and fume,
                  To ſtampe and ſtare, and call me falſe forſworne,
                  And at the length with all his power preſume,
                  To helpe King Henrie vtterly forlorne.
                  Our friendly profers ſtill he tooke in ſcorne;
                  Refuſed peace, and came to Barnet field,
                  And there was kill'd becauſe he would not yeeld.
               
               
                  
                  His brother alſo there with him was ſlaine,
                  Whereby decayed the keyes of chiualrie:
                  For neuer liu'd the matches of them twaine,
                  In manhood, power, and martiall policie,
                  In vertuous thewes, and friendly conſtancie,
                  That would to God if it had been his will
                  They might haue turn'd to vs and liued ſtill.
               
               
                  But what ſhall be ſhall be: there is no choyce,
                  Things needs muſt driue as deſtiny decreeth,
                  For which we ought in all our haps reioyce,
                  Becauſe the eye eterne all things foreſeeth
                  Which to no ill at any time agreeth,
                  For il's too ill to vs, be good to it,
                  So far his skilles exceed our reach of wit.
               
               
                  The wounded man which muſt abide the ſmart
                  Of ſtitching vp, or ſearing of his ſore,
                  As thing too bad, reproues the Surgeons art
                  Which notwithſtanding doth his health reſtore:
                  The child likewiſe to ſcience plied ſore,
                  Counts knowledge ill, his teacher to be wood,
                  Yet Surgerie and ſciences be good.
               
               
                  But as the patients griefe and ſchollers paine,
                  Cauſe them deeme bad ſuch things as ſure be beſt,
                  So want of wiſdome cauſeth vs complaine
                  Of euery hap, whereby we ſeeme oppreſt:
                  The poore do pine for pelfe, the rich for reſt,
                  And when as loſſe or ſickeneſſe vs aſſaile
                  We curſe our fate, our fortune we bewaile.
               
               
                  Yet for our good, God worketh euery thing:
                  For through the death of theſe two noble Peeres
                  My brother liu'd and raign'd a quiet King,
                  Who had they liu'd perchance in courſe of yeares
                  Would haue deliuered Henrie from the breares,
                  Or holpe his ſonne t'enioy the carefull Crowne,
                  Whereby our line ſhould haue been quite put downe.
               
               
                  
                  A carefull Crowne it may be iuſtly named,
                  Not only for the cares thereto annext.
                  To ſee the ſubiect well and duly framed,
                  With which good care few Kings are greatly vext,
                  But for the dred wherwith they are perplext,
                  Of loſing Lordſhip, liberty, or life:
                  Which wofull wracks in kingdoms happen rife.
               
               
                  The which to ſhun while ſome too ſore haue ſought,
                  They haue not ſparde all perſons to ſuſpect:
                  And to deſtroy ſuch as they guilty thought,
                  Though no apparance proued them infect,
                  Take me for one of this wrong puniſht ſect,
                  Impriſond firſt, accuſed without cauſe,
                  And done to death, no proceſſe had by lawes.
               
               
                  Wherein I note how vengeance doth acquite
                  Like ill for ill, how vices vertue quell:
                  For as my mariage loue did me excite
                  Againſt the King my brother to rebell,
                  So loue to haue his children proſper well,
                  Prouoked him againſt both law and right,
                  To murder me, his brother and his knight:
               
               
                  For by his Queene two Pincelike ſonnes he had,
                  Borne to be puniſht for their parents ſinne:
                  Whoſe Fortunes calked made the father ſad,
                  Such wofull haps were found to be therin:
                  Which to auouch, writ in a rotten skin
                  A propheſie was found, which ſaid a G,
                  Of Edwards children ſhould deſtruction be.
               
               
                  Me to be G, becauſe my name was George
                  
                  My brother thought, and therefore did me hate,
                  But woe be to the wicked heads that forge
                  Such doubtfull dreames to breed vnkind debate.
                  For God, a Gleue, a Gibbet, Grate, or Gate,
                  A Gray, a Griffeth, or a Gregory,
                  As well as George are written with a G.
               
               
                  
                  Such doubtfull riddles are no propheſies.
                  For propheſies, in writing though obſcure,
                  Are plaine in ſenſe, the darke be very lies:
                  What God foreſheweth is euident and pure,
                  Truth is no Harold nor no Sophiſt ſure:
                  She noteth not mens names, their ſhields nor creaſts,
                  Though ſhe compare them vnto birds and beaſts.
               
               
                  But whom ſhe doth foreſhew ſhall raigne by force,
                  She tearmes a Wolfe, a Dragon, or a Beare:
                  A wilfull Prince, a raineleſſe raging horſe:
                  A bold, a Lion: a Coward much in feare,
                  A Hare or Hart: a craftie, pricked eare:
                  A leacherous, a Bull, a Goat, a Foale:
                  An vnderminer, a Moldwarpe, or a Mole.
               
               
                  By knowen beaſts thus truth doth plaine declare
                  VVhat men they be of whom ſhe ſpeakes before.
                  And whoſo can mens properties compare,
                  And marke what beaſt they do reſemble more,
                  Shall ſoone diſcerne who is the grieſly Bore.
                  For God by beaſts expreſſeth mens conditions,
                  And not their badges, Harolds ſuperſtitions.
               
               
                  And learned Merline whom God gaue the ſprite
                  To know and vtter Princes acts to come,
                  Like to the Iewiſh Prophets, did recite
                  In ſhade of beaſts their doings all and ſome,
                  Expreſſing plaine by maners of the dome,
                  That Kings and Lords ſuch properties ſhould haue
                  As haue the beaſts whoſe name he to them gaue.
               
               
                  Which while the fooliſh did not well conſider,
                  And ſeeing Princes gaue for difference
                  And knowledge of their iſſues mixt together,
                  All maner beaſts for badges of pretence,
                  There tooke thoſe badges to expreſſe the ſence
                  Of Merlines mind, and thoſe that gaue the ſame,
                  To be the Princes noted by their name.
               
               
                  
                  And hereof ſprang the falſe nam'd propheſies,
                  That go by letters, ciphers, armes or ſignes:
                  VVhich all be fooliſh, falſe, and craftie lies
                  Deuis'd by gheſſe, or guiles vntrue diuines:
                  For when they ſaw that ſome of many lines
                  Giue armes alike, they wiſt not which was he
                  VVhom Merline meant the noted beaſt to be.
               
               
                  For all the brood of Warwickes gaue the Beare,
                  The Buckinghams do likewiſe giue the Swan:
                  But which Beare-bearer ſhould the Lion teare
                  They were as wiſe as Gooſe the ferry man:
                  Yet in their skill they ſeaſed not to ſcan,
                  And to be deemed of the people wiſe,
                  Setforth their gloſes vpon propheſies.
               
               
                  And whom they doubted openly to name
                  They darkely tearm'd or by ſome letter ment,
                  For ſo they thought how ere the world did frame,
                  To keepe themſelues from ſhame or being ſhent.
                  For howſoeuer contrary it went,
                  They might expound their meaning otherwiſe,
                  As haps in things ſhould newly ſtill ariſe.
               
               
                  And thus there grew of a miſtaken truth,
                  An art ſo falſe as made the true ſuſpect:
                  Whereof hath come much miſchiefe, more the ruth
                  That errors ſhould our minds ſo much infect,
                  True Prophets haue oft foulely been reiect:
                  The falſe which breed both murder war and ſtrife
                  Beleeu'd, to loſſe of many a good mans life.
               
               
                  And therefore Baldwine teach men to diſcerne,
                  VVhich propheſies be falſe, and which be true:
                  And for a ground this leſſon let them learne,
                  That all be falſe which are deuiſed new.
                  The age of things are iudged by the hue.
                  All riddles made by letters, names or armes,
                  Are yong and falſe, far worſe then witches charmes.
               
               
                  
                  I know thou muſeſt at this lore of mine,
                  How I no ſtudient ſhould haue learned it:
                  And doſt impute it to the fume of wine
                  That ſtirres the tongue, and ſharpneth vp the wit.
                  But heark, a friend did teach me euery whit,
                  A man of mine, in all good knowledge rife,
                  For which he guiltleſſe loſt his learned life.
               
               
                  This man abode my ſeruant many a day,
                  And ſtill in ſtudy ſet his whole delight:
                  Which taught me more then I could beare away
                  Of euery arte: and by his ſearching ſight
                  Of things to come he would foreſhew as right
                  As I rehearſe the pageants that were paſt:
                  Such perfectnes God gaue him at the laſt.
               
               
                  He knew my brother Richard was the Bore,
                  Whoſe tusks ſhould teare my brothers boies and me,
                  And gaue me warning therof long before.
                  But wit nor warning can in no degree
                  Let things to hap, which are ordaind to bee.
                  Witneſſe the painted Lioneſſe, which ſlue
                  A Prince empriſoned, Lions to eſchewe.
               
               
                  He told me eke my yoke-fellow ſhould dy,
                  (Wherein would God he had been no diuine)
                  And ſhe being dead I ſhould woo earneſtly
                  A ſpouſe, wherat my brother would repine,
                  And find the means ſhe ſhould be none of mine.
                  For which ſuch malice ſhould among vs riſe,
                  As ſaue my death no treaty ſhould deciſe.
               
               
                  And as he ſaid, ſo all things came to paſſe:
                  For when King Henry and his ſonne were ſlaine,
                  And euery broile ſo throughly quenched was,
                  That then my brother quietly did raigne,
                  I, reconciled to his loue againe,
                  In proſperous health did lead a quiet life,
                  For fiue yeares ſpace with honours laden rife.
               
               
                  
                  And to augment the fulneſſe of my bliſſe,
                  Two louely children by my wife I had:
                  But froward hap whoſe maner euer is
                  In chiefeſt ioy to make the happie ſad,
                  Bemixt my ſweet with bitternes too bad:
                  For while I ſwam in ioyes on euery ſide,
                  My louing wife, my chiefeſt Iewel dide,
               
               
                  Whoſe lack when ſole I had bewail'd a yeare,
                  The Duke of Burgoines wife dame Margaret
                  
                  My louing ſiſter willing me to cheere,
                  To wed againe did kindly me entreate
                  And wiſh'd me matched with a maiden nete
                  A ſtep-daughter of hers, Duke Charles his heire,
                  A noble damſell, yong, diſcreete and faire.
               
               
                  To whoſe deſire becauſe I did incline,
                  The King my brother doubting my degree
                  Through Propheſies, againſt vs did repine:
                  And at no hand would to our willes agree.
                  For which ſuch rancour pierſt both him and mee,
                  That face to face we fell at flat defiance,
                  But were appeas'd by friends of our alliance:
               
               
                  Howbeit my mariage vtterly was daſht:
                  VVherein becauſe my ſeruant ſaid his mind,
                  A meane was ſought whereby he might be laſht,
                  And, for they could no crime againſt him find,
                  They forg'd a ſault the peoples eyes to blind,
                  And told he ſhould by ſorceries pretend
                  To bring the King vnto a ſpeedie end.
               
               
                  Of all which points he was as innocent
                  As is the babe that lacketh kindly breath:
                  And yet condemned by the Kings aſſent,
                  Moſt cruelly put to a ſhamefull death.
                  This fir'd my heart, as foulder doth the heath:
                  So that I could not but exclame and crie,
                  Againſt ſo great and open iniurie.
               
               
                  
                  For this I was commanded to the Tower,
                  The King my brother was ſo cruell harted:
                  And when my brother Richard ſaw the hower
                  Was come, for which his hart ſo ſore had ſmarted,
                  He thought it beſt take time before it parted.
                  For he endeuour'd to attaine the Crowne,
                  From which my life muſt needs haue held him downe.
               
               
                  For though the King within a while had died,
                  As needs he muſt, he ſurfaited ſo oft,
                  I muſt haue had his children in my guide,
                  So Richard ſhould beſide the Crowne haue coft:
                  This made him ply the while the wax was ſoft,
                  To finde a meane to bring me to an end,
                  For realmrape ſpareth neither kin nor frend.
               
               
                  And when he ſaw how reaſon can aſſwage
                  Through length of time my brother Edwards ire,
                  With forged tales he ſet him newe in rage,
                  Till at the laſt they did my death conſpire.
                  And though my truth ſore troubled their deſire,
                  For all the world did know mine innocence,
                  Yet they agreed to charge me with offence.
               
               
                  And couertly within the Tower they calde
                  A queſt, to giue ſuch verdit as they ſhould.
                  Who what with feare and what with fauour thrald,
                  Durſt not pronounce but as my brethren would.
                  And though my falſe accuſers neuer could
                  Proue ought they ſaid, I guiltleſſe was condemned:
                  Such verdits paſſe where iuſtice is contemned.
               
               
                  This feate atchieud yet could they not for ſhame
                  Cauſe me be kild by any common way,
                  But like a wolfe the tyrant Richard came,
                  (My brother, nay my butcher I may ſay)
                  Vnto the Tower when all men were away,
                  Saue ſuch as were prouided for the ſeate:
                  Who in this wiſe did ſtrangely me entreate.
               
               
                  
                  His purpoſe was with a prepared ſtring
                  To ſtrangle me: but I beſtird me ſo,
                  That by no force they could me therto bring,
                  Which cauſed him that purpoſe to forgo:
                  Howbeit they bound me whether I would or no,
                  And in a But of Malmeſey ſtanding by,
                  New chriſtned me becauſe I ſhould not cry.
               
               
                  Thus drownd I was, yet for no due deſert,
                  Except the zeale of Iuſtice be a crime:
                  Falſe prophecies bewitcht King Edwards hart,
                  My brother Richard to the Crowne would clime.
                  Note theſe three cauſes in thy rufull rime,
                  And boldly ſay they did procure my fall,
                  And death of deaths moſt ſtrange and hard of all.
               
               
                  And warne all Princes prophecies t'eſchue
                  That are too dark and doubtfull to be knowne:
                  What God hath ſaid, that cannot but enſue,
                  Though all the world would haue it ouerthrowne,
                  When men ſuppoſe by fetches of their owne
                  To fly their fate, they further on the ſame
                  Like quenching blaſts which oft reuiue the flame.
               
               
                  Will Princes therefore not to thinke by murder
                  They may auoid what prophecies behight,
                  But by their meanes their miſchiefes they may furder,
                  And cauſe Gods vengeance heauier to alight:
                  Woe worth the wretch that ſtriues with Gods foreſight.
                  They are not wiſe, but wickedly doe erre,
                  Which thinke ill deedes due deſtinies may barre.
               
               
                  For if we thinke that prophecies be true,
                  We muſt beleeue it cannot but betide,
                  Which God in them foreſheweth ſhall enſue:
                  For his decrees vnchanged doe abide.
                  Which to be true my brethren both haue tried,
                  Whoſe wicked workes warne Princes to deteſt,
                  That others harmes may keepe them better bleſt.
               
            
            
               
               HOW KING EDWARD THE FOVRTH THROVGH HIS SVRFETING and vntemperate life, ſuddenly died in the middeſt of his proſperitie, the ninth of Aprill, Anno 1483.
               
                  
                     
                        MIſeremini mei ye that be my friends,
                  This world hath form'd me downe to fall:
                  How may I endure when that euery thing ends?
                  What creature is borne to be eternall?
                  Now there is no more but pray for me all,
                  Thus ſay I Edward that late was your King,
                  And twentie two yeares ruled this Imperiall,
                  Some vnto pleaſure and ſome to no liking:
                  Mercie I aske of my miſdoing.
                  What auaileth it friends to be my foe?
                  Sith I cannot reſiſt, nor amend your complaining,
                  
                     Quia ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
                  
               
               
                  I ſleepe now in mould as it is naturall,
                  As earth vnto earth hath his reuerture:
                  What ordained God to be terreſtriall,
                  Without recourſe to the earth by nature?
                  Who to liue euer may himſelfe aſſure?
                  What is it to truſt to mutabilitie?
                  Sith that in this world nothing may endure.
                  (For now am I gone that was late in proſperitie)
                  To preſume thereupon it is but vanitie.
                  Not certaine, but as a cherie faire full of wo.
                  Raigned not I of late in great proſperitie?
                  
                     Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Where was in my life ſuch an one as I,
                  While Lady Fortune had with me continuance:
                  Granted not ſhe me to haue victorie.
                  In England to raigne and to contribute France?
                  She tooke me by the hand and led me a dance,
                  And with her ſugred lips on me ſhe ſmiled,
                  But what for diſſembled countenance,
                  I could not beware till I was beguiled.
                  Now from this world ſhe hath me exiled,
                  When I was lotheſt hence for to go,
                  And am in age (who ſaith) but a child,
                  
                     Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
                  
               
               
                  I had enough, I held me not content,
                  Without remembrance that I ſhould die:
                  And moreouer to encroch readie was I bent,
                  I knew not how long I ſhould it occupie,
                  I made the Tower ſtrong I wiſt not why.
                  I knew not to whom I purchaſed Tarterſoll.
                  I mended Douer on the mountaine high,
                  And London I prouoked to fortifie the wall.
                  I made Notingham a place full royall.
                  Windſore, Eltam, and many other mo,
                  Yet at the laſt I went from them all,
                  
                     Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
                  
               
               
                  Where is now my conqueſt and victorie?
                  Where is my riches and royall array?
                  Where be my courſers and my horſes hie?
                  Where is my mirth, my ſolace, and my play?
                  As vanitie to nought all is withered away:
                  O Lady Bes long for me may you call,
                  For I am departed vntill domes day:
                  But loue you that Lord that is Soueraigne of all.
                  Where be my Caſtles and buildings royall?
                  But Windſore alone now haue I no moe,
                  And of Eton the prayers perpetuall,
                  
                     Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Why ſhould a man be proud or preſume high?
                  Saint Bernard thereof nobly doth treate,
                  Saying a man is but a ſacke of ſtercorie,
                  And ſhall returne vnto wormes meat:
                  Why, what became of Alexander the great?
                  Or elſe of ſtrong Sampſon, who can tell?
                  Were not wormes ordain'd their fleſh to freat?
                  And of Salomon, that was of wit the Well,
                  
                     Abſolon preferred his haire for to ſell,
                  Yet for his beautie wormes eat him alſo,
                  And I but late in honors did excell,
                  
                     Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
                  
               
               
                  I haue played my pageant, now am I paſt,
                  Ye wot well all I was of no great elde.
                  Thus all things concluded ſhall be at the laſt,
                  When death approcheth then loſt is the field:
                  Then ſeeing the world me no longer vpheld,
                  (For nought would conſerue me heere in this place;
                  
                     In manus tuas Domine my ſpirit vp I yeeld,
                  Humblie beſeeching thee O God of thy grace.
                  O you courteous Commons your hearts embrace
                  Benignely now to remember me alſo,
                  For right well you know your King I was:
                  
                     Et ecce nunc in puluere dormio.
                  
               
            
            
               HOW SIR ANTHONY WODVILE Lord Riuers and Scales, gouernour of Prince EDVVARD, was with his Nephew Lord Richard Gray and other cauſeleſſe impriſoned, and cruelly murdered, Anno, 1483.
               
                  
                     AS ſilly ſuiters letted by delayes
                  To ſhew their Prince the meaning of their mind,
                  That long haue bought their brokers yeas and nayes
                  And nere the nigher, do daily wait to find
                  The Princes grace, from waightie affaires vntwind:
                  Which time attain'd, by attending all the yeare,
                  The wearied Prince will then no ſuiters heare:
               
               
                  
                  My caſe was ſuch not many daies ago.
                  For after bruite had blazed all abroad
                  That Baldwine through the aide of other mo,
                  Of fame or ſhame fall'n Princes would vnload,
                  Out from our graues we got without abode,
                  And preaſed forward with the rufull rout,
                  That ſought to haue their doings boulted out.
               
               
                  But when I had long tended for my turne
                  To tell my tale, as diuers other did:
                  In hope I ſhould no longer while ſoiourne
                  But from my ſuits haue ſpeedily been rid,
                  When courſe and place both orderly had bid
                  Me ſhew my mind, and I prepar'd to ſay,
                  The hearers paus'd, aroſe, and went their way.
               
               
                  Theſe doubtfull doings draue me to my dumpes,
                  Vncertaine what ſhould moue them ſo to do:
                  I feared leſt affections lothly lumpes
                  Or inward grudge had driuen them thereto,
                  Whoſe wicked ſtings all ſtories truth vndo,
                  Oft cauſing good to be reported ill,
                  Or drown'd in ſuds of Laethes muddie ſwill.
               
               
                  For hitherto ſlie writers wilie wits
                  Which haue engroſſed Princes chiefe affaires,
                  Haue been like horſes ſnaffled with the bits
                  Of fancie, feare, or doubts full deepe deſpaires,
                  Whoſe raines enchained to the chiefeſt chaires,
                  Haue ſo been ſtrain'd of thoſe that bare the ſtroke
                  That truth was forſt to chow or elſe to choke.
               
               
                  This cauſed ſuch as lothed loud to lie,
                  To paſſe with ſilence ſundrie Princes liues.
                  Leſſe fault it is to leaue, then leade awrie,
                  And better droun'd, then euer bound in giues:
                  For fatall fraud this world ſo fondly driues,
                  That whatſoeuer writers braines may brue
                  Be it neuer ſo falſe, at length is tane for true.
               
               
                  
                  What harme may hap by helpe of lying pens,
                  How written lies may leaudly be maintain'd,
                  The lothly rites, the diuelliſh idoll dens,
                  With guiltleſſe blood of vertuous men beſtain'd,
                  Is ſuch a proofe as all good hearts haue plain'd,
                  The taly grounds of ſtories throughly tries,
                  The death of Martyrs vengeance on it cries.
               
               
                  The freſheſt wits I know will ſoone be wearie,
                  In reading long what euer booke it bee,
                  Except it be vaine matter, ſtrange, or merrie,
                  Well ſauſt with lies, and glared all with glee,
                  VVith which becauſe no graue truth may agree,
                  The cloſeſt ſtile for ſtories is the meeteſt,
                  In rufull meanes the ſhorteſt forme is ſweeteſt:
               
               
                  And ſeeth the plaints alreadie by thee pen'd,
                  Are briefe enough, the number alſo ſmall,
                  The tediouſneſſe I thinke doth none offend,
                  Saue ſuch as haue no luſt to learne at all:
                  Regard none ſuch: no matter what they brall.
                  Warne thou the warie leſt they hap to ſtumble:
                  As for the careleſſe, care not what they mumble.
               
               
                  My life is ſuch as (if thou note it well)
                  May cauſe the wittie wealthie to beware.
                  For their ſakes therefore plainly will I tell,
                  How falſe and cumbrous worldly honors are,
                  How cankred foes bring careleſſe folke to care,
                  How tyrants ſuffered and not quell'd in time,
                  Do cut their throats that ſuffer them to clime.
               
               
                  Nor will I hide the chiefeſt point of all,
                  VVhich wiſeſt Rulers leaſt of all regard,
                  That was and will be cauſe of many a fall.
                  This cannot be too earneſtly declar'd,
                  Becauſe it is ſo ſeeld, and ſlackly hard.
                  Th abuſe and ſcorning of Gods ordinances,
                  Is chiefeſt cauſe of care and wofull chances.
               
               
                  
                  Gods holy orders highly are abuſed
                  When men do change their ends for ſtrange reſpects:
                  They ſcorned are, when they be cleane refuſed,
                  For that they cannot ſerue our fond affects:
                  The one our ſhame, the other our ſinne detects.
                  It is a ſhame for Chriſtians to abuſe them,
                  But deadly ſinne for ſcorners to refuſe them.
               
               
                  I meane not this alonely of degrees
                  Ordaind by God for peoples preſeruation,
                  But of his law, good orders, and decrees,
                  Prouided for his creatures conſeruation;
                  And ſpecially the ſtate of procreation,
                  Wherein we here the number of them encreaſe,
                  Which ſhall in Heauen enioy eternall peace.
               
               
                  The only end why God ordained this,
                  Was for th' encreaſing of that bleſſed number
                  For whom he hath prepard eternall bliſſe.
                  They that refuſe it for the care or cumber
                  Being apt thereto are in a ſinfull ſlumber:
                  No fond reſpect, no vaine deuiſed vowes
                  Can quit or bar what God in charge allowes.
               
               
                  It is not good for man to liue alone
                  Said God: and therefore made he him a make:
                  Sole life ſaid Chriſt is granted few or none,
                  All ſeed-ſheders are bound like wiues to take:
                  Yet not for luſt, for lands, or riches ſake,
                  But to beget and foſter ſo their fruite
                  That Heauen and Earth be ſtored with the ſuite.
               
               
                  But as the ſtate is damnably refuſed
                  Of many apt and able thereunto,
                  So is it likewiſe wickedly abuſed
                  Of all that vſe it as they ſhould not doe:
                  Wherein are guilty all the greedy who
                  For gaine, for friendſhip, lands, or honours wed,
                  And theſe pollute the vndefiled bed.
               
               
                  
                  And therfore God through iuſtice cannot ceaſe
                  To plague theſe faults with ſundry ſorts of whips:
                  As diſagreement, healths or wealths decreaſe,
                  Or lothing ſore the neuer liked lips.
                  Diſdiane alſo with rigour ſome times nips
                  Preſuming mates, vnequally that match:
                  Some bitter leauen ſowers the muſty batch.
               
               
                  We worldly folke account him very wiſe
                  That hath the wit moſt wealthily to wed:
                  By all meanes therefore alwaies we deuiſe
                  To ſee our yſſue rich in ſpouſals ſped.
                  We buy and ſell rich orphanes: babes ſcant bred
                  Muſt marry ere they know what mariage meanes,
                  Boyes marry old trots, old fooles wed yong queanes.
               
               
                  We call this wedding which in any wiſe
                  Can bee no mariage, but pollution plaine.
                  A new found trade of humane merchandiſe,
                  The diuels net, a filthy fleſhly gaine:
                  Of kinde and nature an vnnaturall ſtaine;
                  A foule abuſe of Gods moſt holy order,
                  And yet allow'd almoſt in euery border.
               
               
                  Would God I were the laſt that ſhall haue cauſe
                  Againſt this creeping canker to complaine,
                  That men would ſo regard their makers lawes,
                  That all would leaue the leaudneſſe of their braine,
                  That holy orders holy might remaine,
                  That our reſpects in wedding ſhould not choke
                  The end and fruite of Gods moſt holy yoke.
               
               
                  The Sage King Solon after that he ſaw
                  What miſchiefes follow miſſought mariages,
                  To barre all baits, eſtabliſhed this law:
                  No friend nor father ſhall giue heritages,
                  Coine, cattell, ſtuffe, or other carriages
                  With any maid for dowry or wedding ſale,
                  By any meane, on paine of banning bale.
               
               
                  
                  Had this good law in England been in force,
                  My fire had not ſo cruelly been ſlaine,
                  My brother had not cauſeleſſe loſt his corps,
                  Our mariage had not bred vs ſuch diſdaine,
                  My ſelfe had lack'd great part of grieuous paine:
                  VVe wedded wiues for dignitie and lands,
                  And left our liues in enuies bloodie hands.
               
               
                  My father hight Sir Richard Woduile: he
                  Eſpouſed Bedford Ducheſſe, and by her
                  Had iſſue males my brother Iohn, and me
                  Call'd Anthony: King Edward did prefer
                  Vs far aboue the ſtate wherein we were:
                  He 'ſpous'd our ſiſter Elizabeth,
                  
                  Whom Sir Iohn Gray made widow by his death.
               
               
                  How glad were we, thinke you, of this alliance?
                  So neerely coupled with ſo great a King.
                  VVho durſt with any of vs be at defiance
                  Thus made of might the mightieſt to wring?
                  But fie, what cares do higheſt honors bring?
                  VVhat careleſneſſe our ſelues or friends to know?
                  VVhat ſpite and enuie both of high and low?
               
               
                  Becauſe the King had made our ſiſter Queene,
                  It was his honor to prefer her kin:
                  And ſith the readieſt way (as wiſeſt weene)
                  VVas firſt by wedding wealthie heires to win,
                  It pleas'd the Prince by like meane to begin:
                  To me he gaue the rich Lord Scales his heire,
                  A vertuous maid, in my mind very faire.
               
               
                  He ioyned to my brother Iohn, the old
                  Duches of Northfolke notable of fame.
                  My nephew Thomas (who had in his hold
                  The honor and right of Marquiſe Dorſets name)
                  Eſpouſed Cicelie a right wealthie dame,
                  Lord Bonuiles heire: by whom he was poſſeſt
                  In all the rights where through that houſe was bleſt.
               
               
                  
                  The honours that my Sire attaind were diuers,
                  Firſt Chamberlaine, then Conſtable he was:
                  I doe omit the gainfulleſt, Earle Riuers.
                  
                  Thus gliſtred we to glory cleere as glaſſe.
                  Such miracles can Princes bring to paſſe
                  Among their lieges whom they mind to heaue
                  To honours falſe, who all their gueſts deceiue.
               
               
                  Honours are like that cruell King of Thrace,
                  With new come gueſts that fed his hungry horſes:
                  Or like the tyrant Buſiris, whoſe grace
                  Offred his Gods all ſtrangers ſtrangled corſes.
                  To forrenners ſo hard falſe honors force is,
                  That all her bourders, ſtrangers either geaſts
                  She ſpoiles to feede her Gods and greedy beaſts.
               
               
                  Her Gods be thoſe whom God by law or lot,
                  Or kinde by birth doth place in higheſt roomes,
                  Her beaſts be ſuch as greedily haue got
                  Office or charge to guide the ſilly groomes.
                  Theſe officers in law or charge are broomes,
                  Which ſweep away the ſweet from ſimple wretches,
                  And ſpoile th' enriched by their crafty fetches.
               
               
                  Theſe plucke downe thoſe whom Princes ſet aloft,
                  By wreſting lawes, and falſe conſpiracies:
                  Yea Kings themſelues by theſe are ſpoiled oft.
                  When wilfull Princes careleſly deſpiſe
                  To heare th' oppreſſed peoples heauy cries,
                  Nor will correct their polling theeues, then God
                  Doth make thoſe reues the reckles Princes rod.
               
               
                  The ſecond Richard is a proofe of this,
                  Whom crafty Lawyers by their lawes depoſed.
                  Another patern good King Henry is,
                  Whoſe right by them hath diuerſly beene gloſed,
                  Good while he grew, bad when he was vnroſed:
                  And as they ſodred theſe and diuers other,
                  With like deceit they vſde the King my brother.
               
               
                  
                  While he preuail'd they ſaid he owed the Crowne,
                  All lawes and rights agreed with the ſame:
                  But when by drifts hee ſeemed to be downe,
                  All lawes and right extremely did him blame,
                  Nought ſaue vſurping traytour was his name.
                  So conſtantly the Iudges conſtrue lawes,
                  That all agree ſtill with the ſtronger cauſe.
               
               
                  Theſe (as I ſaid) and other like in charge
                  Are honours horſes, whom ſhee feedes with geſts,
                  For all whom Princes frankly doe enlarge
                  With dignities, theſe barke at in their breſts,
                  Their ſpite, their might, their falſehood neuer reſts
                  Till they deuour them, ſparing neither bloud,
                  Ne lim, ne life, and all to get their good.
               
               
                  The Earle of Warwicke was a pranſing courſer,
                  The hauty heart of his could beare no mate:
                  Our wealth through him waxt many a time the worſer,
                  So cankardly he had our kin in hate.
                  He troubled oft the Kings vnſteady ſtate,
                  And that becauſe he would not be his ward
                  To wed and worke as he ſhould liſt award.
               
               
                  He ſpited vs becauſe we were preferd
                  By mariage to dignities ſo great,
                  But craftily his malice he deferd
                  Till traytorouſly he found meanes to entreate
                  Our brother of Clarence to aſſiſt his feate:
                  Whom when he had by mariage to him bound,
                  Then wrought he ſtraight our linage to confound.
               
               
                  Through ſlanderous brutes he brued many a broile
                  Throughout the Realme, againſt the King my brother,
                  And raiſed trayterous rebels thirſting ſpoile
                  To murder men: of whom among all other
                  
                     Robin of Kiddeſdale many a ſoule did ſmother,
                  His raſcall rable at my father wroth
                  Tooke ſire and ſonne, and quicke beheaded both.
               
               
                  
                  This heynous act although the King deteſted,
                  Yet was he faine to pardon: for the rout
                  Of rebels all the Realme ſo ſore infeſted,
                  That euery way aſſaild, he ſtood in doubt:
                  And though he were of courage high and ſtout,
                  Yet he aſſaid by faire meanes to aſſwage
                  His enemies ire, reueld by rebels rage.
               
               
                  But Warwicke was not pacified thus,
                  His conſtant rancour cauſeles was extreme,
                  No meane could ſerue the quarell to diſcus,
                  Till he had driuen the King out of the Realme.
                  Nor would he then be waked from his dreame:
                  For when my brother was come and plac'd againe,
                  He ſtinted not till he was ſtoutly ſlaine.
               
               
                  Then grew the King and Realme to quiet reſt,
                  Our ſtocke and friends ſtill ſtying higher and higher:
                  The Queene with children fruitfully was bleſt:
                  I gouernd them, it was the Kings deſier.
                  This ſet their vncles furiouſly on fier,
                  That we the Queenes bloud were aſſignd to gouern
                  The Prince, not they, the Kings owne bloud and brethren.
               
               
                  This cauſde the Duke of Clarence ſo to chafe,
                  That with the King he braineleſſe fell at bate:
                  The Counſaile warily to keepe him ſafe.
                  From raiſing tumults as he did of late,
                  Impriſoned him: where through his brothers hate
                  He was condemnd, and murdered in ſuch ſort
                  As he himſelfe hath truly made report.
               
               
                  Was none abhord theſe miſchiefs more then I,
                  Yet could I not be therewith diſcontented,
                  Conſidering that his rancour toucht mee ny:
                  Els would my conſcience neuer haue conſented
                  To wiſh him harme, could he haue beene contented.
                  But feare of hurt, for ſauegard of out ſtate
                  Doth cauſe more miſchiefe then deſert or hate.
               
               
                  
                  Such is the ſtate that many wiſh to beare,
                  That or we muſt with others bloud be ſtaind,
                  Or leade our liues continually in feare.
                  You mounting mindes behold here what is gaind
                  By coumbrous honour, painfully attaind:
                  A damned ſoule for murdring them that hate you,
                  Or doubtfull life, in danger leſt they mate you.
               
               
                  The cauſe (I thinke) why ſome of high degree
                  Do deadly hate all ſeekers to aſcend,
                  Is this: The clowne contented can not be
                  With any ſtate, till time he apprehend
                  The higheſt top: for therto climers tend:
                  Which ſeldome is attaind without the wracke
                  Of thoſe betweene that ſtay and beare him back.
               
               
                  To ſaue themſelues they therfore are compeld
                  To hate ſuch climers, and with wit and power
                  To compaſſe meanes where through they may be queld,
                  Ere they aſcend their honours to deuoure.
                  This cauſd the Duke of Clarence frowne and lowre
                  At me and other, whom the King promoted
                  To dignities: wherein he madly doted.
               
               
                  For ſeeing we were his deare allied frends,
                  Our furtherance ſhould rather haue made him glad
                  Then enmy-like to wiſh our wofull ends.
                  We were the neereſt kinſfolk that he had.
                  We ioyed with him, his ſorow made vs ſad:
                  But he eſteem'd ſo much his painted ſheath,
                  That he diſdaind the loue of all beneath.
               
               
                  But ſee how ſharply God reuengeth ſinne:
                  As he maligned me and many other
                  His faithfull friends, and kindeſt of his kin,
                  So Richard Duke of Gloceſter his owne brother,
                  Maligned him and beaſtly did him ſmother,
                  A diuelliſh deed, a moſt vnkindly part,
                  Yet iuſt reuenge for his vnnaturall hart.
               
               
                  
                  Although this brother-queller, tyrant fell
                  Enuide our ſtate as much and more then he:
                  Yet did his cloaking flattery ſo excell
                  To all our friends ward, chiefly vnto mee,
                  That he appear'd our truſtie ſtay to bee:
                  For outwardly he wrought our ſtate to furder,
                  Where inwardly hee minded nought ſaue murder.
               
               
                  Thus in appearance who but I was bleſt?
                  The chiefeſt honours heaped on my head:
                  Belou'd of all, enioying quiet reſt.
                  The forward Prince by me alone was led,
                  A noble impe, to all good vertues bred:
                  The King my Liege without my counſaile knowne
                  Agreed nought: though wiſeſt were his owne.
               
               
                  But quiet bliſſe in no ſtate laſteth long
                  Aſſailed ſtill by miſchief many waies:
                  Whoſe ſpoyling battrie glowing hote and ſtrong,
                  No flowing wealth, no force nor wiſdome ſtaies,
                  Her ſmoakles powder beaten ſouldiers ſlaies.
                  By open force foule miſchiefe oft preuailes,
                  By ſecret ſleight, ſhe ſeeld her purpoſe failes.
               
               
                  The King was bent too much to fooliſh pleaſure,
                  In banqueting he had ſo great delight:
                  This made him grow in groſſeneſſe out of meaſure,
                  Which, as it kindleth carnall appetite,
                  So quencheth it the liuelines of ſprite.
                  Whereof enſue ſuch ſicknes and diſeaſes
                  As none can cure ſaue death that all diſpleaſes.
               
               
                  Through this fault furdered by his brothers fraud
                  (Now God forgiue me if I iudge amiſſe)
                  Or through that beaſt his ribald or his baud
                  That larded ſtill theſe ſinfull luſts of his,
                  He ſodainely forſooke all worldly bliſſe.
                  That loathed leach, that neuer welcome death,
                  Through Spaſmous humours ſtopped vp his breath.
               
               
                  
                  That time lay I at Ludloe Wales his border,
                  For with the Prince the King had ſent me thither
                  To ſtay the robberies, ſpoile, and foule diſorder
                  Of diuers outlawes gathered there together:
                  Whoſe banding tended no man wiſt well whither,
                  VVhen theſe by wiſdome ſafely were ſuppreſſed,
                  Came wofull newes, our ſoueraigne was deceaſſed.
               
               
                  The griefe whereof when reaſon had aſſwaged,
                  Becauſe the Prince remained in my guide,
                  For his defence great ſtore of men I waged,
                  Doubting the ſtormes which at ſuch time betide.
                  But while I there thus warely did prouide,
                  Commandement came to ſend them home againe
                  And bring the King thēce with his houſhold traine.
               
               
                  This charge ſent from the Counſell and the Queene
                  Though much againſt my minde I beaſt obayed:
                  The diuell himſelfe wrought all the drift I weene,
                  Becauſe he would haue innocents betraied:
                  For ere the King were halfe his way conuayed,
                  A ſort of traytors falſly him betrapt
                  I caught afore, and cloſe in priſon clapt.
               
               
                  The Duke of Gloceſter that in carnate deuill
                  Confedred with the Duke of Buckingham,
                  VVith eke Lord Haſtings, haſty both to euill
                  To meete the King in mourning habit came,
                  (A cruell VVolfe though clothed like a Lambe)
                  And at Northampton, where as then I baited,
                  They toke their Inne as they on me had waited.
               
               
                  The King that night at Stonyſtratford lay,
                  A towne too ſmall to harbour all his traine:
                  This was the cauſe why he was gone away
                  VVhile I with other did behind remaine.
                  But will you ſee how falſly friends can faine?
                  Not Synon ſly, whoſe fraud beſt fame rebukes,
                  VVas halfe ſo ſuttle as theſe double Dukes.
               
               
                  
                  Firſt to mine Inne commeth in my brother falſe,
                  Embraceth me: well met good brother Scales,
                  
                  And weepes withall: the other me enhalſe
                  With welcome coſin, now welcome out of Wales:
                  O happie day, for now all ſtormie gales
                  Of ſtrife and rancour vtterly are ſwaged,
                  And we our owne to liue or die vnwaged.
               
               
                  This proferd ſeruice ſauſt with ſalutations
                  Immoderate, might cauſe me to ſuſpect:
                  For commonly in all diſſimulations
                  Th' exceſſe of glauering doth the guile detect:
                  Reaſon refuſeth falſehood to direct:
                  The will therefore for feare of being ſpide
                  Exceedeth meane, becauſe it wanteth guide.
               
               
                  This is the cauſe why ſuch as faine to weepe
                  Do houle outright, or wailing crie ah, ah,
                  Tearing themſelues, and ſtraining ſighes moſt deepe:
                  Why ſuch diſſemblers as would ſeeme to laugh
                  Breath not tihhee, but bray out, hah hah hah:
                  Why beggers faining brauery are the proud'ſt,
                  Why cowards bragging boldneſſe, wrangle loud'ſt.
               
               
                  For commonly all that do counterfeat
                  In any thing, exceed the naturall meane,
                  And that for feare of failing in their feat.
                  But theſe conſpirers couched all ſo cleane
                  Through cloſe demeanour, that their wiles did weane
                  My heart from doubts, ſo many a falſe deuice
                  They forged freſh, to hide their enterpriſe.
               
               
                  They ſupt with me, propounding friendly talke
                  Of our affaires, ſtill giuing me the prayſe:
                  And euer among the cups to me ward walke:
                  I drinke to you good Cuz each traytour ſayes.
                  Our banquet done, when they ſhould go their waies
                  They took their leaue, oft wiſhing me good night,
                  As heartily as any creature might.
               
               
                  
                  A noble heart they ſay is Lion like,
                  It cannot couch, diſſemble, crouch, nor faine.
                  How villanous were theſe, and how vnlike?
                  Of noble ſtocke the moſt ignoble ſtaine.
                  Their woluiſh hearts, their trayterous foxly braine
                  Or proue them baſe, of raſcall race engendred,
                  Or from hault linage baſtard like degendred.
               
               
                  Such polling heads as praiſe for prudent policie
                  Falſe practiſes, I wiſh were pact on poles:
                  I meane the baſtard law-brood, which can mollifie
                  All kind of cauſes in their craftie noles.
                  Theſe vndermine all vertue, blind as Moles,
                  They bolſter wrong, they racke and ſtraine the right,
                  And prayſe for law both malice, fraud, and might.
               
               
                  Theſe quench the worthie flames of noble kind,
                  Prouoking beſt borne to the baſeſt vices:
                  Through crafts they make the boldeſt courage blind,
                  Diſliking highly valiant enterprices,
                  And prayſing vilely villanous deuices.
                  Theſe make the Bore a Hog, the Bull an Oxe,
                  The Swan a Gooſe, the Lion a Wolfe or Foxe.
               
               
                  The Lawyer Cateſby and his craftie feeres
                  A rout that nere did good in any reame,
                  Are they that had transform'd theſe noble peeres:
                  They turn'd their blood to melancholike fleumes,
                  Their courage hault to cowardife extreame,
                  Their force and manhood into fraud and malice,
                  Their wit to wiles, ſtout Hector into Paris.
                  
               
               
                  Theſe glauerers gone, my ſelfe to reſt I laid,
                  And doubting nothing ſoundly fell a ſleepe:
                  But ſuddenly my ſeruants ſore afraid
                  Awaked me: and drawing ſighes full deepe,
                  Alas (quoth one) my Lord we are betrai'd.
                  How ſo (quoth I) the Dukes are gone their waies,
                  Th' haue bar'd the gates, and borne away the kaies.
               
               
                  
                  While he thus ſpake, there came into my mind
                  This fearefull dreame, whereout I waked was:
                  I ſaw a riuer ſtopt with ſtormes of winde,
                  Where through a Swan, a Bull, and Bore did paſſe,
                  Franching the fiſh and frie, with teeth of braſſe,
                  The riuer dri'd vp ſaue a little ſtreame,
                  Which at the laſt did water all the Reame.
               
               
                  Me thought this ſtreame did drowne the cruell Bore
                  In little ſpace, it grew ſo deepe and brode:
                  But he had kill'd the Bull and Swan before.
                  Beſides all this I ſaw an vglie Tode
                  Crale toward me, on which me thought I trode:
                  But what became of her, or what of mee
                  My ſudden waking would not let me ſee.
               
               
                  Theſe dreames conſidered with this ſudden newes,
                  So diuers from their doings ouer night,
                  Did cauſe me not a little for to muſe,
                  I bleſt me, roſe in all the haſt I might.
                  By this, Aurora ſpred abroad the light,
                  Which from the ends of Phoebus beames he tooke,
                  Who then the Bulles chiefe gallery forſooke.
               
               
                  When I had open'd the window to looke out,
                  There might I ſee the ſtreets each where beſet,
                  My Inne on each ſide compaſſed about
                  With armed watchmen, all eſcapes to let:
                  Thus had theſe Neroes caught me in their net,
                  But to what end I could not throughly gheſſe,
                  Such was my plainnes, ſuch their doubleneſſe.
               
               
                  My conſcience was ſo cleare I could not doubt
                  Their deadly drift, which leſſe apparant lay,
                  Becauſe they caus'd their men returne the rout
                  That rode toward Stonyſtratford as they ſay,
                  Becauſe the Dukes will firſt be there to day:
                  For this (thought I) they hinder me in ieſt,
                  For guiltleſſe minds do eaſely deeme the beſt.
               
               
                  
                  By this the Dukes were come into mine Inne,
                  For they were lodged in another by.
                  I got me to them, thinking it a ſinne
                  Within my chamber cowardly to lye.
                  And merrily I ask'd my brother why
                  He vs'd me ſo? he ſterne in euill ſadnes
                  Cried out: I arreſt thee traytour for thy badnes.
               
               
                  How ſo (quoth I) whence riſeth your ſuſpicion?
                  Thou art a traytour (quoth he) I thee arreſt
                  Arreſt (quoth I) why where is your commiſſion?
                  He drew his weapon, ſo did all the reſt,
                  Crying: yeeld thee traytour. I ſo ſore diſtreſt
                  Made no reſiſtande: but was ſent to ward,
                  None ſaue their ſeruants ſigned to my gard.
               
               
                  This done they ſped him to the King in poſt,
                  And after humble reuerence to him done,
                  They trayterouſly began to rule the roſt,
                  They pickt a quarell to my ſiſters ſon
                  Lord Richard Gray: the King would not be won
                  T'agree to them, yet they againſt all reaſon
                  Arreſted him, they ſaid for hainous treaſon.
               
               
                  Sir Thomas Vaughan and Sir Richard Hault
                  
                  Two worthie Knights were likewiſe apprehended,
                  Theſe all were guiltie in one kind of fault,
                  They would not like the practiſe then pretended:
                  And ſeeing the King was herewith ſore offended,
                  Backe to Northampton they brought him againe,
                  And thence diſcharged moſt part of his traine.
               
               
                  There loe Duke Richard made himſelfe Protector
                  Of King and Realme, by open proclamation,
                  Though neither King nor Queene were his elector,
                  Thus he preſum'd by lawleſſe vſurpation.
                  But will you ſee his deepe diſſimulation?
                  He ſent me a diſh of dainties from his bord
                  That day, and with it, this falſe friendly word:
               
               
                  
                  Commend me to him, all things ſhall be weil,
                  I am his friend, bid him be of good cheere:
                  Theſe newes I prayed the meſſenger go tell
                  My Nephew Richard, whom I lou'd full deere.
                  But what he ment by well, now ſhall you heere:
                  He thought it well to haue vs quickly murdred,
                  Which not long after thorowly he furdred.
               
               
                  For ſtraight from thence we cloſely were conueied,
                  From iayle to iayle Northward, we wiſt not whither:
                  Where, after a while we had in ſunder ſtaied,
                  At laſt we met at Pomfret all together.
                  Sir Richard Ratcliffe bade vs welcome thither,
                  Who openly, all law and right contemned,
                  Beheaded vs before we were condemned.
               
               
                  My coſin Richard could not be content
                  To leaue his life, becauſe he wiſt not why,
                  Good gentleman that neuer harme had ment,
                  Therefore he asked wherefore he ſhould die:
                  The Prieſt his ghoſtly father did replie
                  With weeping eyes: I know one wofull cauſe;
                  The Realme hath neither righteous Lords not lawes.
               
               
                  Sir Thomas Ʋaughan chaſing cried ſtill:
                  This tyrant Glocester is the graceleſſe G,
                  That will his brothers children beaſtly kill.
                  And, leſt the people through his talke might ſee
                  The miſciefes toward, and thereto not agree,
                  Our tormentour that falſe periured Knight
                  Bad ſtop our mouthes, with words of high deſpight.
               
               
                  Thus di'd we guiltleſſe, proceſſe heard we none,
                  No cauſe alleag'd, no Iudge, nor yet accuſer,
                  No Queſt empanel'd paſſed vs vpon.
                  That murdrer Ratcliffe, law and rights refuſer,
                  Did all to flatter Richard his abuſer.
                  Vnhappie both that euer they were borne,
                  Through guiltleſſe blood that haue their ſoules forlorne.
               
               
                  
                  In part I grant I well deſerued this,
                  Becauſe I caus'd not ſpeedie execution
                  Be done on Richard for that murder of his,
                  When firſt he wrought King Henries cloſe confuſion,
                  Not for his brothers hatefull perſecution.
                  Theſe cruell murders painfull death deſerued,
                  Which had he ſuffred, many had been preſerued.
               
               
                  Warne therefore all that charge or office beare,
                  To ſee all murdrers ſpeedily executed:
                  And ſpare them not for fauour or for feare:
                  By guiltleſſe blood the earth remaines polluted.
                  For lacke of Iuſtice kingdomes are tranſmuted.
                  They that ſaue murdrers from deſerued paine,
                  Shall through thoſe murdrers miſerably be ſlaine.
               
            
            
               HOW THE LORD HASTINGS WAS BETRAYED BY TRVSTING TOO MVCH to his euill Counſeller Cateſby, and villanouſly murdered in the Tower of London, by Richard Duke of Glocester, the 13. of Iune, Anno, 1483.
               
                  
                     I Am that Hastings whoſe too haſtie death,
                  They blame that know wherefore I loſt my breath,
                  With others fearing leſt my headleſſe name
                  Be wrong'd, by partiall brute of flattering Fame.
                  Hearing O Baldwine that thou mean'ſt to pen,
                  The liues and falles of Engliſh Noblemen,
                  My ſelfe heere preſent, do preſent to thee
                  My life, my fall, and forced deſtinie.
               
               
                  Ne feare to ſtaine thy credit by my tale:
                  In Laethes floud, long ſince, in Stigian vale,
                  Selfe loue I drown'd. What time hath fin'd for true,
                  And ceaſeth not, (though ſtale) ſtill to renue:
                  Recount I will: whereof take this for proofe,
                  That blaſe I will my praiſe, and my reproofe.
                  We naked ghoſts are but the very man
                  Nor of our ſelues more then we ought, we ſcan.
               
               
                  
                  The Heauens high, and Earthly vale belowe,
                  Yet ring his Fame, whoſe deedes ſo great did grow.
                  Edward the fourth ye know vnnam'd I meane,
                  Whoſe noble nature ſo to me did leane,
                  That I his ſtaffe was, I his onely ioy,
                  And euen what Pandare was to him of Troy:
                  VVhich mou'd him firſt, to make me Chamberlaine,
                  To ſerue his ſweets, to my moſt ſower paine.
               
               
                  VVherein, to iuſtly prais'd for ſecretneſſe
                  (For now my guilt with ſhriking I confeſſe)
                  To him too true too vntrue to the Queene,
                  Such hate I wan, as laſted long betweene
                  Our families: Shores wife was my Nice cheat,
                  The holy whore, and eke the wily peat.
                  I fed his luſt with louely peeces ſo,
                  That Gods ſharp wrath I purchaſt, my iuſt wo.
               
               
                  See here the difference of a noble minde.
                  Some vertue raiſeth, ſome by vice haue climde.
                  The firſt, though onely of themſelues begon,
                  Yet circlewiſe into themſelues do ron.
                  VVithin themſelues their force vnited ſo,
                  Both endleſſe is, and ſtronger gainſt their foe.
                  For, when end'th it that neuer hath begon?
                  Or how may that, that hath no end, b'vndone?
               
               
                  Th' other as by wicked meanes they grue,
                  And raigned by flatterie, ſo ſoone they rue.
                  Firſt tumbling ſtep fro honours old, is vice.
                  VVhich once ſtept downe, ſome linger, none ariſe
                  To former type: But they catch vertues ſpray,
                  VVhich raiſeth them that climbe by lawfull way.
                  Beware to riſe by ſeruing princely luſt.
                  Surely to ſtand, one meane is riſing iuſt.
               
               
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      learne by me, whom let it helpe t'excuſe,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •••
                     hfull now my ſelfe I do accuſe,
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                      my Prince I euer pleas'd with ſuch,
                  
                     
As harmed none, and him contented much.
                  In vice ſome fauour, or leſſe hate let win,
                  That I ne wried to worſer end my ſin.
                  But vſde my fauour to the helpe of ſuch,
                  As death in later warre to liue did grutch.
               
               
                  For as on durt (though durtie) ſhin'th the Sunne:
                  So, euen amidſt my vice, my vertue ſhoane.
                  My ſelfe I ſpared with his cheate to ſtaine,
                  For loue or reuerence ſo I could refraine.
                  
                     Giſippus wife erſt Titus would deſire
                  With friendſhips breach: I quencht that brutiſh fire.
                  Manly it is, to loth the pleaſing luſt.
                  Small vant to flie, that of conſtraint thou muſt.
               
               
                  Theſe faults except, if ſo my life thou ſcan,
                  Lo! none I hurt but furdred euery man.
                  My Chamber England was, my ſtaffe the law:
                  Whereby ſaunce rigour, all I held in awe.
                  So kind to all, and ſo belou'd of all,
                  As, (what enſued vpon my bloodie fall
                  Though I ne felt) yet ſurely this I thinke,
                  Full many a trickling teare their mouthes did drinke.
               
               
                  Diſdaine not Princes eaſie acceſſe, meeke cheare.
                  We know then Angels ſtatelier port ye beare
                  Of God himſelfe: too maſſie a charge for ſprits.
                  But then, my Lords, conſider, he delights
                  To vaile his grace to vs poore earthly wants,
                  To ſimpleſt ſhrubs, and to the dunghill plants.
                  Expreſſe him then, in might, and mercies meane:
                  So ſhall ye win, as now ye rule the Reame.
               
               
                  But all too long I feare I do delay
                  The many meanes, whereby I did bewray
                  My zealous will, to earne my Princes grace.
                  Leſt thou defer, to thinke me kind percaſe.
                  As nought may laſt, ſo Fortunes changing cheare
                  With pouting lookes gan lower on my ſire,
                  
                     
And on her wheele, aduanſt high in his rome
                  The Warwick Earle, admir'd through Chriſtendome.
               
               
                  Beſides the tempting proweſſe of the foe.
                  My Princes brother did him then forgoe.
                  The cauſe was lik'd, I was his link'd allie.
                  Yet nor the cauſe, nor brothers treacherie,
                  Nor enmies force, nor band of mingled blood:
                  Made Hastings beare any other mind then good.
                  But tane, and ſcap'd from Warwickes griping pawes,
                  With me he fled through Fortunes froward flawes.
               
               
                  To London come, at large we might haue ſeemed,
                  Had not we then the Realme a priſon deemed.
                  Each buſh, a bar, each ſpray, a banner ſplayed,
                  Each houſe, a fort, our paſſage to haue ſtayed.
                  To Lin we leape, where while w'await the tide,
                  My ſecret friends in ſecret I ſuppli'd,
                  In mouth to further Henrie ſixt their King,
                  And vſe my beſt meanes Edward in to bring.
               
               
                  The reſtleſſe tide, to bar the emptie bay,
                  With waltring waues roames wambling forth. Away
                  The merrie Mariner hales. The bragging boy,
                  To maſts high top vp hies. In ſigne of ioy
                  The wauering flag is vanſt. The ſurging ſeas
                  Their ſwelling ceaſe: to calmeſt euen peace
                  Sinkes downe their pride. With drunkenneſſe 'gainſt all care
                  The Seamen arm'd, await their noble fare.
               
               
                  On bord we come. The maſſie anchors wai'd,
                  One Engliſh ſhip, two hulks of Holland, aid
                  In ſuch a pinch. So ſmall though was the traine,
                  Such his conſtraint, that now, that one with paine
                  Command he might, who late might many moe:
                  Then ghaſtly Greekes erſt brought to Tenedo.
                  So nought is ours that we by hap may loſe,
                  What neareſt ſeemes, is fartheſt off in woes.
               
               
                  
                  As baniſhed wights, ſuch ioyes we might haue made.
                  Eas'd of aye threatning death that late we drade.
                  But once our countries ſight (not care) exempt,
                  No harbour ſhewing, that might our feare relent,
                  No couert caue, no ſhrub to ſhroud our liues.
                  No hollow wood, no flight that oft depriues
                  The mightie his prey, no ſanctuarie left
                  For exil'd Prince, that ſhrouds each ſlaue for theft:
               
               
                  In priſon pent whoſe woodie walles to paſſe
                  Of no leſſe perill then the dying was:
                  With th' Ocean moated battred with the waues,
                  (As chain'd at oares the wretched galley ſlaues,
                  At mercie ſit of ſea and enmies ſhot,
                  And ſhun with death that they with flight may not)
                  But greeniſh waues, and heauie lowring skies
                  All comfort elſe forcloſed our exiled eies:
               
               
                  Lo lo from higheſt top the ſlauiſh boy
                  Sent vp, with ſight of land our hearts to ioy:
                  Deſcries at hand a fleete of Eaſterlings
                  As then hot enmies of the Britiſh Kings.
                  The Mouſe may ſometime helpe the Lion in need,
                  The bittle Bee once ſpilt the Aegles breed.
                  O Princes ſeeke no foes. In your diſtreſſe,
                  The earth, the ſeas, conſpire your heauineſſe.
               
               
                  Our foe deſcried by flight we ſhun in haſt
                  And laid with canuas now the bending maſt,
                  The ſhip was rackt to trie her ſailing then,
                  As Squirels climbe the troupes of truſtie men.
                  The ſteerſman ſeekes a readier courſe to run,
                  The ſouldier ſtirs, the Gunner hies to gun.
                  The Flemmings ſweate, the Engliſh ſhip diſdaines
                  To wait behind to beare the Flemmings traines.
               
               
                  Forth flieth the Barke, as from the violent Goone
                  The pellet breakes all ſtaies, and ſtops eftſoone.
                  And ſwift ſhe ſwindg'th, as oft in Sunnie day,
                  
                     
The Dolphin fleetes in ſeas, in merrie May.
                  As we for liues, ſo th' eaſterlings for gaine,
                  Thwack on the ſailes, and after make amaine.
                  Though heauie they were, and of burthen great:
                  A King to maſter yet, what Swine nold ſweat?
               
               
                  So mid the vale the Greyhound ſeeing ſtart
                  The fearefull Hare, purſueth before ſhe flert,
                  And where ſhe turn'th he turn'th her, there to beare.
                  The one prey pricketh, th' other ſafeties feare.
                  So were we chas'd, ſo fled we 'fore our foes.
                  Bet flight then fight in ſo vneuen cloſe.
                  I end. Some thinke perhaps, too long he ſtaieth
                  In perill preſent ſhewing his fixed faith.
               
               
                  This ventred I, this dread I did ſuſtaine,
                  To trie my truth, my life I did diſdaine.
                  But, loe! like triall' gainſt his ciuill foe,
                  Faiths worſt is triall, which reſerues to woe.
                  I paſſe our ſcape, and ſharpe returning home,
                  Where we were welcom'd by our wonted fone.
                  To battell maine deſcends the Empires right,
                  At Barnet ioyne the hoſts in bloodie fight.
               
               
                  There ioyn'd three battels ranged in ſuch array,
                  As might for terror, Alexander fray.
                  What ſhould I ſtay to tell the long diſcourſe?
                  Who wan the Palme? who bare away the worſe?
                  Sufficeth ſay by my reſerued band,
                  Our enemies fled, we had the vpper hand.
                  My iron armie held her ſteadie place,
                  My Prince to ſhield, his feared foe to chaſe.
               
               
                  The like ſucceſſe befell in Tewkesbury field.
                  My furious force, their force perforc'd to yeeld
                  My Princes foe: and render to my King
                  Her only ſonne, leſt he more bate might bring.
                  Thus haſt a mirrour of a Subiects mind,
                  Such as perhaps is rare againe to find.
               
               
                  
                  The caruing cuts, that cleaue the truſty ſteele,
                  My faith, and due allegeance, could not feele.
               
               
                  But out alas, what praiſe may I recount,
                  That is not ſtain'd with ſpot, that doth ſurmount
                  My greateſt vaunt? bloudy for VVarre, to feete
                  A Tiger was I, all for peace vnmeete,
                  A ſouldiers hands muſt oft be died with goare,
                  Leſt ſtarke with reſt, they finewd waxe and hoare.
                  Peace could I win by VVarre, but peace not vſe.
                  Few daies liue he, who VVarlike peace doth chuſe.
               
               
                  VVhen Crofts a Knight preſented Henries Heiro
                  To this our Prince, in furious moode enquere
                  Of him he gan, what folly or phrenſy vaine,
                  With Arms forſt him t'inuade his Realme againe?
                  Whom anſwering, that he claim'd his fathers right:
                  With Gauntlet ſmit, commanded from his ſight,
                  
                     Glocester, Clarence, I and Dorſet ſlewe:
                  The guilt whereof we ſhortly all did rue.
               
               
                  
                     Clarence, as Cyrus, drown'd in bloud like Wine,
                  
                     Dorſet I furthered to his ſpeedy pine.
                  Of me, my ſelfe am ſpeaking preſident,
                  Nor eaſier fate the briſtled Boare is lent.
                  Our blouds haue paid the vengeance of our guilt,
                  His bones, ſhall broile for bloud which he hath ſpilt,
                  O deadly murther, that attaint'th our fame,
                  O wicked Traytours wanting worthy name.
               
               
                  Who as miſchieuouſly of men deſerue,
                  As they merit well, who doe mens liues preſerue.
                  If thoſe therefore we recken heauenly wights,
                  Theſe may we well deeme Feendes, and damned Sprits,
                  And while on earth they walke, diſguiſed deuils,
                  Sworne foes of vertue, factours for all euils.
                  Whoſe bloudy hands torment their goared harts,
                  Through bloudſheds horrour, in ſound ſleepe he ſtarts.
               
               
                  
                  O happy world were the Lions men,
                  All Lions ſhould at leaſt be ſpared then.
                  No ſuerty now, no laſting league is bloud.
                  A meacocke is he, who dreadth to ſee bloud ſhed.
                  Old is the Practiſe of ſuch bloudy ſtrife,
                  While ij. weare Armies. ij. the Iſſues of firſt Wife,
                  With armed hart and hand, the one bloudy brother,
                  With cruell chaſe purſueth, and murdreth th' other.
               
               
                  Which who abhorreth not? yet who ceaſeth to ſue?
                  The bloudy Caines their bloudy ſire renue.
                  The horror yet is like in common fraies.
                  For in ech murther, brother brother ſlaies.
                  Traytours to nature, countrey kin and kinde.
                  Whom no band ſerueth in brothers loue to bind.
                  O ſimple age, when ſlaunder ſlaughter was.
                  The tongues ſmal euil, how doth this miſchief paſſe?
               
               
                  Hopeſt thou to cloake thy couert miſchiefe wrought?
                  Thy conſcience, Caitif, ſhal proclaime thy thought,
                  A viſion, Chaucer ſheweth difcloaſd thy crime.
                  The Foxe deſcrie the crowes and chattring pien,
                  And ſhal thy fellow felons, not bewray
                  The guilteleſſe death, whom guiltie hands do ſlay?
                  Vnpuniſhed ſcaped for hainous crime ſome one,
                  But vnaduenged, in minde or body none.
               
               
                  Vengeance on minde, the freating furies take,
                  The ſinful corps, like earth quake agues ſhake,
                  Their frowning lookes, their troubled minds bewray,
                  In haſt they runne, and mids their race they ſtaie,
                  As gidded Roe. Amids their ſpeech they whiſt,
                  At meate they muſe. No where they may perſiſt
                  But ſome feare netleth them. Ay hang they ſo.
                  So neuer wanteth the wicked murtherer wo.
               
               
                  An infant rent with Lions ramping pawes?
                  Why ſlaunder I Lions? They feare the ſacred lawes
                  Of royall bloud. Ay me more brute then beaſt.
                  
                     
With infants ſides, (Lycaons pie) to feaſt.
                  O tyrant Tigers, O inſaciate woolues,
                  O Engliſh courteſie, monſtrous mowes and gulfes.
                  Onely becauſe our Prince diſpleaſ'd we ſaw
                  With him, we ſlue him ſtraight before all law.
               
               
                  Before our Prince commanded once his death,
                  Our bloudie ſwords on him we did vnſheath,
                  Preuenting law, and euen our Princes heſt,
                  We hid our weapons in the young lings breſt.
                  Whom not deſire of raigne did driue to field,
                  But mothers pride, who longd the Realme to wield.
                  But ſtraight my death ſhall ſhew my worthie meed,
                  If firſt to one other murther I proceed.
               
               
                  VVhile Edward liued, diſſembled diſcord lurked
                  In double hearts, yet ſo his reuerence worked.
                  But when ſucceeding tender feeble age,
                  Gaue open gap to tyrants ruſhing rage:
                  I holpe the Boare, and Bucke, to captiuate
                  Lord Riuers, Gray, ſir Thomas Vaughan and Hawte.
                  
                  If land would helpe the ſea, well earnd that ground
                  It ſelfe, to be with conquering waues ſurround.
               
               
                  Their ſpeedie death by priuie dome procured,
                  At Pomfret: tho my life ſhort while endured.
                  My ſelfe I ſlue, when them I damned to death,
                  At once my throate I riued, and reft them breath.
                  For that ſelfe day, before or neere the hower
                  That withred Atropos nipt the ſpringing flower
                  VVith violent hand, of their forth running life:
                  My head and body, in Tower twinde like knife.
               
               
                  By this my paterne all ye peeres beware.
                  Oft hangth he himſelfe who others weenth to ſnare:
                  Spare to be each others butcher. Feare the Kite,
                  VVho ſoareth aloft, (while frog and mouſe do fight
                  In ciuil combat, grappling void of feare
                  Of forreine foe) at once al both to beare.
                  
                     
Which plainer by my pitied plaint to ſee,
                  A while anew your liſtning lend to mee.
               
               
                  Too true it is two ſundrie aſſemblies kept,
                  At Crosbies place, and Baynards Caſtle ſet:
                  The Dukes at Crosbies, but at Baynards we.
                  The one to crowne a king, the other to be.
                  Suſpicious is ſeceſſion of foule frends,
                  When eithers drift to th' others miſchief tends,
                  I fear'd the end, my Catesbies being there
                  Diſcharg'd all doubts. Him held I moſt entire.
               
               
                  Whoſe great preſerment by my meanes, I thought
                  Some ſpurre, to pay the thankfulneſſe hee ought.
                  The truſt he ought me, made me truſt him ſo,
                  That priuie he was both to my weale and wo.
                  My hearts one halfe, my cheſt of confidence,
                  Mine only truſt, my ioy dwelt in his preſence.
                  I lou'd him Baldwine, as the apple of mine eye;
                  I loath'd my life when Catesby would me die.
               
               
                  Flie from thy chanel Thames, forſake thy ſtreames,
                  Leaue the Adamant Iron: Phoebus lay thy beames:
                  Ceaſe heauenly Sphears at laſt your weary warke,
                  Betray your charge, returne to Chaos darke.
                  At leaſt, ſome ruthleſſe Tiger hang her whelp,
                  My Catesby ſo with ſome excuſe to help.
                  And me to comfort, that I alone, ne ſeeme
                  Of all dame natures workes left in extreeme.
               
               
                  A Golden treaſure is the tried frend.
                  But who may Gold from Counterfaits defend?
                  Truſt not too ſoone, nor yet too ſoone miſtruſt:
                  With th' one thy ſelfe, with th' other thy friend thou hurt'ſt.
                  VVho twin'th betwixt, and ſteareth the golden meane,
                  Nor raſhly loueth, nor miſtruſteth in vaine.
                  In friendſhip ſoueraigne it is as Mithridate,
                  Thy friend to loue as one whom thou maiſt hate.
               
               
                  
                  Of tickle credit ne had bin the miſchiefe,
                  What needed 
                        Ʋirbius miracle doubled life?
                  Credulity ſurnamed firſt the Aegean Seas.
                  Miſtruſt, doth reaſon in the truſtieſt raiſe.
                  Suſpicious Romulus, ſtain'd his Walls firſt reard
                  With brothers bloud, whom for light leape he feard.
                  So not in brotherhood ielouſie may be borne,
                  The ielous Cuckold weares the Infamous Horne.
               
               
                  A beaſt may preach by triall, not foreſight.
                  Could I haue ſhund light credit, nere had light
                  The dreaded death, vpon my guilty head.
                  But Fooles aye wont to learne by after read.
                  Had Catesby kept vnſtaind the truth he plight,
                  Yet had yet enioied me, and I yet the light:
                  All Derbies doubts I cleared with his name.
                  I knew, no harme could hap me without his blame.
               
               
                  But ſee the fruites of tickle light beleefe.
                  The ambitious Dukes corrupt the Traitor theefe,
                  To grope mee, if allured I would aſſent,
                  To bin a Partner of their curſed intent.
                  Whereto, when as by no meanes friendſhip vail'd,
                  By Tyrant force behold they me aſſail'd,
                  And ſummond ſhortly a Counſell in the Tower,
                  Of Iune the fifteenth, at appointed hower.
               
               
                  Alas, are Counſels wried to catch the good?
                  No place is now exempt from ſheading bloud,
                  Sith counſels, that were carefull to preſerue
                  The guilteleſſe good, are meanes to make them ſtarue,
                  VVhat may not miſchiefe of Mad man abuſe?
                  Religious cloake ſome one to vice doth chuſe,
                  And maketh God Protectour of his crime.
                  Omonſtrous world, well ought we wiſh thy fine.
               
               
                  The fatall skies, roll on the blackeſt day,
                  VVhen doubled bloudſhed, my bloud muſt repay.
                  Others none forceth. To me ſir Thomas Haward
                  
                  
                     
As ſpurre is buckled, to prouoke me froward.
                  
                     Derbie who feared the parted ſittings yore,
                  Whether, much more he knew by experience hoare,
                  Or better minded, clearelier truth could ſee:
                  At midnight darke this meſſage ſends to mee.
               
               
                  
                     Hastings away, in ſleepe the gods foreſhow
                  By dreadfull dreame, fell fates vnto vs two.
                  Me thought a Bore with tuske ſo raced our throate,
                  That both our ſhoulders of the blood did ſmoake.
                  Ariſe to horſe, ſtraight homeward let vs hie:
                  And ſeeth our foe we cannot match, O flie.
                  Of Chanteclere you learne dreames ſooth to know,
                  Thence wiſemen conſtrue, more then the cock doth crow.
               
               
                  While thus he ſpake, I held within mine arme
                  
                     Shores wife, the tender piece, to keepe me warme.
                  Fie on adulterie, fie on leacherous luſt.
                  Marke in me ye Nobles all, Gods iudgements iuſt.
                  A Pander, Murderer, and Adulterer thus,
                  Only ſuch death I die, as I ne bluſh.
                  Now leſt my dame might thinke appall'd my hart
                  With eager mood vp in my bed I ſtart.
               
               
                  And, is thy Lord (quoth I) a Sorcerer?
                  A wiſeman now become? a dreame reader?
                  What though ſo Chanteclere crowed? I reck it not?
                  On my part pleadeth as well dame Partelot.
                  
                  Vniudg'd hang'th yet the caſe betwixt them tway.
                  Nay was his dreame cauſe of his hap I ſay.
                  Shall dreaming doubts from Prince my ſeruing ſlack?
                  Nay, then might Hastings life and liuing lacke.
               
               
                  He parteth. I ſleepe, my mind ſurcharg'd with ſinne,
                  As Phoebus beames by miſtie cloud kept in,
                  Ne could miſgiue, ne dreame of my miſhap:
                  As blocke, I tumbled to mine enemies trap.
                  Securitie cauſeleſſe through my fained frend,
                  Reft me foreſight of my approching end.
                  
                     
So Cateſby clawed me, as when the Cat doth play,
                  Dallying with Mouſe whom ſtraight ſhe meanes to ſlay.
               
               
                  The morow come, the lateſt light to me,
                  On Palfray mounted, to the Tower I hie,
                  Accompanied with that Haward my mortall foe,
                  To ſlaughter led, thou God didſt ſuffer ſo.
                  (O deepe diſſemblers, honoring with your cheare,
                  Whom in hid heart you trayterouſly teare)
                  Neuer had Realme ſo open ſignes of wrack,
                  As I had ſhewed me of my heauie hap.
               
               
                  The viſion firſt of Stanley late deſcried:
                  Then mirth ſo extreame, that neare for ioy I died.
                  Were it, that Swanlike I foreſong my death,
                  Or merrie mind foreſaw the loſſe of breath
                  That long it coueted, from this earths annoy,
                  But euen as ſiker as th' end of woe is ioy,
                  And glorious light to obſcure night doth tend:
                  So extreame mirth, in extreame mone doth end.
               
               
                  For why, extreames are haps rackt out of courſe,
                  By violent might far ſwinged forth perforce.
                  Which as they are piercing'ſt while they violent'ſt moue,
                  For that they are neare to cauſe that doth them ſhoue:
                  So ſooneſt fall from that their higheſt extreame,
                  To th' other contrarie that doth want of meane.
                  So laughed he erſt, who laughed out his breath:
                  So laughed I, when I laugh'd my ſelfe to death.
               
               
                  The pleaſing'ſt meanes bode not the luckieſt ends.
                  Not aye, found treaſure to like pleaſure tends.
                  Mirth meanes not mirth all time, thrice happie hire
                  Of wit, to ſhun the exceſſe that all deſire.
                  But this I paſſe, I hie to other like.
                  My palfrey in the plaineſt paued ſtreete,
                  Thrice bowed his bones, thrice kneeled on the flower
                  Thrice ſhun'd (as Balams aſſe) the dreaded Tower.
               
               
                  
                  What? ſhould thinke he had ſenſe of after haps?
                  As beaſts foreſhow the drought or rainie drops,
                  As humours in them want or elſe abound,
                  By influence from the heauens, or change of ground?
                  Or do we interpret by ſucceſſe each ſigne?
                  And as we fancie of each hap diuine?
                  And make that cauſe, that kin is to th' effect?
                  Not hauing ought of conſe quence reſpect?
               
               
                  
                     Bucephalus kneeling only to his Lord,
                  Shewed only he was Monarch of the world.
                  Why may not then the ſteed foreſhew by fall,
                  What caſuall hap the ſitter happen ſhall?
                  
                     Darius horſe by braying brought a Realme.
                  And what letteth, why he ne is (as the aſſe) Gods meane
                  By ſpeaking ſigne, to ſhew his hap to come,
                  Who is deaſe hearer of his ſpeaking dome?
               
               
                  But forward yet. In Tower-ſtreet I ſtai'd,
                  Where (could I haue ſeene) loe Haward all bewrai'd:
                  For as I commond with a Prieſt I met:
                  Away my Lord, quoth he, your time is ne yet
                  To take a Prieſt. Lo, Sinon might be ſeene,
                  Had not the Troians hares fooliſh forthright eyen,
                  But ſince the time was come that I ſhould die,
                  Some grace it was to die with wimpled eye.
               
               
                  Nay was this all. For euen at Tower-wharfe,
                  Neere to thoſe walles within the which I ſtarfe,
                  Where erſt, in ſorow ſouſt, and deepe diſtreſſe,
                  I emparted all my pining penſiueneſſe
                  With Hastings: (ſo my Purſeuant men call)
                  Euen there, the ſame to meete it did me fall.
                  Who gan to me moſt dolefully renue,
                  The wofull conference had erſt in that lieu.
               
               
                  
                     Hastings (quoth I) according now they fare,
                  At Pomfret this day dying, who caus'd that care.
                  My ſelfe haue all the world at my will,
                  
                     
With pleaſures cloyed, engorged with the fill.
                  God grant it ſo, quoth he: why doubteſt thou tho
                  Quoth I? and all in chafe, to him gan ſhew
                  In ample wiſe, our drift with tedious tale:
                  And entred ſo the Tower to my bale.
               
               
                  What ſhould we thinke of ſrignes? They are but haps,
                  How may they then, be ſignes of afterclaps?
                  Doth euery chance foreſhew or cauſe ſome other?
                  Or ending at it ſelfe, extend'th no further?
                  As th' ouer flowing floud ſome mount doth choake,
                  But to his aide ſome other floud it yoake:
                  So, if with ſignes thy ſinnes once ioyne, beware.
                  Elſe whereto chances tend, do neuer care.
               
               
                  Had not my ſinne deſerued my death as wreake,
                  What might my mirth haue hurt? or horſes becke?
                  Or Hawards bitter ſcoffe? or Hastings talke?
                  What meane then foole Aſtrologers to calke?
                  That twinckling ſtarres fling downe the fixed fate?
                  And all is guided by the ſtarrie ſtate?
                  Perdy a certaine charge aſſign'd they haue
                  To ſhine, and times diuide, not fate to graue.
               
               
                  But grant they ſomewhat giue it at one inſtant
                  Of euery babe the birth in heauen ſo ſcand,
                  That they that reſtleſſe roll, and neuer ſtay,
                  Should in his life beare yet ſo violent ſway:
                  That, not his actions only next to birth,
                  But all his life and death he ſwayed therewith?
                  How may one motion make ſo ſundrie affects?
                  Or one impreſſion tend to ſuch reſpects?
               
               
                  Some rule there is yet. Elſe, why were defer'd
                  Till now, theſe plagues, ſo long ere now deſeru'd?
                  If for they are trifles, they ne ſeeme of care:
                  But toyes with God the ſtately ſcepters are.
                  Yet in them too plaine doth appeare foreſet,
                  The certaine rule and fatall limits ſet,
                  
                     
Yet thinke we not, this ſure foreſetting fate,
                  But Gods faſt prouidence for each princely ſtate.
               
               
                  And hath he erſt reſtrain'd his prouidence?
                  Or is he nigard of his free diſpence?
                  Or is he vncertaine foreſet drifts to driue?
                  That not dame Chance but he all goods may giue?
                  A heathen god they hold whom Fortune keepe,
                  To deale them haps while god they weene aſleepe:
                  Mocke-gods they are and many gods induce,
                  Who fortune faine to father their abuſe.
               
               
                  How ſo it be, it might haue warned me,
                  But, what I could not, that in me ſee ye,
                  Who run in race, the honor like to win,
                  Whoſe faireſt forme nought may deforme but ſin,
                  Alas, when moſt I did defie all dread,
                  By ſingle haire deaths ſword hung ouer my head,
                  For hearke the end and liſten now my fall:
                  This is the laſt, and this the fruit of all.
               
               
                  To Counſell chamber come, a while we ſtaid
                  For him without whom nought was done or ſaid:
                  At laſt he came, and courteouſly excuſed,
                  That he ſo long our patience had abuſed.
                  And pleaſantly began to paint his cheere,
                  And ſaid: My Lord of Elie, would we had heere
                  Some of the ſtrawberries, whereof you haue ſtore:
                  The laſt delighted me ſo as nothing more.
               
               
                  Would, what ſo you wiſh, I might as well command,
                  My Lord (quoth he) as thoſe. And out of hand
                  His ſeruant ſendeth to Ely place for them.
                  Out goeth from vs the reſtleſſe diuell againe:
                  Belike (I thinke) ſcarce yet perſwaded full,
                  To worke the miſchiefe that did mad his ſcull.
                  At laſt determin'd, of his bloodie thought
                  And force ordain'd, to worke the wile he ſought:
               
               
                  
                  Frowning he enters, with ſo changed cheare,
                  As for milde May had chopped foule Ianuere:
                  And lowring on me with the goggle eye,
                  The whetted tuske, and fur'wed forehead hie,
                  His crooked ſhoulder briſtlelike ſet vp,
                  With frothie iawes, whoſe fome he chaw'd and ſup'd,
                  With angrie lookes that flamed as the fire:
                  Thus gan at laſt to grunt the grimmeſt fire.
               
               
                  What merit they, whom me, the kingdomes ſtay,
                  Contriued haue counſell trayterouſly to ſlay?
                  Abaſhed all ſate. I thought I might be bold,
                  For conſcience cleareneſſe and acquaintance old,
                  Their hire is plaine, quoth I Be death the leaſt
                  To whoſo ſeeketh your grace ſo to moleſt.
                  Withouten ſtay: the Queene and the whore Shores wife,
                  By witchcraft (quoth he) ſeeke to waſte my life.
               
               
                  Lo heere the withered and be witched arme,
                  That thus is ſpent by thoſe two Sorcereſſe charme:
                  And bared his arme and ſhewed his ſwiniſh skin.
                  Such cloakes they vſe, that ſeeke to cloud their ſin.
                  But out alas, it ſerueth not for the raine,
                  To all the houſe the colour was too plaine:
                  Nature had giuen him many a maimed marke
                  And it amongſt to note her monſtruous warke.
               
               
                  My doubtfull heart diſtracted this replie.
                  For th' one I cared not. th' other nipt ſo nie
                  That whiſt I could not: but forthwith brake forth.
                  If ſo it be, of death they are doubtleſſe worth.
                  If, traytour quoth he? plai'ſt thou with ifs and ands?
                  Ile on thy bodie auow it with theſe hands.
                  And there withall he mightly bounced the bord.
                  In ruſh'd his bil-men, one himſelfe beſtird,
               
               
                  Laying at Lord Stanley, whoſe braine he had ſurely cleft,
                  Had he not downe beneath the table crept.
                  But Ely, Yorke, and I were taken ſtraight,
                  
                     
Impriſoned they: I ſhould no longer wait,
                  But charged was to ſhriue me, and ſhift with haſt.
                  My Lord muſt dine, and now midday was paſt.
                  The Bores firſt diſh, not the bores head ſhould be.
                  But Haſtings head the boriſh beaſt would ſee.
               
               
                  VVhy ſtay I his dinner? vnto the chappel ioineth
                  A greeniſh hil, that body and ſoule oft twineth.
                  There on a blocke my head was ſtricken off,
                  As Baptists head, for Herod bloudy gnoffe.
                  Thus liu'd I Baldwine, thus dide I, thus I fel,
                  This is the ſumme, which al at large to tel
                  VVould volumes fil: whence yet theſe leſſons note
                  Ye noble Lords, to learne and ken by rote.
               
               
                  By filthie riſing feare your names to ſtaine;
                  If not for vertues loue, for dread of paine.
                  VVhom ſo the mindes vnquiet ſtate vpheaues,
                  Be it for loue or feare: when fancie reaues
                  Reaſon her right, by mocking of the wit,
                  If once the cauſe of this affection flit,
                  Reaſon preuailing on the vubridled thought:
                  Downe falth he who by fancie climbe aloft.
               
               
                  So hath the riſer foule no ſtaie from fall,
                  No not of thoſe that raiſd him firſt of all.
                  His ſuretie ſtands in mainteining the cauſe
                  That heau'd him firſt, which reſt by reaſons ſawes,
                  Not onely falth he to his former ſtate,
                  But liueth for euer in his princes hate.
                  And marke my Lords, God for adulterie ſleath,
                  Though ye it thinke too ſweete a ſinne for death.
               
               
                  Serue trulie your Prince and feare not rebels might,
                  On Princes halues the mightie God doth fight.
                  O much more then forſweare a forrein foe,
                  Who ſeeketh your realme and country to vndo.
                  Murther deteſt, haue hands vnſtaind with bloud.
                  Aie with your ſuccour do protect the good.
                  
                     
Chace treaſon where truſt ſhould be wed to your frend
                  Your heart and power, to your liues laſt end.
               
               
                  Flie tickle credit, ſhun alike diſtruſt.
                  Too true it is, and credit it you muſt:
                  The iealous nature wanteth no ſtormie ſtrife,
                  The ſimple ſoule aye leadeth a ſower life.
                  Beware of flatterers, friends in outward ſhow:
                  Beſt is of ſuch to make your open foe.
                  What all men ſeeke, that all men ſeeke to ſaine,
                  Some ſuch to be, ſome ſuch to ſeeme, them paine.
               
               
                  Marke Gods iuſt iudgements, puniſhing ſin by ſinne,
                  And ſlipperie ſtate wherein aloft we ſwimme.
                  The prouerbe, all day vp if we ne fall,
                  Agreeth well to vs high heaued worldlings all.
                  From common ſort vprais'd, in honors weed
                  We ſhine: while Fortune falſe (whom none erſt feed
                  To ſtand with ſtay and forſweare tickleneſſe:)
                  Sowſeth vs in mire of durtie brittleneſſe.
               
               
                  And learne ye Princes by my wronged ſprite,
                  Not to miſconſter what is meant aright,
                  The winged words too oft preuent the wit,
                  When ſilence ceaſeth afore the lips to ſit.
                  Alas, what may the words yeeld worthie death?
                  The words worſt is, the ſpeakers ſtinking breath.
                  Words are but winde, why coſt they then ſo much
                  The guiltie kicke, when they too ſmartly touch.
               
               
                  Forth irreturnable flieth the ſpoken word,
                  Be it in ſcoffe, in earneſt, or in bourd.
                  Without returne, and vnreceiu'd, it hangs,
                  And at the takers mercie, or rigour ſtands.
                  Which if he ſowerly wreſt with wrathfull cheare,
                  The ſhiuering word turnes to the ſpeakers feare.
                  If friendly courtefie do the word expound,
                  To the ſpeakers comfort ſweetly it doth redound.
               
               
                  
                  Euen as the vapour which the fire repels,
                  Turnes not to earth, but in mid aire dwels.
                  Where while it hangeth, if Boreas froſtie flawes
                  With rigour rattle it: not to raine it thawes,
                  But thunder, lightnings, ratling haile or ſnow
                  Sends downe to earth, whence firſt it roſe below;
                  But if faire Phoebus with his countenance ſweete
                  Reſolue it, downe the dew, or Manna ſleete.
               
               
                  (The Manna dew, that in the Eaſterne lands,
                  Excell'th the labour of the bees ſmall hands.)
                  Elſe for her Memnon gray Auroras teares,
                  On the earth it ſtilleth, the partener of her feares.
                  Or ſendeth ſweet ſhowers to glad their mother earth,
                  Whence firſt they tooke their firſt inconſtant birth,
                  To ſo great griefes, ill taken words do grow:
                  Of words well taken, ſuch delights do flow.
               
               
                  This learned, thus be heere at length an end,
                  What ſince enſued, to thee I will commend.
                  Now farewell Baldwine, ſhield my torne name,
                  From ſlanderous trumpe of blaſting blacke defame.
                  But ere I part, hereof thou record beare:
                  I claime no part of vertues reckoned heere.
                  My vice my ſelfe, but God my vertues take.
                  So hence depart I, as I entred nak'd,
               
               
                  Thus ended Hastings both his life and tale,
                  Containing all his worldly bliſſe and bale.
                  Happie he liued, too happie but for ſinne,
                  Happie he died whom right his death did bring.
                  Thus euer happie. For there is no meane
                  Twixt bliſſefull liues and mortall deaths extreame,
                  Yet feared not his foes to ſtaine his name,
                  And by theſe ſlanders to procure his ſhame.
               
               
                  In ruſtie armour as in extreame ſhift,
                  They clad themſelues, to cloake their diuelliſh drift.
                  And forth with for ſubſtantiall citizens ſent,
                  
                     
Declaring to them, Hastings forged intent
                  Was to haue ſlaine the Duke: and to haue ſeiſed
                  The Kings yong perſon, ſlaying whom he had pleas'd.
                  But God of Iuſtice had withturn'd that fate,
                  Which where it ought, light on his proper pate.
               
               
                  Then practiſed they by proclamation ſpread,
                  Nought to forget, that mought defame him dead.
                  Which was ſo curious, and ſo clerkely pend,
                  So long withall: that when ſome did attend
                  His death ſo yong: they ſaw that long before
                  The ſhroud was ſhaped, then babe to die was bore.
                  So wonteth God to blind the worldly wiſe,
                  That not to ſee, that all the world eſpies.
               
               
                  One hearing it cried out: A goodly caſt,
                  And well contriued, foule caſt away for haſt:
                  Whereto another gan in ſcoffe replie,
                  Firſt pend it was by enſpiring prophecie.
                  So can God rip vp ſecret miſchiefes wrought,
                  To the confuſion of the workers thought.
                  My Lords, the tub, that dround the Clarence Duke,
                  Dround not his death, not yet his deaths rebuke.
               
               
                  Your politique ſecrets gard with truſtie loyaltie:
                  So ſhall they lurke in moſt aſſured ſecrecie.
                  By Hastings death, and after fame ye learne,
                  The earth for murder crieth out vengeance ſterne.
                  Flie from his faults, and ſpare to hurt his fame.
                  The eager hounds forbeare their ſlaine game,
                  Dead, dead, auaunt Curs from the conquered chaſe.
                  Ill might he liue who loueth the dead to race.
               
               
                  Thus liued this Lord, thus died he, thus he ſlept.
                  Mids forward race when firſt to reſt he ſtept,
                  Enuious death that bounceth as well with mace
                  At Keſars courts, as at the pooreſt gates:
                  When nature ſeem'd too ſlow, by this ſloape meane,
                  Conueighed him ſooner to his liues extreame.
                  
                     
Happie in preuenting woes that after happ'd,
                  In ſlumber ſweete his liuing lights he lapp'd.
               
               
                  Whoſe haſtie death, if it do any grieue:
                  Know he, he liu'd to die, and dide to liue.
                  Vntimely neuer comes the liues laſt met.
                  In cradle death may rightly claime his det.
                  Straight after birth due is the fatall beere.
                  By deaths permiſſion the aged linger heere.
                  Euen in the ſwathbands out commiſſion goeth
                  To looſe thy breath, that yet but yongly bloweth.
               
               
                  Happie, thrice happie, who ſo loos'th his breath,
                  That life he gaineth by his godly death.
                  As Hastings heere. Whom time and truth agree,
                  To engraue by fame in ſtrong eternitie.
                  Who ſpareth not ſpeaking, with danger of his blood?
                  Yet loe this noble Lord did thinke it good
                  To cleare the innocent not to ſpare to ſpeake,
                  Although his ſhoulders with his blood ſhould reake.
               
               
                  Worthie to liue, who liu'd not for himſelfe
                  But priſed his ſame more then this worldly pelfe,
                  Whoſe name and line, if any yet preſerue,
                  We wiſh they liue like honor to deſtrue.
                  Whether thou ſeeke by martiall proweſe praiſe,
                  Or Pallas policie high thy name to raiſe,
                  Or truſtie ſeruice honor to attaine;
                  
                     Hastings foreled: tracke heere his bloodie traine.
               
               FINIS.
               Master D.
            
            
               
               THE COMPLAINT OF HENRIE DVKE of Buckingham.
               
                  
                     WHo truſts too much to honors higheſt throne,
                  And warily watch not ſlie dame Fortunes ſnares:
                  Or who in Court will beare the ſwing alone,
                  And wiſely weigh not how to weild the care,
                  Behold he me, and by my death beware:
                  Whom flattering Fortune falſely ſo beguilde,
                  That loe ſhe ſlew, where erſt full ſmooth ſhee ſmilde.
               
               
                  And Sackuill ſith in purpoſe now thou haſt
                  The wofull fall of Princes to deſcriue,
                  Whom Fortune both vplift and eke downe caſt,
                  To ſhew thereby th' vnſuretie in this life,
                  Marke well my fall, which I ſhall ſhew beliue,
                  And paint it forth, that all eſtates may know:
                  Haue they the warning, and be mine the woe.
               
               
                  For noble blood made me both Prince and Peere,
                  Yea peereleſſe too, had reaſon purchaſt place,
                  And God with gifts endow'd me largely heere.
                  But what auailes his gifts where failes his grace?
                  My mothers ſire ſprung of a kingly race,
                  And call'd was Edmund Duke of Sommerſet,
                  Bereft of life ere time by nature ſet.
               
               
                  Whoſe faithfull heart to Henrie ſixt ſo wrought
                  That he him nere in weale, or woe forſooke,
                  Till laſtly he at Tewkesbury field was cought
                  Where with an axe his violent death he tooke:
                  He neuer could King Edwards partie brooke,
                  Till by his death he voucht that quarrell good,
                  In which his Sire, and Grand-ſire ſpilt their blood.
               
               
                  
                  And ſuch was erſt my fathers cruell chance,
                  Of Stafford Earle by name that Humfrey hight
                  Who euer preſt did Henries part aduance,
                  And neuer ceaſt till at Saint Albones fight
                  He loſt his life, as then did many a Knight:
                  Where eke my Grandſire, Duke of Buckingham
                  Was wounded ſore, and hardly ſcapt vntane.
               
               
                  But what may boote to ſtay the Siſters three,
                  When Atropos perforce will cut the thred?
                  The dolefull day was come when you might ſee
                  Northampton field with armed men oreſpred,
                  VVhere fate would algates haue my Grandſire dead:
                  So ruſhing forth amids the fierceſt fight,
                  He liu'd, and di'd there in his Maſters right.
               
               
                  In place of whom as it befell my lot,
                  Like on a ſtage, ſo ſtept I in ſtraightway,
                  Enioying there but wofully God wot,
                  As he that had a ſlender part to play:
                  To teach thereby, in earth no ſtate may ſtay,
                  But as our parts abridge, or length our age,
                  So paſſe we all while others fill the ſtage.
               
               
                  For of my ſelfe the dreerie fate to plaine,
                  I was ſometime a Prince withouten peere,
                  VVhen Edward fift began his rufull raigne,
                  Ay me, then I began that hatefull yeare,
                  To compaſſe that which I haue bought ſo deare:
                  I bare the ſwinge, I and that wretched wight,
                  The Duke of Gloceſter that Richard hight.
               
               
                  For when the fates had reft that Roiall Prince
                  
                     Edward the fourth, chiefe mirrour of that name,
                  The Duke, and I faſt ioined euer ſince,
                  In faithfull loue, our ſecret driſtes to frame:
                  VVhat he thought beſt, to me ſo ſeem'd the ſame,
                  My ſelfe not bent ſo much for to aſpire,
                  As to fulfill that greedy Dukes deſire.
               
               
                  
                  Whoſe reſtleſſe minde ſore thirſting after rule,
                  When that he ſaw his nephewes both to bin
                  Through tender yeares as yet vnfit to rule,
                  And rather ruled by their Mothers kin,
                  There ſought he firſt his miſchiefe to begin,
                  To pluck from them their Mothers friends aſſinde,
                  For well he wiſt they would wiſtand his minde.
               
               
                  To follow which he ran ſo headlong ſwift,
                  With eagre thirſt of his deſired draught,
                  To ſeeke their deaths that ſought to daſh his drift,
                  Of whom the chiefe the Queenes allies he thought,
                  That bent thereto with mounts of miſchiefe fraught,
                  He knew their liues would be ſo ſore his let,
                  That in their deaths his onely help he ſet.
               
               
                  And I moſt curſed caitiffe that I was,
                  Seeing the ſtate vnſtedfaſt how it ſtood,
                  His chiefe complice to bring the ſame to paſſe,
                  Vnhappie wretch conſented to their blood:
                  Yee Kings, and Peeres that ſwim in worldly good.
                  In ſeeking bloud the end aduert you plaine,
                  And ſee if bloud ay aske not bloud againe.
               
               
                  Conſider Cyrus in your cruell thought,
                  A matchleſſe Prince in riches, and in might,
                  And weigh in minde the bloudy deedes he wrought,
                  In ſheading which he ſet his whole delight:
                  But ſee the guerdon lotted to this wight,
                  He whoſe huge power no man might ouerthrow,
                  
                     Tamiris Queene with great deſpite hath ſlow.
               
               
                  His head diſmembred from his mangled corps,
                  Her ſelfe ſhe caſt into a veſſell fraught
                  VVith clottered bloud of them that felt her force.
                  And with theſe words a iuſtreward ſhe taught:
                  
                     Drinke now thy fill of thy deſired draught.
                  
                  Loe marke the fine that did this Prince befall:
                  Marke not this one, but marke the end of all.
               
               
                  
                  Behold Cambiſes, and his fatall day,
                  Where murders miſchiefe mirrour like is left:
                  While he his brother Mergus caſt to ſlay,
                  A dreadfull thing, his wits were him bereft.
                  A ſword he caught, wherewith he pierced eft
                  His bodie gor'd, which he of life benoomes:
                  So iuſt is God in all his dreadfull doomes.
               
               
                  O bloodie Brutus rightly didſt thou rue,
                  And thou O Caſſius, iuſtly came thy fall,
                  That with the ſword wherewith thou Caeſar ſlue
                  Murdredſt thy ſelfe, and reft thy life withall.
                  A Mirrour let him be vnto you all
                  That murdrers be, of murder to your meed:
                  For murder cries out vengeance on your ſeed.
               
               
                  Loe Beſſus he that arm'd with murdrers knife,
                  And traytrours heart, againſt his royall King,
                  With bloodie hands bereft his maſters life,
                  Aduert the fine his foule offence did bring:
                  And lothing murder as moſt lothly thing,
                  Behold in him the iuſt deſerued fall,
                  That euer hath, and ſhall betide them all.
               
               
                  What booted him his falſe vſurped raigne?
                  Whereto by murder he did ſo aſcend,
                  When like a wretch led in an iron chaine,
                  He was preſented by his chiefeſt friend,
                  Vnto the foes of him whom he had ſlaine:
                  That euen they ſhould auenge ſo foule a gilt,
                  That rather ſought to haue his blood yſpilt.
               
               
                  Take heed ye Princes and ye Prelats all
                  Of this outrage, which though it ſleepe a while
                  And not diſclos'd, as it doth ſeld befall,
                  Yet God that ſuffereth ſilence to beguile
                  Such guilts, wherewith both earth and aire ye file,
                  At laſt deſcries them to your foule diſgrace,
                  You ſee th' examples ſet before your face.
               
               
                  
                  And deeply graue within your ſtony harts,
                  The dreerie dole that mightie Macedo,
                  
                  With tears vnfolded wrapt in deadly ſmarts,
                  VVhen he the death of Clitus ſorowed ſo,
                  VVhom erſt he murdred with the deadly blow
                  Raught in his rage vpon his friend ſo deare,
                  For which behold loe how his pangs appeare.
               
               
                  The launced ſpeare he writhes out of the wound,
                  From which the purple bloud ſpins in his face:
                  His heinous guilt when he returned found,
                  He throwes himſelfe vpon the corps alas,
                  And in his armes how oft doth he imbrace
                  His murdred friend? and kiſſing him in vaine,
                  Forth flow the flouds of ſalt repentant raine.
               
               
                  His friends amaz'd at ſuch a murder done,
                  In fearefull flocks begin to ſhrinke away:
                  And he therat with heapes of grief fordone,
                  Hateth himſelfe, wiſhing his latter day.
                  Now he likewiſe perceiued in like ſtay,
                  As is the wilde beaſt in the deſert bred,
                  Both dreading others and him ſelfe adred:
               
               
                  He calles for death, and loathing longer life,
                  Bent to his bane, refuſeth kindly food:
                  And plung'd in depth of death and dolours ſtrife,
                  Had queld himſelfe, had not his friends withſtood.
                  Loe he that thus hath ſhed the guiltleſſe bloud,
                  Though he were King and Keſar ouer all,
                  Yet choſe he death to guerdon death withall.
               
               
                  This Prince whoſe Peere was neuer vnder ſunne,
                  Whoſe gliſtening fame the earth did ouerglide,
                  Which with his power welny the world had wonne,
                  His bloudy hands himſelfe could not abide,
                  But folly bent with famine to haue dide:
                  The worthy Prince deemed in his regard,
                  That death for death could be but iuſt reward.
               
               
                  
                  Yet we that were ſo drowned in the depth
                  Of deepe deſire, to drinke the guiltleſſe bloud,
                  Like to the Wolfe, with greedy lookes that lepth
                  Into the ſnare, to feed on deadly food:
                  So we delighted in the ſtate we ſtood,
                  Blinded ſo far in all our blinded traine,
                  That blind we ſaw not our deſtruction plaine.
               
               
                  We ſpared none whoſe life could ought forlet
                  Our wicked purpoſe to his paſſe to come.
                  Foure worthy Knights we headed at Pomfret,
                  Guilteleſſe (God wot) withouten law or dome.
                  My heart euen bleedes to tell you all and ſome,
                  And how Lord Haſtings when he feared leaſt,
                  Diſpiteouſly was murdred and oppreſt.
               
               
                  Theſe rocks vpraught, that threatned moſt our wreck,
                  We ſeemd to ſaile much ſurer in the ſtreame:
                  And Fortune faring as ſhe were at becke
                  Laid in our lap the rule of all the Realme.
                  The Nephues ſtraight depoſde were by the Eame.
                  And we aduanſt to that we bought full deere,
                  He crowned King, and I his chiefeſt Peere.
               
               
                  Thus hauing won our long deſired pray,
                  To make him King that he might make me chiefe,
                  Downe throw we ſtraight his ſilly Nephues tway,
                  From Princes pompe, to wofull priſoners life:
                  In hope that now ſtint was all further ſtrife.
                  Sith he was King, and I chiefe ſtroke did beare,
                  Who ioied but we, yet who more cauſe to feare?
               
               
                  The guiltles bloud which we vniuſtly ſhed,
                  The roiall babes deueſted from their throne,
                  And we like traytours raigning in their ſtead,
                  Theſe heauy burdens paſſed vs vpon,
                  Tormenting vs ſo by our ſelues alone,
                  Much like the felon that purſu'd by night,
                  Starts at ech buſh, as his foe were in ſight.
               
               
                  
                  Now doubting ſtate, now dreading loſſe of life,
                  In feare of wrack at euery blaſt of winde,
                  Now ſtart in dreames through dread of murders knife,
                  As though euen then reuengement were aſſinde,
                  With reſtles thought ſo is the guilty minde
                  Turmoild, and neuer feeleth eaſe or ſtay,
                  But liues in feare of that which followes aye.
               
               
                  Well gaue that Iudge his doome vpon the death
                  Of Titus Celius that in bed was ſlaine:
                  When euery wight the cruell murder laieth
                  To his two ſonnes that in his chamber laine,
                  The Iudge, that by the proofe perceiueth plaine,
                  That they were found faſt ſleeping in their bed,
                  Hath deemd them guiltles of this bloud yſhed.
               
               
                  He thought it could not be, that they which brake
                  The lawes of God and man in ſuch outrage,
                  Could ſo forth with themſelues to ſleepe betake:
                  He rather thought the horrour and the rage
                  Of ſuch an heinous guilt could neuer ſwage,
                  Nor neuer ſuffer them to ſleepe or reſt,
                  Or dreadles breath one breth out of their breſt.
               
               
                  So gnawes the griefe of conſcience euermore,
                  And in the heart it is ſo deepe ygraue,
                  That they may neither ſleepe nor reſt therefore,
                  Ne thinke one thought but on the dread they haue.
                  Still to the death foretoſſed with the waue
                  Of reſtles woe, in terrour and deſpeare,
                  They lead a life continually in feare.
               
               
                  Like to the Deere that ſtricken with the dart,
                  Withdrawes himſelfe into ſome ſecret place,
                  And feeling greene the wound about his hart,
                  Startles with pangs till he falt on the graſſe,
                  And in great feare lies gaſping there a ſpace,
                  Forth braying ſighes, as though ech pang had brought
                  The preſent death, which 
                        〈…〉
                      dread ſo oft:
               
               
                  
                  So we deepe wounded with the bloodie thought,
                  And gnawing worme that grieu'd our conſcience ſo,
                  Neuer tooke eaſe, but as our heart out brought
                  The ſtayned ſighes in witnes of our woe,
                  Such reſtleſſe cares our fault did well beknow:
                  Wherewith of our deſerued fall the feares
                  In euery place rang death within our eares.
               
               
                  And as ill graine is neuer well ykept,
                  So fared it by vs within a while:
                  That which ſo long with ſuch vnreſt we reapt,
                  In dread and danger by all wit and wile,
                  Loe ſee the fine, when once it felt the whele
                  Of ſlipper Fortune, ſtay it might no ſtowne,
                  The wheele whurles vp, but ſtraight it whurleth downe.
               
               
                  For hauing rule and riches in our hand,
                  Who durſt gaine ſay the thing that we auer'd?
                  Will was wiſdome, our luſt for law did ſtand,
                  In ſort ſo ſtrange, that who was not afeard,
                  When he the ſound but of King Richard heard?
                  So hatefull waxt the hearing of his name,
                  That you may deeme the reſidue of the ſame.
               
               
                  But what auail'd the terrour and the feare,
                  Wherewith he kept his lieges vnder awe?
                  It rather wan him hatred euery where,
                  And fained faces forc'd by feare of law:
                  That but while Fortune doth with fauour blaw,
                  Flatter through feare: for in their heart lurkes aye
                  A ſecret hate that hopeth for a day.
               
               
                  Recordeth Dionyſius the King,
                  That with his rigour ſo his Realme oppreſt,
                  As that he thought by cruell feare to bring
                  His ſubiects vnder, as him liked beſt:
                  But loe the dread wherewith himſelfe was ſtreſt,
                  And you ſhall ſee the fine of forced feare,
                  Moſt Mirrour like in this proud Prince appeare.
               
               
                  
                  All were his head with crowne of gold yſpread,
                  And in his hand the royall ſcepter ſet,
                  And he with princely purple richly clad;
                  Yet was his heart with wretched cares orefret,
                  And inwardly with deadly feare beſet,
                  Of thoſe whom he by rigour kept in awe,
                  And fore oppreſt with might of tyrants law.
               
               
                  Againſt whoſe feare, no heapes of gold and glie,
                  No ſtrength of guard, nor all his hired powre,
                  Ne proud high towres that preaſed to the skie,
                  His cruell heart of ſafetie could aſſure:
                  But dreading them whom he ſhould deeme moſt ſure,
                  Himſelfe his beard with burning brand would ſeare,
                  Of death deſeru'd ſo vexed him the feare.
               
               
                  This might ſuffice to repreſent the fine
                  Of tyrants force, their feares, and their vnreſt:
                  But heare this one, although my heart repine
                  To let the ſound once ſinke within my breſt:
                  Of fell Phereus that aboue the reſt,
                  Such crueltie vpon his people wrought,
                  As (oh alas) I tremble with the thought.
               
               
                  Some he encaſed in the coats of Beares,
                  Among wilde beaſts deuoured ſo to be:
                  And ſome for prey vnto the hunters ſpeares,
                  Like ſauage beaſts withouten ruth to die.
                  Sometime t'encreaſe his horrid crueltie,
                  The quicke with face to face engraued hee,
                  Each others death that each might liuing ſee.
               
               
                  Loe what more cruell horror might be found,
                  To purchaſe feare, if feare could ſtay his raigne?
                  It booted not, it rather ſtrake the wound
                  Of feare in him to feare the like againe.
                  And ſo he did full oft, and not in vaine,
                  As in his life his cares could witneſſe well,
                  But moſt of all his wretched end doth tell.
               
               
                  
                  His owne deare wife whom as his life he loued,
                  He durſt not truſt, nor proch vnto her bed,
                  But cauſing firſt his ſlaue with naked ſword
                  To go before, himſelfe with trembling dread
                  Straight followeth faſt, and whurling in his head
                  His rolling eyne, he ſearched heere and there
                  The danger deepe that he ſo ſore did feare.
               
               
                  For not in vaine it ran ſtill in his breſt,
                  Some wretched hap ſhould hale him to his end.
                  And therefore alway by his pillow preſt
                  Had he a ſword, and with that ſword he wend,
                  In vaine (God wot) all perils to defend.
                  For loe his wife foreirking of his raigne,
                  Sleeping in bed this cruell wretch hath ſlaine.
               
               
                  What ſhould I more now ſeeke to ſay in this,
                  Or one iot further linger forth my tale?
                  With cruell Nero, or with Phalaris,
                  
                  
                     Caligula, Domitian, and all
                  The cruell rout? or of their wretched fall?
                  I can no more, but in my name aduert
                  All earthly powres beware of tyrants heart.
               
               
                  And as our ſtate endured but a throw,
                  So, beſt in vs the ſtay of ſuch a ſtate
                  May beſt appeare to hang on ouer throw,
                  And better teach tyrants deſerued hate,
                  Then any tyrants death tofore or late.
                  So cruell ſeem'd this Richard third to me,
                  That loe my ſelfe now loth'd his crueltie.
               
               
                  For when alas, I ſaw the tyrant King
                  Content not only from his nephewes twaine
                  To riue worlds bliſſe, but alſo all worlds being,
                  Sauns earthly guilt ycauſing both be ſlaine,
                  My heart agrieud that ſuch a wretch ſhould raigne,
                  Whoſe bloodie breaſt ſo ſauag'd out of kind,
                  That Phalaris had nere ſo foule a mind.
               
               
                  
                  Nay could I brooke him once within my breſt,
                  But with the thought my teeth would gnaſh withall:
                  For though I erſt were his by ſworne beheſt,
                  Yet when I ſaw miſchiefe on miſchiefe fall,
                  So deepe in blood, to murder Prince and all,
                  Aye then thought I, alas, and welaway,
                  And to my ſelfe thus mourning would I ſay:
               
               
                  If neither loue, kindred, nay knot of blood,
                  His owne allegeance to his Prince of due,
                  Nor yet the ſtate of truſt wherein he ſtood,
                  The worlds defame, nor nought could forme him true,
                  Thoſe guiltleſſe babes, could they not make him rue?
                  Nor could their youth, nor innocence withall
                  Moue him from reauing them their life and all?
               
               
                  Alas it could not moue him any iot,
                  Nay make him once to rue or wet his eye,
                  Stir'd him no more then that that ſtirreth not:
                  But as the rocke or ſtone that will not plie,
                  So was his heart made hard with crueltie,
                  To murder them: alas I weepe in thought,
                  To thinke on that which this fell wretch hath wrought.
               
               
                  That now when he had done the thing he ſought,
                  And as he would, compliſht and compaſt all,
                  And ſaw and knew the treaſon he had wrought
                  To God and man, to ſlay his Prince and all,
                  Then ſeem'd he firſt to doubt and dread vs all,
                  And me in chiefe, whoſe death all meanes he might,
                  He ſought to worke by malice and by might.
               
               
                  Such heapes of harmes vpharbar'd in his breſt,
                  With enuious heart my honor to deface,
                  And knowing he that I which wotted beſt
                  His wretched drifts, and all his wretched caſe,
                  If euer ſprang within me ſparke of grace,
                  Muſt needs abhorre him and his hatefull race:
                  Now more and more gan caſt me out of grace.
               
               
                  
                  Which ſudden change when I by ſecret chance
                  Had well perceiu'd, by proofe of enuious frowne,
                  And ſaw the lot that did me to aduance
                  Him to a King that ſought to caſt me downe,
                  Too late it was to linger any ſtowne:
                  Sith preſent choice lay caſt before mine eye,
                  To worke his death, or I my ſelfe to die.
               
               
                  And as the Knight in field among his foes,
                  Beſet with ſwords, muſt ſlay or there be ſlaine:
                  So I alas lapt in a thouſand woes,
                  Beholding death on euery ſide ſo plaine,
                  I rather choſe by ſome ſly ſecret traine
                  To worke his death, and I to liue therby,
                  Then he to liue, and I of force to dye.
               
               
                  Which heauy choice ſo haſtened me to choſe,
                  That I in part agrieu'd at his diſdaine,
                  In part to wreake the dolefull death of thoſe
                  Two tender babes, his ſilly nephewes twaine,
                  By him, alas, commanded to be ſlaine,
                  With painted cheere humbly before his face,
                  Straight tooke my leaue, and rode to Brecknocke place.
               
               
                  And there as cloſe and couert as I might,
                  My purpoſde practiſe to his paſſe to bring,
                  In ſecret drifts I lingred day and night,
                  All how I might depoſe this cruell King,
                  That ſeemd to all ſo much deſirde a thing,
                  As therto truſting I empriſde the ſame:
                  But too much truſting brought me to my bane.
               
               
                  For while I now had Fortune at my becke,
                  Miſtruſting I no earthly thing at all,
                  Vnwares alas, leaſt looking for a checke,
                  She mated me in turning of a ball:
                  When leaſt I feard, then neereſt was my fall,
                  And when whole Hoſts were preſt to ſtroy my fone,
                  She changed her cheare, and left me poſt alone.
               
               
                  
                  I had vprais'd a mightie band of men,
                  And marched forth in order of array,
                  Leading my power amid the forreſt Dene,
                  Againſt the tyrant banner to diſplay:
                  But loe my ſouldiers baſely ſhranke away.
                  For ſuch is Fortune when ſhe liſt to frowne,
                  Who ſeemes moſt ſure, him ſooneſt whurles ſhe downe.
               
               
                  O let no Prince put truſt in Commontie,
                  Nor hope in faith of giddie peoples mind,
                  But let all noble men take heed by me,
                  That by the proofe too well the paine do find:
                  Loe, where is truth or truſt? or what could bind
                  The vaine people, but they will ſwerue and ſway,
                  As chance brings change, to driue and draw that way.
               
               
                  Rome, thou that once aduanced vp ſo hie,
                  Thy ſtay, Patron, and flowre of excellence,
                  Haſt now throwne him to depth of miſerie,
                  Exiled him that was thy whole defence,
                  Nay count'ſt it not an horrible offence,
                  To reuen him of honor and of fame,
                  That wan it thee when thou hadſt loſt the ſame.
               
               
                  Behold Camillus, he that erſt reuiued
                  The ſtate of Rome, that dying he did find,
                  Of his owne ſtate is now alas depriued,
                  Baniſht by them whom he did thus debt-bind:
                  That cruell folke, vnthankfull and vnkind,
                  Declared well their falſe vnconſtancie,
                  And Fortune eke her mutabilitie.
               
               
                  And thou Scipio, a Mirrour maiſt thou be
                  To all nobles, that they learne not too late,
                  How they once truſt th' vnſtable Commontie.
                  Thou that recur'd the torne diſmembred ſtate,
                  Euen when the Conquerour was at the gate,
                  Art now exil'd, as though thou not deſerued
                  To reſt in her, whom thou hadſt ſo preſerued.
               
               
                  
                  Ingratefull Rome haſt ſhew'd thy crueltie
                  On him, by whom thou liueſt yet in fame,
                  But not thy deed, nor his deſert ſhall die,
                  But his owne words ſhall witneſſe aye the ſame:
                  For loe his graue doth thee moſt iuſtly blame.
                  And with diſdaine in marble ſaies to thee:
                  Vnkind countrey, my bones ſhalt thou not ſee.
               
               
                  What more vnworthie then this his exile?
                  More iuſt then this the wofull plaint he wrote?
                  Or who could ſhew a plainer proofe the while,
                  Of moſt falſe faith, then they that thus forgot
                  His great deſerts? that ſo deſerued not.
                  His cinders yet loe, doth he them denie,
                  That him deni'd amongſt them for to die.
               
               
                  
                     Milciades, ô happie hadſt thou ben,
                  And well rewarded of thy countrey men,
                  If in the field when thou hadſt forſt to flie,
                  By thy proweſſe, three hundred thouſand men,
                  Content they had been to exile thee then:
                  And not caſt thee in depth of priſon ſo,
                  Laden with gyues, to end thy life in wo.
               
               
                  Alas how hard and ſteelie hearts had they,
                  That not contented there to haue thee die,
                  With fettred gyues in priſon where thou lay,
                  Increaſt ſo far in hatefull crueltie,
                  That buriall to thy corps, they eke denie:
                  Ne will they grant the ſame till thy ſonne haue
                  Put on thy gyues, to purchaſe thee a graue.
               
               
                  Loe Hannibal as long as fixed fate,
                  And brittle Fortune had ordained ſo:
                  Who euermore aduanſt his countrey ſtate
                  Then thou that liu'dſt for her and for no mo?
                  But when the ſtormie waues began to grow,
                  Without reſpect of thy deſerts ere while,
                  Art by thy countrey throwne into exile,
               
               
                  
                  Vnfriendly Fortune ſhall I thee now blame?
                  Or ſhall I fault the fates that ſo ordaine?
                  Or art thou Ioue the cauſer of the ſame?
                  Or crueltie her ſelfe doth ſhe conſtraine?
                  Or on whom elſe alas ſhall I complaine?
                  O truſtleſſe world I can accuſen none,
                  But fickle faith of Commontie alone.
               
               
                  The Polypus nor the Cameleon ſtrange,
                  That turne themſelues to euery hue they ſee,
                  Are not ſo full of vaine and fickle change,
                  As is this falſe vnſtedfaſt Commontie,
                  Loe I alas with mine aduerſitie
                  Haue tri'd it true, for they are fled and gone,
                  And of an hoſt there is not left me one.
               
               
                  That I alas in this calamitie
                  Alone was left, and to my ſelfe might plaine
                  This treaſon, and this wretched cowardie,
                  And eke with teares beweepen and complaine
                  My hatefull hap, ſtill looking to be ſlaine:
                  Wandring in woe, and to the heauens on hie
                  Cleaping for vengeance of this treacherie.
               
               
                  And as the Turtle that hath loſt her mate,
                  Whom griping ſorow doth ſo ſore attaint,
                  With dolefull voice and ſound that ſhe doth make,
                  Mourning her loſſe, filles all the groue with plaint:
                  So I alas forſaken, and forfaint,
                  With reſtleſſe foot the wood roame vp and downe,
                  Which of my dole all ſhiuering doth reſowne.
               
               
                  And being thus alone, and all forſake,
                  Amid the thicke, forwandred in deſpaire,
                  As one diſmaid, nay wiſt what way to take,
                  Vntill at laſt gan to my mind repaire,
                  A man of mine cal'd Humfrey Banastaire:
                  
                  Wherewith me feeling much recomforted,
                  In hope of ſuccour to his houſe I fled.
               
               
                  
                  Who being one whom erſt I had vp brought
                  Euen from his youth, and lou'd and liked beſt,
                  To gentrie ſtate aduancing him from nought,
                  And had in ſecret truſt aboue the reſt,
                  Of ſpeciall truſt now being thus diſtreſt,
                  Full ſecretly to him I me conuei'd,
                  Not doubting there but I ſhould find ſome aide.
               
               
                  But out alas on cruell treacherie,
                  When that this caytife once an inkling heard,
                  How that King Richard had proclaim'd, that he
                  Which me deſcri'd ſhould haue for his reward
                  A thouſand pounds, and farther be prefer'd,
                  His truth ſo turn'd to treaſon, all diſtain'd,
                  That faith quite fled, and I by truſt was train'd.
               
               
                  For by this wretch I being ſtraight betrayed,
                  To one Iohn Mitton, Sheriffe of Shropſhire then,
                  All ſuddenly was taken, and conuayed
                  To Salisbury, with rout of harneſt men,
                  Vnto King Richard there emcamped then,
                  Faſt by the Citie with a mightie hoſt:
                  Withouten doome where head and life I loſt.
               
               
                  And with theſe words, as if the axe euen there
                  Diſmembred had his head and corps apart,
                  Dead fell he downe: and we in wofull feare
                  Stood mazed when he would to life reuert:
                  But deadly griefes ſtill grew about his heart,
                  That ſtill he lay, ſometime reuiu'd with paine,
                  And with a ſigh becomming dead againe.
               
               
                  Midnight was come, when euery vitall thing
                  With ſweet ſound ſleepe their wearie limbes did reſt,
                  The beaſts were ſtill, the little birds that ſing,
                  Now ſweetly ſlept, beſides their mothers breſt:
                  The old and all were ſhrowded in their neſt,
                  The waters calme, the cruell ſeas did ceaſe,
                  The woods, the fields, and all things held their peace.
               
               
                  
                  The golden ſtars were whirld amid their race,
                  And on the earth did laugh with twinkling light,
                  When each thing neſtled in his reſting place,
                  Forgat daies paine with pleaſure of the night:
                  The Hare had not the greedy Hounds in ſight,
                  The fearfull Deere, of death ſtood not in doubt,
                  The Partridge drept not of the Falcons foote.
               
               
                  The vgly Beare now minded not the ſtake,
                  Nor how the cruell maſtiues doe him teare,
                  The Stag lay ſtill vnrouſed from the brake,
                  The fomy Boare feard not the hunters ſpeare:
                  All things were ſtill in deſert, buſh and breare.
                  With quiet heart now from their trauailes ceaſt,
                  Soundly they ſlept in midſt of all their reſt.
               
               
                  When Buckingham amid his plaint oppreſt,
                  With ſurging ſorrowes and with pinching paines
                  In ſort thus ſown'd, and with a ſigh he ceaſt,
                  To tellen forth the trechery and the traines
                  Of Banaſtaire, which him ſo ſore diſtraines,
                  That from a ſigh he falls into a ſounde,
                  And from a ſound li'th raging on the ground.
               
               
                  So twiching were the pangs that he aſſaid,
                  And he ſo ſore with ruthfull rage diſtraught,
                  To thinke vpon the wretch that him betraid,
                  Whom erſt he made a gentleman of naught,
                  That more and more agrieued with this thought,
                  He ſtormes out ſighes, and with redoubled ſore,
                  Struck with the furies, rageth more and more.
               
               
                  Whoſo hath ſeene the Bull chaſed with darts,
                  And with deepe wounds foregald and gored ſo,
                  Till he oppreſſed with the deadly ſmarts,
                  Fall in a rage, and run vpon his foe:
                  Let him I ſay behold the raging woe
                  Of Buckingham, that in theſe gripes of griefe,
                  Rageth gainſt him that hath betraid his life.
               
               
                  
                  With bloud red eine he ſtareth here and there,
                  Frothing at mouth, with face as pale as clout:
                  When loe my lims were trembling all for feare,
                  And I amazde ſtood ſtill in dread and doubt,
                  While I mought ſee him throw his armes about:
                  And gainſt the ground himſelfe plunge with ſuch force,
                  As if the life forthwith ſhould leaue the corps.
               
               
                  With ſmoke of ſighs ſometime I might behold
                  The place all dimd, like to the morning miſt:
                  And ſtraight againe the teares how they down rold
                  Alongſt his cheekes, as if the riuers hiſt:
                  Whoſe flowing ſtreames ne were no ſooner whiſt,
                  But to the ſtars ſuch dreadfull ſhouts he ſent,
                  As if the throne of mighty Ioue ſhould rent.
               
               
                  And I the while with ſprits welny bereft,
                  Beheld the plight and pangs that did him ſtraine,
                  And how the bloud his deadly colour left,
                  And ſtraight returnd with flaming red againe:
                  When ſuddenly amid his raging paine
                  He gaue a ſigh, and with that ſigh hee ſaid,
                  Oh Banaſtaire, and ſtraight againe he ſtaid.
               
               
                  Dead lay his corps, as dead as any ſtone,
                  Till ſwelling ſighs ſtorming within his breaſt
                  Vpraiſd his head, that downeward fell anon,
                  With lookes vpcaſt, and ſighs that neuer ceaſt:
                  Forth ſtreamd the teares records of his vnreſt,
                  When he with ſhrikes thus groueling on the ground,
                  Ybraied theſe words with ſhrill and dolefull ſound:
               
               
                  Heauen and earth, and ye eternall lamps,
                  That in the heauens wrapt, will vs to reſt,
                  Thou bright Phoebe, that cleareſt the nights damps,
                  Witneſſe the plaints that in theſe pangs oppreſt,
                  I wofull wretch vnlade out of my breſt.
                  And let me yeeld my laſt words ere I part,
                  You, you, I call to record of my ſmart.
               
               
                  
                  And thou Alecto feede mee with thy food,
                  Let fall thy ſerpents from thy ſnaky heare,
                  For ſuch reliefe well fits mee in this mood,
                  To feede my plaint with horrour and with feare,
                  While rage afreſh thy venomd worme areare.
                  And thou Sibylla when thou ſeeſt mee faint,
                  Addreſſe thy ſelfe the guide of my complaint.
               
               
                  And thou O Ioue, that with the deepe fordoome
                  Doſt rule the earth, and raigne aboue the skies,
                  That wreakeſt wrongs, and giu'ſt the dreadful doome
                  Againſt the wretch that doth thy name deſpiſe,
                  Receiue theſe words, and wreake them in ſuch wiſe,
                  As heauen and earth may witneſſe and behold,
                  Thy heapes of wrath vpon this wretch vnfold.
               
               
                  Thou Banaſtaire, gainſt thee I clepe and call
                  Vnto the Gods, that they iuſt vengeance take
                  On thee, thy bloud, thy ſtained ſtocke and all.
                  O Ioue to thee aboue the reſt I make
                  My humble plaint, guide me, that what I ſpeake,
                  May be thy will vpon this wretch to fall,
                  On thee Banastaire, wretch of wretches all.
               
               
                  O would to God the cruell diſmal day,
                  That gaue me light firſt to behold thy face,
                  With foule eclipſe had reft my ſight away:
                  Th' vnhappy hower, the time, and eke the day,
                  The Sunne and Moone, the Stars, and all that was
                  In their aſpects helping in ought to thee,
                  The earth and aire, and all accurſed be.
               
               
                  And thou caitiffe, that like a monſter ſwarued
                  From kind and kindnes, haſt thy maſter lorne,
                  Whom neither trueth, nor truſt wherein thou ſerued,
                  Ne his deſerts could moue, nor thy faith ſworne,
                  How ſhall I curſe, but wiſh that thou vnborne
                  Had beene, or that the earth had rent in tway,
                  And ſwallowed thee in cradle as thou laie.
               
               
                  
                  To this did I euen from thy tender youth
                  Vouchſafe to bring thee vp? did I herefore
                  Beleeue the oth of thy vndoubted truth?
                  Aduance thee vp, and truſt thee euermore?
                  By truſting thee that I ſhould die therfore?
                  O wretch, and worſe then wretch, what ſhall I ſay?
                  But clepe and curſe gainſt thee and thine for aye.
               
               
                  Hated be thou, diſdaind of euery wight,
                  And pointed at where euer that thou goe:
                  A traiterous wretch, vnworthy of the light
                  Be thou eſteemd: and to encreaſe thy woe,
                  The ſound be hatefull of thy name alſo:
                  And in this ſort with ſhame and ſharp reproch,
                  Lead thou thy life, till greater griefe approch.
               
               
                  Dole and deſpaire, let thoſe be thy delight,
                  Wrapped in woes that cannot be vnfold,
                  To waile the day, and weepe the weary night,
                  With rainy eine and ſighes cannot be told,
                  And let no wight thy woe ſeeke to withhold:
                  But count thee worthy (wretch) of ſorowes ſtore,
                  That ſuffering much; oughtſt ſtill to ſuffer more.
               
               
                  Deſerue thou death, yea be thou deem'd to die
                  A ſhamefull death, to end thy ſhamefull life,
                  A ſight longed for, ioifull to euery eye,
                  When thou ſhalt be arraigned as a theefe,
                  Standing at bar, and pleading for thy life,
                  With trembling tongue in dread and dolours rage,
                  Lade with white lockes, and fourſcore yeares of age.
               
               
                  Yet ſhall not death deliuer thee ſo ſoone
                  Out of thy woes, ſo happy ſhalt not be:
                  But to th' eternall Ioue this is my boone,
                  That thou maiſt liue thine eldeſt ſonne to ſee
                  Reft of his wits, and in a ſoule Bores ſtye
                  To end his daies, in rage and death diſtreſt,
                  A worthy tombe where one of thine ſhould reſt.
               
               
                  
                  Yet after this yet pray I more, thou may
                  Thy ſecond ſonne ſee drowned in a dike,
                  And in ſuch ſort to cloſe his latter day,
                  As heard or ſeene erſt hath not been the like:
                  Yſtrangled in a puddle not ſo deepe
                  As halfe a foot, that ſuch hard loſſe of life,
                  So cruelly chanſt, may be the greater griefe.
               
               
                  And not yet ſhall thy dolefull ſorrowes ceaſe,
                  
                     Ioue ſhall not ſo withhold his wrath from thee,
                  But that thy plagues may more and more encreaſe,
                  Thou ſhalt ſtill liue, that thou thy ſelfe maiſt ſee
                  Thy daughter ſtrucken with the leproſie:
                  That ſhe that erſt was all thy whole delight,
                  Thou now maiſt loath to haue her come in ſight.
               
               
                  And after that, let ſhame and ſorrowes griefe
                  Feed forth thy yeares continually in woe,
                  That thou maiſt liue in death, and die in life,
                  And in this ſort forwaild and wearied ſo,
                  At laſt thy ghoſt to part thy bodie fro:
                  This pray I Ioue, and with this latter breath,
                  Vengeance I aske vpon my cruell death.
               
               
                  This ſaid, he flung his retchleſſe armes abroad,
                  And groueling flat vpon the ground he lay,
                  Which with his teeth he all to gnaſht and gnaw'd:
                  Deepe grones he fet, as he that would away.
                  But loe in vaine he did the death aſſay,
                  Although I thinke was neuer man that knew
                  Such deadly paines, where death did not enſue.
               
               
                  So ſtroue he thus a while as with the death,
                  Now pale as lead, and cold as any ſtone,
                  Now ſtill as calme, now ſtorming forth a breath
                  Of ſmokie ſighes, as breath and all were gone.
                  But euery thing hath end: ſo he anon
                  Came to himſelfe, when with a ſigh outbrayed,
                  With woefull cheere, theſe woefull words he ſaid.
               
               
                  
                  Ah where am I, what thing, or whence is this?
                  Who reſt my wits? or how do I thus lie?
                  My limbes do quake, my thought agaſted is.
                  Why ſigh I ſo? or whereunto do I
                  Thus groule on the ground? and by and by
                  Vprais'd he ſtood, and with a ſigh hath ſtai'd,
                  When to himſelfe returned, thus he ſaid:
               
               
                  Sufficeth now this plaint and this regrete,
                  Whereof my heart his bottome hath vnfraught:
                  And of my death let Peeres and Princes were
                  The worlds vntruſt, that they thereby be taught.
                  And in her wealth, ſith that ſuch change is wrought,
                  Hope not too much, but in the mids of all
                  Thinke on my death, and what may them befall.
               
               
                  So long as Fortune would permit the ſame,
                  I liu'd in rule and riches with the beſt:
                  And paſt my time in honor and in fame,
                  That of miſhap no feare was in my breaſt:
                  But falſe Fortune whom I ſuſpected leaſt,
                  Did turne the wheele, and with a dolefull fall
                  Hath me bereft of honor, life, and all.
               
               
                  Loe what auailes in riches flouds that flowes?
                  Though ſhe ſo ſmil'd, as all the world were his.
                  Euen Kings and Keſars bidden Fortunes throwes,
                  And ſimple ſort muſt beare it as it is.
                  Take heed by me that blith'd in balefull bliſſe:
                  My rule, my riches, royall blood and all,
                  When Fortune frown'd the feller made my fall.
               
               
                  For hard miſhaps that happens vnto ſuch,
                  Whoſe wretched ſtate erſt neuer fell no change,
                  Agreeue them not in any part ſo much,
                  As their diſtreſſe to whom it is ſo ſtrange,
                  That all their liues nay paſſed pleaſures range:
                  Their ſudden woe that aye weild wealth at will,
                  Algates their he arts more piercingly muſt thrill.
               
               
                  
                  For of my birth, my blood was of the beſt,
                  Firſt borne an Earle, then Duke by due deſcent:
                  To ſwing the ſway in Court among the reſt,
                  Dame fortune me her rule moſt largely lent:
                  And kind with courage ſo my corps had blent,
                  That loe on whom but me did ſhe moſt ſmile?
                  And whom but me loe, did ſhe moſt beguile?
               
               
                  Now haſt thou heard the whole of my vnhap,
                  My chance, my change, the cauſe of all my care:
                  In wealth and woe, how Fortune did me wrap,
                  With world at will, to win me to her ſnare.
                  Bid Kings, bid Keſars, bid all ſtates beware,
                  And tell them this from me that tri'd it true:
                  Who reckleſſe rules, right ſoone may hap to rue.
               
               FINIS.
               T. Saxuiſt.
            
            
               HOW COLLINGBOVRNE WAS CRVELLY EXECVTED FOR making a Rime.
               
                  
                     BEware, take heed, take heed, I ſay, beware,
                  You Poets you, that purpoſe to rehearce
                  By any art what tyrants doings are.
                  
                     Erynnis rage is growne ſo fell and fearce,
                  That vitious acts may not be toucht in verſe:
                  The Muſes freedome, granted them of eld,
                  Is bar'd, ſlie reaſons treaſons hie are held.
               
               
                  Be rough in rime, and then they ſay you raile,
                  As Iuuenal was, but that doth make no matter:
                  With Ieremie you ſhall be had to iaile,
                  Or forc'd with Martial, Caeſars faults to flatter.
                  Clerkes muſt be taught to claw, and not to clatter:
                  Free Helicon and franke Parnaſſus hilles,
                  Are hellie haunts, and ranke pernicious illes.
               
               
                  
                  Touch couertly in termes, and then you taunt,
                  Though praiſed Poets alway did the like,
                  Controll vs not, elſe traytour vile auaunt,
                  What paſſe we what the learned do miſlike?
                  Our ſinnes we ſee, wherein to ſwarme we ſeeke.
                  We paſſe not what the people ſay or thinke:
                  Their ſhittle hate makes none but cowards ſhrinke.
               
               
                  We know (ſay they) the courſe of Fortunes wheele,
                  How conſtantly it whitleth ſtill about,
                  Arrearing now, while elder headlong reele,
                  How all the riders alway hang in doubt.
                  But what for that? we count him but a lout
                  That ſtickes to mount, and baſely like a beaſt
                  Liues temperatly, for feare of blockam feaſt.
               
               
                  Indeed we would of all be deemed gods
                  What ere we do: and therefore partly hate
                  Rude Preachers, that dare threaten plagues and rods,
                  And blaſe the blots whereby we ſtaine our ſtate:
                  But nought we paſſe what any ſuch do prate;
                  Of courſe and office they muſt ſay their pleaſure,
                  And we of courſe muſt heare, and mend at leaſure.
               
               
                  But when theſe pelting Poets in their rimes
                  Shall taunt, or ieſt, or paint our wicked workes,
                  And cauſe the people know and curſe our crimes,
                  This vgly fault, no tyrant liues but irkes.
                  Wherfore we loath ſuch taunters worſe then Turkes,
                  Whoſe meaning is to make vs know our miſſe,
                  And ſo to mend: but they but dote in this.
               
               
                  We know our faults as well as any other,
                  We alſo doubt the dangers from them due:
                  Yet ſtill we truſt ſo right to rule the rother,
                  That ſcape we ſhall the ſcourges that enſue.
                  We thinke we know more ſhifts then other knew.
                  In vaine therefore for vs are counſels writ:
                  We know our faults, and will not mend a whit.
               
               
                  
                  Theſe are the feats of the vnhappie ſort,
                  That preaſe for honors, wealth, and pleaſures vaine.
                  Ceaſe therefore Baldwine, ceaſe I thee exhort,
                  Withdraw thy pen, for nothing ſhalt thou gaine
                  Saue hate, with loſſe of paper, inke, and paine.
                  Few hate their faults, all hate of them to heare,
                  And faultieſt, from fault would ſeeme moſt cleare.
               
               
                  Th' intent I know is honeſt, plaine, and good,
                  To warne the wiſe, to fray the fond from ill:
                  But wicked worldlings are ſo witleſſe wood,
                  That to the worſt they all things conſtrue ſtill.
                  With rigour oft they recompence good will:
                  They racke the words till time their ſinewes burſt,
                  In dolefull ſenſes ſtrayning ſtill the worſt.
               
               
                  A painfull proofe taught me the truth of this,
                  Through tyrants rage, and Fortunes cruell tourne:
                  They murdred me, for meetring things amiſſe.
                  For wot'ſt thou what? I am that Collingbourne
                  
                  Which made the rime, whereof I may well mourne.
                  The Cat, the Rat, and Louell our Dog,
                  Do rule all England vnder a Hog.
               
               
                  Whereof the meaning was ſo plaine and true,
                  That euery foole peceiued it at furſt:
                  Moſt liked it, for moſt that moſt things knew,
                  In hugger mugger muttred what they durſt.
                  The tyrant Prince of moſt was held accurſt,
                  Both for his owne, and for his counſels faults,
                  Of whom were three the naughtieſt of all naughts.
               
               
                  
                     Cateſby was one, whom I did call a Cat,
                  A craftie Lawyer, catching all he could.
                  The ſecond Ratcliffe, whom I nam'd a Rat,
                  A cruell beaſt to gnaw on whom he ſhould.
                  Lord Louell barkt and bit whom Richard would,
                  Whom I therefore did rightly tearme our Dog,
                  Wherewith to rime I call'd the King a Hog.
               
               
                  
                  Till he the Crowne had caught, he gaue the Bore,
                  In which eſtate would God he had deceaſed,
                  Then had the Realme not ruined ſo ſore,
                  His nephewes raigne ſhould not ſo ſoone haue ceaſed,
                  The noble blood had not been ſo decreaſed.
                  His Rat, his Cat, and Blood hound had not noied
                  Such liegemen true, as after they deſtroyed.
               
               
                  Their lawleſſe acts good ſubiects did lament,
                  And ſo did I, and therefore made the rimes,
                  To ſhew my wit how well I could inuent,
                  To warne withall the careleſſe of their crimes.
                  I thought the freedome of the ancient times
                  Stood ſtill in force: Ridentem dicere verum
                  
                  
                     Quis vetat? Nay, nay. Veritas est peſſuma rerum.
                  
               
               
                  Belike no tyrants were in Horace daies,
                  And therefore Poets freely blamed vice,
                  Witneſſe their Satyrs ſharpe, and tragicke plaies,
                  With chiefeſt Princes chiefely had in price.
                  They name no man, they mixe their gall with ſpice,
                  No more do I, I name no man outright,
                  But riddle wiſe, I meane them as I might.
               
               
                  When bruite had brought this to their guiltie eares,
                  Whoſe right ſurnames were noted in the rime,
                  They all conſpired like moſt greedie Beares,
                  To charge me ſtraight with this moſt grieuous crime:
                  And damned me the gallow tree to clime,
                  And ſtrangled then, in quarters to be cut,
                  Which ſhould on high ore London gates be put.
               
               
                  This iudgement giuen ſo vehement and ſore,
                  Made me exclame againſt their tyranny:
                  Wherewith incenſt, to make my paine the more,
                  They practiſed a ſhamefull villanie:
                  They cut me downe aliue, and cruellie
                  Ript vp my panch and bulke, to make me ſmart,
                  And lingred long ere they tooke out my hart.
               
               
                  
                  Heere tyrant Richard plai'd the eager Hog,
                  His graſhing tuskes my tender griſtles ſhore:
                  His blood hound Louell plai'd the hungrie Dog,
                  His woluiſh teeth my guiltleſſe carkaſſe tore:
                  His Rat and Cat did what they might, and more,
                  Cat Cateſby claw'd my guts to make me ſmart,
                  The Rat Ratcliffe gnawed me to the hart.
               
               
                  If Iewes had kill'd the iuſteſt King aliue,
                  If Turkes had burnt vp Churches, gods and all,
                  What greater paine could cruell hearts contriue,
                  Then that I ſuffred for this treſpaſſe ſmall?
                  I was no Prince nor Peere, but yet my fall
                  Is worthie to be thought vpon for this,
                  To ſee how cankard tyrants malice is.
               
               
                  To teach alſo all ſubiects to take heed
                  They meddle not with Magiſtrates affaires,
                  But pray to God to mend them if it need:
                  To warne alſo all Poets that be ſtrayers,
                  To keepe them cloſe in compaſſe of their chayers,
                  And when they touch that they would wiſh amended,
                  To ſauce them ſo, that few need be offended.
               
               
                  And ſo to mixe their ſharpe rebukes with mirth,
                  That they may pierce, not cauſing any paine,
                  Saue ſuch as followeth euery kindly birth,
                  Requited ſtraight with gladneſſe of the gaine.
                  A Poet muſt be pleaſant, not too plaine,
                  Faults to controule, ne yet to flatter vice,
                  But ſound and ſweet, in all things ware and wiſe.
               
               
                  The Greekes do paint a Poets office whole
                  In Pegaſus, their fained horſe with wings,
                  Whom ſhaped ſo Meduſaes blood did foale,
                  Who with his feet ſtrake out the Muſes ſprings,
                  From flintie rockes to Helicon that clings.
                  And then flue vp into the ſtarrie skie,
                  And there abides among the gods on hie.
               
               
                  
                  For he that ſhall a perfect Poet be,
                  Muſt firſt be bred out of Meduſaes bloud:
                  He muſt be chaſt and vertuous as was ſhe.
                  Who to her powre the Ocean God withſtood.
                  To th' end alſo his doome be iuſt and good,
                  He muſt (as ſhe) looke rightly with one eye
                  Truth to regard, and write nothing awrie.
               
               
                  In courage eke he muſt be like a horſe,
                  He may not feare to regiſter the right.
                  What though ſome frowne? there of he may not force,
                  No bit nor reine his tender iawes may twight,
                  He muſt be armde with ſtrength of wit and ſprite,
                  To daſh the rocks, darke cauſes and obſcure,
                  Till he attaine the ſprings of truth moſt pure.
               
               
                  His hooues alſo muſt pliant be and ſtrong,
                  To rieue the rocks of luſt and errors blind,
                  In brainleſſe heads, that alway wander wrong:
                  Theſe muſt he bruſe with reaſons plaine and kind,
                  Till ſprings of grace doe guſh out of the mind:
                  For till affections from the fond be driuen,
                  In vaine is truth told, or good counſell giuen.
               
               
                  Like Pegaſus a Poet muſt haue wings,
                  To flie to heauen, or where him liketh beſt:
                  He muſt haue knowledge of eternall things,
                  Almightie Ioue muſt harbour in his breſt:
                  With worldly cares he may not be oppreſt,
                  The wings of wit and skill muſt heaue him hier,
                  With great delight to ſatiſfie deſier.
               
               
                  He muſt alſo be luſty, free, and ſwift,
                  To trauaile far, to view the trades of men,
                  Great knowledge oft is gotten by this ſhift:
                  Things that import he muſt be quicke to pen,
                  Reprouing vices ſharply now and then.
                  He muſt be ſwift when touched tyrants chafe,
                  To gallop thence, to keepe his carkas ſafe.
               
               
                  
                  If I had well theſe qualities conſidered,
                  Eſpecially that which I touched laſt,
                  With ſpeedie flight my feet ſhould haue deliuered
                  My feeble bodie from moſt boiſtrous blaſt,
                  They ſhould haue caught me, ere I had bin caſt.
                  But too much truſting to a tyrants grace,
                  I neuer ſhrunke, nor changed port or place.
               
               
                  I thought the Poets ancient liberties
                  For pleas had been allowed at the bar:
                  I had forgot how new found tyrannies
                  With truth and freedome were at open war,
                  That luſt was law, that might did make and mar,
                  That among tyrants t'is and euer was,
                  
                     Sic volo, ſic iubeo, ſtet pro ratione voluntas.
                  
               
               
                  Where luſt is law it booteth not to pleade,
                  No priuiledge nor liberties auaile.
                  But with the learn'd, whom law and wiſdome leade,
                  Although through raſhneſſe Poets hap to raile,
                  A plea of dotage may all quarels quaile:
                  Their old licence their writings to expound,
                  Doth quit them cleare from faults by Momus ſound.
               
               
                  This freedome old ought not to be debard
                  From any wight that ſpeaketh ought, or writeth:
                  The Authors meaning ſhould of right be heard,
                  He knoweth beſt to what end he enditeth:
                  Words ſometime beare more then the heart behiteth.
                  Admit therefore the Authors expoſition,
                  If plaine, for truth: if forc'd, for his ſubmiſſion.
               
               
                  In caſe of ſlander, lawes require no more,
                  Saue to amend that ſeemed not well ſaid:
                  Or to vnſay the ſlanders ſaid afore,
                  And aske forgiueneſſe for the haſtie braid:
                  To Heretikes no greater paine is laid,
                  Then to recant their errours or retract:
                  And worſe then theſe can be no writers act.
               
               
                  
                  Yes (quoth the Cat) thy railing words be treaſon,
                  And treaſon is far worſe then hereſie.
                  Then muſt it follow by this awkeward reaſon,
                  That Kings be more then God in maieſtie,
                  And ſoules be leſſe then bodies in degree.
                  For heretikes both ſoules and God offend,
                  Traytours but ſeeke to bring mans life to end.
               
               
                  I ſpeake not this t'abaſe the hainous fault,
                  Of trayterous acts abhor'd by God and man,
                  But to make plaine their iudgement to be naught,
                  That hereſie for leſſer ſinne do ban.
                  I curſe them both as deepe as any can,
                  And alway did: yet through my fooliſh rime,
                  They ſtayned me with that moſt hatefull crime.
               
               
                  I neuer meant the King or Counſell harme,
                  Vnleſſe to wiſh them ſafetie were offence.
                  Againſt their power I neuer lifted arme,
                  Nor pen, nor tongue, for any ill pretence.
                  The rime I made, though rude, was ſound in ſence,
                  For they therein whom I ſo fondly named,
                  So ruled all, that they were foule defamed.
               
               
                  This was no treaſon, but the very troth,
                  They ruled all, none could deny the ſame:
                  What was the cauſe then why they were ſo wroth?
                  What, is it treaſon in a riming frame
                  To clip, to ſtretch, to adde, or change a name?
                  And this reſeru'd, there is no rime nor reaſon,
                  That any craft can clout to ſeeme a treaſon.
               
               
                  For where I meant the King by name of Hog,
                  I only alluded to his badge the Bore:
                  To Louels name I added more our Dog,
                  Becauſe moſt dogs haue borne that name of yere.
                  Theſe metaphors I vs'd with other more,
                  As Cat, and Rat, the halfe names of the reſt,
                  To hide the ſenſe that they ſo wrongly wreſt.
               
               
                  
                  I pray you now what treaſon find you heere?
                  Enough: you rub'd the guiltie on the gaule,
                  Both ſenſe and names do note them very neere.
                  I grant that was the chiefe cauſe of my faule,
                  Yet can you find therein no treaſon at all:
                  There is no word againſt the Prince or State,
                  No harme to them whom all the Realme did hate.
               
               
                  But ſith the guiltie alwaies are ſuſpicions
                  And dread the ruine that muſt ſue by reaſon,
                  They cannot chuſe but count their counſell vicious
                  That note their faults, and therefore call it treaſon.
                  All grace and goodneſſe with the leaud is geaſon.
                  This is the cauſe why they good things do wreſt,
                  Whereas the good take ill things to the beſt.
               
               
                  And therefore Baldwine boldly to the good
                  Rebuke their fault, ſo ſhalt thou purchaſe thankes:
                  As for the bad, thou ſhalt but moue their mood,
                  Though pleaſantly thou touch their naughty prankes.
                  Warne Poets all, no wiſe to paſſe the bankes
                  Of Helicon, but keepe within the bound:
                  So ſhall their freedome to no harme redound.
               
            
            
               THE WILFVLL FALL OF THE BLACK-SMITH, AND THE fooliſh end of the Lord Awdeley, in Iune, Anno Dom. 1496.
               
                  
                     WHo is more bold then is the Bayard blind?
                  Where is more craft then in the clouted ſhone?
                  Who catch more harme then do the bold in mind?
                  Where is more guile then where miſtruſt is none?
                  No plaiſters helpe before the griefe be knowne,
                  So ſeemes by me who could no wiſdome leare,
                  Vntill ſuch time I bought my wit too deare.
               
               
                  
                  Who being boyſtrous, ſtout, and brainleſſe bold,
                  Puft vp with pride, with fire and furies fret,
                  Incenſt with tales ſo rude and plainly told,
                  Wherein deceit with double knot was knit,
                  I trapped was as ſilly fiſh in net,
                  Who ſwift in ſwimming, careleſſe of deceit,
                  Is caught in gin wherein is laid no bait.
               
               
                  Such force and vertue hath this dolefull plaint,
                  Set forth with ſighes and teares of Crocodile,
                  Who ſeemes in ſight as ſimple as a Saint,
                  Hath laid a baite the wareleſſe to beguile,
                  And as they weepe they worke deceit the while,
                  Whoſe rufull cheere the rulers ſo relent,
                  To worke in haſte that they at laſt repent.
               
               
                  Take heed therefore yee Rulers of the Land,
                  Be blind in ſight, and ſtop your other care:
                  In ſentence ſlow, till skill the truth hath ſcand,
                  In all your doomes both loue and hate forbeare,
                  So ſhall your iudgement iuſt and right appeare.
                  It was a ſouthfaſt ſentence long agoe,
                  That haſtie men ſhall neuer lacke much woe.
               
               
                  Is it not truth? Baldwine what ſaieſt thou?
                  Say on thy mind: I pray thee muſe no more:
                  Me thinke thou ſtar'ſt and look'ſt I wot not how,
                  As though thou neuer ſaw'ſt a man before:
                  Belike thou muſeſt why I teach this lore,
                  Elſe what I am, that heere ſo boldie dare,
                  Among the preaſe of Princes to compare.
               
               
                  Though I be bold I pray thee blame not mee,
                  Like as men ſow, ſuch corne needs muſt they reape,
                  And nature planted ſo in each degree,
                  That Crabs like Crabs will kindly crawle and creepe:
                  The ſuttle Fox vnlike the ſilly ſheepe.
                  It is according to my education,
                  Forward to preaſe in rout and congregation.
               
               
                  
                  Behold my coate burnt with the ſparkes of fire,
                  My leather apron fild with horſe ſhooe nailes,
                  Behold my hammer and my pinſers here,
                  Behold my lookes, a marke that ſeldome failes:
                  My cheekes declare I was not fed with quailes,
                  My face, my cloathes, my tooles with all my faſhion,
                  Declare full well a Prince of rude creation.
               
               
                  A Prince I ſaid, a Prince I ſay againe,
                  Though not by birth, by crafty vſurpation.
                  Who doubts but ſome men princehood do obtaine,
                  By open force, and wrongfull domination?
                  Yet while they rule are had in reputation.
                  Euen ſo by me, the while I wrought my feate,
                  I was a Prince, at leaſt in my conceite.
               
               
                  I dare the bolder take on me the name,
                  Becauſe of him whom here I leade in hand,
                  
                     Tychet Lord Awdley one of birth and fame,
                  Which with his ſtrength and power ſeru'd in my band,
                  I was a Prince while that I was ſo mand:
                  His Butterfly ſtill vnderneath my ſhield
                  Diſplaied was, from Welles to Blackeheath field.
               
               
                  But now behold he doth bewaile the ſame:
                  Thus after wits their raſhnes do depraue.
                  Behold diſmaid he dare not ſpeake for ſhame,
                  He lookes like one that late came from the graue,
                  Or one that came forth of Trophonius caue,
                  For that in wit he had ſo litle pith,
                  As he a Lord to ſerue a traytour Smith.
               
               
                  Such is the courage of the noble hart,
                  Which doth deſpiſe the vile and baſer ſort,
                  He may not touch that ſauours of the cart,
                  Himliſteth not with each Iack lout to ſport,
                  He lets him paſſe for pairing of his port:
                  The iolly Eagles catch not litle flees,
                  The courtly ſilkes match ſeeld with homely frees.
               
               
                  
                  But ſurely Baldwine if I were allow'd
                  To ſay the troth, I could ſomewhat declare:
                  But clerkes will ſay, this Smith doth waxe too proud,
                  Thus in precepts of wiſdome to compare.
                  But Smiths muſt ſpeake that Clerkes for feare ne dare.
                  It is a thing that all men may lament,
                  When Clerkes keepe cloſe the truth leſt they be ſhent.
               
               
                  The Hoſtler, Barbar, Miller and the Smith,
                  Heare of the ſawes of ſuch as wiſdome ken,
                  And learne ſome wit, although they want the pith,
                  That Clerkes pretend: and yet both now and then,
                  The greateſt Clerkes proue not the wiſeſt men:
                  It is not right that men forbid ſhould bee
                  To ſpeake the truth, all were he bond or free.
               
               
                  And for becauſe I vs'd to fret and ſome,
                  Not paſſing greatly whom I ſhould diſpleaſe,
                  I dare be bold a while to play the mome,
                  Out of my ſacke ſome others faults to leaſe,
                  And let mine owne behind my backe to peaſe.
                  For he that hath his owne before his eie,
                  Shall not ſo quicke anothers fault eſpie.
               
               
                  I ſay was neuer no ſuch wofull caſe,
                  As is when honor doth it ſelfe abuſe:
                  The noble man that vertue doth embrace,
                  Repreſſeth pride, and humblenes doth vſe,
                  By wiſdome workes, and raſhneſſe doth refuſe.
                  His wanton will and luſt that bridle can,
                  Indeed is gentle both to God and man.
               
               
                  But where the Nobles want both wit and grace,
                  Regard no rede, care not but for their luſt,
                  Oppreſſe the poore, ſet will in reaſons place,
                  And in their words and doomes be found vniuſt,
                  Wealth goeth to wracke till all lie in the duſt:
                  There Fortune frownes, and ſpite begins to grow,
                  Till high, and low, and all be ouer throw.
               
               
                  
                  Then fith that vertue hath ſo good reward,
                  And after vice ſo duely waiteth ſhame,
                  How hap'th that Princes haue no more regard,
                  Their tender youth with vertue to inflame?
                  For lacke whereof their wit and will is lame,
                  Infect with folly, proue to luſt and pride,
                  Not knowing how themſelues or theirs to guide.
               
               
                  Whereby it hapneth to the wanton wight,
                  As to a ſhip vpon the ſtormie ſeas,
                  Which lacking ſterne to guide it ſelfe aright,
                  From ſhore to ſhore the winde and tide to teaſe,
                  Finding no place to reſt or take his eaſe,
                  Till at the laſt it ſinke vpon the ſand:
                  So fare they all that haue no vertues ſcand.
               
               
                  The plowman firſt his land doth dreſſe and tourne,
                  And makes it apt or ere the ſeed he ſow,
                  Whereby he is full like to reape good corne,
                  Where otherwiſe no ſeed but weed would grow:
                  By which enſample men may eaſely know,
                  When youth haue wealth before they can well vſe it,
                  It is no wonder though they do abuſe it.
               
               
                  How can he rule well in a commonwealth,
                  Which knoweth not himſelfe in rule to frame?
                  How ſhould he rule himſelfe in ghoſtly health,
                  Which neuer learn'd one leſſon for the ſame?
                  If ſuch catch harme their parents are too blame:
                  For needs muſt they be blind, and blindly led,
                  Where no good leſſon can be taught or read.
               
               
                  Some thinke their youth diſcreet and wiſely taught,
                  That brag, and boaſt, and weare their feather braue,
                  Can roiſt and rout, both loure and looke aloft,
                  Can ſweare and ſtare, and call their fellowes knaue,
                  Can pill and poll, and catch before they craue,
                  Can card and dice, both cog and foiſt at fare,
                  Play on vnthriftie, till their purſe be bare.
               
               
                  
                  Some teach their youth to pipe, to ſing and dance,
                  To hauke, to hunt, to chooſe and kill their game,
                  To wind their horne, and with their horſe to praunce,
                  To play at tenis, ſet the lute in frame,
                  Run at the ring, and vſe ſuch other game:
                  Which feats although they be not all vnfit,
                  Yet cannot they the marke of vertue hit.
               
               
                  For noble youth, there is nothing ſo meete
                  As learning is, to know the good from ill:
                  To know the tongues and perfectly endite,
                  And of the lawes to haue a perfect skill,
                  Things to reforme as right and iuſtice will:
                  For honour is ordeined for no cauſe,
                  But to ſee right maintained by the lawes.
               
               
                  It ſpites my heart to heare when noble men
                  Cannot diſcloſe their ſecrets to their frend,
                  In ſauegard ſure, with paper, inke, and pen,
                  But firſt they muſt a ſecretary find,
                  To whom they ſhew the bottome of their mind:
                  And be he falſe or true, a blab or cloſe,
                  To him they muſt their counſaile needs diſcloſe.
               
               
                  And where they rule that haue of law no skill,
                  There is no boote, they needes muſt ſeeke for ayd:
                  Then rul'd are they, and rule as others will,
                  As he that on a ſtage his part hath plaid:
                  But he was taught, nought hath he done or ſaid.
                  Such youth therfore ſeek ſcience of the ſage,
                  As thinke to rule when that ye come to age.
               
               
                  Where youth is brought vp in feare and obedience,
                  Kept from ill company, bridled of their luſt,
                  Do ſerue God duly and know their allegiance,
                  Learne godly weale which time nor age can ruſt:
                  There Prince, people, and Peers needes proſper muſt.
                  For happy are the folke, and bleſſed is that land,
                  Where truth and vertue both haue got the ouer hand.
               
               
                  
                  I ſpeake this Baldwine of this rufull Lord,
                  Whom I perforce do heere preſent to thee,
                  He faints ſo ſore he may not ſpeake a word:
                  I pleade his cauſe without reward or fee,
                  And am enforc'd to ſpeake for him and mee:
                  If in his youth he had been wiſely tought,
                  He ſhould not now his wit ſo deare haue bought.
               
               
                  For what is he that hath but halfe a wit,
                  But may well know that rebels cannot ſpeed?
                  Marke well my tale, and take good heed to it,
                  Recount it well, and take it for good reed,
                  Proue it vntrue I will not truſt my creed:
                  Was neuer rebell heretofore or ſince,
                  That could or ſhall preuaile againſt his Prince.
               
               
                  For ere the ſubiect purpoſe to rebell,
                  Within himſelfe let him conſider well,
                  Foreſee the danger, and beare in his braine,
                  How hard it is his purpoſe to obtaine:
                  For if he once be entred to the breares,
                  He hath a raging wolfe faſt by the eares.
               
               
                  And when he entred is to rule the rout,
                  Although he would, he can no way get out:
                  He may be ſure none will to him reſort,
                  But ſuch as are the vile and raſcall ſort:
                  All honeſt men, as well the moſt as leſt,
                  To taſte of treaſon vtterly deteſt.
               
               
                  Then let him waigh how long he can be ſure,
                  Where faith nor friendſhip may no while endure:
                  He whom he truſteth moſt, to gaine a groate
                  Will fall him from, and ſeeke to cut his throate:
                  Among the knaues and ſlaues where vice is rooted,
                  There is no other friendſhip to be looked.
               
               
                  With fooliſh men ſo falſehood is in price,
                  That faith is ſinne, and vertue counted vice.
                  And where the quarell is ſo vile and bad,
                  
                     
What hope of aid then is there to be had?
                  Thinkes he that men will run at this or that,
                  To do a thing they know not how or what?
               
               
                  Nor yet what danger may thereof betide,
                  VVhere wiſdome would they ſhould at home abide,
                  Rather then ſeeke, and know not what to find.
                  VViſe men will firſt debate this in their mind:
                  Full ſure they are if that they go to wrecke,
                  Without all grace they loſe both head and necke.
               
               
                  They loſe their lands and goods, their child and wife
                  VVith griefe and ſhame ſhall leade a wofull life:
                  If he be ſlaine in field he dieth accurſt,
                  VVhich of all wreckes we ſhould account the worſt:
                  And he that dieth defending his liege Lord,
                  Is bleſt and bleſt againe by Gods owne word.
               
               
                  And where the ſouldiers wages is vnpai'd,
                  There is the Captaine ſlenderly obey'd:
                  And where the ſouldier's out of feare and dreed,
                  He will be lacke when that there is moſt need,
                  And priuately he ſeekes his eaſe and leaſure,
                  And will be rul'd but at his will and pleaſure.
               
               
                  And where ſome draw forth, other do draw backe,
                  There in the end muſt needs be woe and wracke:
                  To hope for aid of Lords it is but vaine,
                  Whoſe foretaught wit of treaſon knoweth the paine:
                  They know what powre a Prince hath in his hand,
                  And what it is with rebels for to ſtand.
               
               
                  They know by treaſon honor is defaced,
                  Their ofſpring and their progenie diſgraced.
                  They know to praiſe is not ſo worthie a thing,
                  As to be true and faithfull to their King.
                  Aboue cogniſance or armes, or pedigree a far,
                  An vnſported coat is like a blaſing ſtar:
               
               
                  
                  Therefore the rebell is accurſtand mad,
                  That hopes for that which rebell neuer had:
                  Who truſting ſtill to tales doth hang in hope,
                  Till at the laſt he hang faſt by the rope.
                  For though that tales be told that hope might feed,
                  Such fooliſh hope hath ſtill vnhappie ſpeed.
               
               
                  Is is a cuſtome neuer will be broken,
                  In broiles the bag of lies is euer open:
                  Such lying newes men daily will inuent,
                  As can the hearers fancie beſt content:
                  And as the newes do run and neuer ceaſe,
                  So more and more they daily do encreaſe.
               
               
                  And as they 'ncreaſe, they multiplie as faſt,
                  That ten is ten hundred, ten thouſand at the laſt.
                  And though the rebell had once got the field,
                  Thinkes he thereby to make his Prince to yeeld?
                  A Princes power within his owne region,
                  Is not ſo ſoone brought to confuſion.
               
               
                  For Kings through God are ſtrong and ſtoutly harted,
                  That they of ſubiects will not be ſubuerted:
                  If Kings would yeeld, yet God would them reſtraine,
                  Of whom the Prince hath grace and power to raigne:
                  Who ſtraitly chargeth vs aboue all thing,
                  That no man ſhould reſiſt againſt his King.
               
               
                  Who that reſiſteth his dread ſoueraigne Lord;
                  Doth damne his ſoule, by Gods owne very word,
                  A Chriſtian ſubiect ſhould with honor due,
                  Obey his Soueraigne though he were a Iew:
                  Whereby aſſur'd when ſubiects do rebell,
                  Gods wrath is kindled, and threatneth fire and hell.
               
               
                  It is ſoone knowne when Gods fierce wrath is kindled,
                  How they ſhall ſpeed with whom he is offended:
                  If God giue victorie to whom he liketh beſt,
                  Why looke they for it whom God doth moſt deteſt?
                  For treaſon is hatefull, and abhor'd in Gods ſight,
                  Example of Iudas that moſt wicked wight:
               
               
                  
                  Which is the chiefe cauſe no treaſon preuailes,
                  For ill muſt he ſpeed whom Gods wrath aſſailes.
                  Let traytours and rebels looke to ſpeed then,
                  VVhen Gods mightie power is ſubiect to men.
                  Much might be ſaid that goeth more neere the pith,
                  But this ſufficeth for a rurall Smith.
               
               
                  
                     Baldwine when thou hear'ſt reaſon in this caſe,
                  Belike thou think'ſt I was not very wiſe,
                  And that I was accurſt, or elſe wanted grace,
                  Which knowing the end of my fond enterpriſe,
                  VVould thus preſume againſt my Prince to riſe:
                  But as there is a cauſe that moueth euery woe,
                  Somewhat there was whereof this ſore did grow:
               
               
                  And to be plaine and ſimple in this caſe,
                  The cauſe why I ſuch matter tooke in hand,
                  VVas nothing elſe but pride and lacke of grace,
                  Vaine hope of helpe, and tales both falſe and fond:
                  By meane whereof I did my Prince withſtand,
                  Deni'd the taxe aſſeſt by conuocation,
                  To maintaine warre againſt the Scottiſh nation.
               
               
                  VVhereat the Corniſh men did much repine,
                  For they of gold and ſiluer were full bare,
                  And liued hardly, digging in the mine,
                  They ſaid they had no money for to ſpare:
                  Gan firſt to grudge, and then to ſweare and ſtare,
                  Forgot their due obeyſance, and raſhly fell to rauing,
                  And ſaid they would not beare ſuch polling and ſuch ſhauing.
               
               
                  They firſt accus'd the King as author of their griefe,
                  And then the Biſhop Morton, and Sir Reinold Bray:
                  
                  For they then were about the King moſt chiefe,
                  Becauſe they thought the whole fault in them lay:
                  They did proteſt to rid them of the way.
                  Such thanke haue they that rule aboue a Prince,
                  They beare the blame of other mens offence.
               
               
                  
                  VVhen I perceiu'd the Commons in a rore,
                  Then I and Flamoke both agreed together,
                  To whom the people reſorted more and more,
                  Lamenting and crying, helpe vs now or neuer,
                  Breake bondage now, then are we free for euer:
                  VVhereat inflam'd in hope to purchaſe fame,
                  To be their captaines tooke on vs the name.
               
               
                  Then might you heare the people make a ſhout,
                  God ſaue the captaines, and ſend vs all good ſpeed:
                  Then he that fainted counted was a lout,
                  The ruffians ran to ſow ſeditious ſeed:
                  To call for company there was no need,
                  For euery man his brother did entice,
                  To be partaker of his wicked vice.
               
               
                  Then all ſuch newes as made for our auaile,
                  Was brought to me, but ſuch as ſounded ill,
                  VVas none ſo bold to ſpeake or yet bewaile:
                  Each one ſo wedded was vnto his will,
                  That forth they cri'd with bowes, with ſword, and bill.
                  And what the rufler ſpake the lout tooke for a verdite,
                  For there the beſt was worſt, worſt beſt regarded.
               
               
                  For when men rebell, there ſtill the viler ſort
                  Conſpire together, and will haue all the ſway:
                  And be it well or ill, they beare the port,
                  As they will do, the reſt muſt needs obay.
                  They prattle and prate as doth the Popingay:
                  They crie vnto the reſt to keepe th' array,
                  Whiles they may range and rob for ſpoile and pray.
               
               
                  And when we had prepared euery thing,
                  VVe went to Tawnton with all our prouiſion,
                  And there we ſlew the Prouoſt of Peniyn,
                  For that he there did ſit in high Commiſſion:
                  He was not wiſe, nor yet of great diſcretion,
                  That durſt approch his enmies in their rage,
                  VVhen wit nor reaſon could their ire aſſwage.
               
               
                  
                  From thence we went to Wels, and were receiued
                  Of this Lord Awdely as our chiefe captaine,
                  He had the name, but yet he was deceiued,
                  For I indeed did rule the clubbiſh traine,
                  My cartly Knights true honour did diſdaine:
                  For like doth loue his like, t'will be none other,
                  A chorle will loue a chorle, before he will his brother.
               
               
                  From Wels and Wincheſter, to Blackheath field,
                  And there encamped looking for more aid,
                  But when none came, we thought our ſelues beguild.
                  Such Corniſhmen as knew they were betraid,
                  From vs by night away together ſtraid:
                  There might we learne how vaine it is to truſt
                  Our fained friends, in quarels ſo vniuſt.
               
               
                  But we that thought our power was ſtrong;
                  Were bent to try what euer ſhould betide.
                  We were the bolder, for the King ſo long
                  Deferred fight: which ſo increaſt our pride,
                  That ſure we thought the King himſelfe did hide
                  Within the City, and with courage hault,
                  We did intend the City to aſſault.
               
               
                  But he contrary to our expectation,
                  Was fully bent to let vs run our race,
                  Till we were fartheſt from our habitation,
                  Where that of aid or ſuccour was no place,
                  And then be plagu'd as it ſhould pleaſe his grace:
                  All doubtfull plaints, how euer they did ſound,
                  To our beſt vaile we alway did expound.
               
               
                  When that the King ſaw time, with courage bold
                  He ſent a power to circumuent vs all:
                  Where we encloſd as ſimple ſheepe in folde,
                  Were ſlaughtered all as beaſts in butchers ſtall:
                  The King himſelfe, what euer might befall,
                  VVas ſtrongly arm'd within Saint Georges field,
                  And there abode till that he heard vs yeeld.
               
               
                  
                  Then downe we kneeld, and cride to ſaue our life,
                  It was too late our folly to bewaile:
                  There were we ſpoild of armour, coate, and knife:
                  And we which thought the City to aſſaile,
                  Were led as priſners naked as my naile.
                  Of vs two thouſand they had ſlaine before,
                  And we of them three hundred and no more.
               
               
                  My Lord and we the Captaines of the Weſt,
                  Took Inne at Newgate, faſt in fetters tide,
                  Where after doome we had but litle reſt.
                  My Lord through London was drawne on a ſlide,
                  To Tower hill, where with an axe he dide,
                  Clad in his armour painted all in paper,
                  Torne and reuers'd in ſpite of his behauer.
               
               
                  With Flamoke I and other of our bent,
                  As traytours at Tiburne our iudgement did obay:
                  The people lookt I ſhould my fault lament,
                  To whom I ſpake, that for my fond aſſaie,
                  I ſhould haue fame that neuer ſhould decay:
                  Wherby ye may perceiue vaine glory doth enflame
                  As well the meaner ſort, as men of greater name.
               
               
                  But as the fickle patient, ſometime hath deſire,
                  To taſt the things that Phyſick hath denide,
                  And hath both paine and ſorrow for his hire:
                  The ſame to mee right well may be applide,
                  Which while I raught for fame on ſhame did ſlide,
                  And ſeeking fame, brought forth my bitter bane,
                  As he that fierd the temple of Diane.
                  
               
               
                  I tell thee Baldwine, I muſe oft, to ſee
                  How euery man for wealth and honour gapeth,
                  How euery man would climbe aboue the skie,
                  How euery man th' aſſured meane ſo hateth,
                  How froward Fortune oft their purpoſe mateth:
                  And if they hap their purpoſe to obtaine,
                  Their wealth is woe, their honour care and paine.
               
               
                  
                  VVe ſee the ſeruant happier then his Lord,
                  VVe ſee him liue when that his Lord is dead,
                  He ſleepeth ſound, is merry at his bord,
                  No ſorow in his heart doth vex his head:
                  Happie is he that pouertie can wed.
                  VVhat gaine the mightie men when they be dead,
                  By all the ſpoile, and blood that they haue ſhed?
               
               
                  The loftie towre where honor hath his ſeat,
                  Is high on rockes more ſlipper then the ice,
                  VVhere ſtill the whirling winde doth roare and beat,
                  VVhere ſudden qualmes and perils ſtill ariſe,
                  And is beſet with many ſundrie vice,
                  So ſtrange to men when firſt they come thereat,
                  They be amas'd, and do they wot not what.
               
               
                  He that preuailes, and to the towre can clime,
                  VVith toile and care muſt needs abridge his daies:
                  And he that ſlides may curſe the houre and time
                  He did attempt to giue ſo fond aſſaies,
                  And all his life to griefe and ſhame obaies.
                  Thus ſlide he downe, or to the top aſcend,
                  Aſſure himſelfe repentance is the end.
               
               
                  
                     Baldwine therefore do thou record my name,
                  For preſident to ſuch as credit lies,
                  Or thirſt to ſuck the ſugred cup of fame,
                  Or do attempt againſt their Prince to riſe:
                  And charge them all to keepe within their ſiſe.
                  VVho doth aſſay to wreſt beyond his ſtrength,
                  Let him be ſure he ſhall repent at length.
               
               
                  At my requeſt admoniſh thou all men,
                  To ſpend the talent well which God hath lent,
                  He that hath one, let him not toile for ten,
                  For one's too much, vnleſſe it be well ſpent:
                  I haue had proofe, therefore I now repent,
                  Thrice happie are thoſe men, yea bleſt is hee,
                  VVho can contented ſerue in his degree.
               
               M. Cauil.
            
            
               
               HOW THE VALIANT KNIGHT SIR NICHOLAS Burdet, Chiefe Butler of Normandie, was ſlaine at Pontoiſe, Anno Dom. 1441.
               
                  
                     IF erſt in Kings affaires we counted were of truſt,
                  To fight in waged warres, as Captaines gainſt the foes,
                  And might therefore aliue receiue the guerdon iuſt,
                  Which aye his Maieſtie employ'd on thoſe:
                  Why ſhould we ſo keepe ſilence now, and not diſcloſe
                  Our noble acts to thoſe remaine aliue,
                  T' encourage them the like exploits t'atchiue?
               
               
                  For if when as we warr'd, for Prince and publike weale,
                  We might to each for both haue time and place to ſpeake,
                  Then why not now, if we to both appeale?
                  Sith both well know our dealings were not weake.
                  We claime as right, in truth our minds to breake,
                  The rather eke we thinke to ſpeake we franchiz'd are,
                  Becauſe we ſeru'd for peace and di'd in Princes warre.
               
               
                  VVhich granted ſo, and held deſerued due,
                  I may full well on ſtage ſupplie the place a while,
                  Till I haue plainly laid before your view
                  That I haue cauſe, as theſe, to plaine of Fortunes guile,
                  VVhich ſmirking though at firſt, ſhe ſeeme to ſmooth and ſmile,
                  (If Fortune be) who deem'd themſelues in skies to dwell,
                  She thirleth downe to dread the gulfes of gaſtly hell.
               
               
                  But heere I let a while the Ladie Fortune ſtay,
                  To tell what time I liu'd, and what our warres were then,
                  The great exploits we did, and where our armies lay,
                  Eke of the praiſe of ſome right honorable men,
                  VVhich things with eyes I ſaw, call'd now to mind agen.
                  VVhat I performed preſent in the fight,
                  I will in order and my fall recite.
               
               
                  
                  In youth I ſeru'd that roiall Henry fift the King,
                  Whoſe praiſe for martiall feats eternall fame reteines,
                  When he the Normanes ſtout did in ſubiection bring,
                  My ſelfe was vnder then his enſignes taking paines.
                  With loial hart I fought, purſu'd my Prince his gaines,
                  There dealt I ſo that time my fame to raiſe,
                  French writers yet my name and manhood praiſe.
               
               
                  And erſt as Burdets diuers warlike wights
                  (In Warwicke ſhire their lands in Arrow ar)
                  Were for good ſeruice done made worthy Knights,
                  Whoſe noble acts be yet recounted far:
                  Euen ſo my ſelfe well fram'd to peace or war,
                  Of theſe the heire by due diſcent I came,
                  
                     Sir Nicholas Burdet Knight, which had to name.
               
               
                  That time the noble Iohn of Bedford Duke bare ſway,
                  And feared was in France for courage ſtout and fell,
                  He lou'd me for my fight and perſon, (though I ſay)
                  And with reuenues me rewarded yearely well.
                  I plaid the faithfull ſubiects part, the truth to tell,
                  And was accounted loiall, conſtant ſtill,
                  Of ſtomack, worſhip great, and warlike skill.
               
               
                  But then (O greefe to tell) ere long this peereleſſe King,
                  When he reſtored had his right vnto the Crowne
                  The Duchie all of Normandy, eke ſubiect bring
                  The Frenchemen all, and ſet Lieutenants in each towne
                  High Regent made of France, then Fortune gan to frowne,
                  He then departed life, too ſoone alas:
                  Some men ſuppoſe his grace empoiſond was.
               
               
                  Thou Fortune ſlie, what meanſt thou thus, theſe prancks to play?
                  Falſe Fortune blere ey'd blind, vnſteady ſtartling ſtill,
                  What meanſt thou turning thus thy flattering face away,
                  Inconſtant where thou beareſt moſt good will?
                  Is it thy nature then? or iſt thy wonted skill?
                  It coſt thee nought, they ſay it comes by kind,
                  As thou art biſme, ſo are thine actions blind.
               
               
                  
                  I nothing doubt then thou thy ſelfe ſhalt fall.
                  I truſt to ſee the time when thou ſhalt be forgot.
                  For why thy pride, and pompe and power muſt vaniſh all,
                  Thy name ſhall die for aye, and periſh quite I wot.
                  And when thou ſhalt be counted but a ſot,
                  The noble wights which liu'd and dide in worthy fame,
                  In heauen and earth ſhall find an euerlaſting name.
               
               
                  But words of courſe are theſe of Fortune had,
                  When vnto Princes haps chance good or ill:
                  God ſends to euery ſort theſe tempeſts ſad,
                  VVhen from his word they ſwarue and heauenly will.
                  Men muſt endeuour then to pleaſe his goodneſſe ſtill,
                  And then come life or death, come ioy, come ſmart,
                  No Fortunes frowne can daunt the doughty hart.
               
               
                  The famous King ſo dead, his ſon but nine months old
                  
                     Henry the ſixt, of England was proclaimed King:
                  And then the Frenchmen waxt more ſtout and bold,
                  His youth occaſion gaue them to conſpire the thing,
                  Which might them all from due ſubiection bring.
                  On which the Counſell cald a Parliament:
                  Of French that might the treaſons high preuent.
               
               
                  VTherein the Duke of Bedford my good Lord and frend
                  VVas Regent made the Prince his deputy in France:
                  The Duke of Gloceſter Protectour was, to th' end
                  To rule in caſes ſuch at home might hap to chance:
                  They choſe to gard the Prince in honour to aduance
                  
                     Henry Benford Biſhop of VVincheſter,
                  And Thomas the noble Duke of Exceſter.
               
               
                  But here before thoſe things could well be ſetled ſure,
                  (As great affaires of Kingdomes longer time doe take)
                  The Frenchmen did by treaſon, force, and coine procure
                  Some townes which Engliſh were in France their faith forſake.
                  A long diſcourſe it were of all recitall make:
                  But of my chance that time, recite will I,
                  VVhich ſeru'd in warres my Prince in Normandy.
               
               
                  
                  Before the Mount S. Michael as in ſiege I lay,
                  In confines of the Normans and the Britons land,
                  From towneſmen famiſht nigh we vitailes kept away,
                  And made them oft in danger of diſ-Mounting ſtand:
                  But it being ſtrong and alſo ſtoutly man'd,
                  Euen by our loſſes they gate heart of graſſe,
                  And we declining ſaw what Fortune was.
               
               
                  Yet neretheleſſe we thought by famine make them yeeld,
                  Eke they by fight or ſuccours hopte the ſiege to raiſe,
                  T'accompliſh which they ruſht on ſudden out to feeld,
                  As bent to die or win the wanted food with praiſe:
                  And we as readie were for them at all aſſaies.
                  Theſe eager impes whom food want feaz'd to fight amaine,
                  VVe forc'd them die, fall, flie, to take their fort againe.
               
               
                  VVhere I in chaſe purſu'd them euen to the towne,
                  Tane priſoner was, a while for ranſome lay:
                  But then the worthie Duke the Regent of renowne,
                  Did for me quite disburſe the price requir'd to pay.
                  The ſiege we rais'd, from thence we went our way,
                  And I redeemed bare this blanke in mind,
                  Till of requite I might occaſion find.
               
               
                  VVhich thus ere long befell, to this a while giue eare:
                  VVhen Arthur Earle of Richmond to S. Iaques came
                  
                     De Beuuron where my ſelfe and other Captaines were,
                  VVhich had repared well and fortifi'd the ſame,
                  VVe made him flie, to his immortall ſhame:
                  Euen thus to him and fortie thouſand moe,
                  Fiue hundred Engliſh gaue the ouerthroe.
               
               
                  Long while he batterie laid againſt the wall,
                  Thereby to make a breach for them to enter in:
                  But well perceiuing ſtill his ſhot to profit ſmall,
                  And that we weigh'd not of his power a pin,
                  On euery ſide afreſh he did th' aſſault begin:
                  Yet we ſo bare them off, and beate them downe,
                  They durſt not ſeaze or enter on the towne.
               
               
                  
                  But wearied with the ſiege and fault they pauſd a while,
                  Conſulting what were beſt, and ſo did we likewiſe:
                  They found the feate, they thought ſhould ſurely vs beguile,
                  And in an euening came t'accompliſh th' enterpriſe.
                  A ſharp aſſault they gaue. Alarme my mates we riſe:
                  On both the ſides they ſcald, the fort to gaine:
                  But from the ſcales and walkes we flang them downe amaine.
               
               
                  It was my charge that time to keepe a bulwarke bace,
                  Where Britons came along to enter by a ſtrait:
                  T'was in a bottome low, a pond was by the place,
                  By which they needes muſt paſſe vp to a poſterne gate.
                  I meant to make them fiſh the poole without a bait,
                  Proteſting ere they there ſhould get the wall
                  We would as Engliſh die, or giue our foes the fall.
               
               
                  The trumpets ſound tan tara, tan tan tara right,
                  The guns were ſhot founce-founce-founce, fomp-fum, fow-powthow,
                  The drums went downe-dun downe, the fluits fit-fite-fit-fite,
                  The weapons cliſh-claſh and the captaines now-now now.
                  With billes we beat thē downe, with ſhafts we ſhot them throw.
                  The gory ground did groane, the ſmoky ſhot and cries
                  Dimd all the aire, and thundred through the skies.
               
               
                  S. Deniſe cride the French, and Britons glahe-lahee,
                  
                  S. George the Engliſh cride, fight-fight-fight, kill-kill-kill:
                  Fight-fight (quoth I) come on, they flee, they flee, they flee.
                  And therewithall we vſe a point of warlike skill,
                  We cauſd the men within to cry vnto vs ſtill,
                  Fight Suffolke now, fight-fight and Salsbury:
                  
                  Fight fight you noble Earles, the Britons flee they flee.
               
               
                  With that amazed all the Britons gan recoile,
                  Some drowned in the pond, wherin they ran for feare,
                  And I purſu'd the flight, to wrecke my captiue foile,
                  We paid them in the chaſe diſordred as they were,
                  Seuen hundred ſlew, tooke fifty priſners there,
                  Gaind eighteene ſtanderds, and one banner more:
                  Yet I and mine not fully were foureſcore.
               
               
                  
                  Of this exploit when th' Earle of Richmond heard,
                  Which gaue an hot aſſault on th' otherſide the towne,
                  No leſſe was he diſpleaſde, amazed, then affeard,
                  To heare the names of thoſe two Earles of high renowne,
                  His guilty courage quaild, his heart was danted downe,
                  He cauſde the trumpets ſound retrait away:
                  To ſcale our walles he durſt no longer ſtay.
               
               
                  At midnight he diſlodgd, from ſiege he made depart
                  The Conſtable of France (late Earle of Richmond) fled,
                  And toward Fougiers ſped, with ſuch as tooke his part,
                  For haſte perhaps with feare leſt he ſhould loſe his head.
                  They left two hundred pipes of flowre and bisket bread,
                  Greate gunnes fourteene, three hundred pipes of wine,
                  Two hundred frailes of figs and raiſons fine.
               
               
                  Fiue hundred barrels they of herring left beſide,
                  Of pouder for our gunnes full forty barrels more,
                  They fled without their tents, the daſterds durſt not bide,
                  For feare they could not ſtay, to take away their ſtore.
                  Haue you oft heard the like, of cowards ſuch before?
                  Thoſe forty thouſand, Britons, French, and Scots,
                  Foure ſcore them foiled, made them flee like ſots.
               
               
                  When this, that noble man, the Duke of Bedford heard,
                  How I did quit my ſelfe, and ſeru'd my Prince ſo well,
                  He me procured of the King as great reward
                  As my deſerts could wiſh, and more the truth to tell,
                  Chiefe Butlerſhip of Normandy vnto me fell,
                  Reuenues eke in Normandy of lands,
                  A thouſand crownes came yearely to my hands.
               
               
                  I after this was ſent to make inrode
                  Vpon the coaſt of Britaine, for to bate their pride,
                  A band of horſemen tooke without abode,
                  The Duke of Sommerſet made me their guide,
                  To many townes about their bounds we ride:
                  Set them on fire, or made them ranſom pay,
                  Tooke ſtore of priſners, wrought them much decay.
               
               
                  
                  Returned victours ſafe to Normandy,
                  With good ſucceſſe, for why the cauſe was good:
                  And of our Prince were guerdond gratefully
                  With laud and gifts, as for our ſeruice ſtood.
                  This makes the Captaines venture life and blood,
                  And ſouldiers ſerue with heart in what they may,
                  Which are aſſur'd of honour, praiſe, and pay.
               
               
                  Yee worthy wights aliue, which loue your Countreis weale,
                  And for your Princes port ſuch warres doe vndertake,
                  Learne ſo for Countrey yours with forraine foes to deale,
                  See that of manhood good, ſo great accounts ye make.
                  It nothing vailes in peace, to ſweare, ſtur, face or crake:
                  In warres he winnes the fame of noble wight
                  Who warlike deales, for Prince and publique right.
               
               
                  Yf you ſo pointed be, to ſerue your Prince in war,
                  As erſt was I, and muſt before the muſter take,
                  Retaine ſuch ſouldiers as well made, ſtrong, ſeemely ar,
                  Brought vp to labour hard, of ſuch account doe make:
                  Theſe able are at neede to ſtand and keepe the ſtake,
                  When facing foiſters fit for Tiburne fraies
                  Are food-ſick faint, or hart-ſicke run their waies.
               
               
                  At whom a man may find a number euery day,
                  Which weare their weapons ſtill, as all the world were war,
                  And keepe a coile to beare the beſt of blades away,
                  VVith bucklers braue at backs, to ſhew what men they are.
                  In peace at home they ſweare, ſtare, foiſt, roiſt, fight, and iar:
                  But when abroad they feare of warres the ſmart,
                  Some better ſouldiers proue from driuing cart.
               
               
                  In warres to ſerue (as we) and weapons haue
                  VVhen warlike ſtormes do rage beſeemes a warlike man:
                  In pleaſant peace who ſets himſelfe to banding braue,
                  And facing fares at home, abroad doe nothing can,
                  (Though nere ſo much he boaſt) fie on him coward than:
                  For not in gauntlet, ſword, targ, oathes, haire, ſtaring eyes:
                  But in the breaſt, good courage, vertue lies.
               
               
                  
                  But here perhas (you ſay) I fall a note too low,
                  Beneath the perſons of theſe worthy Peeres and me.
                  Tis true indeed, and yet ſuch fruite hereof may grow:
                  As eke the meane hereby, his iarring out may ſee.
                  Without good meane, the ſong can neuer ſweetly gree.
                  Leaue out the meane, or let him keepe no tune:
                  And you ſhall ſing when Eaſter falles in Iune.
               
               
                  Euen ſo, if meaner ſorts doe iangle here and iar
                  To languiſh vnder Mars, but fill good peace with fight,
                  As diſcord foule in muſicke, fit they for the war:
                  They neuer can atchieue the victory aright.
                  Lead ſuch as ſquare or feare, then farewell all, good night.
                  A ſheepe is euen as good to ſtarting ſtand and bea:
                  As he that iangles, wrangles, rangles, runnes awea.
               
               
                  Then whoſo deales for warre, muſt wiſely make his mart,
                  And chooſe ſuch ſouldiers ſtout will ſtiffe in warfare ſtand.
                  If he not recke what ruffian roiſters take his part,
                  He weeldes vnwiſely then the mace of Mars in hand.
                  He muſt be able eke, to deeme for ſea and land
                  What men may ſerue, to beſt aduantage make,
                  And them inſtruct fine warlike points to take.
               
               
                  With skilfull knowledge fraight he muſt be void of feare,
                  Of wiſedom ſo diſcreete, ſo ſober, graue and ſage,
                  To deeme, perceiue, abide, aduentures both to beare
                  As may in all exploits of fight with Fortune wage:
                  He muſt haue art in vre, and vſe not rule by rage:
                  Wiſe dealing ſets the ſouldiers ſure in ray,
                  Wilde ouer raſhneſſe caſteth all away:
               
               
                  The cauſe, ground, place and time, the order of their fights,
                  The valour of his foes, and what is their intent,
                  The weather faire or foule, occaſion of the nights,
                  What witty wiles and policies may them preuent,
                  And how the time or ſtore of th' enmies hath been ſpent:
                  All theſe (I ſay) muſt well be waide before,
                  By him that ſets in warres of credit ſtore.
               
               
                  
                  In all which points that noble Duke his grace did paſſe,
                  I meane the Regent good, for chuſing, vſing men,
                  By nature fram'd thereto, he wondrous skilfull was,
                  And friendly vſed all, inſtructing now and then
                  Not only Captaines ſtout, that were his countrie men,
                  But alſo ſundrie ſouldiers as occaſion came,
                  And taught them how to warres themſelues to frame.
               
               
                  His princely grace and geſture yet me thinkes I ſee,
                  And how he bare himſelfe, to deale for warre or peace:
                  In warre full Mars-like, hardie, ſterne, and bold was he:
                  And meek and prudent, merciful, when ſtormes of wars did ceaſe:
                  Whom pitie mou'd as much inflicted paines to releaſe,
                  As euer wight in whom the broiles of warre
                  Or force of fights, had entred in ſo far.
               
               
                  VVhich if againe to rue the loſſe of ſuch a friend,
                  In ſight with plaints, of teares the fountaines out might flow
                  So all lamenting Muſes would me wailings lend,
                  The dolours of my heart in ſight again to ſhow:
                  I would deplore his death, and Englands cauſe of woe,
                  With ſuch ſad mourning tunes, and ſuch ſobs, ſighes, and teares
                  As were not ſeene for one, this ten times twentie yeares.
               
               
                  For why this noble Prince, when we had needed moſt,
                  To ſet the ſtates of France and England in a ſtay,
                  That feared was of foes in euery forren coaſt,
                  Too ſoone (alas) this Duke was taken hence away.
                  In France he di'd, he laſſe lament his loſſe we may,
                  That Regent regall, rule of publique right.
                  Loe how my hurts afreſh beweepe this wanted wight.
               
               
                  "With that his wounds (me thought) gan freſhly bleed,
                  "And he waxt faint and fell, and my ſalt teares
                  "Ran downe my rufull cheekes, with trickling ſpeed,
                  "(For who could chuſe that ſuch cauſe ſees and heares?)
                  "O worthie Knight (quoth I) whoſe loyall faith appeares:
                  "Ceaſe wailes, riſe vp, inſtruct my quiuering pen,
                  "To tell the reſt of Fortunes doublings then.
               
               
                  
                  I haue (quoth he) not Fortunes flatterie to accuſe,
                  Nor Fate nor Deſtinie, nor any fancie faind:
                  I haue no cauſe t'affirme that theſe could ought miſuſe
                  This noble Prince, whoſe life & acts ſuch fame and honour gaind,
                  But our deſerts, our ſinnes, and our offences ſtaind
                  This noble Ile and vs, our ſinnes (I ſay)
                  Offending God, he tooke this Prince away.
               
               
                  He laſſe how loth can I returne, and leaue this pearle in Roane
                  My Lord Iohn Duke of Bedford, there his corps yet lies
                  Encloſd with coſtly tombe, wrought curiouſly of ſtone,
                  By North the altar high (delighting many Martiall eyes)
                  Within our Ladie Church, where fame him lifts to skies,
                  By daily view his name renoum'd exalted is,
                  And ſoule, I truſt, full ſweetly ſweames in bliſſe.
               
               
                  Needs muſt I enterline my talke a while with this:
                  And then I will returne to tell you how I ſped.
                  When once the French men ſaw this noble Duke to miſſe,
                  Which Engliſh armies all gainſt foes with fortunes led
                  They liu'd at large, rebeld againſt their ſoueraigne head,
                  Forſooke their oathes, allegeance all denide,
                  And Engliſh men with all their force defide.
               
               
                  While he did liue, they durſt not ſo to deale,
                  They durſt not dare with th' Engliſh oft to fraie,
                  They found it was not for their owne of publique weale,
                  To riſe againſt their Lord the Regent in arraie.
                  Soone after he was dead, departed hence away
                  Both French and Normanes cloſe to win did cloſe,
                  And we diuided were, our rights abroad to loſe.
               
               
                  The feend (I thinke) deuiſde a way to make the breach,
                  By enuie bred in breaſts of two right noble Peeres,
                  Which miſchiefe hatcht in England, then may teach
                  All noble men that liue, hence many hundred yeares,
                  Beware of Enuie blacke, how far ſhe deares.
                  Euen their examples tell, how true our Chriſt doth ſay:
                  Each realme, towne, houſe, in ciuil ſtrife, ſhall deſolate decay:
               
               
                  
                  Perdie the Duke of Yorke was Regent made of France,
                  At which the Duke of Sommerſet did much repine,
                  He thought they rather ought him ſo t'aduance
                  King Henries kin, for honour of his Princely line:
                  But marke the grape which grew on this vngracious vine,
                  I will not ſay it after ſtroid their lines and houſes nie,
                  But this I ſay, we daily ſaw diſhonour came thereby.
               
               
                  For though the hauty Duke were worthy it to haue,
                  As well for courage good as vertues honour due:
                  Yet ſith to'th Duke of Yorke th' election firſt it gaue,
                  And he the ſaddle miſt, what needed he to rue?
                  When tumults great and ſturres in France yet daily grew,
                  He nild the Regent hence diſpatcht in many daies:
                  That loſſe might win him hurt, or long diſpraiſe.
               
               
                  Wild wengand on ſuch ire, wherby the realme doth loſe,
                  What gaine haue they, which heaue at honour ſo?
                  At home diſdaine and greefe, abroad they friend their foes.
                  I muſt be plaine in that which wrought my webs of woe,
                  My webs (quoth I?) would God they had wrought no moe.
                  It was the cauſe of many a bleeding Engliſh breſt,
                  And to the French, their end of woefull warres addreſt.
               
               
                  I dare auouch if they had firme in friendſhip bode,
                  And ſoothly as beſeemd ioin'd frendly hand with hands,
                  They had not felt defame in any forraine rode,
                  Nor had not ſo beene ſent, with loſſe from Gallia ſtrands:
                  They might poſſeſſion kept, ſtill of their conquerd lands,
                  And able been to tride themſelues ſo true,
                  As might haue made their enmies ſtill to rue.
               
               
                  For while the Duke of Sommerſet made here ſo great delaies,
                  That into France the ſuccours ſmall and ſlackly came,
                  Not only Paris then was loſt, within few daies,
                  That famous flowre of France, of far renowned fame,
                  The French (I ſay) not onely gat and kept the ſame,
                  But by this meanes, in France we daily felt ſuch ſmart,
                  As might with pitie pierce an adamantine hart.
               
               
                  
                  O great miſhap, the noble Duke of Bedford once being dead,
                  Our wealth went backe, by diſcords foule deſpite we loſt
                  Not only townes in France, and Captaines armies led,
                  But many ſouldiers eke with labour, ſpence and coſt:
                  And though full oft we made the French men ſmell of the roſt,
                  Yet in the end we gaine of fight the fame,
                  And they by craft and treaſon gate the game.
               
               
                  What reſteth more, it were, perdie, too long to tell,
                  Of battels great and broiles which happened daily ſtill,
                  The ſtories eke declare aduentures which befell:
                  Although (God wot) the writers wanted points of skill,
                  Of whom to ſpeake a while, digreſſe againe I will,
                  And partly ſhew what one he ought to be,
                  Which takes on him to write an Hiſtorie.
               
               
                  A Chronicler ſhould well in diuers tongues be ſeene,
                  And eke in all the arts he ought to haue a ſight,
                  Whereby he might the truth of diuers actions deeme,
                  And both ſupplie the wants, correct that is not right:
                  He ſhould haue eloquence, and full and fitly write,
                  Not mangle ſtories, ſnatching heere and there:
                  Nor gloſe to make a volume great appeare.
               
               
                  He ſhould be of ſuch countenance and wit,
                  As ſhould giue witneſſe to the Hiſtories he writes,
                  He ſhould be able well his reaſons ſo to knit,
                  As ſhould continue well the matter he recites:
                  He ſhould not praiſe, diſpraiſe, for fauour or deſpites,
                  But ſhould ſo place each thing in order due,
                  As might approue the ſtories to be true.
               
               
                  But this may haps the time may ſeeke at length redreſſe,
                  And then ſuch ſtories now and noble acts as die,
                  May come againe to light (at leaſt defaced leſſe)
                  If from the Britaines firſt antiquities they trie.
                  In great defects if they the truth ſupplie,
                  Then ſhall the readers fuller ſtories find,
                  And haue whereby to recreate the mind.
               
               
                  
                  But now returne I muſt, and briefly heere declare
                  Before my death, what ſundrie haps we had.
                  In warres right variouſly the ſtates of Captaines fare,
                  Now well, now woe, now ioyfull, now right ſad.
                  But who well ends, though all his haps were bad,
                  Let him erſt ſinke or ſwim, loſe, win, be ſlaine, die, fall,
                  If he die well, h'is thrice and foure times bleſt of all.
               
               
                  In France eight leagues from Paris, Pontoiſe ſtands,
                  (Tweene that and Roane) which we had won before:
                  And ſo we held it Engliſh ſafely in our hands.
                  For to our Prince the men allegeance ſwore,
                  And they remain'd obedient euermore,
                  Till from their neckes to reaue the Engliſh yoke,
                  They might find meanes by whom to ſtrike the ſtroke.
               
               
                  When theſe ſaw Paris loſt, and cities moe beſide,
                  And what in France and Normandie reuolts had done,
                  They thought no longer ſubiect to abide,
                  But ſought occaſion how they might by French be won.
                  As of our loſſe reports did daily to them run,
                  So with King Charles th' agreed when to betray the towne,
                  And force the Engliſh flee, or yeeld, or beate them downe.
               
               
                  For why, the powre of France could not with mightie hoſt
                  Performe to win by force from vs th' aſſaulted towne,
                  Them ſcaling often from the walles we toſt.
                  On euery ſide full faſt we flang the French men downe.
                  Our noble acts before had gotten ſuch renowne,
                  And Fortune erſt had paſt with vs ſo farre,
                  They had ſmall hope to win our forts by warre.
               
               
                  Wherefore King Charles aſſai'd the ſecret ſaut,
                  Not by his force of French, but by his golden fee,
                  Corrupting diuers Burgeſes to make the faut,
                  Whereby an entrie ſhould to his oppugning bee:
                  And they (as erſt is ſaid) were willing to agree,
                  Like periur'd theeues conſpir'd by ſecret fine deuice,
                  Gaue Pontoiſe vp, and tooke the promiſt price.
               
               
                  
                  But in Nouember next when it was ſharpe and cold,
                  And daily froſt had dri'd and parched hard the ground,
                  We were in hope againe to get of Pontoiſe hold,
                  Which erſt the towneſmen ſold, for gaine of many a pound
                  The ſnow fell faſt, lay thicke, and couered well the ground,
                  And ditches were ſo hard about the towne befrore,
                  That on the ice by euery ſide we ſafely might get ore.
               
               
                  The Lord Iohn Clifford was chiefe Captaine then,
                  Which with vs Captaines did this policie deuiſe,
                  That we in clothing white and ſouldiers euery man,
                  Should in our armour finely vs diſguiſe:
                  The next night ſo we ſhould to the aſſault ariſe,
                  And paſſe the frozen ditch vnto the wall,
                  With ladders ſcale, and kill the watchmen all.
               
               
                  We ſo prepar'd our ſelues as time occaſion gaue,
                  And dreſt in white coats trim, it ioy'd our hearts to ſee
                  How fine we paſt the ditch, what good ſucceſſe we haue:
                  How on the walles we find the watch nigh frozen bee:
                  As noble Greekes on Troy, on Pontoiſe ſeaſon'd wee,
                  We ſlew the watch, we beat the ſouldiers downe,
                  Some priſners tooke, and tooke withall the towne.
               
               
                  Of ſtately Captaines French, was Iohn de Ʋillers one
                  Within the taken towne, and Narrabon a Knight
                  Burgunion: yet they fled, away they gate them gone:
                  They durſt not bide againſt the blanched boyes to fight.
                  We paid the periur'd knaues the Burgeſſes that night,
                  And gat as much of honor and renowne
                  As they gat ſhame and loſſe, which bought and ſold the towne.
               
               
                  Marke well the French mens foiles in all our worthie warre
                  In theſe two regall Henries times, and you ſhall ſee
                  How we ſurpaſt the French in valour farre:
                  And bend for Prince and Realme ſo valiant for to bee:
                  Which if ye ſhall, and deale in ſeruice as did wee,
                  I nothing doubt renowne and fame ſhall ſay,
                  That noble England beares for warres the palme away.
               
               
                  
                  But When King Charles had heard how Pontoiſe men had ſped,
                  His armie ſtraight aſſembled he therefore againe,
                  Wherewith to win this towne afreſh th' aſſault he led,
                  He piners ſet to trench and vndermine amaine,
                  Made baſtiles for defence, yet all this toile was vaine.
                  For batterie of our walles he ſpent his powder ſtill,
                  Made freſhly French aſſaults, but did no ill.
               
               
                  The noble Duke of Yorke diſcharged late before,
                  When now the Earle of Warwicke chanſt at Roane to die,
                  Being Regent choſen once againe of France, as yore,
                  (Th' Earle of Warwicke Regent was two yeares perdie)
                  Arriu'd in France, to rouſe the French King he did hie,
                  (Which lay beſieging Pontoiſe, as I ſaid)
                  VVith him to fight, and eke to bring vs aide.
               
               
                  The French King fled, for haſte he left his ſtore behind:
                  VVhen he was once aſſur'd the Duke of Yorke drue neare,
                  He durſt not ſtay to bide the time or place aſſign'd
                  To fight our Regent with, but fled away for feare.
                  By theſe aſſaies you ſee what men in France they were,
                  Diſcourag'd oft, ſlaine, put to flight and fall:
                  By ſight, force, fight, and names of numbers ſmall.
               
               
                  There when the Duke had fortifi'd our Pontoiſe towne,
                  Then he purſu'd the French King erſt that fled,
                  To Poyſſy, where he lay with Lords of French renowne.
                  Before which towne, the Duke his noble armie led:
                  The French King durſt not out of Poyſſy put his head:
                  And yet there came to skirmiſh out French gentlemen,
                  Of which ſome ſlaine, foure tane, the reſt retir'd agen.
               
               
                  The Duke to bid him battell did pretend,
                  If he could there encounter with him tho:
                  But forth againe he durſt not come nor ſend,
                  For feare he ſhould receiue the foile and ouerthro.
                  On which the Duke diſlodg'd, departing Poyſſy fro,
                  To Maunt, and Roane, from thence his grace did hie,
                  T'appeaſe the broiles of ſtrife in Normandie.
               
               
                  
                  But then the French King calling vnto mind his loſſe,
                  His charges in the ſiege, his baſtiles trenches made,
                  How erſt we did them thence, ſans bag and bagage toſſe,
                  Eke how from ſiege he durſt not ſtay the ſtore to lade,
                  And how their Fortunes oft, in fight went retrograde,
                  How neighbours ill to Paris, we of Pontoiſe were:
                  He caſt aſide his French and fainting feare.
               
               
                  The rather yet, for why, Pariſiens aye did raile,
                  They ſaid he wanted courage good, he durſt not fight,
                  He lackt no ſouldiers good, his feeble heart did faile:
                  
                     Le Roy (quoth they) du France, les Anglois point nennit:
                  
                  
                     Le Roy ne oſe pas pour Pontoiſe faire pour ſuit:
                  
                  
                     Le Roy est Lourd, ſans cueur: car peu de gens,
                  
                  
                     Fait nostre Roy & pais faire grande dispens.
                  
               
               
                  On this King Charles return'd with mightie hoſt,
                  To vindicate this great reproch and ſhame:
                  And vnto Pontoiſe gaue aſſault in poſt
                  Full hotly, when we feared leaſt the ſame.
                  Whereon, to fight againſt him all our force we frame,
                  But number great at th' entrie got ſuch hand,
                  We could not forth againe their force aband.
               
               
                  VVith trumpets ſounding, tan tan-tar'aloud
                  The larum bell we rung, our ſelues to trie diſpoſe,
                  To make them pay the price of our diſtreſſe we vow'd,
                  Before we would poſſeſſion got, of Pontoiſe loſe:
                  In euery ſtreet we met the ſtrength of all our foes,
                  And made them paſſe by deadly dint away,
                  VVhich ventured firſt our Engliſh mates to ſlay.
               
               
                  VVhy now my friends, for England fight, I cri'd:
                  If euer Engliſh hearts your noble breſts poſſeſt,
                  I promiſe you to make them flinch, if I may bide:
                  Mates follow me. Amongſt my foes I ruſht before the reſt:
                  O heere come on (quoth I) now fight we for the beſt.
                  And therewithall I vs'd ſuch courage, force and might:
                  As made my foes to fall, and ſouldiers fitly fight.
               
               
                  
                  If we do leeſe (quoth I) the French men ſhall not gaine:
                  So if we win, tis worth the while to keepe array.
                  If ye ſtand ſtifly to't, weele make them peaze the paine,
                  And leade with loſſe of liuely limbes the laud away.
                  Although they fiercely fight, in hope vs all to ſlay:
                  Loe ſixe to one they fall, and dead they lie:
                  We Engliſh men, in triumph fight, and honor die.
               
               
                  With bloodie broiles of warre, the hapleſſe towne did ſmoke,
                  The children ſaw their fathers deare, to bleed their laſt:
                  The wiues be wailed much the fatall ſtroke,
                  Which forſt their husbands bleed, fall, die ſo faſt:
                  Helas the women cri'd, the wofull ſtreets that paſt:
                  (When ſo they ſaw the channels bloodie ſtreame)
                  What plague is this, that peſters ſo our Reame?
               
               
                  Is no remorce of life, but kill, kill, kill? (he laſſe)
                  Kill, kill the Engliſh ctie, and valiantly they fight:
                  What hap had we to ſee theſe miſchiefes come to paſſe?
                  
                     Helas le ſang de nous amis, la mort helas:
                  
                  The maidens crie, the widowes waile, and aged mourne,
                  With wringing hands vplift, and wiſh themſelues vnborne.
               
               
                  Of vs one thouſand Engliſh men within the towne,
                  Suſtain'd the force, the powre and puiſſance of their King:
                  And of the French that fought, we beate three thouſand downe,
                  We ſlew no leſſe, for all the number he did bring.
                  If this vntrue ſhall ſeeme, diſere dit mine to ring,
                  A French Hiſtorian writing for themſelues ſhall ſay:
                  Three thouſand French men there, were ſlaine that day.
               
               
                  Foure hundred Engliſh men that time were ſlaine in fight,
                  My ſelfe was one, with loſſe they wan the towne perdie:
                  But if I might haue liu'd t'haue tri'd our right,
                  With one for euery ſeuen, by ods as we did die:
                  I doubt not (ſo the reſt, would done their parts as I.)
                  But that King Charles, his Lords, nor all his men,
                  Should ſcarce haue tane the towne of Pontoiſe then.
               
               
                  
                  VVhat need I more debate of theſe things here,
                  In England was the fault, though we did feele the ſmart.
                  VVhile they at home, at bate and ſtrife for honors were,
                  They loſt abroad of Normandie the greater part.
                  To thinke on this torments againe my wounded hart,
                  That Lords at home, ſhould ſtriue about the name,
                  And loſe abroad their countries weale and fame.
               
               
                  Let Engliſh Peeres abandon ſuch contentious ſtrife,
                  It hurts the publike weale, decayes the State:
                  It reaues the yeares too ſoone of longer life:
                  It frets the breſt with ruſt of baend debate:
                  It giues the checke to him that giues the mate:
                  Then thus I end, that wight of all is bleſt
                  VVhich liues in loue with God, his Prince and countrie beſt.
               
               
                  So Higins if thou write, how this my fall befell;
                  Place it in Baldwines Mirrour with the reſt.
                  From crazed ſcull ſith heere my mind I tell:
                  Sith bleeding heart theſe rufull rimes expreſt:
                  This mangled tale beſeemes my perſon beſt.
                  Do ſo (quoth he) and let it paſſe euen thus:
                  
                     Viuit (quoth I) post funer a virtus.
                  
               
               Iohn Higins.
            
            
               HOW SHORES WIFE, KING EDWARD THE FOVRTHS CONCVBINE, WAS by King Richard deſpoiled of all her goods, and forced to doe open penance.
               
               
                  
                     AMong the reſt, by Fortune ouerthrowne,
                  I am not leaſt, that moſt may waile her fate:
                  My fame and brute, abroad the world is blowne,
                  VVho can forget, a thing thus done ſo late?
                  My great miſchance, my fall, and heauie ſtate,
                  Is ſuch a marke, whereat each tongue doth ſhoot,
                  That my good name, is pluckt vp by the root.
               
               
                  
                  This wandring world, bewitched me with wiles,
                  And won my wits, with wanton ſugred ioyes:
                  In Fortunes frekes, who truſts her when ſhe ſmiles,
                  Shall find her falſe, and full of fickle toyes,
                  Her triumphes all, but fill our eares with noiſe,
                  Her flattring gifts, are pleaſures mixt with paine,
                  Yea, all her words, are thunders threatning raine.
               
               
                  The fond deſire, that we in glorie ſet,
                  Doth thirle our hearts, to hope in ſlipper hap:
                  A blaſt of pompe, is all the fruit we get,
                  And vnder that, lies hid a ſudden clap.
                  In ſeeking reſt, vnwares we fall in trap,
                  In groping flowres, with nettles ſtung we are,
                  In labring long, we reape the crop of care.
               
               
                  Oh darke deceit, with painted face for ſho,
                  Oh poiſned bait, that makes vs eager ſtill,
                  Oh fained friend, deceiuing people ſo,
                  Oh world, of thee, we cannot ſpeake too ill:
                  Yet fooles we are, that bend ſo to thy skill.
                  The plague and ſcourge, that thouſands daily feele,
                  Should warne the wiſe, to ſhun thy whirling wheele.
               
               
                  But who can ſtop, the ſtreame that runnes full ſwift?
                  Or quench the fire, that is crept in the ſtraw?
                  The thirſtie drinkes, there is no other ſhift,
                  Perforce is ſuch, that need obeyes no law.
                  Thus bound we are, in worldly yokes to draw,
                  And cannot ſtay, nor turne againe in time,
                  Nor learne of thoſe, that ſought too high to clime.
               
               
                  My ſelfe for proofe, loe heere I now appeare,
                  In womans weed, with weeping watred eyes,
                  That bought her youth, and her delights full deare,
                  Whoſe loud reproch, doth ſound vnto the skies,
                  And bids my corſe, out of the graue to riſe,
                  As one that may, no longer hide her face,
                  But needs muſt come, and ſhew her pitious caſe.
               
               
                  
                  The ſheete of ſhame, wherein I ſhrowded was,
                  Did moue me oft, to plaine before this day,
                  And in mine cares did ring the trumpe of braſſe,
                  Which is defame, that doth each thing bewray.
                  Yea though full dead, and low in earth I lay,
                  I heard the voice, of me what people ſaid,
                  But then to ſpeake, alas I was afraid.
               
               
                  And now a time, for me I ſee prepar'd,
                  I heare the liues, and falles of many wights:
                  My tale therefore, the better may be har'd,
                  For at the torch, the little candle lights.
                  Where pageants be, ſmall things fill out the ſights.
                  Wherefore giue eare, good Churchyard do thy beſt,
                  My tragedie, to place among the reſt.
               
               
                  Becauſe the truth, ſhall witnes well with thee,
                  I will rehearſe, in order as it fell,
                  My life, my death, my dolefull deſtinie,
                  My wealth, my woe, my doing euery deale,
                  My bitter bliſſe, wherein I long did dwell:
                  A whole diſcourſe, by me Shores wife by name,
                  Now ſhalt thou heare, as thou hadſt ſeene the ſame.
               
               
                  Of noble blood, I cannot boaſt my birth,
                  For I was made out of the meaneſt mold,
                  Mine heritage, but ſeuen foot of th' earth,
                  Fortune ne gaue, to me the gifts of gold:
                  But I could brag, of nature if I wold,
                  Who fil'd my face, with fauour freſh and faire,
                  Whoſe beautie ſhone, like Phoebus in the aire.
               
               
                  My ſhape ſome ſaid, was ſeemely to each ſight,
                  My countenance, did ſhew a ſober grace,
                  Mines eyes in lookes, were neuer proued light,
                  My tongue in words was chaſt in euery caſe.
                  Mine eares were deafe, and would no louers place,
                  Saue that, alas, a Prince did blot my brow,
                  Loe, there the ſtrong, did make the weake to bow.
               
               
                  
                  The maieſty, that Kings to people beare,
                  The ſtately port, the awfull cheere they ſhow,
                  Doth make the meane, to ſhrink and couch for feare,
                  Like as the hound, that doth, his maſter know:
                  What then? ſince I, was made vnto the bow,
                  There is no cloke, can ſerue to hide my fault:
                  For I agreed, the fort he ſhould aſſault.
               
               
                  The Eagles force, ſubdues ech bird that flies,
                  What metall may, reſiſt the flaming fire?
                  Doth not the Sun, dazell the cleareſt eies,
                  And melt the ice, and make the froſt retire?
                  Who can withſtand, a puiſſant Kings deſire?
                  The ſtiffeſt ſtones, are pierced through with tooles,
                  The wiſeſt are, with Princes made but fooles.
               
               
                  If kinde had wrought, my forme in common frames,
                  And ſet me forth, in colours blacke and browne,
                  Or beautie had, beene percht in Phoebus flames,
                  Or ſhamefaſt waies, had pluckt my fethers downe,
                  Then had I kept, my fame and good renowne:
                  For natures gifts, were cauſe of all my griefe.
                  A pleaſant prey, entiſeth many a thiefe.
               
               
                  Thus woe to thee, that wrought my peacocks pride,
                  By clothing me with natures tapeſtry:
                  Woe worth the hew, wherein my face was dide,
                  Which made me thinke, I pleaſed euery eye.
                  Like as the ſtarres, make men behold the skie,
                  So beauties ſhew, doth make the wiſe full fond,
                  And brings free harts, full oft to endleſſe bond.
               
               
                  But cleare from blame, my frends can not be found,
                  Before my time, my youth they did abuſe:
                  In mariage, a prentiſe was I bound.
                  Then that meere loue, I knew not how to vſe.
                  But wel away, that cannot me excuſe,
                  The harme is mine, though they deuiſde my care,
                  And I muſt ſmart, and ſit in ſlandrous ſnare.
               
               
                  
                  Yet giue me leaue, to plead my cauſe at large:
                  If that the horſe, do run beyond his race,
                  Or any thing that keepers haue in charge,
                  Do breake their courſe, where Rulers may take place:
                  Or meat be ſet, before the hungries face,
                  Who is in fault? th' offender yea or no,
                  Or they that are, the cauſe of all this wo.
               
               
                  Note well what ſtrife, this forced mariage makes,
                  What lothed liues, do come where loue doth lacke,
                  What ſcratching breers, do grow vpon ſuch brakes,
                  What common weales, by it are brought to wracke,
                  What heauie loade, is put on patients backe,
                  What ſtrange delights, this branch of vice doth breed,
                  And marke what graine, ſprings out of ſuch a ſeed.
               
               
                  Compell the hauke, to ſit that is vnman'd,
                  Or make the hound, vntaught to draw the Deere,
                  Or bring the free, againſt his will in band,
                  Or moue the ſad, a pleaſant tale to heere,
                  Your time is loſt, and you no whit the neere:
                  So loue ne learnes, of force the knot to knit,
                  She ſerues but thoſe, that feele ſweet fancies fit.
               
               
                  The leſſe defame, redounds to my diſpraiſe,
                  I was entiſt, by traines, and trapt by truſt:
                  Though in my powre, remained yeas and nayes,
                  Vnto my friends, yet needs conſent I muſt,
                  In euery thing, yea lawfull or vniuſt.
                  They brake the boughes, and ſhakte the tree by ſleight,
                  And bent the wand, that might haue growne full ſtreight.
               
               
                  What helpe in this, the pale thus broken downe,
                  The Deere muſt needs, in danger run aſtray:
                  At me therefore, why ſhould the world ſo frowne?
                  My weakneſſe made, my youth a Princes pray.
                  Though wiſdome ſhould, the courſe of nature ſtay,
                  Yet trie my caſe, who liſt, and they ſhall proue,
                  The ripeſt wits, are ſooneſt thralles to loue.
               
               
                  
                  What need I more, to cleare my ſelfe ſo much?
                  A King me wan, and had me at his call,
                  His royall ſtate, his princely grace was ſuch,
                  The hope of will, that women ſeeke for all,
                  The eaſe and wealth, the gifts which were not ſmall,
                  Beſieged me, ſo ſtrongly round about,
                  My powre was weake, I could not hold him out.
               
               
                  Duke Hannibal, in all his conqueſt great,
                  Or Caeſar yet, whoſe triumphs did exceed,
                  Of all their ſpoiles, which made them toile and ſweat,
                  Were not ſo glad, to haue ſo rich a meed,
                  As was this Prince, when I to him agreed,
                  And yeelded me, a priſner willingly,
                  As one that knew, no way away to flie.
               
               
                  The Nightingale, for all his merry voyce,
                  Nor yet the Larke, that ſtill delights to ſing,
                  Did neuer make, the hearers ſo reioyce,
                  As I with words, haue made this worthie King:
                  I neuer iar'd, in tune was euery ſtring,
                  I tempred ſo, my tongue to pleaſe his eare,
                  That what I ſaid, was currant euery where.
               
               
                  I ioyn'd my talke, my geſtures and my grace,
                  In wittie frames, that long might laſt and ſtand,
                  So that I brought, the King in ſuch a caſe,
                  That to his death, I was his chiefeſt hand.
                  I gouern'd him, that ruled all this Land:
                  I bare the ſword, though he did weare the Crowne,
                  I ſtrake the ſtroke, that threw the mightie downe.
               
               
                  If iuſtice ſaid, that iudgement was but death,
                  With my ſweete words, I could the King perſwade,
                  And make him pauſe, and take therein a breath,
                  Till I with ſuite, the faultors peace had made:
                  I knew what way, to vſe him in his trade,
                  I had the art, to make the Lion meeke,
                  There was no point, wherein I was to ſeeke.
               
               
                  
                  If I did frowne, who then did looke a wrie?
                  If I did ſmile, who would not laugh outright?
                  If I but ſpeake, who durſt my words denie?
                  If I purſude, who would forſake the flight?
                  I meane, my powre, was knowne to euery wight.
                  On ſuch a height, good hap had built my bowre,
                  As though my ſweete, ſhould nere haue turnd to ſowre.
               
               
                  My husband then, as one that knew his good,
                  Refuſde to keepe, a Princes Concubine,
                  Forſeeing th' end, and miſchiefe as it ſtood,
                  Againſt the King did neuer much repine:
                  He ſaw the grape, whereof hee dranke the wine.
                  Though inward thought, his heart did ſtill torment,
                  Yet outwardly, he ſeemd he was content.
               
               
                  To purchaſe praiſe, and win the peoples zeale,
                  Yea rather bent, of kinde to do ſome good,
                  I euer did, vphold the common weale,
                  I had delight, to ſaue the guiltleſſe blood:
                  Each ſuters cauſe, when that I vnderſtood,
                  I did prefer, as it had bene mine owne,
                  And help them vp, that might haue been orethrowne.
               
               
                  My powre was preſt, to right the poore mans wrong,
                  My hands were free, to giue where need required:
                  To watch for grace, I neuer thought it long,
                  To do men good, I need not bee deſired.
                  Nor yet with gifts, my heart was neuer hired.
                  But when the ball, was at my foote to guide,
                  I plaid to thoſe, that Fortune did abide.
               
               
                  My want was wealth, my woe was eaſe at will,
                  Ny robes were rich, and brauer then the ſunne:
                  My Fortune then, was far aboue my skill,
                  My ſtate was great, my glaſſe did euer runne.
                  My fatall threed, ſo happely was ſpunne,
                  That then I ſate, in earthly pleaſures clad,
                  And for the time, a Goddeſſe place I had.
               
               
                  
                  But I had not, ſo ſoone this life poſſeſt,
                  But my good hap, began to ſlip aſide:
                  And Fortune then, did me ſo ſore moleſt,
                  That vnto plaints, was turned all my pride.
                  It booted not, to row againſt the tide:
                  Mine oares were weake, my heart and ſtrength did ſaile,
                  The winde was rough, I durſt not beare a ſaile.
               
               
                  What ſteps of ſtrife, belong to high eſtate?
                  The climing vp, is doubtfull to endure,
                  The ſeat it ſelfe, doth purchaſe priuie hate,
                  And honors fame, is fickle and vnſure,
                  And all ſhe brings, is flowres that be vnpure:
                  Which fall as faſt, as they do ſprout and ſpring,
                  And cannot laſt, they are ſo vaine a thing.
               
               
                  We count no care, to catch that we do wiſh,
                  But what we win is long to vs vnknowen:
                  Till preſent paine, be ſerued in our diſh,
                  We ſcarce perceiue, whereon our griefe hath growen:
                  What graine proues well, that is ſo raſhly ſowen?
                  If that a meane, did meaſure all our deeds,
                  In ſteed of corne, we ſhould not gather weeds.
               
               
                  The ſetled mind, is free from Fortunes power,
                  They need not feare, who looke not vp aloft:
                  But they that climbe, are carefull euery hower,
                  For when they fall, they light not very ſoft.
                  Examples haue, the wiſeſt warned oft,
                  That where the trees, the ſmalleſt branches bere,
                  The ſtormes do blow, and haue moſt rigour there.
               
               
                  Where is it ſtrong, but neere the ground and roote?
                  Where is it weake, but on the higheſt ſprayes?
                  Where may a man, ſo ſurely ſet his foote,
                  But on thoſe bowes, that groweth low alwayes?
                  The little twigs, are but vnſtedfaſt ſtayes,
                  If they breake not, they bend with euery blaſt,
                  Who truſts to them, ſhall neuer ſtand full faſt.
               
               
                  
                  The winde is great, vpon the higheſt hilles,
                  The quiet life, is in the dale below:
                  Who treads on ice, ſhall ſlide againſt their willes,
                  They want not cares, that curious arts would know.
                  VVho liues at eaſe, and can content him ſo,
                  Is perfect wiſe, and ſets vs all to ſchoole,
                  VVho hates this lore, may well be call'd a foole.
               
               
                  VVhat greater griefe, may come to any life,
                  Then after ſweete, to taſte the bitter ſowre?
                  Or after peace, to fall at warre and ſtrife,
                  Or after mirth, to haue a cauſe to lowre?
                  Vnder ſuch props, falſe Fortune builds her bowre,
                  On ſudden change, her flittering frames be ſet,
                  Where is no way, for to eſcape the net.
               
               
                  The haſtie ſmart, that Fortune ſends in ſpite,
                  Is hard to brooke, where gladneſſe we embrace:
                  She threatens not, but ſuddenly doth ſmite,
                  Where ioy is moſt, there doth ſhe ſorow place.
                  But ſure I thinke, this is too ſtrange a caſe,
                  For vs to feele, ſuch griefe amid our game,
                  And know not why, vntill we taſte the ſame.
               
               
                  As erſt I ſaid, my bliſſe was turn'd to bale,
                  I had good cauſe, to weepe and wring my hands,
                  And ſhew ſad cheare, with countenance full pale:
                  For I was brought, in ſorowes wofull bands.
                  A pirrie came, and ſet my ſhip on ſands.
                  What ſhould I hide, or colour care and noy?
                  King Edward di'd, in whom was all my ioy.
               
               
                  And when the earth, receiued had his corſe,
                  And that in tombe, this worthie Prince was laid,
                  The world on me, began to ſhew his force,
                  Of troubles then, my part I long aſſai'd:
                  For they of whom, I neuer was afrai'd,
                  Vndid me moſt, and wrought me ſuch deſpite,
                  That they bereſt, me from my pleaſure quite.
               
               
                  
                  As long as life, remain'd in Edwards breſt,
                  Who was but I? who had ſuch friends at call?
                  His bodie was, no ſooner put in cheſt,
                  But well was he, that could procure my fall:
                  His brother was, mine enmie moſt of all,
                  Protector then, whoſe vice did ſtill abound,
                  From ill to worſe, till death did him confound.
               
               
                  He falſely fain'd, that I of counſell was,
                  To poiſon him, which thing I neuer ment:
                  But he could ſet, thereon a face of braſſe,
                  To bring to paſſe, his leaud and falſe intent.
                  To ſuch miſchiefe, this tyrants heart was bent,
                  To God, ne man, he neuer ſtood in awe,
                  For in his wrath, he made his will a law.
               
               
                  Lord Hastings blood, for vengeance on him cries,
                  And many moe, that were too long to name:
                  But moſt of all; and in moſt wofull wiſe,
                  I had good cauſe, this wretched man to blame,
                  Before the world, I ſuffred open ſhame,
                  Where people were, as thick as is the ſand,
                  I penance tooke, with taper in my hand.
               
               
                  Each eye did ſtare, and looke me in the face,
                  As I paſt by, the rumours on me ran,
                  But patience then, had lent me ſuch a grace,
                  My quiet lookes, were prais'd of euery man:
                  The ſhamefaſt blood, brought me ſuch colour than,
                  That thouſands ſaid, which ſaw my ſober cheere,
                  It is great ruth, to ſee this woman heere.
               
               
                  But what preuail'd, the peoples pitie there?
                  This raging wolfe, would ſpare no guiltleſſe blood.
                  Oh wicked wombe, that ſuch ill fruit did beare,
                  Oh curſed earth, that yeeldeth forth ſuch mud:
                  The hell conſume, all things that did thee good,
                  The heauens ſhut, their gates againſt thy ſpreete,
                  The world tread downe, thy glorie vnder feete.
               
               
                  
                  I aske of God, a vengeance on thy bones,
                  Thy ſtinking corps, corrupts the aire I know:
                  Thy ſhamefull death, no earthly wight bemones,
                  For in thy life, thy workes were hated ſo,
                  That euery man, did wiſh thy ouerthro:
                  Wherefore I may, though partiall now I am,
                  Curſe euery cauſe, whereof thy bodie came.
               
               
                  Woe worth the man, that fathered ſuch a child,
                  Woe worth the houre, wherein thou waſt begate:
                  Woe worth the breſts, that haue the world beguil'd,
                  To nouriſh thee, that all the world did hate.
                  Woe worth the gods, that gaue thee ſuch a fate,
                  To liue ſo long, that death deſeru'd ſo oft.
                  Woe worth the chance, that ſet thee vp aloft.
               
               
                  Yee Princes all, and Rulers euery chone,
                  In puniſhment, beware of hatreds ire.
                  Before yee ſcourge, take heed, looke well thereon:
                  In wroths ill will, if malice kindle fire,
                  Your hearts will burne, in ſuch a hot deſire,
                  That in thoſe flames, the ſmoke ſhall dim your ſight,
                  Yee ſhall forget, to ioyne your iuſtice right.
               
               
                  You ſhould not iudge, till things be well diſcerned,
                  Your charge is ſtill, to maintaine vpright lawes:
                  In conſcience rules, ye ſhould be throughly learned,
                  Where clemencie, bids wrath and raſhnes pauſe,
                  And further ſaith, ſtrike not without a cauſe:
                  And when ye ſmite, do it for iuſtice ſake,
                  Then in good part, each man your ſcourge wil take.
               
               
                  If that ſuch zeale, had mou'd this tyrants mind,
                  To make my plague, a warrant for the reſt,
                  I had ſmall cauſe, ſuch fault in him to find,
                  Such puniſhment, is vſed for the beſt:
                  But by ill will, and powre I was oppreſt,
                  He ſpoil'd my goods, and left me bare and poore,
                  And cauſed me, to beg from dore to doore.
               
               
                  
                  What fall was this, to come from Princes fare,
                  To watch for crums, among the blind and lame?
                  When almes were delt, I had an hungrie ſhare,
                  Becauſe I knew not, how to aske for ſhame,
                  Till force and need, had brought me in ſuch frame,
                  That ſtarue I muſt, or learne to beg an almes,
                  With booke in hand, to ſay S. Dauids Pſalmes.
               
               
                  Where I was wont, the golden chaines to weare,
                  A paire of beads, about my necke was wound,
                  A linnen cloth, was lapt about my heare,
                  A ragged gowne, that trayled on the ground,
                  A diſh that clapt, and gaue a heauie ſound,
                  A ſtaying ſtaffe, and wallet therewithall,
                  I bare about, as witneſſe of my fall.
               
               
                  I had no houſe, wherein to hide my head,
                  The open ſtreete, my lodging was perforce:
                  Full oft I went, all hungrie to my bed,
                  My fleſh conſum'd, I looked like a corſe.
                  Yet in that plight, who had on me remorſe?
                  O God thou know'ſt, my friends forſooke me then,
                  Not one holpe me, that ſuccred many a man.
               
               
                  They froun'd on me, that faun'd on me before,
                  And fled from me, that followed me full faſt:
                  They hated me, by whom I ſet much ſtore,
                  They knew full well, my fortune did not laſt.
                  In euery place, I was condemn'd and caſt,
                  To pleade my cauſe, at barre it was no boote,
                  For euery man, did tread me vnder foote.
               
               
                  Thus long I liu'd, all wearie of my life,
                  Till death approcht, and rid me from that woe:
                  Example take, by me, both maid and wife,
                  Beware, take heed, fall not to follie ſo.
                  A mirour make, by my great ouerthro,
                  Defie the world, and all his wanton waies,
                  Beware by me, that ſpent ſo ill her daies.
               
               Tho. Churchyard.
            
            
               
               HOW THOMAS WOLSEY DID ARISE VNTO GREAT authoritie and gouernment, his manner of life, pompe and dignitie, and how he fell downe into great diſgrace, and was arrested of high treaſon. Anno, 1530.
               
                  
                     SHall I looke on, when States ſtep on the ſtage,
                  And play their parts before the peoples face?
                  Some men liue now, ſcarce foureſcore yeares of age,
                  Who in time paſt, did know the Cardnals Grace.
                  A gameſome world, when Biſhops run at bace,
                  Yea, get a fall, in ſtriuing for the gole,
                  And bodie loſe, and hazard ſilly ſole.
               
               
                  Ambitious mind, a world of wealth would haue,
                  So ſcrats and ſcrapes, for ſcorfe and ſcornie droſſe:
                  And till the fleſh and bones be hid in graue,
                  Wit neuer reſts, to grope for mucke and moſſe.
                  Fie on proud pompe, and gilded bridles boſſe:
                  O glorious gold, the gaping after thee,
                  So blinds mine eyes, they can no danger ſee.
               
               
                  Now note my birth, and marke how I began,
                  Behold from whence, roſe all this pride of mine,
                  My father but, a plaine poore honeſt man,
                  And I his ſonne, of wit and iudgement fine,
                  Brought vp at ſchoole, and prou'd a good Diuine:
                  For which great gifts, degree of ſchoole I had,
                  And Batchler was, and I a little lad.
               
               
                  So, taſting ſome, of Fortunes ſweete concaits,
                  I clapt the hood, on ſhoulder, braue as Son,
                  And hopte at length, to bite at better baits,
                  And fill my mouth, ere banquet halfe were don.
                  Thus holding on, the courſe I thought to ron:
                  By many a feaſt, my belly grew ſo big,
                  That Wolſey ſtreight, became a wanton twig.
               
               
                  
                  Loe what it is, to feed on daintie meate,
                  And pamper vp, the gorge, with ſuger plate:
                  Nay, ſee how lads, in hope of higher ſeate
                  Riſe early vp, and ſtudie learning late.
                  But he thriues beſt, that hath a bleſſed fate,
                  And he ſpeeds worſt, that world will nere aduance,
                  Nor neuer knowes, what meanes good lucke nor chance.
               
               
                  My chance was great, for from a poore mans ſon,
                  I roſe aloft, and chopt and chang'd degree:
                  In Oxford firſt, my famous name begon,
                  Where many a day the ſcholers honor'd mee.
                  Then thought I how, I might a courtier bee:
                  So came to Court, and feathred there my wing,
                  With Henrie th' eight, who was a worthie King.
               
               
                  He did with words, aſſay me once or twice,
                  To ſee what wit, and readie ſprite I had:
                  And when he ſaw, I was both graue and wiſe,
                  For ſome good cauſe, the King was wondrous glad.
                  Then downe I lookt, with ſober countnance ſad,
                  But heart was vp, as high as hope could go,
                  That ſuttle fox, might win ſome fauour ſo.
               
               
                  We worke with wiles, the minds of men like wax,
                  The fawning whelp, gets many a piece of bred:
                  We follow Kings, with many cunning knacks,
                  By ſearching out, how are their humours fed.
                  He haunts no Court, that hath a doltiſh hed:
                  For as in gold, the pretious ſtone is ſet,
                  So fineſt wits, in Court the credit get.
               
               
                  I quickly learn'd to kneele and kiſſe the hand,
                  To wait at heele, and turne like top about,
                  To ſtretch out necke, and like an Image ſtand,
                  To taunt, to ſcoffe, and face the matter out,
                  To preaſe in place, among the greateſt rout:
                  Yet like a Prieſt, my ſelfe did well behaue,
                  In faire long gowne, and goodly garments graue.
               
               
                  
                  Where Wolſey went, the world like Beeswould ſwarme,
                  To heare my ſpeech, and note my nature well.
                  I could with tongue, vſe ſuch a kind of charme,
                  That voice full cleare, ſhould ſound like ſiluer bell.
                  When head deuis'd, a long diſcourſe to tell,
                  With ſtories ſtrange, my ſpeech ſhould ſpiſed be,
                  To make the world, to muſe the more on me.
               
               
                  Each tale was ſweet, each word a ſentence waid,
                  Each eare I pleas'd, each eye gaue me the view,
                  Each Iudgement markt, and pauſed what I ſaid,
                  Each mind I fed, with matter rare and new,
                  Each day and houre, my grace and credit grew:
                  So that the King, in hearing of this newes,
                  Deuiſed how, he might my ſeruice vſe.
               
               
                  He made me then, his Chaplaine, to ſay Maſſe
                  Before his grace, yea twice or thrice a weeke:
                  Now had I time, to trim my ſelfe by glaſſe,
                  Now found I meane, ſome liuing for to ſeeke,
                  Now I became, both humble, milde, and meeke,
                  Now I appli'd, my wits and ſenſes throw,
                  To reape ſome corne, if God would ſpeed the plow.
               
               
                  Whom moſt I ſaw, in fauour with the King,
                  I follow'd faſt, to get ſome hap thereby:
                  But I obſeru'd, another finer thing,
                  That was, to keepe, me ſtill in Princes eye.
                  As vnder wing, the hawke in winde doth lie,
                  So for a prey, I prowled heere and there,
                  And tried friends, and fortune euery where.
               
               
                  The King at length, ſent me beyond the ſeas,
                  Embaſtour then, with meſſage good and great:
                  And in that time, I did the King ſo pleas,
                  By ſhort diſpatch, and wrought ſo fine a feat,
                  That did aduance my ſelfe to higher ſeat,
                  The Deanrie then, of Lincolne he me gaue:
                  And bountie ſhew'd, before I gan to craue.
               
               
                  
                  His Amner too, he made me all in haſte,
                  And threefold gifts, he threw vpon me ſtill:
                  His counſler ſtraight, likewaies was Wolſey plaſte.
                  Thus in ſhort time, I had the world at will:
                  VVhich paſſed far, mans reaſon, wit, and skill.
                  O hap, thou haſt, great ſecrets in thy might,
                  VVhich long lie hid, from wily worldlings ſight.
               
               
                  As ſhewres of raine, fall quickly on the graſſe,
                  That fading flowres, are ſoone refreſht thereby:
                  Or as with Sun, the morning dew doth paſſe,
                  And quiet calme, makes cleare a troubled skie:
                  So Princes powre, at twinkling of an eye
                  Sets vp aloft, a fau'ret on the wheele,
                  When giddy braines, about the ſtreets doe reele.
               
               
                  They are but blind, that wake where Fortune ſleepes,
                  They work in vaine, that ſtriue with ſtreame and tide:
                  In double gard, they dwell, that deſtny keepes,
                  In ſimple ſort, they liue that lacke a guide:
                  They miſſe the marke, that ſhoot their arrowes wide,
                  They hit the pricke, that make their flight to glance
                  So neere the white, that ſhaft may light on chance.
               
               
                  Such was my lucke, I ſhot no ſhaft in vaine,
                  My bow ſtood bent, and braſed all the yeere:
                  I waited hard, but neuer loſt my paine:
                  Such wealth came in, to beare the charges cleere.
                  And in the end, I was the greateſt peere
                  Among them all, for I ſo rulde the land,
                  By Kings conſent, that all was in my hand.
               
               
                  Within on yeare, three Biſhoprickes I had,
                  And in ſmall ſpace, a Cardnall I was made:
                  With long red robes, rich Wolſey then was clad,
                  I walkt in Sun, when others ſate in ſhade:
                  I went abroad, with ſuch a traine and trade,
                  With croſſes borne, before me where I paſt,
                  That man was thought, to be ſome God at laſt.
               
               
                  
                  With ſonnes of Earles, and Lords I ſerued was,
                  An hundred chaines, at leaſt were in my traine:
                  I daile dranke in gold, but not in glas,
                  My bread mas made, of fineſt flowre and graine:
                  My dainty mouth, did common meates diſdaine,
                  I fed like Prince, on fowles moſt deare and ſtrange,
                  And bankets made, of fine conceits for change.
               
               
                  My hall was full, of Knights, and Squires of name,
                  And gentlemen, two hundred told by pole:
                  Tale yeomen too, did hourely ſerue the ſame,
                  Whoſe names each weeke, I ſaw within check role,
                  All went to church, when ſeruice bell did knole,
                  All dinde and ſupt and ſlept, at Cardnals charge,
                  And all would wait, when Wolſey tooke his barge.
               
               
                  My houſehold ſtuffe, my wealth and ſiluer plate,
                  Might well ſuffice, a Monarke at this day:
                  I neuer fed, but vnder cloth of ſtate,
                  Nor walkt abroad, till Vſhars cleard the way.
                  In houſe I had, muſitions for to play,
                  In open ſtreete, my trumpets loud did ſound,
                  Which pearſt the skies, and ſeem'd to ſhake the ground.
               
               
                  My men moſt braue, marcht two and two in ranke,
                  Who held in length, much more then halfe a mile:
                  Not one of theſe, but gaue his maſter thanke,
                  For ſome good turne, or pleaſure got ſome while.
                  I did not feed, my ſeruants with a ſmile,
                  Or gloſing words, that neuer bring forth fruite,
                  But gaue them gold, or els preferd their ſuite.
               
               
                  In ſurety ſo whiles God was pleaſd, I ſtood,
                  I knew I muſt, leaue all my wealth behinde:
                  I ſaw they lou'd, me not for birth or blood,
                  But ſeru'd a ſpace, to try my noble minde.
                  The more men giue, the more indeed they finde
                  Of loue, and troth, and ſeruice, euery way:
                  The more they ſpare, the more doth loue decay.
               
               
                  
                  Iioide to ſee, my ſeruants thriue ſo well,
                  And go ſo gay, with little that they got:
                  For as I did in honour ſtill excell,
                  So would I oft, the want of ſeruants note:
                  Which made my men, on maſter ſo to dote,
                  That when I ſaid, let ſuch a thing be done,
                  They would indeed, through fire and water ronne.
               
               
                  I had in houſe, ſo many off'cers ſtill,
                  Which were obaid, and honourd for their place,
                  That careleſſe I, might ſleepe or walke at will,
                  Saue that ſometime, I weigh'd a poore mans caſe,
                  And ſalu'd ſuch ſores, whoſe griefe might breed diſgrace.
                  Thus men did wait, and wicked world did gaze,
                  On me and them, that brought vs all in maze.
               
               
                  For world was whiſt, and durſt not ſpeake a word
                  Of that they ſaw, my credit curbd them ſo:
                  I waded far, and paſſed ore the foord,
                  And minded not, for to returne I troe.
                  The world was wiſe, yet ſcarce it ſelfe did knoe,
                  When wonder made, of men that roſe by hap:
                  For Fortune rare, fals not in each mans lap.
               
               
                  I clim'd the clouds, by knowledge and good wit,
                  My men ſought chance, by ſeruice or good lucke,
                  The world walkt low, when I aboue did ſit,
                  Or downe did come, to trample on this mucke:
                  And I did ſwim, as dainty as a ducke,
                  When water ſerues, to keepe the body braue,
                  And to enioy, the gifts that Fortune gaue.
               
               
                  And though my pompe, ſurpaſt all Prelates now,
                  And like a Prince I liu'd and pleaſure tooke:
                  That was not fure, ſo great a blur in brow,
                  If on my workes, indiffrent eyes doe looke.
                  I thought great ſcorne, ſuch 
                        ••
                     uings heere to brooke,
                  Except I built, ſome houſes for the poore,
                  And order tooke, to giue great almes at doore.
               
               
                  
                  A Colledge faire, in Oxford I did make,
                  A ſumptuous houſe, a ſtately work indeede.
                  I gaue great lands, to that, for learning ſake,
                  To bring vp youth, and ſuccour ſcholers neede.
                  That charge of mine, full many a mouth did feede,
                  When I in Court, was ſeeking ſome good turne,
                  To mend my torch, or make my candell burne.
               
               
                  More houſes gay, I built, then thouſands do
                  That haue enough, yet will no goodnes ſhoe:
                  And where I built, I did maintaine it to,
                  With ſuch great coſt, as few beſtowes I troe.
                  Of buildings large, I could rehearſe a roe,
                  That by miſchance, this day haue loſt my name,
                  Whereof I do, deſerue the only fame.
               
               
                  And as for ſutes, about the King was none
                  So apt as I, to ſpeake and purchaſe grace.
                  Though long before, ſome ſay Shores wife was one,
                  That oft kneeld downe, before the Princes face
                  For poore mens ſutes, and holpe their woefull caſe,
                  Yet ſhe had not, ſuch credit as I gate,
                  Although a King, would heare the parret prate.
               
               
                  My words were graue, and bore an equall poies,
                  In ballance iuſt, for many a weightie cauſe:
                  She pleaſd a Prince, with pretty merry toies,
                  And had no ſight, in ſtate, nor courſe of lawes:
                  I could perſwade, and make a Prince to pawes,
                  And take a breath, before he drew the ſword,
                  And ſpie the time, to rule him with a word.
               
               
                  I will not ſay, but fancy may do much,
                  Yet world will grant, that wiſdome may do more:
                  To wanton girls, affection is not ſuch,
                  That Princes wiſe, wil be abuſde therfore:
                  One ſute of mine, was ſurely worth a ſcore
                  Of hers indeed, for ſhe her time muſt watch,
                  And at all howres, I durſt go draw the latch.
               
               
                  
                  My voice but heard, the dore was open ſtreight,
                  She might not come, till ſhe were cald or brought:
                  I rul'd the King, by cuſtome, art and ſleight,
                  And knew full well, the ſecrets of his thought.
                  Without my mind, all that was done was nought,
                  In wars or peace, my counſell ſwaied all,
                  For ſtill the King, would for the Cardnall call.
               
               
                  I kept a court, my ſelfe, as great as his,
                  (I not compare, vnto my maſter here)
                  But looke my Lords, what liuely world was this,
                  That one poore man, became ſo great a peere?
                  Yet though this tale, be very ſtrange to here,
                  Wit wins a world: and who hath hap and wit,
                  With triumph long, in princely throne may ſit.
               
               
                  What man like me, bare rule in any age,
                  I ſhone like Sun, more cleare then morning ſtar:
                  Was neuer part, ſo plaid, in open ſtage
                  As mine, nor fame, of man flew halfe ſo far.
                  I ſate on bench, when thowſands at the bar
                  Did plead for right: for I in publique weale
                  Lord Chancelor was, and had the great broad ſeale.
               
               
                  Now haue I told, how I did riſe aloft,
                  And ſate with pride, and pomp, in golden hall,
                  And ſet my feete, on coſtly carpets ſoft,
                  And plaid at goale, with goodly golden ball:
                  But after, Lord, I muſt rehearſe my fall.
                  O trembling heart, thou canſt not now for teares
                  Preſent that tale, vnto the hearers eares.
               
               
                  Beſt weepe it out, and ſudden ſilence keepe,
                  Till priuy pangs, make pinched heart complaine:
                  Or caſt thy ſelfe, into ſome ſlumbring ſleepe,
                  Till wakened wits, remembrance bring againe.
                  When heauy teares, do hollow cheekes diſtaine,
                  The world will thinke, thy ſprits are growne ſo weake,
                  The feeble tongue, hath ſure no power to ſpeake.
               
               
                  
                  A tale by ſignes, with ſighes and ſobs ſet out,
                  Moues peoples mindes, to pity plagued men:
                  With howling voice, do rather crie and ſhout,
                  And ſo by arte, ſhew forth thy ſorrow then.
                  For if thou ſpeake, ſome man will note with pen
                  What Wolſey ſaid, and what threw Wolſey downe,
                  And vnder foote, flings Wolſeis great renowne.
               
               
                  What force of that, my fall muſt needs be herd,
                  Before I fell, I had a time to riſe:
                  As fatall chance, and Fortune me preferd.
                  So miſchiefe came, and did my ſtate deſpiſe.
                  If I might plead, my caſe among the wiſe,
                  I could excuſe, right much of mine offence:
                  But leaue a while, ſuch matter in ſuſpence.
               
               
                  The Pope, or pride, or peeuiſh parts of mine,
                  Made King to frowne, and take the ſeale from me:
                  Now ſeru'd no words, nor pleaſant ſpeeches fine,
                  Now Wolſey, lo, muſt needes diſgraced be.
                  Yet had I leaue (as dolefull priſner free)
                  To keepe a houſe (God wot) with heauy cheere,
                  Where that I found, no wine, ne bread, nor beere.
               
               
                  My time was come, I could no longer liue,
                  What ſhould I make, my ſorrow further knowne:
                  Vpon ſome cauſe, that King that all did giue
                  Tooke all againe, and ſo poſſeſt his owne.
                  My goods, my plate, and all was ouerthrowne,
                  And looke what I, had gathred many a day,
                  Within one houre, was cleanly ſwept away.
               
               
                  But harken now, how that my Fortune fell,
                  To Yorke I muſt, where I the Biſhop was:
                  Where I by right, in grace a while did dwell,
                  And was in ſtawle, with honour great to paſſe.
                  The Priors then, and Abbots gan to ſmell,
                  How Cardnall muſt, be honourd as he ought,
                  And for that day, was great prouiſion brought.
               
               
                  
                  At Cawood then, where I great buildings made,
                  And did through cauſe, expect my ſtawling day,
                  The King deuiſde, a ſecret vnder ſhade,
                  How Cardnall ſhould, bee reſt and brought away.
                  One Wealſh a Knight, came downe in good aray,
                  And ſeaſned ſure, becauſe from Court hee came,
                  On Wolſey wolfe, that ſpoiled many a lambe.
               
               
                  Then was I led, toward Court, like dog in ſtring,
                  And brought as biefe, that Butcher-row muſt ſee.
                  But ſtill I hopte, to come before the King,
                  And that repaire, was not denide to me.
                  But he that kept, the Towre, my guide muſt be.
                  Ah there I ſaw, what King thereby did meane,
                  And ſo I ſearcht if conſcience now were cleane.
               
               
                  Some ſpots I found, of pride and popiſh parts,
                  That might accuſe, a better man then I:
                  Now Oxford came, to minde, with all their arts,
                  And Cambridge too, but all not worth a flie:
                  For ſchoolemen can, no foule defects ſupplie.
                  My ſauce was ſowre, though meate before was ſweete,
                  Now Wolſey lackt, both cunning, wit, and ſpreete.
               
               
                  A deepe conceit, of that, poſſeſt my head,
                  So fell I ſicke, conſum'd as ſome did thinke.
                  So tooke in haſte, my chamber and my bed,
                  On which deuice, perhaps the world might winke.
                  But in the heart, ſharpe ſorrow ſo did ſinke,
                  That gladnes ſweete, (forſooke my ſenſes all)
                  In thoſe extremes, did yeeld vnto my fall.
               
               
                  O let me curſe, the popiſh Cardnall hat,
                  Thoſe miters big, beſet with pearle and ſtones,
                  And all the reſt, of traſh I know not what,
                  The ſaints in ſhrine, their fleſh and rotten bones,
                  The maske of Monkes, deuiſed for the nones,
                  And all the flocke, of Freers, what ere they are,
                  That brought me vp, and left me there ſo bare.
               
               
                  
                  O curſed prieſts, that prate for profits ſake,
                  And follow floud, and tide, where ere it floes:
                  O merchants fine, that do aduantage take
                  Of euery graine, how euer market goes.
                  O fie on wolues, that march in masking cloes,
                  For to deuoure, the lambs, when ſhepherd ſleepes,
                  And woe to you, that promiſe neuer keepes.
               
               
                  You ſaid I ſhould, be reskude if I need,
                  And you would curſe, with candell, booke and bell:
                  But when ye ſhould, now ſerue my turne indeed,
                  Yee haue no houſe, I know not where ye dwell.
                  O Freers and Monkes, your harbour is in hell,
                  For in this world, ye haue no rightfull place,
                  Nor dare not once, in heauen ſhew your face.
               
               
                  Your fault not halfe, ſo great as was my pride,
                  For which offence, fell Lucifer from skies:
                  Although I would, that wilfull folly hide,
                  The thing lies plaine, before the peoples eies,
                  On which hie heart, a hatefull name doth ries.
                  It hath been ſaid, of old, and daily will,
                  Pride goes before, and ſhame comes after ſtill.
               
               
                  Pride is a thing, that God and man abores,
                  A ſwelling tode, that poiſons euery place,
                  A ſtinking wound, that breedeth many ſores,
                  A priuie plague, found out in ſtately face,
                  A painted bird, that keeps a peacoks pace,
                  A lothſome lout, that lookes like tinkers dog,
                  A helliſh hownd, a ſwiniſh hateful hog.
               
               
                  That grunts and groanes, at euery thing it ſees,
                  And holds vp ſnowt, like pig that coms from draffe.
                  Why ſhould I make, of pride all theſe degrees,
                  That firſt tooke roote, from filthy droſſe and chaffe,
                  And makes men ſtay, vpon a broken ſtaffe?
                  No weakneſſe more, then thinke to ſtand vpright,
                  When ſtumbling blocke, makes men to fall downe right.
               
               
                  
                  He needs muſt fall, that lookes not where he goes,
                  And on the ſtarres, walkes ſtaring gozling like:
                  On ſudden oft, a bluſtering tempeſt bloes,
                  Then downe great trees are tumbled in the dike.
                  Who knowes the time, and houre when God will ſtrike?
                  Then looke about, and marke what ſteps ye take,
                  Before you pace, the pirgrimage yee make.
               
               
                  Run not on head, as all the world were yours,
                  Nor thruſt them backe, that cannot bide a ſhocke:
                  Who ſtriues for place, his owne decay procures:
                  Who alwaies braules, is ſure to catch a knocke:
                  Who beards a King, his head is neere the blocke:
                  But who doth ſtand, in feare, and worldly dreed,
                  Ere miſchiefe comes, had need to take good heed.
               
               
                  I hauing hap, did make account of none,
                  But ſuch as fed, my humour good or bad.
                  To fawning dogs, ſometimes I gaue a bone,
                  And flung ſome ſcraps, to ſuch as nothing had:
                  But in my hands, ſtill kept the golden gad,
                  That ſeru'd my turne, and laught the reſt to ſcorne,
                  As for himſelfe was Cardnall Wolſey borne.
               
               
                  No, no, good men, we liue not for our ſelues,
                  Though each one catch, as much as he may get:
                  We ought to looke, to thoſe that digs and delues,
                  That alwaies dwell, and liue in endleſſe det.
                  If in ſuch ſort, we would our compaſſe ſet,
                  We ſhould haue loue, where now but hate we find,
                  And headſtrong will, with cruell hollow mind.
               
               
                  I thought nothing, of dutie, loue, or feare,
                  I ſnatcht vp all, and alwaies ſought to clime:
                  I puniſht all, and would with no man beare,
                  I ſought for all, and ſo could take the time.
                  I pli'd the Prince, whiles Fortune was in prime,
                  I fill'd the bags, and gold in hoord I heapt,
                  Thought not on thoſe, that threſht the corne I reapt.
               
               
                  
                  So all I loſt, and all I gate was nought,
                  And all my pride, and pompe lay in the duſt:
                  I aske you all, what man aliue had thought,
                  That in this world, had been ſo little truſt?
                  Why, all things heere, with time decline they muſt.
                  Then all is vaine, ſo all not worth a flie,
                  If all ſhall thinke, that all are borne to die.
               
               
                  If all be baſe, and of ſo ſmall account,
                  VVhy do we all, in folly ſo abound?
                  VVhy do the meane, and mightie ſeeke to mount,
                  Beyond all hope, where is no ſuretie found,
                  And where the wheele, is alwaies turning round?
                  The caſe is plaine, if all be vnderſtood,
                  VVeare ſo vaine, we know not what is good.
               
               
                  Yet ſome will ſay, when they haue heapes of gold,
                  VVith flockes of friends, and ſeruants at their call,
                  They liue like Gods, in pleaſure treble fold,
                  And haue no cauſe, to find no fault at all.
                  O blind conceit, theſe glories are but ſmall,
                  And as for friends, they change their minds ſo mich,
                  They ſtay not long, with neither poore nor rich.
               
               
                  VVith hope of friends, our ſelues we do deceaue,
                  VVith feare of foes, we threatned are in ſleepe:
                  But friends ſpeake faire, yet men alone they leaue
                  To ſinke or ſwim, to mourne, to laugh, or weepe.
                  Yet when foe ſmiles, the ſnake begins to creepe,
                  As world falles out, theſe daies in compaſſe iuſt,
                  VVe know not how, the friend or foe to truſt.
               
               
                  Both can betray, the trueſt man aliue,
                  Both are to doubt, in matters of great weight,
                  Both will ſometime, for goods and honor ſtriue,
                  Both ſeemeth plaine, yet both can ſhew great ſleight,
                  Both ſtoopes full low, yet both can looke on height,
                  And beſt of both, not worth a cracked crowne:
                  Yet leaſt of both, may loſe a walled towne.
               
               
                  
                  Talke not of friends, the name thereof is nought,
                  Then truſt no foes, if friends their credit loſe;
                  If foes and friends, of one bare earth were wrought,
                  Blame nere of both, though both one nature ſhowes.
                  Grace paſſeth kind, where grace and vertue flowes,
                  But where grace wants, make foes and friends alike,
                  The one drawes ſword, the other ſure will ſtrike.
               
               
                  I prou'd that true, by triall twentie times,
                  When Wolſey ſtood, on top of Fortunes wheele,
                  But ſuch as to the height of ladder climes,
                  Know not what lead, lies hanging on their heele.
                  Tell me my mates, that heauie Fortune feele,
                  If riſing vp, breed not a giddie braine,
                  And falling downe, be not a grieuous paine.
               
               
                  I told you how, from Cawood I was led,
                  And ſo fell ſicke, when I arreſted was;
                  VVhat needeth now more words herein be ſed,
                  I knew full well, I muſt to priſon paſſe,
                  And ſaw my ſtate, as brittle as a glaſſe:
                  So gaue vp ghoſt, and bad the world farewell,
                  VVherein, God wot, I could no longer dwell.
               
               
                  Thus vnto duſt, and aſhes I return'd,
                  VVhen blaze of life, and vitall breath went out,
                  Like glowing coale, that is to cinders burn'd;
                  All fleſh and blood, ſo end, you need not doubt.
                  But when the brute of this was blowne about,
                  The world was glad, the Cardnall was in graue,
                  This is of world, loe all the hope we haue.
               
               
                  Full many a yeare, the world lookt for my fall,
                  And when I fell, I made as great a cracke,
                  As doth an oake, or mightie tottering wall,
                  That whirling winde, doth bring to ruine and wrack,
                  Now babling world, will talke behind my backe,
                  A thouſand things, to my reproch and ſhame,
                  So will it too, of others do the ſame.
               
               
                  
                  But what of that? the beſt is we are gone,
                  And worſt of all, when we our tales haue told,
                  Our open plagues will warning be to none,
                  Men are by hap, and courage made ſo bold:
                  They thinke all is, their owne they haue in hold.
                  Well, let them ſay, and thinke what thing they pleas,
                  This weltring world, both flowes, and ebs like ſeas.
               
               Tho. Churchyard.
            
            
               HOW THE LORD CROMWELL EXALTED FROM MEANE ESTATE, was after by the enuie of the Biſhop of Wincheſter and other his complices brought to vntimely end, Anno Dom. 1540.
               
                  
                     AWak'd, and trembling betwixt rage and dread
                  With the loud ſlander (by the impious time)
                  That of my actions euery where is ſpread,
                  Through which to honor falſely I ſhould clime,
                  From the ſad dwelling of th' vntimely dead,
                  To quit me of that execrable crime,
                  
                     Cromwell appeares his wretched plight to ſhow,
                  Much that can tell, one much that once did know.
               
               
                  Roughly not made vp in the common mould,
                  That with the vulgar vilely I ſhould die,
                  What thing ſo ſtrange of Cromwell is not told?
                  What man more prais'd? who more condemn'd then I?
                  That with the world when I am waxed old,
                  Moſt t'were vnfit that ſame of me ſhould lie
                  With fables vaine my hiſtorie to fill,
                  Forcing my good, excuſing of my ill.
               
               
                  You that but hearing of my hated name,
                  Your ancient malice inſtantly bewray,
                  And for my ſake your ill deſerued blame
                  Vpon my legend publikely ſhall lay;
                  
                     
Would you forbeare to blaſt me with defame,
                  Might I ſo meane a priuiledge but pray,
                  He that three, ages hath endur'd your wrong,
                  Heare him a little that hath heard you long.
               
               
                  Since Romes ſad ruine heere by me began,
                  Who her Religion pluckt vp by the root,
                  Of the falſe world ſuch hate for which I wan,
                  Which ſtill at me her poiſned'ſt darts doth ſhoot;
                  That to excuſe it, do the beſt I can,
                  Little I feare my labour me will boot:
                  Yet will I ſpeake my troubled heart to eaſe,
                  Much to the mind, her ſelfe it is to pleaſe.
               
               
                  O powerfull number, from whoſe ſtricter law
                  Heart-mouing muſicke did receiue the ground
                  Which men to faire ciuilitie did draw
                  With the brute beaſt when lawleſſe he was found:
                  O if according to the wiſer ſaw
                  There be a high diuinitie in ſound,
                  Be now abundant proſp'rouſly to aide
                  The pen prepar'd my doubtfull caſe to pleade.
               
               
                  Putney the place made bleſſed in my brith,
                  Whoſe meaneſt cottage ſimplie me did ſhrowd,
                  To me as deareſt of the Engliſh earth;
                  So of my bringing that poore village prou'd,
                  Though in a time when neuer leſſe the dearth
                  Of happie wits, yet mine ſo well allow'd
                  That with the beſt ſhe boldly durſt confer
                  Him that his breath acknowledged from her.
               
               
                  Twice flow'd proud Thames as at my comming wood,
                  Striking the wondring borderers with feare,
                  And the pale Genius of that aged flood
                  Vnto my mother labouring did appeare,
                  And with a countenance much diſtracted ſtood,
                  Threatning the fruit her pained wombe ſhould beare:
                  My ſpeedie birth being added thereunto,
                  Seem'd to foretell that much I came to do.
               
               
                  
                  That was reſerued for thoſe worſer daies,
                  As the great ebbe vnto ſo long a flow,
                  VVhen what thoſe ages formerly did raiſe,
                  This when I liu'd did laſtly ouerthrow,
                  And that great'ſt labour of the world did ſeaze,
                  Only for which immedicable blow
                  Due to that time me dooming heauen ordain'd,
                  VVherein confuſion abſolutely raign'd.
               
               
                  Vainly yet noted this prodigious ſigne,
                  Often predictions of moſt fearefull things,
                  As plagues, or warre, or great men to decline,
                  Riſing of Commons, or the death of Kings;
                  But ſome ſtrange newes though euer it diuine,
                  Yet forth them not immediatly it brings,
                  Vntill th' effects men afterward did learne,
                  To know that me it chiefly did concerne.
               
               
                  VVhil'ſt yet my father by his painfull trade,
                  VVhoſe laboured Anuile only was his fee,
                  VVhom my great towardneſſe ſtrongly did perſwade
                  In knowledge to haue educated mee:
                  But death did him vnluckily inuade,
                  Ere he the fruits of his deſire could ſee,
                  Leauing me yong, then little that did know
                  How me the heauens had purpos'd to beſtow.
               
               
                  Hopeleſſe as helpeleſſe moſt might me ſuppoſe,
                  Whoſe meanneſſe ſeem'd their abiect breath to draw:
                  Yet did my breaſt that glorious fire incloſe,
                  VVhich their dull purblind ignorance not ſaw,
                  VVhich ſtill is ſetled vpon outward ſhowes,
                  The vulgars iudgement euer is ſo raw,
                  VVhich the vnworthieſt ſottiſhly do loue
                  In their owne region properly that moue.
               
               
                  Yet me my fortune ſo could not diſguiſe,
                  But through this cloud were ſome that did me know,
                  VVhich then the reſt more happie or more wiſe,
                  Me did relieue when I was driuen low,
                  
                     
Which as the ſtaier by which I firſt did riſe,
                  When to my height I afterward did grow,
                  Them to requite my bounties were ſo hie,
                  As made my fame through euery eare to flie.
               
               
                  That height and Godlike puritie of minde
                  Reſteth not ſtill, where titles moſt adorne
                  With any, nor peculiarly confinde
                  To names, and to be limited doth ſcorne:
                  Man doth the moſt degenerate from kinde,
                  Richeſt and pooreſt both alike are borne;
                  And to be alwaies pertinently good,
                  Followes not ſtill the greatnes of our blood.
               
               
                  Pitie it is that to one vertuous man
                  That marke him lent to gentrie to aduance,
                  Which firſt by noble induſtrie he wan,
                  His baſer iſſue after ſhould inhance,
                  And the rude ſlaue not any good that can,
                  Such ſhould thruſt downe by what is his by chance:
                  As had not he been firſt that him did raiſe,
                  Nere had his great heire wrought his grandſires praiſe.
               
               
                  How weake art thou that makeſt it thy end
                  To heape ſuch worldly dignities on thee,
                  When vpon Fortune only they depend,
                  And by her changes gouerned muſt bee?
                  Beſides the dangers ſtill that ſuch attend,
                  Liuel'eſt of all men purtraied out in mee,
                  When that for which I hated was of all,
                  Soon'ſt from me fled, ſcarſe tarrying for my fall.
               
               
                  You that but boaſt your anceſtors proud ſtile,
                  And the large ſtem whence your vaine greatnes grew,
                  When you your ſelues are ignorant and vile,
                  Nor glorious thing dare actually purſue,
                  That all good ſpirits would vtterly exile,
                  Doubting their worth ſhould elſe diſcouer you,
                  Giuing your ſelues vnto ignoble things;
                  Baſe I proclaime you though deriu'd from Kings.
               
               
                  
                  Vertue but poore, God in this earth doth place
                  Gainſt the rude world to ſtand vp in his right,
                  To ſuffer ſad affliction and diſgrace,
                  Not ceaſing to purſue her with deſpight:
                  Yet when of all ſhe is accounted baſe,
                  And ſeeming in moſt miſerable plight,
                  Out of her power new life to her doth take,
                  Leaſt then diſmai'd when all do her forſake.
               
               
                  That is the man of an vndaunted ſpirit,
                  For her deare ſake that offereth him to dye,
                  For whom, when him the world doth diſinherit,
                  Looketh vpon it with a pleaſed eye,
                  What's done for vertue thinking it doth merit,
                  Daring the proudeſt menaces defie,
                  More worth then life, how ere the baſe world rate him,
                  Belou'd of heauen, although the earth doth hate him.
               
               
                  Iniurious time, vnto the good vniuſt,
                  O how may weake poſteritie ſuppoſe
                  Euer to haue their merit from the duſt,
                  Gainſt them thy partialitie that knowes!
                  To thy report ô who ſhall euer truſt,
                  Triumphant arches building vnto thoſe
                  Allow'd the longeſt memorie to haue,
                  That were the moſt vnworthie of a graue?
               
               
                  But my cleere mettle had that powerfull heat,
                  As it not turn'd with all that Fortune could:
                  Nor when the world me terribleſt did threat,
                  Could that place win which my hie thoughts did hold,
                  That waxed ſtill more proſperouſly great,
                  The more the world me ſtroue to haue control'd,
                  On my owne Columnes conſtantly to ſtand,
                  Without the falſe helpe of anothers hand.
               
               
                  My youthfull courſe thus wiſely did I ſteere,
                  T'auoid thoſe rockes my wracke that elſe did thret:
                  Yet ſome faire hopes from farre did ſtill appeere,
                  If that too much my wants me did not let:
                  
                     
Wherefore my ſelfe aboue my ſelfe to beare,
                  Still as I grew I knowledge ſtroue to get,
                  To perfect that which in the Embryon was,
                  Whoſe birth I found time well might bring to paſſe.
               
               
                  But when my meanes to faile me I did finde,
                  My ſelfe to trauell preſently betooke,
                  As much diſtaſtfull to my noble minde,
                  That the vile world into my wants ſhould looke,
                  And of my ſelfe induſtriouſly inclinde,
                  To meaſure others actions with my booke,
                  I might my iudgement rectifie thereby,
                  In matters that were difficult and hie.
               
               
                  When loe it hapt that fortune as my guide,
                  Of me did with ſuch prouidence diſpoſe,
                  That th' Engliſh Merchants then who did reſide
                  At Antwerpe, me their Secretarie choſe,
                  (As though in me to manifeſt her pride)
                  Whence to thoſe principalities I roſe,
                  To pluck me downe, whence afterward ſhe fear'd
                  Beyond her power that almoſt ſhe had rear'd.
               
               
                  When firſt the wealthie Netherlands me traind
                  In wiſe commerce moſt proper to the place,
                  And from my countrie carefully me wain'd,
                  That with the world did chiefly winne me grace,
                  Where great experience happily I gaind;
                  Yet here I ſeem'd but tutor'd for a ſpace,
                  For hie imploiment otherwiſe ordaind,
                  Till which the time I idely entertaind.
               
               
                  For hauing Boſton buſineſſe in hand,
                  The charge thereof on Chambers being laid,
                  Comming to Flanders hapt to vnderſtand
                  Of me whom he requeſted him to aid;
                  Of which when I the benefit had ſcand,
                  Weighing what time at Antwerpe I had ſtaid,
                  Quickly me wonne faire Italy to trie,
                  Vnder a cheerefull and more luckie skie:
               
               
                  
                  For what the meaneſt cleerely makes to ſhine,
                  Youth, wit, and courage, all in me concurre
                  In euery proiect, that ſo powerfull trine
                  By whoſe kind working brauely I did ſturre,
                  Which to each hie and glorious deſigne
                  (The time could offer) freely did me ſpurre,
                  As forcing fate ſome new thing to prepare
                  (Shewing ſucceſſe) t'attempt that could me dare:
               
               
                  Where now my ſpirit got roomth it ſelfe to ſhow,
                  To the fair'ſt pitch doth make a gallant flight,
                  From things that too much earthly were and low,
                  Strongly attracted by a genuine light,
                  Where higher ſtill it euery day did grow;
                  And being in ſo excellent a plight,
                  Crau'd but occaſion happily to proue
                  How much it ſate each vulgar ſpirit aboue.
               
               
                  The good ſucceſſe th' affaires of England found,
                  Much prais'd the choice of me that had been made:
                  For where moſt men the depth durſt hardly ſound,
                  I held it nothing boldly through to wade
                  My ſelfe, and through the ſtrait'ſt waies I woond.
                  So could I act, ſo well I could perſwade
                  As meerely Iouiall, me to mirth applie,
                  Compos'd of freedome and alacritie.
               
               
                  Not long it was ere Rome of me did ring
                  (Hardly ſhall Rome ſo full daies ſee again)
                  Of freemens catches to the Pope I ſing,
                  Which wan much licence to my countrimen,
                  Thither the which I was the firſt did bring,
                  That were vnknowne to Italy till then:
                  Light humours them when iudgement doth direct,
                  Euen of the wiſe win plauſible reſpect.
               
               
                  And thoſe from whom that penſions were allow'd,
                  And heere did for intelligence remaine,
                  Vnder my power themſelues were glad to ſhroud,
                  
                     Ruſſell and Pace yea oftentimes were faine,
                  
                     
When as their names they durſt not haue auow'd,
                  Me into their ſocietie t'retaine,
                  Riſing before me mightie as they were,
                  Great though at home, yet did they need me there.
               
               
                  In forraine parts nere friends I yet forſake
                  That had before been deeply bound to mee,
                  And would againe I vſe of them ſhould make,
                  But ſtill my ſtarres command I ſhould be free,
                  And all thoſe offers lightly from me ſhake,
                  Which to requite I fettred elſe might bee,
                  And though that oft great perils me oppungne,
                  And meanes were weak, my mind was euer ſtrong.
               
               
                  And thoſe great wants fate to my youth did tie
                  Me from delights of thoſe rich countries driue,
                  Thereby inforc'd with painfull induſtrie
                  Againſt affliction manfully to ſtriue
                  Vnder her burthen faintly not to lie,
                  But ſince my good I hardly muſt deriue,
                  Vnto the ſame to make my ſelfe a way
                  Through all the power againſt me ſhe could lay.
               
               
                  As a Comedian where my life I led,
                  For ſo a while my need did me conſtraine,
                  With other my poore countrimen (that plai'd)
                  Thither that came in hope of better gaine,
                  Whereas when Fortune ſeem'd me low to tread
                  Vnder her feet, ſhe ſet me vp againe,
                  Vntill the vſe me bad her not to feare
                  Her good and ill that patiently could beare.
               
               
                  Till Charles the fift th' emperiall power did bend
                  Gainſt Rome, which Burbon skilfully did guide,
                  Which ſore declining Italy did rend;
                  For th' right that him her holineſſe denide,
                  Wholly her ſelfe enforced to defend
                  Gainſt him that iuſtly puniſhed her pride,
                  To which my ſelfe I laſtly did betake,
                  Seeing thereof what Fortune ment to make.
               
               
                  
                  And at the ſiege with that great Generall ſeru'd,
                  When he did girt her ſtubborne waſte with ſteele,
                  Within her walles who well neer being ſtaru'd,
                  And that with faintnes ſhe began to reele,
                  Shewing her ſelfe a little as ſhe ſwaru'd:
                  Firſt her then noting I began to feele,
                  She whoſe great power ſo far abroad did rome,
                  What in her ſelfe ſhe truly was at home.
               
               
                  That the great ſchoole of the falſe world was then,
                  Where her's their ſubtill practiſes did vie,
                  Amongſt that mightie confluence of men,
                  French plots propt vp by Engliſh policie,
                  The German powers, falſe ſhuffling, and agen
                  All countermin'd by skilfull Italy,
                  Each one in poſſibility to win,
                  Great reſts were vp and mightie hands were in.
               
               
                  Here firſt to worke my buſie braine was ſet,
                  (My inclination finding it to pleaſe
                  This ſtirring world which ſtrongly ſtill did whet)
                  To temper in ſo dangerous aſſaies,
                  Which did ſtrange formes of policies beget;
                  Beſides in times ſo turbulent as theſe,
                  Wherein my ſtudies hopefully did bend
                  Vnto that point the wiſeſt made their end:
               
               
                  And my experience happily me taught
                  Into the ſecrets of thoſe times to ſee,
                  From whence to England afterward I brought
                  Thoſe ſlights of ſtate deliu'red vnto me,
                  In t'which were then but very few that ſought,
                  Nor did with th' umour of that age agree,
                  After did great and fearfull things effect,
                  Whoſe ſecret working few did then ſuſpect:
               
               
                  When though t'were long it hapned yet at laſt
                  Some hopes me homeward ſecretly allur'd,
                  When many perils ſtrangely I had paſt,
                  As many ſad calamities endur'd
                  
                     
Beyond the Moone, when I began to caſt
                  By my rare parts what place might be procur'd,
                  If they at home were to the mightie knowne,
                  How they would ſeeme compared with their owne.
               
               
                  Or if that there the great ſhould me neglect,
                  As I the worſt that vainely did not feare,
                  To my experience how to gaine reſpect
                  In other countries that doe hold it deare,
                  And now occaſion ſeemed to reiect,
                  Whil'ſt ſtill before me other riſing were,
                  And ſome themſelues had mounted to the skie,
                  Little before vnlike to thriue as I.
               
               
                  When now in England Bigamie with blood
                  Lately begot by luxurie and pride,
                  In their great'ſt fulnes peremptorie ſtood;
                  Some thereunto that diligently pri'd,
                  Stillie were fiſhing in that troubled flood
                  For future changes wiſely to prouide,
                  Finding the world ſo rankly then to ſwell,
                  That till it brake it neuer could be well.
               
               
                  But floting long vpon my firſt arriue,
                  Whil'ſt many doubts me ſeemed to appall,
                  Like to a barke that with the tide doth driue,
                  Hauing not left to faſten it withall,
                  Thus with the time by ſuffring I doe ſtriue
                  Vnto that harbor doubtfull yet to fall;
                  Vntill inforc'd to put it to the chance,
                  Caſting the fair'ſt my fortune to aduance.
               
               
                  Making my ſelfe to mightie Wolſey knowne,
                  That Atlas which the gouernment vpſtai'd,
                  Which from meane place in little time was growne
                  Vp vnto him, that weight vpon him lai'd,
                  And being got the neereſt to his throne,
                  He the more eaſly the great kingdome ſwai'd,
                  Leaning thereon his wearied ſelfe to breath,
                  Whil'ſt euen the greateſt farre ſat him beneath.
               
               
                  
                  Where learned More and Gardiner I met,
                  Men in thoſe times immatchable for wit,
                  Able that were the dulleſt ſpirit to whet,
                  And did my humour excellently fit,
                  Into their ranke that worthily did get
                  There as their proud competitor to ſit,
                  One excellence to many is the mother,
                  Wit doth as creatures one beget another.
               
               
                  This Founder of the palaces of Kings,
                  Whoſe veines with more then vſuall ſpirit were fild,
                  A man ordained to the mighti'ſt things,
                  In Oxford then determining to build
                  To Chriſt a Colledge, and together brings
                  All that thereof the great foundation wills,
                  There me imploies, whoſe induſtrie he found
                  Worthie to worke vpon the nobleſt ground.
               
               
                  Yet in the entrance wiſely that did feare
                  Coyne might fall ſhort, yet with this worke on fire,
                  Wherefore ſuch houſes as Religious were
                  Whoſe being no neceſſitie require,
                  But that the greater very well might beare,
                  From Rome the Card'nall cunningly did hire,
                  Winning withall his Soueraigne to conſent,
                  Both colouring with ſo holy an intent.
               
               
                  This like a ſymptome to a long diſeaſe
                  Was the forerunner to this mightie fall,
                  And but too vnaduiſedly did ſeaſe
                  Vpon the part that ruinated all,
                  Which had the worke been of ſo many daies
                  And more againe, recouer hardly ſhall:
                  But loe it ſunke which time did long vphold,
                  Where now it lies euen leueld with the mould.
               
               
                  Thus thou great Rome here firſt waſt ouerthrowne,
                  Thy future harmes that blindly couldſt not ſe,
                  And in this worke they only were thine owne,
                  Whoſe knowledge lent that deadly wound to thee,
                  
                     
Which to the world before had they not ſhowne,
                  Nere had thoſe ſecrets been deſcri'd by mee,
                  Nor by thy wealth ſo many from the plow
                  Worne thoſe hie types wherein they floriſh now.
               
               
                  After when as the Cardinall againe
                  Into hie fauour with the King mee brought,
                  VVith whom my ſelfe ſo well I did demeane,
                  As that I ſeem'd to exerciſe his thought,
                  And his great liking ſtrongly did retaine
                  With what before my Maſter me had taught,
                  From whoſe example by thoſe Cels were ſmall
                  Sprang the ſubuerſion laſtly of them all.
               
               
                  Yet many a let was caſt into the way,
                  VVherein I ran ſo ſteddily and right,
                  And many a ſnare my aduerſaries lay,
                  Much wrought they with their power much with their ſlight,
                  Wiſely perceiuing that my ſmalleſt ſtay
                  Fully requir'd the vtmoſt of their might,
                  To my aſcendant haſting me to clime,
                  There as the firſt predomining the time,
               
               
                  Knowing what wealth me earneſtly did wooe,
                  VVhich I through Wolſey hapned had to finde,
                  And could the path moſt perfectly vntoo,
                  The King thereafter earneſtly inclin'd,
                  Seeing beſides what after I might doe
                  If ſo great power mee fully were aſſign'd,
                  By all their meanes againſt me ſtrongly wrought,
                  Lab'ring as faſt to bring their Church to nought.
               
               
                  Whil'ſt to the King continually I ſue,
                  And in this buſineſſe faithfully did ſtirre
                  Strongly t'approue my iudgement to be true
                  Gainſt thoſe who moſt ſuppoſed me to erre,
                  Nor the leaſt meanes which any way I knew
                  Might grace me, or my purpoſes preferre
                  Did I omit, till wonne I had his eare,
                  Moſt that me mark'd when leaſt he ſeem'd to heare.
               
               
                  
                  This wound to them thus violently giuen,
                  Enuie at me her ſharpeſt darts doth roue,
                  Affecting the ſupremacie of heauen,
                  As the firſt Giants warring againſt Ioue,
                  
                  Heap'd hils on hils, the Gods till they had driuen
                  The meaneſt ſhapes of earthly things to proue:
                  So muſt I ſhift from them againſt me roſe,
                  Mortall their hate, as mightie were my foes.
               
               
                  But their great force againſt me wholly bent
                  Preuail'd vpon my purpoſes ſo farre,
                  That I my ruine ſcarſely could preuent,
                  So momentarie worldly fauours are,
                  That till the vtmoſt of their ſpight was ſpent,
                  Had not my ſpirit maintain'd a manly warre,
                  Riſen they had when laid I had been low,
                  Vpon whoſe ruine after I did grow.
               
               
                  When the great King their ſtrange reports that tooke
                  That as pernitious as they potent were,
                  Which at the faire growth of my fortune ſtrooke,
                  Whoſe deadly malice blame me not to feare,
                  Me at the firſt ſo violently ſhooke,
                  That they this frame were likely downe to beare,
                  If reſolution with a ſetled brow
                  Had not vpheld my peremptorie vow.
               
               
                  Yet theſe encounters thruſt me not awry,
                  Nor could my courſes force me to forſake,
                  After this ſhipwrack I againe muſt trie
                  Some happier voiage hopefull ſtill to make,
                  The plots that barren long we ſee did lie,
                  Some fitting ſeaſon plentifully take,
                  One fruitfull harueſt frankly doth reſtore
                  What many winters hindred had before.
               
               
                  That to account I ſtrictly call my wit
                  How it this while had managed my ſtate,
                  My ſoule in counſell ſummoning to ſit,
                  If poſſible to turne the courſe of fate,
                  
                     
For waies there be the greateſt things to hit,
                  If men could find the peremptorie gate,
                  And ſince I once was got ſo neere the brinke
                  More then before, t'would grieue me now to ſinke.
               
               
                  
                     Bedford whoſe life (ſome ſaid) that I had ſau'd
                  In Italy, one me that fauoured moſt,
                  And reuerend Hayles who but occaſion crau'd
                  To ſhew his loue, no leſſe that I had coſt,
                  VVho to the King perceiuing me diſgrac'd,
                  VVhoſe fauour I vnluckily had loſt,
                  Both with him great, a foot ſet in withall
                  If not to ſtay, to qualifie my fall.
               
               
                  High their regard, yet higher was their hap,
                  Well neere quite ſunke recouer me that could,
                  And once more get me into Fortunes lap,
                  VVhich well my ſelfe might teach me there to hold,
                  Eſcap'd out of ſo dangerous a trap,
                  VVhoſe praiſe by me to ages ſhall be told,
                  As the two props by which I only roſe,
                  VVhen moſt ſuppreſt, moſt trod on by my foes.
               
               
                  This me to vrge the premunire wonne,
                  Ordain'd in matters dangerous and hie,
                  In t'which the heedleſſe Prelacie were runne,
                  That backe vnto the Papacie did flie,
                  Sworne to that ſea, and what before was done
                  Due to the King, diſpenſed were thereby,
                  In t'which firſt entring offred me the meane
                  That to throw downe alreadie that did leane.
               
               
                  This was to me that ouerflowing fourſe,
                  From whence his bounties plentifully ſpring,
                  VVhoſe ſpeedie current with vnuſuall force
                  Bare me into the boſome of the King,
                  By putting him into that readie courſe
                  VVhich ſoone to paſſe his purpoſes might bring,
                  Where thoſe which late emperiouſly control'd me
                  Pale ſtrooke with feare ſtood trembling to behold me.
               
               
                  
                  When ſtate to me thoſe ceremonies ſhow'd
                  That to ſo great a fauorite were due,
                  And Fortune ſtill with honors did me load,
                  As though no meane ſhe in my riſing knew,
                  Or heauen to me more then to man had ow'd,
                  (What to the world vnheard of was and new)
                  And was to other ſparing of her ſtore
                  Till ſhe could giue, or aske I could no more.
               
               
                  Thoſe high preferments he vpon me laid,
                  Might make the world me publikely to know
                  Such as in iudgement rightly being wai'd,
                  Seemed too great for me to vndergo,
                  Nor could his hand from powring on be ſtai'd
                  Vntill I ſo abundantly did flow,
                  That looking downe whence lately I was cloame,
                  Danger bid feare if further I ſhould roame.
               
               
                  For firſt from Knighthood riſing in degree,
                  The office of the Iewell houſe my lot,
                  After the Roles he frankely gaue to mee,
                  From whence a priuie Counſeller I got,
                  Choſe of the Garter: and the Earle to bee
                  Of Eſſex: yet ſufficient theſe not
                  But to the great Vicegerencie I grew,
                  Being a title as ſupreame as new.
               
               
                  So well did me theſe dignities befit,
                  And honor ſo me euery way became,
                  As more then man I had been made for it,
                  Or as from me it had deriu'd the name:
                  Where was that man whoſe loue I not requit
                  Beyond his owne imaginarie aime,
                  Which had me ſuccour'd neerely being driuen
                  As things to me that idlely were not giuen?
               
               
                  What tongue ſo ſlow the tale ſhall not report
                  Of hoſpitable Friſcobald and mee,
                  And ſhew in how reciprocall a ſort
                  My thankes did with his courteſie agree,
                  
                     
When as my meanes in Italy were ſhort
                  That me relieu'd, leſſe great that would not bee,
                  When I of England Chancellor was made,
                  His former bounties librally repai'd?
               
               
                  The maner briefly gentler Muſe relate,
                  Since oft before it wiſely hath been told,
                  The ſudden change of vnauoided fate,
                  That famous Merchant reuerend Friſcobald
                  
                  Grew poore, and the ſmall remnant of his ſtate
                  Was certaine goods to England he had ſold,
                  Which in the hands of Creditors but bad,
                  Small hope to get, yet leſſer meanes he had.
               
               
                  Hither his wants him forciblie conſtrain'd,
                  Though with long trauell both by land and ſeas,
                  Led by this hope that only now remain'd,
                  Whereon his fortune finally he laies,
                  And if he found that friendſhip heere were fain'd,
                  Yet at the worſt it better ſhould him pleaſe,
                  Farre out of ſight to periſh heere vnknowne,
                  Then vnrelieu'd be pitied of his owne.
               
               
                  It chanc'd as I toward Westmister did ride,
                  Mongſt the great concourſe paſſing to and fro,
                  An aged man I happily eſpide,
                  Whoſe outward looks much inward griefe did ſhow,
                  Which made me note him, and the more I ey'd
                  Him, me thought more preciſely I ſhould know,
                  Reuoluing long it came into my mind,
                  This was the man to me had been ſo kind:
               
               
                  Was there withall ſo ioyed with his ſight,
                  (With the deare ſight of his ſo reuerend face)
                  That I could ſcarcely keepe me from t'alight,
                  And in mine armes him openly embrace;
                  Weighing yet (well) what ſome imagine might,
                  He being a ſtranger and the publike place
                  Checkt my affection, till ſome fitter hower
                  On him my loue effectually might ſhower.
               
               
                  
                  Neuer, quoth I, was Fortune ſo vniuſt
                  As to do wrong vnto thy noble hart,
                  VVhat man ſo wicked could betray the truſt
                  Of one ſo vpright of ſo good deſart?
                  And though obey neceſſitie thou muſt,
                  As when the great'ſt the ſame to me thou art,
                  Let me alone the laſt be left of all,
                  That from the reſt declin'd not with thy fall.
               
               
                  And calling to a Gentleman of mine,
                  VViſe and diſcreet that well I knew to bee,
                  Shew'd him that ſtranger, whoſe deiected eyne
                  Fixt on the earth nere once lookt vp at mee,
                  Bid yonder man come home to me and dine
                  (Quoth I) beſpeake him reuerently (you ſee)
                  Scorne not his habit, little canſt thou tell
                  How rich a mind in thoſe meane rags doth dwell.
               
               
                  He with my name that kindly did him greete,
                  Slowly caſt vp his deadly-mouing eye,
                  That long time had been fixed on his feete,
                  To looke no higher then his miſerie,
                  Thinking him more calamitie did greete,
                  Or that I had ſuppoſed him ſome ſpye,
                  VVith a deepe ſigh that from his heart he drew,
                  Quoth he, his will accompliſht be by you.
               
               
                  My man departed and the meſſage done,
                  He whoſe ſad heart with ſtrange impreſſions ſtrooke,
                  To thinke vpon this accident begun,
                  And on himſelfe ſuſpitiouſly to looke,
                  Into all doubts he fearefully doth run,
                  Oft himſelfe cheering, oft himſelfe forſooke:
                  Strangely perplext vnto my houſe doth come,
                  Not knowing why iudg'd nor dreading yet his doome.
               
               
                  My ſeruants ſet his comming to attend,
                  That were therein not common for their skill,
                  VVhoſe vſage yet the former did amend:
                  He hop'd not good, nor guiltie was of ill,
                  
                     
But as a man whoſe thoughts were at an end,
                  Fortune (quoth he) then worke on me thy will,
                  Wiſer then man I thinke he were that knew
                  Whence this may come, or what thereof enſue.
               
               
                  His honored preſence ſo did me enflame,
                  That though being then in preſence of my Peeres,
                  Daine not the leſſe to meet him as he came,
                  (That very hardly could containe my teares)
                  Kindly ſalute him, call him by his name,
                  And oft together aske him how he cheares,
                  With ſtill along maintaining the extreame;
                  Yet thought the man he had been in a dreame.
               
               
                  At length t'awake him gently I began
                  With this demaund, if once he did not know
                  One Thomas Cromwell a poore Engliſh man,
                  By him relieu'd when he was driuen low:
                  When I perceiu'd he my remembrance wan,
                  Yet with his teares it ſilently did ſhow:
                  I wept for woe to ſee mine hoſt diſtreſt,
                  But he for ioy to ſee his happie gueſt.
               
               
                  Him to the Lords I publiſht by my praiſe,
                  And at my table, carefully him ſet,
                  Recounting them the many ſundrie waies
                  I was vnto this gentleman in debt,
                  How great he was in Florence in thoſe daies,
                  With all that grace or reuerence him might get:
                  Which all the while yet ſilently he heares,
                  Moiſting (among) his viands with his teares.
               
               
                  And to lend fulneſſe laſtly to his fate
                  Great ſummes I gaue him, and what was his due
                  Made knowne, my ſelfe became his aduocate,
                  And at my charge his creditors I ſue,
                  Recouering him vnto his former ſtate:
                  Thus he the world began by me anew,
                  That ſhall to all poſteritie expreſſe
                  His honored bountie, and my thankfulneſſe.
               
               
                  
                  But Muſe recount, before thou further paſſe,
                  How this great change ſo quickly came about,
                  And what the cauſe of this ſad downefall was,
                  In euery part the ſpatious Realme throughout,
                  Being effected in ſo little ſpace,
                  Leaue not thereof poſteritie to doubt,
                  That with the world obſcured elſe may bee,
                  If in this place reuealed not by thee.
               
               
                  If the whole land did on the Church relie,
                  Hauing full power Kings to account to call,
                  That to the world read only policie,
                  Beſides heauens keyes to ſtop or let in all,
                  Let me but know from her ſupremacie
                  How ſhe ſhould come ſo ſuddenly to fall:
                  T'was more then chance ſure put a hand thereto,
                  That had the power ſo great a thing to do.
               
               
                  Or ought there were had biding vnder Sunne,
                  Who would haue thought thoſe edifices great,
                  Which firſt religion holily begunne,
                  The Church approu'd, and wiſdome richly ſeate,
                  Deuotion nouriſh'd, faith allowance wonne,
                  And all that them might any way compleate,
                  Should in their ruines laſtly buried lie,
                  But that begun and ended from the skie?
               
               
                  And the King late obedient to her lawes,
                  Againſt the Clerke of Germany had writ,
                  As he that firſt ſtirr'd in the Churches cauſe,
                  Againſt him greatlieſt that oppugned it,
                  And wan from her ſo gratefull an applauſe,
                  Then in her fauour chiefly that did ſit,
                  That as the prop, whereon ſhe only ſtai'th,
                  Him ſhe inſtil'd Defender of the faith.
                  
               
               
                  But not their power, whoſe wiſdomes them did place
                  In the firſt ranke, the oracles of ſtate,
                  Who that opinion ſtrongly did embrace,
                  Which through the land receiued was of late,
                  
                     
Then ought at all preuailed in this caſe,
                  O powerfull doome of vnauoided fate,
                  Whoſe depth not weake mortalitie can know,
                  Who can vphold what heauen will ouerthrow?
               
               
                  VVhen time now vniuerſally did ſhow
                  The power to her peculiarly annex'd,
                  VVith moſt abundance then when ſhe did flow,
                  Yet euery hower ſtill proſp'rouſly ſhe wex'd,
                  But the world poore did by looſe riots grow,
                  VVhich ſerued as an excellent pretext,
                  And colour gaue to plucke her from her pride,
                  VVhoſe only greatneſſe ſuffred none beſide.
               
               
                  Likewiſe to that poſteritie did doubt
                  Thoſe at the firſt not rightly did adore,
                  Their fathers that too credulous deuout
                  Vnto the Church contributed their ſtore,
                  And to recouer only went about
                  VVhat their great zeale had lauiſhed before,
                  On her a ſtrong hand violently lai'd,
                  Preying on that, they gaue for to be prai'd.
               
               
                  And now the King ſet in a courſe ſo right,
                  VVhich I for him laboriouſly had tract,
                  (VVho till I learn'd him, did not know his might)
                  I ſtill to prompt his power with me to act,
                  Into thoſe ſecrets got ſo deepe a ſight,
                  That nothing laſtly to his furtherance lackt,
                  And by example plainly to him ſhowne,
                  How all might now be eaſly ouerthrowne.
               
               
                  In taking downe yet of this goodly frame
                  He ſuddenly not brake off euery band,
                  But tooke the power firſt from the Papall name,
                  After a while let the Religion ſtand,
                  When limbe by limbe he daily did it lame,
                  Firſt tooke a leg, and after tooke a hand,
                  Till the poore ſemblance of a bodie left,
                  But all ſhould ſtay it, vtterly bereft.
               
               
                  
                  For if ſome Abbey hapned void to fall
                  By death of him that the ſuperiour was,
                  Gaine that did firſt Church libertie enthrall,
                  Only ſupreame, promoted to the place,
                  Mongſt many bad the worſt moſt times of all,
                  Vnder the colour of ſome others grace,
                  That by the ſlander from his life ſhould ſpring,
                  Into contempt it more and more might bring.
               
               
                  This time from heauen when by the ſecret courſe,
                  Diſſenſion vniuerſally began,
                  (Preuailing as a planetarie ſourſe)
                  I'th Church belieuing, as Mahumitan,
                  When Luther firſt did thoſe opinions nurſe,
                  Much from great Rome in little ſpace that wan,
                  It to this change ſo aptly did diſpoſe,
                  From whoſe ſad ruine ours ſo great aroſe.
               
               
                  That heere that fabrique vtterly did faile,
                  Which powerfull fate had limited to time,
                  By whoſe ſtrong law it naturally muſt quaile,
                  From that proud height to which it long did clime,
                  Letting gainſt it the contrarie preuaile,
                  Therein to puniſh ſome notorious crime,
                  For which at length iuſt dooming heauen decreed,
                  That on her buildings ruine heere ſhould feed.
               
               
                  Th' authoritie vpon her ſhe did take,
                  And vſe thereof in euery little thing,
                  Finding her ſelfe how oft ſhe did forſake,
                  In her owne bounds her neuer limiting,
                  That awfull feare and due obedience brake
                  Which her reputed holineſſe did bring,
                  From ſlight regard ſoone brought her into hate
                  With thoſe that much diſliked her eſtate.
               
               
                  And that thoſe parts ſhe cunningly had plai'd,
                  Beliefe vnto her miracles to win,
                  Vnto the world were euery day be wrai'd,
                  From which the doubt did of her power begin,
                  
                     
Damnation yet to queſtion what ſhe ſaid
                  Made moſt ſuſpect the faith they had been in,
                  When their ſaluation eaſly might be bought,
                  Found not this yet the way that they had ſought.
               
               
                  When thoſe ill humours ripened to a head,
                  Bred by the rankneſſe of the plentious land,
                  And they not only ſtrangely from her fled,
                  Bound for her ancient libertie to ſtand,
                  But what their fathers gaue her being dead,
                  The ſonnes rap'd from her with a violent hand,
                  And thoſe her buildings moſt of all abus'd,
                  That with the waight their fathers coffins bruis'd.
               
               
                  The wiſeſt and moſt prouident but build,
                  For time againe too waſtfully deſtroy,
                  The coſtly piles and monuments we guild,
                  Succeeding time ſhall reckon but a toy,
                  Viciſſitude impartially wild,
                  The goodlieſt things be ſubiect to annoy,
                  And what one age did ſtudiouſly maintaine,
                  The next againe accounteth vile and vaine.
               
               
                  Yet time doth tell, in ſome things they did erre,
                  That put their helpe her brauery to deface,
                  When as the wealth, that taken was from her,
                  Others ſoone raiſed, that did them diſplace,
                  Their titles and their offices conferre
                  On ſuch before, as were obſcure and baſe,
                  Who would with her they likewiſe downe ſhould go,
                  And o'rthrew them that her did ouerthrow.
               
               
                  And th' Romiſh rites that with a cleerer ſight
                  The wiſeſt thought they iuſtly did reiect,
                  They after ſaw that the receiued light
                  Not altogether free was from defect,
                  Myſterious things being not conceiued right,
                  Thereof bred in the ignorant neglect,
                  For in opinion ſomething ſhort doth fall,
                  Wants there haue been and ſhall be ſtill in all.
               
               
                  
                  But negligent ſecuritie and eaſe
                  Vnbridled ſenſualitie begat,
                  That only ſought his appetite to pleaſe,
                  As in the midſt it of abundance ſat,
                  The Church not willing others ſhould her praiſe
                  That ſhe was leane, when as her lands were fat,
                  Her ſelfe to too much libertie did giue,
                  Which ſome perceiu'd that in thoſe times did liue.
               
               
                  
                     Pierce the wiſe Plowman in his viſion ſaw
                  Conſcience ſore hurt, yet ſorer was affraid
                  The ſeuen great ſins to hell him like to draw,
                  And to wiſe Clergie mainly cri'd for aid;
                  Falne ere he wiſt (whom perill much did awe)
                  On vncleane Prieſts whil'ſt faintly he him ſtaid,
                  Willing good Clergie t'eaſe his wretched caſe,
                  Whom theſe ſtrong Giants hotly had in chaſe.
               
               
                  Clergie call'd Friers which neere at hand did dwell,
                  And them requeſts to take in hand the cure,
                  But for their Leechcraft that they could not well,
                  He liſted not their dreſſing to endure,
                  VVhen in his eare Need ſoftly him did tell
                  (And of his knowledge more did him aſſure)
                  They came for gain their end which they did make,
                  For which on them the charge of ſoules they take.
               
               
                  And voluntarie pouertie profeſt,
                  By food of Angels ſeeming as to liue;
                  But yet with them th' accounted were the beſt
                  That moſt to their fraternitie doe giue,
                  And beyond number that they were increas'd:
                  If ſo (quoth Conſcience) thee may I beleeue,
                  Then t'is in vaine more on them to beſtow,
                  If beyond number like they be to grow.
               
               
                  The Frier ſoone feeling Conſcience had him found,
                  And hearing how Hypocriſie did thriue,
                  That many Teachers euery where did wound,
                  For which Contrition miſerably did grieue:
                  
                     
Now in deceit to ſhew himſelfe profound,
                  His former hopes yet laſtly to reuiue
                  Gets the Popes letters, whereof he doth ſhape
                  Him a diſguiſe from Conſcience to eſcape.
               
               
                  And ſo towards goodly Vnitie he goes,
                  A ſtrong-built Caſtle ſtanding very hie,
                  VVhere Conſcience liu'd to keepe him from his foes,
                  VVhom leſt ſome watchfull Centinell ſhould ſpie,
                  And him vnto the garriſon diſcloſe,
                  His cowle about him carefully doth tie,
                  Creepes to the gate and cloſely thereat beate,
                  As one that entrance gladly would intreate.
               
               
                  Peace the good porter readie ſtill at hand
                  It doth vnpin, and praies him God to ſaue,
                  And after ſaluing kindly doth demand
                  VVhat was his will, or who he there would haue?
                  The Frier low lowting croſſing with his hand,
                  Speak with Contrition (quoth he) I would craue.
                  Father (quoth Peace) your comming is in vaine,
                  For him of late Hypocriſie hath ſlaine.
               
               
                  God ſhield (quoth he) and turning vp the eyes,
                  To former health I hope him to reſtore,
                  For in my skill his ſound recouerie lies,
                  Doubt not thereof if ſetting God before.
                  Are you a ſurgeon, Peace againe replies;
                  Yea (quoth the Frier) and ſent to heale his ſore:
                  Come neere (quoth Peace) and God your comming ſpeed,
                  Neuer of help Contrition had more need.
               
               
                  And for more haſte he haleth in the Frier,
                  And his Lord Conſcience quickly of him told,
                  VVho entertain'd him with right friendly cheere:
                  O Sir (quoth he) intreate you that I could
                  To lend your hand vnto my Coſin deare
                  Contrition, whom a ſore diſeaſe doth hold,
                  That wounded by Hypocriſie of late,
                  Now lieth in moſt deſperate eſtate.
               
               
                  
                  Sir (quoth the Frier) I hope him ſoone to cure,
                  Which to your comfort quickly you ſhall ſee,
                  Will he a while my dreſſing but endure;
                  And to contrition therewith commeth hee,
                  And by faire ſpeech himſelfe of him aſſure,
                  But firſt of all going thorough for his fee:
                  VVhich done (quoth he) if outwardly you ſhow
                  Sound, t'not auailes if inwardly or no.
               
               
                  But ſecretly aſſoiling of his ſin,
                  No other med'cine will vnto him lay,
                  Saying that heauen his ſiluer him ſhould win,
                  And to giue Friers was better then to pray,
                  So he were ſhrieu'd what need he care a pin.
                  Thus with his patient he ſo long did play,
                  Vntill contrition had forgot to weepe,
                  This the wiſe plowman ſhew'd me from his ſleepe.
               
               
                  He ſaw their faults, that looſly liued then,
                  Others againe our weakneſſes ſhall ſee:
                  For this is ſure he bideth not with men
                  That ſhall know all to be what they ſhould bee:
                  Yet let the faithfull and induſtrious pen
                  Haue the due merit; but returne to mee,
                  Whoſe fall this while blind Fortune did deuiſe,
                  To be as ſtrange as ſtrangely I did riſe.
               
               
                  Thoſe ſecret foes yet ſubt'ly to deceiue,
                  That me maligning lifted at my ſtate,
                  The King to marry forward ſtill I heaue,
                  (His former wife being repudiate)
                  To Anne the ſiſter of the Duke of Cleaue,
                  The German Princes to confederate,
                  To backe me ſtill gainſt thoſe againſt me lay,
                  Which as their owne retain'd me here in pay.
               
               
                  Which my deſtruction principally wrought,
                  When afterward abandoning her bed,
                  Which to his will to paſſe could not be brought,
                  So long as yet I beare about my head
                  
                     
The only man her ſafetie that had ſought,
                  Of her againe and only fauoured,
                  Which was the cauſe he haſted to my end,
                  Vpon whoſe fall hers likewiſe did depend.
               
               
                  For in his high diſtemprature of blood
                  Who was ſo great whoſe life he did regard?
                  Or what was it that his deſires withſtood
                  He not inueſted were it nere ſo hard?
                  Nor held he me ſo abſolutely good,
                  That though I croſt him yet I ſhould be ſpar'd,
                  But with thoſe things I laſtly was to go,
                  Which he to ground did violently throw.
               
               
                  When Winchester with all thoſe enemies
                  Whom my much power from audience had debarr'd,
                  The longer time their miſchiefes to deuiſe,
                  Feeling with me how laſtly now it far'd,
                  When I had done the King that did ſuffice,
                  Laſtly thruſt in againſt me to be heard,
                  When all was ill contrarily turn'd good,
                  Making amaine to th' ſhedding of my blood.
               
               
                  And that the King his action doth deny,
                  And on my guilt doth altogether lay,
                  Hauing his riot ſatisfied thereby,
                  Seemes not to know how I therein did ſway,
                  What late was truth conuerted hereſie:
                  When he in me had purchaſed his pray,
                  Himſelfe to cleere and ſatisfie the ſin,
                  Leaues me but late his inſtrument therein.
               
               
                  Thoſe lawes I made, my ſelfe alone to pleaſe,
                  To giue me power more freely to my will,
                  Euen to my equals hurtfull ſundrie waies,
                  (Forced to things that moſt do ſay were ill)
                  Vpon me now as violently ceaze,
                  By which I laſtly periſht by my skill,
                  On mine owne necke returning (as my due)
                  That heauie yoke wherein by me they drew
               
               
                  
                  My greatneſſe threatned by ill-boding eyes,
                  My actions ſtrangely cenſured of all,
                  Yet in my way my giddines not ſees
                  The pit wherein I likely was to fall:
                  O were the ſweets of mans felicities
                  Often amongſt not temp'red with ſome gall,
                  He would forget by his ore weening skill,
                  Iuſt heauen aboue doth cenſure good and ill.
               
               
                  Things ouer rancke do neuer kindly beare,
                  As in the corne the fluxure, when we ſee
                  Fill but the ſtraw when it ſhould feed the eare,
                  Rotting that time in ripening it ſhould bee,
                  And being once downe it ſelfe can neuer reare:
                  With vs well doth this ſimilie agree,
                  (By the wiſe man) due to the great in all,
                  By their owne weight b'ing broken in their fall.
               
               
                  Selfe louing man what ſooner doth abuſe,
                  And more then his proſperitie doth wound?
                  Into the deepe but fall how can he chuſe
                  That ouer-ſtrides whereon his foot to ground?
                  Who ſparingly proſperitie doth vſe,
                  And to himſelfe doth after-ill propound,
                  Vnto his height who happily doth clime,
                  Sits aboue Fortune, and controlleth time.
               
               
                  Not chuſing that vs moſt delight doth bring,
                  And moſt that by the generall breath is freed,
                  Wooing that ſuffrage; but the vertuous thing
                  Which in it ſelfe is excellent indeed,
                  Of which the depth and perfect managing
                  Amongſt the moſt, but few there be that heed,
                  Affecting that agreeing with their blood,
                  Seldome enduring neuer yet was good.
               
               
                  But whil'ſt we ſtriue too ſuddenly to riſe
                  By flattring Princes with a ſeruill tong,
                  And being ſoothers to their tyrannies,
                  Worke our more woes by what doth many wrong,
                  
                     
And vnto others tending iniuries,
                  Vnto our ſelues it hapneth oft among
                  In our owne ſnares vnluckily are caught,
                  Whil'ſt our attempts fall inſtantly to naught.
               
               
                  The Counſell Chamber place of my arreſt,
                  Where chiefe I was, when greateſt was the ſtore,
                  And had my ſpeeches noted of the beſt,
                  That did them as hie Oracles adore:
                  A Parliament was laſtly my enqueſt,
                  That was my ſelfe a Parliament before,
                  The Tower hill ſcaftold laſt I did aſcend:
                  Thus the great'ſt man of England made his end.
               
               Michael Drayton.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   