
      
         
            
               
               
An Anſwere to the Hollanders Declaration, concerning the Occurrents of the Eaſt-India.
            The firſt Part.
            
               Written by certaine Marriners, lately returned from thence into England.
            Printed 1622.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            AN ANSWERE TO THE HOLLANders Declaration concerning the Occurrents of the Eaſt-India.
            THere was of late two Currants publiſhed, bearing date, the one, the 8. of February, the other, the 28. In theſe two Currants ſundry, both incredible and intollerable wrongs and grieuances were made knowne, which the Hollanders of the Eaſt-Indies had inflicted and enforced vpon the Engliſh company of the Eaſt-Indies. Sithence the printing of theſe two Currants, the Hollanders haue publiſhed a Pamphlet entituled, A declaration of the affaires of the Eaſt-Indies. This declaration was publiſhed (as by the diſcourſe may appeare) in anſwer of the two Currants aboue mentioned, for the whole ſcope of the declaration tendeth to no other end, but to iuſtifie their owne right in the Eaſt-Indies, and thereupon to charge the Engliſh with wrongs done to them, that thereby the world might be made beleeue that whatſoeuer extremities or hard meaſures they offered to the Engliſh, they were vrged and prouoked thereunto by the vniuſt dealing of the Engliſh, and the wrongs firſt offered by them: How ſoeuer the Engliſh prouoked the Hollanders in India, the Hollanders by this declaration doe vrge and prouoke the Engliſh to defend themſelues againſt ſo falſe and fabulous ſlanders impoſed vpon them. Is it not too much that the Hollanders moſt vniuſtly oppreſſed vs in India, but that

they muſt proceede further to ſlander vs in England. They ſpoyled vs of our goods in forraigne parts, and now they practice to depriue vs from all hope of reliefe in our owne Countrey? What reliefe & remedy can we expect, if by our own deſert and prouocation wee drew and vrged the Hollanders to practice what they did vpon vs. Where puniſhment is deſerued the offenders are condemned and their complaints contemned: It is an old Prouerbe, Giue loſers leaue to ſpeake; Our loſſes are without compare, to loſe our liues and liberty, to loſe our goods, to loſe our trade and trafficke, and now laſtly in our owne Countrey to loſe the honeſt reputation of men, of Engliſhmen, of Engliſh Merchants, of the Engliſh company of Eaſt-India. This is a loſſe irrecouerable, as an Heathen Hiſtorian writeth; Maiora ſunt fame & fidei damna, quam que ſarciri poſſunt: The loſſe of a good name, the loſſe of truſt and credit are loſſes irrecouerable. But thanks bee to Almightie God who doth alwayes protect the innocent: This Declaration of the Hollanders entended and publiſhed for our vtter vn doing and diſgrace, offereth vnto vs in two reſpects both hope and helpe, ſo that wee may ſay to the Hollanders as the primatiue Chriſtians ſaid of Iulian the Apoſtata; Voluntatem nocendi habes, poteſtatem auiem non habes Iuliani: We vnderſtand your intents O Hollanders, to ouerthrow vs, but you want power, wee doe not meane your Sea power (which is too potent) but we meane of your malice, which is by the iudgement of God vtterly confounded: if in this Declaration of yours, your will and malice had ioyned

in equall power, wee the oppreſſed Engliſh might haue for borne to haue complained of our wrongs, with ſhame & confuſion; of whom or what ſhould we complaine, if our ſelues vrged, prouoked and deſerued our owne misfortunes. But as wee haue ſaid, thanks bee to Almighty God, who hath conuerted Hamon his Gallowes entended againſt Mordocheus, to his owne confuſion, like as he hath ſuffered you to publiſh a Declaration to cut your owne throats: what could you deuiſe to write and publiſh more oppoſite to what you intended, more to diſgrace your ſelues in conuincing you of falſhood, more to honor, acquite and cleere the Engliſh then this Declaration? All which ſhall manifeſtly appeare in the examination of your declaration, which followeth.
            To begin with the very firſt lines and page, you affirme, that all the Ilands of Banda from the tenth of Auguſt 1609. were by a ſpeciall Treaty and agreement made with the Orange Cayus the Magiſtrates of the Ilands, put vnder the protection of the States of Netherlands: how vntrue this is, let all men iudge, when as you confeſſe in the latter end of the firſt page, and in the beginning of the ſecond, were afterward broken and violated; And that the Ilanders withheld their fruits and ſpices, that they enforced & robbed their Ware-houſes, murthered at ſundry times and places diuers of the principall Officers, committies, and ſeruants of the Netherlands company, taking away their ſhips & prouiſion, what could the Hollanders ſay leſſe then to pretend an agreement? and what or how could alledge & proue more directly to conuince them ſelues of vntruth then ſo plainly & largely confeſſe

the recited hoſtilities, practiſed by the Bandineſes againſt them: what an agreement could this bee where there was ſo great an auerſion of the Ilanders mindes, declared by the hoſtile deeds which they practiſed againſt the Hollanders, they might perhaps ſay, there was a Treatie; but ſuch hoſtile practices manifeſtly proue there could bee no agreement.
            The Hollanders proceede further, from the yeer 1609. to the yeere 1616. where they ſpeake of another agreement concluded in May, by one of the Netherlanders Commanders called Lam. And another agreement made by their Gouernour Generall called Reall, in the yeere 1617. which they confeſſe were both ſhortly after broken by the Bandineſes, but how? Here commeth in the maine matter, the Bandineſes rebelled through the animating of the Engliſh, who did openly ayd and aſſiſt them with victuals, munition, great Ordinance, men, and ſhips.
            In this ſecond Page here are ſtrange wrongs offered to the Hollanders by the Bandineſes and the Engliſh, nay, to God himſelfe, of which wee muſt firſt ſpeake.
            The Bandineſes enforced Chriſtians to turne Moores againe. Firſt, let vs aske you who conuerted theſe turne-coate Chriſtians, did you? Admit you did. Next let vs aske you to what kinde of Chriſtianity did you conuert them, if to that kinde of Chriſtianity to which one Chircke, the Maſter of a Ship called the Sampſon, which you wrongfully tooke from the Engliſh, the offence of

the Bandineſes was the leſſe, if they compelled the inhabitants to forſake ſuch Chriſtianity, for your owne Countrey men in the Eaſt-Indies doe and did openly & ieſtingly confeſſe that Chircke was a Cuckold before he was a Chriſtian, for being married in Holland, hee left his wife with his familiar friends, who did out of their familiar loue encreaſe the family in the Husbands abſence; It was two or three yeers after that Chircke was chriſtned. Such Chriſtians may quickly turne Moores who delay Baptizing till thirty fiue. But to returne to the heauy burden with which the Engliſh are charged; namely, to animate, to aide and aſſiſt the Bandineſes, it were neceſſary that the Hollanders ſhould ſet downe the cauſes which moued the Engliſh to ioyne ſo ſarre with the Bandineſes, for the cauſes doe either leſſon or agrauate the charge impoſed vpon the Engliſh: they muſt either ſay the Engliſh ayded the Bandineſes directly againſt the Hollanders without further reſpect, which they cannot proue, or they muſt alleadge, which themſelues in their Declaration, doe proue that the Engliſh did endeauour to defend them with whom they had free trade and trafficke, who louingly and with free conſent ſold to the Engliſh their ſpices, &c. who put themſelues vnder the protection of the Engliſh, who yeelded the Ilands of Polawaye, Polerone and Lantore, vnder the obeyſance of the King of England, which if they would they cannot deny, for they confeſſe that the Engliſh had mounted ordinance vpon all theſe Ilands: why ſhould the Engliſh plant their ordinance vpon

theſe Ilands but to defend their right. How could the Engliſh plant their Ordinance vpon the Ilands but with free conſent of the Bandineſſes, at what time did the Engliſh plant their Ordinance in theſe Ilands of Banda? The Hollanders confeſſe before they came to the Ilands; for they found them in the Ilands: now where is the wrong that the Engliſh haue done the Hollanders? and in what becauſe the Engliſh did hinder the agreements ſo often made betwixt the Hollanders and the Bandineſſes, why for eleuen yeares the Hollanders confeſſe there was neuer any, as in the third page they ſay: In this wilfulneſſe did the Bandineſſes continue till in Iune 1620. Thus hitherto it is plainely acknowledged the Hollanders neuer had any landing, any Caſtle or Fort, any trading in the Ilands of Banda, but what was gotten by force and abſolute conſtraint: If the Hollanders could proue ſo much for themſelues as they doe for the Engliſh; the Engliſh then might haue bluſhed for ſhame. In all this time that the Hollanders maintained hoſtility with the Bandineſſes there is no mention made that the Bandineſſes euer offered any oppoſition againſt the Engliſh, or once denied them their Spices, but that they had trade and trafficke with them freely and friendly, now if conſent and preſcription of time be the beſt claime the Hollanders would haue for the Ilands of Banda, why the Engliſhmen go farre beyond them, the Bandineſſes did neuer violate any agreement made with the Engliſh, they neuer kept any pretended agreement made with the Hollanders, the Engliſhmen in eleuen

yeeres were neuer expelled, the Hollanders in all that time were neuer entertained, but in all hoſtile manner: The Engliſh men had offer at all times of Nutmegs and Mace, ſo had the Hollanders neuer at any time, but what they got by violence and compulſion; all which is acknowledged in the third Page, and the beginning of the fourth. We paſſe ouer many acknowledgements and confeſſions of the Hollanders, becauſe they all tend but to two ends, to iuſtifie themſelues, and condemne the Engliſh; and becauſe there is ſufficient obſeruation giuen, that in iuſtifying themſelues, they diſgrace themſelues, and in practiſing to diſgrace the Engliſh, they doe them great honor. But to deale plainely and truely, not to abuſe the world with vntruths, nor to wrong the Hollanders without cauſe, we doe confeſſe; The Bandineſes made one famous agreement with the Hollanders, which wee well remember, euen in that yeere in which they report they had made agreement with the Bandineſes. In Iune 1609. after they had by force taken from them a Towne called Noara, and making them flye to the backeſide of the coaſt, to a place which they called Naſſaw. Van Hofe the generall made ſhew of loue & friendſhip with the Bandineſes, which they perceiuing and deſirous to reuenge the wrongs and cruelties offered vnto them by the Hollanders, did diſſemble their intents, entertaining Van Hoofe with vaine hopes, promiſing him to come to ſome agreement, by which meanes they drew Van Hoofe with three ſcore or more of

his Commanders and Souldiers vnto a place in which the Bandineſes had aduantage. Now inſteed of agreement, in warlike manner they ſet vpon Van Hoofe and ſlew him and almoſt his company. This is the beſt agreement that wee euer knew or heard the Bandineſes euer made with the Hollanders during a leauen or twelue yeeres. Preſently after this, in Iuly after, Captaine Bitter who among all the Commanders eſcaped, when Van Hoofe was ſlaine, attempted to ſupprize another Towne caled Slamma; hee was ſought withall by the Bandineſes, and wounded in the thigh, of which wound he ſhortly dyed.
            Now it appeareth manifeſtly without denyall vpon this former examination of the Hollanders declaration that the right to the Hands of Banda was principally yeelded by free conſent of the Ilanders, confirmed by many yeeres trade and trafficke without any oppoſition in any hoſtile manner, but with mutuall enter courſe of all loue and amity.
            This the Hollanders doe confeſſe, and what proofe can be more pregnant then the teſtimony of an aduerſary: Where is now any wrong which the Engliſh hath done the Hollanders, except it bee a wrong to maintaine them, who with free and generall conſent put themſelues vnder the protection of the King of England? or a wrong to defend them who willingly trafficke and trade with the Engliſh, or a wrong to maintaine that right which the Hollanders acknowledge the Engliſh had in

the Iland of Banda: Theſe be all the wrongs which the Hollanders doe or can charge the Engliſh withall.
            But now on the other ſide, what extreame wrongs doe the Engliſh charge vpon the Hollanders? In two Currants printed the eight of February, and the twenty eight 1629. the Hollanders are charged with moſt barbarous and inhumane wrongs done to the Engliſh, all which they paſſe ouer in their Declaration without any anſwere at all, whereby in ſilence they cannot but pleade guilty: to confeſſe them they are a ſhamed, and to deny them they cannot, but in their accuſtomed pollicy they ſeeke to auoyd them by way of infinuation, that the Engliſh deſerued them in ayding and aſſiſting the Bandineſes againſt them.
            There were two Orators of Athens very great and inward friends, before the Iudges the one did accuſe, the other defend a Magiſtrate of Athens, whereupon the one Orator did challenge the other that he had dealt very vnkindly with him to defend his mortall enemy, and thou as vnkindly with me, quoth the other, to accuſe my deareſt friend.
            This is iuſt the like challenge betwixt the Hollanders and the Engliſh: Why doe you ſay the Hollanders defend our greateſt enemies? And why doe you ſay the Engliſh oppoſe againſt our deareſt friends? Yet in this challenge there is a difference, for the Engliſh haue more cauſe to defend their friends, then the Hollanders haue cauſe to oppoſe

againſt their enemies, Engliſh men haue a right by conſent, Hollanders haue nothing but by conſtraint.
            Iuſt defence is more honeſt and honourable then vniuſt oppoſition is, either by Lawes of God or man warrantable.
            To proceede on with the cruell, and inhumane wrongs done by the Hollanders, to the Engliſh, by ſo much more barbarous and inhumane, by how much the Engliſh of all Nations in the world, did leaſt deſerue it. What? deſerue any hard meaſures from the Hollanders? To what Nation vnder the Coape of Heauen, are they ſo much bound as to the Engliſh, who hath foſtered and nurſed them vp to this greatneſſe, but the Engliſh? what Nation hath ſhed ſo much blood, loſt the the liues of ſo many gallant Captaines, Commanders, and Souldiers, to ayde and defende them as the Engliſh?
            
            What Nation hath lent them, and ſpent vpon them ſo much money and treaſure, as the Engliſh haue done, when they were in their extreemeſt weakneſſe, and pouerty? when and where did the Engliſh euer fayle them. If for theſe cauſes, the Engliſh haue deſerued at the Hollanders, hands, to haue their ſhippes taken, and made prize, their goods confiſcate, and conuerted to their owne vſes, their Captaines, Souldiers, Factors, & Mariners, taken priſoners, held in miſerable ſeruitude, clogged with yorns, kept in ſtockes, bound hand and foote, tied to ſtakes, haling, and pulling them

with ropes about their neckes, ſpurning them like dogges, throwing them headlong downe rockes and clifts, killing, murthering, ſtaruing, and pining them to death, enforcing them to carry lime, and ſtone for their buildings. Landing them amongſt the Pagan people, without all prouiſion whatſoeuer, expoſing them to the mercy of miſcreants of whom notwithſtanding they ſound better vſage then of the Hollanders. When as the Hollanders robbed, and ſpoyled other Nations vnder the Engliſh coulers, pretending to diſgrace the Engliſh, that they were Engliſh men, counterfeiting the coyne of other nations, charging the Engliſh with the ſame. Laying the Engliſh, whom they held as priſoners aboue hatches, where the Sunne ſcorched them in the day, and where their ordutes and piſle fell vpon them in the night, till they grew more loathſome and filthie then Leapers, barring the Engliſh, as much as in them lay, from all commerſe and trade in the Indies. As all theſe perticulars are directly to be proued by men yet liuing, who either endured, or their eyes ſaw, what is heare reported, and will be ready vpon all occaſions either with their liues or oathes to iuſtifie for truth, what they haue endured, and what they haue ſeene with their eyes.
            Let all the world iudge whether Engliſh men haue deſerued theſe vſages, at the Hollanders hands: VVhere as ſome people either affected to the Hollanders, or thinking it to ſtrange, and monſterous, that Chriſtians ſhould domineare

ouer Chriſtians, with ſuch inhumane and barbarous cruelty, rather tyranoy, except the Engliſh had prouoked them heauily thereunto.
            Let all ſuch who harbour any ſuch conceits, reade and conſider what is before anſwered to ſuch obiections: the Hollanders in their declaration being charged in the two firſt Currants, with may of theſe extreame wrongs inflicted vpon the Engliſh, they make no deniall of them: make a chalenge that the Engliſh did ayde and aſſiſt the Bandineſes againſt them; it hath formerly bene alleaged, and ſufficiently proued, by their owne confeſſion, that the Engliſh did not maintaine the Ileanders, by way of oppoſing againſt the Hollanders, but they did as much as in them lay, to defend the right of the King of England, they did defend that right which they had by conſent, they did defend that people, who did ſo freely, and friendly trade and trafficke with them, other cauſes then their ſo honeſt, ſo iuſt agreeing with the Lawes of God, of nature, and Nations, they neither do or can alleadge any: ſome other inconſiderat people, who enuy the proſperity of the Eaſt-Indian Merchants will further ſay, to cloaſe with the Hollanders, that theſe extremities were offered in India, onely and no where elſe to the Engliſh, for proffe of the contrary, wee of the Eaſt-Indian Company do chalenge all the Merchants which trauaile or trafficke Eaſt, VVeſt, North, or South, to deliuer their knowledge what indignities they haue endured from the Hollanders in Turkey, in the

               Straights, in Moſcony, in Groynland, at Neuſoundland; and where not ſo that not onely the Eaſt-Indian Company hath onely cauſe to complaine: yea, they wrong Engliſhmen in their owne ſeas, at home, as is generally knowne: Now becauſe Hollanders may ſay, that they are charged with generalities, without perticular inſtances. Generall ſpeaches beeing a common cauſe to aggrauate cauſes, and be auoyded except the Generall bee proued by perticulars, becauſe they ſhall find that wee cannot want of particulers our of infinite, there ſhalbee heare following deliuered ſome by men yet liuing, who haue both ſeene them, and endured them.
            In the Roade of Patanye in the Eaſt-Indies the 17. of Iuly 1619. the two ſhips called the Sampſon and the Hound, riding there at Anchour, three ſhips of the Netherlands ſet vpon them with might and maine, after fiue howers fight, eleuen of the men in the Sampſon were ſlaine out-right, and fiue and thirty men of the ſame ſhip were wounded, maymed and diſmembred, at this time Captaine Iorden was Captaine of the Sampſon,
               
and did hang vp a flagge of Truce, and withall ſent Thomas Hackwell, Maiſter of the Sampſon, to the Netherlanders to parlee about a peacc.
            
               
                  
                     
                        
                        The Examination of Thomas Hackwell the 25. of Ianuary. 1621.
                        Thomas Hackwell being ſworne and examined vppon certaine Articles miniſtred on the behalef of the right worſhipful, the Engliſh company of Merchants trading to the Eaſt India aforeſaid, ſaith and depoſeth thereto as followeth.
                        
                        TO the firſt of the ſaid Articles he ſaith, & depoſeth by charge of his oath, that in the Roade of Pattany in the Eaſt India, vpon the 17. day of Iuly. 1619. laſt paſt, the Sampſon whereof this examinant was Maſter, and the Hound belonging to the Engliſh Company, were forceably aſſaulted by three ſhips of the Hollanders, (viz.) The Angell, the Morning Starre, and the Burgarboate, whereof Hendricke Iohnſon was commander, and after fiue glaſſes fight two houres and a halfe, eleuen of the ſayd ſhip the Sampſon, her men being ſlaine outright, fiue diſmembred, and about thirty otherwiſe wounded, Captaine Iourdaine being then in the ſayd ſhip the Sampſon and Commander of her, cauſed a flagge of truce to be hung out, and ſent this examinant in the Sampſons boate, aboard the Flemmings, to treate with them for a peace, and at the hanging out of the ſaid flagge of truce, and when this examinant left the ſaid Captaine Iourdaine to goe aboord the Flemmings, he was wel; But aboue halfe an houre after the ſaid flag of truce was ſo hung out, and this examinant was in parlee with the Flemmings about the ſayde peace, Captaine Iourdaine not exſpecting any violence

from the Flemmings during the ſayd Parlee, ſhewed himſelfe aboard the Sampſon before the main Maſt vpon the gratings, where the Flemmings eſpying him, moſt treacherouſly and cruelly ſhot at him with a Musket, and ſhot him into the body neere the heart; of which wound he died within halfe an houre after. And this hee ſaith by charge of his oath.
                        To the ſecond hee ſaith, That after the ſaid Ships, the Sampſon and the Hound were ſurprized by the Hollanders in the ſaid fight at Patany, as aforeſaid, the greateſt part of their men, by the command of the Dutch, were brought aboord the Angell, their Admirall: And there notwithſtanding, diuerſe of them in the ſaid fight were much burnt with Gunpounder, and wounded with ſplinters, and thereby ſuffred miſerable torment, yet they the ſayd Dutch moſt vnchriſtianly and inhumanly cauſed and forced them to put their legs downe through the gratings, and ſo ſeized them, and tyed them to the Capſten Barres, inſomuch that ſtill as any man had occaſion to goe and eaſe himſelfe, his legs were ſo ſwelled by reaſon of the extraordinary hard tying of them, that the Carpenter was alwaies fetched to make bigger the holes, at which they were put downe to get out their legs againe. And this he ſaith by charge of his oath is moſt true.
                        To the third he ſaith, That he knoweth that the Dutch at Iackatra, doe cauſe all China men, reſiding and bartering there, to pay monthly 6. ſhillings vppon a head, or elſe you ſhall not ſell any commodity there to the Engliſh, and this he hath ſeene diuers of

                           China men pay at Iackatra.
                        
                        To the fourth he ſaith, That vpon the third day of March laſt was twelue month, aboard the new Zealand then riding in Bantam roade, this examinant, with three or foure oathes, did heare one Clauſe Derickſon, then vpper ſtearſman of the Dutch ſhip called the Southern-Indraught, ſayd that the States in Holland had bin plotting that warre betweene the Engliſh and the Dutch in the Indie ſeuen yeares before.
                        To this laſt Article is witneſſe,

                              
                                 Thomas Hackwell.
                                 William Shaples.
                                 Henrie Backtaſel.
                                 Bartholomew Churchman.
                                 Antony Piccot.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        The depoſition of Bartholomew Churchman.
                        
                        I do affirme, that they haue many times termed vs ſlaues to the king of Holland, & that we ſhould all be ſent to the Moluccaes to rowe in their Gallies, and ſo be kept bond-ſlaues vnder them during our liues.
                        More I affirme, that they haue kept 12. of vs in a dungeon at Poloway, and 24. at Aomboyna, by the comand of Lawrence Riall then Generall, but now returned into Holland, where they piſt and () vppon our heads, and in this manner we lay, vntill ſuch time as we were broken out from top to toe, like lepers, hauing nothing to eate but durty Rice, and ſtinking raine-water, inſomuch as if it had not beene for a Dutch woman, named miſtreſſe Cane, & ſome poore Blackes that brought vs a little fruite,

we had all ſtarued in that place, as many of our company did, beſides the extremitie which they vſed to manyothers, which they had in priſon at other Ilands where they periſhed, leauing their wiues and children here in England ready to ſtarue for want of maintenance.
                        The names of the 10. other men which lay in Poloway are theſe:

                              Bartholomew Churchman.
                              Iacob Lane.
                              Kellam Throgmorton.
                              Mathew Willis.
                              William Burris.
                              Caſsarion David.
                              George Iaokſon.
                              George Pettice.
                              Walter Stacy.
                              Rhichard Phillips.
                           
                        
                        At Amboyna, Richard Swanley, William Brookes, and 12. more, whoſe names I well know not, nor cannot remember, put into a dungeon, with forty Indians all in a hole, hauing no place to eaſe themſelues.
                        
                           Bartholomew Churchman.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        The laſt of October, 1617. Iohn Tucker affirmeth.
                        That the Dutch men tooke the Dragon, the Expedition, the Beare, and the Roſe, and deliuered onely the Roſe, and that there being in the Dragon a preſent from the King of Achai for the King of England, called by them a Creeſe (that is to ſay) a Dagger, which they doe detaine to this houre.
                        This is true, I vnder written do affirme, and teſtifie that it was not done by baſe Rognes (as they term it) but ſome of the principall Commanders.
                        
                           Iohn Tucker.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
After the taking of theſe ſhips, there were aboue three hundred and fiftie men ſet out of the foure ſhippes which were on ſhoare, expoſed vnto the mercie of the Indians, where they found more curteſie then of the Hollanders, otherwiſe they had all periſhed.
            That all theſe abuſes, and many more which wee haue formerly receiued by them, are true, we will maintaine vpon our oathes, and with our liues againſt any of their Nation, or others that ſhall gaine-ſay this trueth. Yet notwithſtanding all this being (by the goodneſſe of almighty God) returned into our owne Countrey, wee haue no ſatisfaction for theſe intollerable iniuries, nor any conſideration for two thirds of our wages moſt barbarouſly kept from vs.
            
               
                  
                     
                        Articles of abuſes done by the Hollanders at the Iland of Moloccas, and other places of the Eaſt Indies, aſwell againſt our Soueraigne Lord the Kings Maieſtie; as alſo againſt vs, and other Engliſhmen, ſince the yeare of our Lord, one thouſand fixe hundred and ſixteene; not onely before the Peace, but alſo ſince, vntill the moneth of March, one thouſand ſix hundred and twentie, that we came out of the Indies, in the good Shippe called the Iames.
                        
                        The ſecond day of the month of February, in the

yeare of our Lord 1616. the Swanne was ſurprized and taken by the Hollanders, at the Ilands of Banda, and her men kept priſoners till the eight and twenty of Aprill following. At which time the Hollanders carried fiue and twenty of the Engliſh to the Moloccaes, where they were very hardly and inhumanely vſed, being fettered and ſhackelled in the day time, and cloſe locked vp a nights. And from the month of Maie, vntill the end of September, they were compelled to carrie ſtone and lime for the building of Forts there; which if any refuſed to do, they were kept in Stocks and Irons till they would worke; and were notwithſtanding alſo very hardly vſed, for their victualls, inſomuch that the one halfe of them died through their hard vſage.
                        When wee were firſt taken, wee were poſſeſſed of diuerſe goodes, prouiſions and meanes wherewith to relieue our ſelues, which they preſently tooke from vs, and left vs not ſo much as wherewith to couer our bodies.
                        Whereof when we complained to Iohn Ellias who was Lieutenant to one Garret Derickſon in the Trow. hoping that he would haue had ſome commiſeration of our miſeries, and long lying in Irons, bad vſage for want of meate, drinke, lodging, and other things: The ſayd Ellias and the reſt of his company did thereupon, and many other times ſay vnto vs, That he cared not for vs, nor for any of our Countreymen; and that if they ſhould take vs and hang vs vp, wee had our deſerts: Yea, they vſed other groſſe and baſe ſpeeches, not fit to bee ſpoken of.
                        
                           
We affirme, that the ſaid Iohn Ellias and his companie ſaid, that they had little need of Engliſhmen; for they in Holland were able of a ſodaine to make and furniſh 24000. of flat-bottomd boates, ſuch as Parma would haue landed vpon the Engliſh ſhore in 88. And alſo ſayd, that they had of their owne Nation and Countreymen at the leaſt 40000. ſtrong in England, that preſently, vpon the leaſt occaſion, would riſe in Armes, and bend their forces ſpeedily againſt vs in our owne Countrey.
                        We affirme, that Laurence Ryall, who was their Generall, cauſed Grates and Cages to be made in their Shippe, and did put vs therein, and carryed vs in them bound in Irons from Port to Port amongſt the Indians, and thus in ſcornefull and deriding manner and ſort ſpake vnto the Indians as followeth: Behold and ſee, heere is the people of that Nation, whoſe King you care ſo much for. But now you may heereby plainely behold how kindly wee vſe his Subiects; making them beleeue, that Engliſhmen were their Vaſſals and Slaues.
                        Beſides all this, they kept many of vs faſt bound and fettered in Irons, in moſt loathſome and darke ſtinking dungeons, and gaue vs no ſuſtenance, but a little durtie Rice to eate, and a little ſtinking rainewater to drinke. So that many of our Engliſh fainting in their ſights, for want of competent ſuſtenance or other lodging at their hands: for want whereof many dyed, who were fetcht out of the Dungeons, and ſo baſely buried, more like Dogges then Chriſtians.
                        
                           
About the fift of May, in the yeare of our Lord one thouſand ſix hundred and nineteene, wee hauing ouer-paſſed many hungrie dayes, and cold nights Lodging, in cold Irons and darke Dungeons, and thinking it not poſſibly able for vs to endure thoſe miſeries any longer, made meanes that ſome of vs came to Iohn Peter Socoma, their Generall that now is, and deſired his Lordſhip (which Title hee duly lookes for in the Eaſt Indies) that hee would conſider of our extreame wants, and miſeries, and helpe vs to ſome better ſuſtenance. And further wee deſired him, that hee would bee ſo much our friend, as to eaſe vs of our Irons but for the day time: Whereupon the ſayd Generall moſt wickedly replyed with baſe ſpeeches, and bade vs bee gone, and trouble him no more; for if wee did, hee would cauſe vs all to bee hanged ſpeedily. So that wee were forced to returne from whence wee came with heauie hearts, hauing no hope but in the Almightie, to whom wee prayed to turne their hearts, and to releaſe vs of our miſeries.
                        Vpon the thirteenth of May, in the yeare of  our Lord one thouſand ſix hundred and nineteene,1619. the Dutch went a-ſhore at Iaparre;
                           Iaparre, the cruelty there. and there they wickedly and maliciouſly burnt downe the Towne, and the Engliſh Houſe there, and from thence forcibly tooke away the Engliſh Flagge, and in great diſdaine of our Countrey trayled our Flagge after them in the durt through the Towne, and towed it aboord their ſhippe

at their boats ſtearne; but what they did with it afterwards, we know not.
                        Vpon the eighteenth day of the moneth of Nouember, and in the yeare of our Lord God one  thouſand ſix hundred and nineteene,1619. they tooke one Bartholomew Churchman, and clapt him vp in Irons, and ſet him where hee ſate in the raine and coldc ſtormes of the night, and in the day time, where the hot Sunne ſhone vpon him, and ſcorched him, without any ſhelter at all: and this they did to him, only becauſe he ſtrucke a baſe fellow that ſpake ſuch words againſt our late Queene Annes Maieſtie, as are not fit to be repeated: which words, as alſo diuers other which they ſpake againſt our dread Soueraigne, wee dare not relate, as being too odious to be vſed in a ſubiects mouth touching his Prince: Howbeit, might licence and freedome of ſpeech be granted vs, to make knowne the baſe flaunderous and detracting ſpeeches of that Nation againſt our King and Countrey, that we might not incurre any danger of his Maieſties diſpleaſure by the repeating them, it would ſufficiently make knowne the pride and crueltic of that people, who did not then let to ſay that they made no account of our King, nor any of his ſubiects.
                        The ſeauenteenth day of the moneth of March, and in the yeere of our Lord God euerlaſting, one thouſand ſixe hundred and nineteenth, their Gouernor of the Moloccas gaue order for the releaſe of the Engliſh there, and appoynted thirtie of them to

be carried to Aombonias,
                           Aombonias crueltie. from thence to be ſent into  England or Holland. But the gouernor of Aombonias, perceiuing them to be arriued, hee vtterly refuſed to diſcharge them, and forced them to ſerue in their 3. ſhips, that went to the Manelees as men of waire, which if any refuſed to doe, they were to rowe in their Gallies chained like vnto ſlaues; in which voyage to the Manelees, foureteene of our men went in the Saint Michael, which were loſt, and neuer ſince heard on, whoſe names doe follow: George Trigges, Iohn Edwards, Iames Welch, Iohn Crocket, William Nichols, Robert Gilbert, Matthew Gilbert, Giles Lipſcombe, Arthur 
                                 •
                              ap, Edward Parker, William Veſe, Iohn King, Iohn Ouer, and William Smith Chirurgeon.
                        Wee affirme, that they hauing Arrian Ellis, Edward Reade, and William Ponell, 3. Engliſhmen priſoſoners, in their ſhip called the Bantam, they chained them in Irons, and layed them in the Beake-head, ſtraitly prohibiting all others to come neare them, to giue them any other foode then their allowance, which was ſo ſmall that meere hunger compelled thoſe three priſoners to throw the dice who ſhould cut each others throat; and ſo they did throw the dice to that end, but were diſcloſed before anie of them were ſlaine, ſo that they were thereupon ſundred, and ſent into other ſhips.
                        They haue taken our men, and without any cauſe haue ſtripped and whipped them openly in the market place; they haue alſo beaten vp their Drumme, and called the Blackes together to ſee it done.
                        They will not ſuffer vs to weare, or ſpread in our Engliſh houſes in thoſe parts where they haue any command, any colours that are our Kings colours.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        The Coppie of a Letter ſent vnto the Dutch in the Eaſt Indies, from their Engliſh Captiues at the Iland of Monoboca, the nineteenth day of March one thouſand ſixe hundred and eighteene, and deliuered vnto Captayne William Iohnſon,Commaunder of the Angell.
                        
                           COnſideration in things of difficultie is requiſite: and therefore much requiſite in theſe our vnchriſtian-like miſeries. But becauſe this hath beene but ſleightly reſpected, we are now reſolued to tell you of all your perfidiouſneſſe. Firſt, Grippe got aduantage to ſurprize our ſhippes, and made a vowe, not to touch life, nor goods in any ſort. But ſince the contrary hath beene ſo much proued, that Grippe and his confederates are now ſeene to be forſworne, as ſhortly after their actions did ſhew, in taking away euen thoſe things, which with their conſent wee did ſaue, and bring aboord your ſhippe called the Trowe.
                        
                        
                           
At that time we being indungeoned at Pollaway, (beſides all the Pagan-like vſage of that cruell man, Laurence Ryall) we were by Vanhooſe kept in ſuch extreame miſerie, with ſtinking water, and Rice halfe full of ſtones and durt (ſcarce able to keepe life and ſoule together) that had not Derrickſon Van lame graunted the Engliſh at Pollo-Roone, free acceſſe to Pollaway to bring vs reliefe, wee had beene all ere this time ſtarued for want. But we paſſed away that time in expectation of better fortunes, which you haue all from time to time promiſed; yet now againe our miſeries are thrice redoubled: for ſince wee came to this place, you haue not onely vſed vs moſt baſely in other things, but alſo haue taken away from vs euen that poore ſuſtenance, which wee bought with our owne monies; and this hath bene done by that enuious man the Maiſter, whom your Commaunders doe ſuffer to be their Commander, rather then their inferiour. If you conſider all his actions, the refreſhing which wee haue bought, hath beene but ſmall, that is to ſay, foure ſmall hennes and cockes, and euen them hath the Maiſter taken away, and eaten them in the great Cabbin, which dealing of his, if it bee Chriſtian-like, we refer it to your owne diſcretion: and now at laſt, for a ſmal cauſe, or nothing at all, to be thus handled, is a ten times worſe affliction, then euer was inflicted vpon vs, for to chaine vs vp like ſo many dogs, and to let vs lie in the raine and ſtormes of the night, without any ſhelter, which is alſo brought to paſſe by the Maiſter: For (Commander) A ſop for Cerberus. we conſidering your gentlenes, ſo that you can diſpenſe with rigor:

Therefore that miſerie that we endure is not by your meanes, but by the maſters and theirs that be of his mind; and this is of a truth, that euen your hogges after their kind lie a nights drier, then we after our kind being Chriſtians: and our griefe is the more, becauſe your men of the blacke Lyon, being taken by our Engliſh, were vſed like men, and we like abiects of the world, to be thus vſed like dogges, being ſubiects to the Kings Maieſtie of England, and in good reſpect with our imployers. But God that is aboue all, knowes all, and in his good time will remedy all. Thus much we haue thought good to certifie vnto you, not in the way of intreaty, for that we ſee is vaine, but onely that you may know, we now neuer looke to come aliue out of your hands: for by all manifeſt appearance, you ſeeke to take euen our liues from vs: and this ſhall bee a true argument of our grieued hearts, witneſſing to all men, how vnchriſtianlike wee haue bin, and are vſed by you, for in all this wee haue not expreſſed the tenth part of your cruelty, yet we hope, that for this time it ſhall be a ſufficient light vnto you for that which hath bin from time to time, practiſed by you againſt the Engliſh. Giuen at the Iland of Monaboca. the 19. of March. 1618.
                        Subſcribed by

                              
                                 Caſſarian Dauid.
                                 Bartholomew Churchman.
                                 George Pettys.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
Vpon the receipt of this letter, wee three aforenamed were layed in Irons for eighteene moneths following, with ſuch barbarous vſage as is not to be imagined to be vſed amongſt Chriſtians.
            Vpon the newes of the taking of our two ſhips called the Sampſon and the Hound in Patania Roade, Hendericke Iohnſon the Commander of three ſhips. viz. the Angell, the Morning Starre, and the Burger-Boate, ſent a letter by the vpper Steresman of the Starre, (who had but one arme) to their Generall Iohn Peeter Sacone then at Iacotra of the taking of our two ſhips, He, the ſaid Sacone then ſaid, you haue now, Henricke Iohnſon, giuen me good ſatisfaction, in that Captaine Iordan is dead, & at his returne thither gratified him with 1400. Gilders, in a chaine of gold, putting it himſelf about his necke, not leauing any one vnrewarded, that had beene at the taking of our two ſhips, and a 100. peeces of eight to him that ſhot him, notwithſtāding our flag of truce was hung out. We affirme alſo that the ſayd Generall Iohn Peeter Sacone vpon the newes brought him by a ſhip called the Hart from the coaſt of Carmandele of the death of Sir Thomas Dale, then ſaid; Dale is dead, and Iordans blood I haue, if I had George Cockins life too I were then ſatisfied.
            
               
                  
                     
                        
                        An anſwer to obiections made by the Hollanders that the Engliſh were the cauſe of the firſt breach in the Eaſt Indies.
                        Whereas the Hollanders affirme that Sir Thomas Dale and Captaine Iordane were the prime cauſe of  all the differences betwixt the two Companies. 1616. Feb. 2. This we affirme and can proue, that both Sir Thomas Dale and Captaine Iordane were both in England when the Defence and the Swan were taken, and alſo that very inhumanely they tooke the Defence when for reliefe being put from their Anchor at Polorone in a ſtorme, they came into one of their harbors for ſuccor. They tooke the ſhip,1617. and detemed her men priſoners, likewiſe in reſcue, wee following they tooke a Pinnice of ours called the Speed-Well, going to Iacatra, one of our men they ſlew, and the reſt they layd in Irons as priſoners, amongſt which one Richard Tayler Carpenter of the ſayde Pinnice, who at that time had the bloody fluxe, who dying in their hands in Irons, they tooke the dead carkaſſe of the ſaid deceaſed, and put him into a buſh, with his head downeward, and his heeles vpward, and ſayd in moſt barbarous manner, that there was a ſtert man, that is a man with a taile with his heeles vpward, and there his carkaſſe rotted in the buſh.
                        
                           
                           
                              〈1 line〉
                           
                           
                              
                                 〈…〉
                              
                            
                           
                              〈◊◊◊◊〉
                            it is to be proued 
                              〈◊◊〉
                            then comming out of England, hardly cleare of the Coaſt, when they tooke both theſe ſhips, vpon faire termes of Compoſition: namely with promiſe to giue vs our liues, goods, and libertie. They robbed vs of all our goods, and kept vs in lamentable manner in Irons; ſome of vs three yeeres, ſome more, ſome leſſe: in which wofull miſerie many of our Company 
                              〈◊〉
                            their daies lamentably; for in truth they neuer kept any faith, oath, or promiſe with vs at all, but moſt proudly, diſdainfully, and cruelly demeaned themſelues towards vs.
                        
                           Bartholomew Churchman.
                        
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         
      
   