
      
         
            
            
            A Cypres
Garland,
For the Sacred Fore-head
of our late Soueraigne
KING IAMES.
            
               By Hugh Holland.
            
               P. Ouid: Naſe▪
               
Infaelix habitum temporis huius habe.
            
               LONDON,
Printed for Simon Waterſon.
               MDCXXV.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ TO MY LORD: THE
DVKE OF BVCKINGHAMS
Grace: Whom God
Preſerue.
            
               PRIVATE acknowledgment may not ſatiſfie
for Publique curteſies. And what more
publique then a Kings preſence? Very glad
therefore I ſhould haue bin of the leaſt opportunity to
expreſſe my thankfulneſſe: and much more grieud at the
heart I am, that now I haue ſo iuſt occaſion. But all the
Noble Fauours which I haue receiued at your Gracious
Hands, I haue layd vp in a gratefull Heart. It was you that
led me by the hand nor once, nor twice, to kiſſe that awful
Hand of his, to which I durſt not haue elſe aſpired▪ With

what ſweeteneſſe and brauery the Great Majeſty of Brittaine,
imbraced then his meaneſt Vaſſal, and thoſe my
humble Compoſitions, Our young Souereigne (then
Prince of my Country) your Grace and the Honourable
Lords then praeſent, perhaps remember (ſure I am, I can neuer
forget) And if I do, let my right hand forget her cunning.
But I will repreſſe my ſelfe, leaſt I may ſeeme to haue
pickt occaſion, rather to boaſt my ſelfe, then to bewaile
him. And yet in ſpight of mine owne modeſty, in ſpight
of others malignity, in the approbation of Iames the great,
I do, I muſt, I will euer triumph His Majeſty to me did
much grace: and faine to his memory would I do ſome
Glory. Oft to my comfort I ſpake or wrot to Him, now to
my griefe I only write of him. This Elegy vents more
ſorow then wit, For in wit the leſſe I was to labour, in
whoſe roome matter had ſucceeded, If it be too longe,
thinke that my teares haue drouned my inke: if it bee too

ſhort, thinke that my ſighes both inke at once▪ and teares
haue drayned▪ With his H
                  •••
               hments, at Weſtminſter I
alſo offer vp my Pen, conſecrating the life thereof to Him,
and him to aeternity. I wil conclude with publique vowes.
With vowes X and with vowes XX. So with X. ſo with
XX. The God of Iacob proiect all his Elixar of bleſſings
vppon the Sonne and Seede of IACOB. That King
CHARLES may euer liue in the fauour of God, your
Grace in his, and I in yours.
            
               Your Graces ſeruant
in much affection
HVGH HOLLAND.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A CYPRES GARLAND, FOR
the Sacred Fore-head of our Late Soueraigne
King IAMES.
            
               WHo now wil reade my Rimes, & with exceding
            Sweet grace, & accent, mend them in the reading
            So would be praiſe the manner, & the matter,
            Nor did they him, he rather them did flatter.
            For with his ſugred lips my eares he charmed:
            And with his ſnowy Hand my lips he warmed.
            But now the froſt of Death my heart hath chilled:
            My blood is through my eyes to teares diſtilled.
            His Ague hath me whole, that for enditing,
            I neither ha
                  ••
                a head, nor hand for writing.
            
               
Great Britany; that knowes no other bounders,
            But Heau'n and Sea, loſt lately Both her Founders
            My Maſter King of Armes, by mans apointment:
            My Soueraign King of Peace, by Gods anointment.
            Oh that my Soueraigne had bin longer liued,
            Or had my Camden yet a while ſuruiued:
            With Angells quill (what elſe can reach his glory?)
            To write this mortall God's immortall ſtory.
            But in that other world, which neuer endeth,
            Him with his Lords his Herald he attendeth.
            How many Great ones here not meanly graced,
            In thirteen months the dance of Death haue traced
            Three Earles, two Dukes, a Marquis & a Baron:
            (Who then may ſcape thy boat vncurteous Caron)
            
               
Beſides young Wriothſly, whō the Earle his Father,
            Then to ſuruiue, choſe to aſſociate rather.
            Two of the Houſe were Stewards, iuſt and loyall:
            But of the Realme Iames was the Steward royall,
            In cares, no leſſe then Name: but euer heedefull
            To furniſh it with noble things, or needefull.
            If Heau'n and Earth did all their Forces muſter,
            You ſhould not finde a gentler nor a Juſter.
            The flower of Kings, the King of flowers is waſted
            The Roſe of England in the Spring is blaſted:
            When in the Ram his beams young Phaebus ſcatred,
            The Ram of death the Fort of Phaebus batred.
            Yet hath Breda thrice three months ſiege endured,
            Is life no more in peace then warre ſecured?
            
               
Great Britaine and Breda haue loſt their Maiſters:
            (Alas! that heere they were no longer laſters)
            Of Peace and Warre the ornaments are ſpoyled:
            Their faces Death and not their fame hath ſoyled.
            The one with peace, which Mars the other ſided:
            Yet neither were in life, nor death, deuided.
            Both in a yeare, too late they were ingendred:
            Both in a yeare, too ſoone to death ſurrendred.
            But with my plaints why ſhould I others mingle?
            The ſorrow which I ſuffer is not ſingle.
            His Holland hath no need my teares to borow,
            Enough is me to ſhare in Englands ſorow.
            Nor haue they ſo much inke on vs beſtowed,
            For all the blood which from our breſts hath flowed.
            
               
Why was the fatall Spinſter ſo vnthrifty?
            To draw my third foure yeares to tell and fifty?
            Why did not Atropos in peeces rauil
            My ſtring of life and cut it with my Nauil?
            Curs'd be the day that I was borne, and curſed
            The nights that haue ſo long my ſorows nurced.
            Yet griefe is by the ſurer ſide my brother:
            The child of payne, and Payne was eke my mother.
            VVho children had, the Arke had men as many,
            Of which, my ſelfe except, now breathes not any.
            Nor Vrſula my deere, nor Phil my daughter:
            Amongſt vs death hath made ſo dire a ſlaughter.
            Them and my Martyn haue I wretch ſuruiued:
            But all their deaths, my Soueraigne's hath retriued.
            
               
Each yeare, moneth, weeke, day, houre, I looſe ſome fleeces,
            So from my ſelfe, and all, I part by peeces:
            The whilſt I ſtand in controuerſy, whether,
            More Sigh and weepe, I, or the winde and weather.
            This is the yeare that all good hearts hath galled,
            Let it no yeare of IVBILE be called:
            This is the moneth of Mars to him ſo bloudy,
            Becauſe he ſtill the arts of peace did ſtudy:
            This is the diſmal day, the ſea'un and twenteth,
            That of no kinde of Spring or ſweetneſſe ſenteth:
            When as the Sun (no Sunday that, nor holy)
            Did ſet at noone, and was ecclipſed wholy.
            Was neuer March ſo moyſt; had heau'n refrained
            From teares, our eies more then enough had rained.
            
               
And yet, oh furious, oh infernall Feauer!
            So great, ſo pretious duſt, no March had euer.
            Yet in this moneth (how haue the Fates revolued?)
            The great Eliza went to duſt diſsolued:
            Yea in this moneth his glorious Anne expired,
            And droun'd his eies, through which his heart ſhe fired.
            Her liuely cheekes were like two louely ſpouſes
            And bare the mingled badge of both the Houſes.
            For, howſoeuer now we ſee it coyned,
            K. Iames the Realmes, and ſhe the Roses ioyned.
            This Sun and Moone betwixt them did ingender
            A Starre, that both their lights alone doth render:
            Young Charlemaine the ioy of either nation:
            Great by his birth, and good in expectation
            
               
His Fathers throne ô may he long inherit:
            His Heire in blood, his Succeſſor in merit.
            With cares, with feares, at home, vntoſt, vntroubled?
            His Fathers longeſt reigne in his be doubled.
            But if vn-friends abroad our peace affritghten,
            In armes ſo will he thunder, and ſo lighten:
            That all the troupes before his face ſhall tremble,
            And more their malice, then their feares diſſemble.
            My Liege, my Lord, my tranſitory treaſure,
            Amid theſe worldly woes a world of pleaſure;
            You now a triple Crowne haue in poſſeſion:
            Yet muſt the ſame demiſſe to your ſucceſſion.
            But may that day, then all our dayes be later,
            Yea turne the world to fire, now turn'd to water.
            
               
But had you twenty more, imagin rather
            Your gaine the leſſe by looſing ſuch a Father.
            You are a liuely Statua of that Quarry,
            Whereof was alſo hew'd your brother Harry,
            
            Your Siſter Marie, and your Siſter Sophey,
            
            Death ouer them erected hath a trophey.
            And now (my griefe I can no longer ſmother)
            Remarried are your Father and your Mother.
            Prophaner heeles on ſacred foreheads trample:
            At VVeſtminſter we daily ſee the ſample.
            VVhere now do lie their bones, but voyd of 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            For whom this Iſle, and Ireland were too narr
                  •••
               
            
            Man is but onely Proclamation building:
            All but on clay, though ſome haue gayer 
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            
               
And Kings are made, what elſe ſo e're we clatter,
            To nobler ends, but of no nobler matter.
            Of limmes or lineaments ſo ſtrong or hanſome,
            Who breaths that from the graue his head may ranſome
            Remēber this my Liege, & them remember,
            Of whom (now head of all) you are a member,
            Con you the leſſons which he gaue your Brother,
            (Perhaps at parting too he gaue ſome other)
            For rule you muſt a people of that brauery:
            That can nor brooke all freedom, nor all ſlauery.
            God proſper you (for God muſt be the grounſell)
            And ſend you ſtill an vnderſtanding Counſell,
            That they may giue, and keepe, with hearts vnhollow
            And that you counſell may diſcerne, and follow.
            
               
The Giuer deepe, the Follower yet is deeper.
            But Cabinet of counſell is the Keeper.
            And thoſe of you ſhall euer moſt be loued,
            VVho lou'd your Father, & whoſe Faith he prooued.
            His heart profound, his tongue was prompt & ready
            His head for counſels fit, not counſels heady.
            His eares to ſutors open were, and heedy,
            So were his hands, but ſome were ouer greedy.
            He neither husband of his wife deceaued,
            Nor of their husbands many wiues bereaued.
            Nor any Fathers made, nor Mothers harmed,
            His breſt no Mars vniuſt nor Venus warmed.
            To blacke reuenge his edge was alſo blunted,
            For after human blood, he neuer hunted.
            
               
And when for exerciſe the fields he rainged,
            
               Minerua ſeem'd into Diana chainged.
            His kingdome was of wits, in euery knolledge
            An Academy, and his Court a Colledge.
            VVhere Cynthea ſometimes ſhone, Apollo's ſiſter,
            
               Apollo ſelfe did with the Muſes gliſter.
            Be proofe his proſe, and well accented Sonets,
            To which the braueſt witts may vaile their bonets.
            Not euery day, nor euery yeare I tro it,
            Is either borne a King, or yet a Poët:
            The beſt of either, him but hardly matched:
            
               In euery neſt the Phoenix is not hatched.
            
            No King with matter fit his Muſe could furniſh,
            No Poët could his Kingly actions burniſh.
            
               
His Holy Soule to ſee the parts and factions,
            That in the Chriſtian Corps, made ſuch diſtractions,
            VVas inly vext: for as his Pen hee wreathed
            With endles bayes, his ſword he would haue ſheathed
            VVithin thoſe bowels, that in part haue eaten
            Thine Heritage ô Chriſt, and all do threaten.
            Of Chriſtendome though hee abhord the cumbers,
            A battell yet he ſung in haughty numbers:
            That all may gather how that Heauenly poëm,
            Was of his great intentions but the proëm.
            
               Lepanto, which he did ſo loudly warble,
            That it ſurmounts Meſſina braſſe, and marble
            When heau'n the childe of Auſtria ſo inflamed
            That halfe the Turky pride, he quickly tamed.
            
               
While he and his, of Heau'n & Earth were parters,
            For Earth the victors had, & Heau'n the martyres.
            A happy man to do ſuch acts renouned:
            But happy more to leaue his acts ſo crowned.
            
               Eliza faire with hers in forraigne regions:
            Who marched in the front of many legions.
            Perhaps but hardly knowes of her diſaſter,
            But ill Report then good
                  •
               ay flyeth faſter:
            Then you my Lords of Holland looke vnto it,
            Let non
                  •
                it tell, and puniſh them that do it:
            Leaſt when Report this in her eare hath rouned
            Your Country with her teares, and theirs be drouned:
            The Rhine with all his waters ſad and ſable,
            To waile her huge misfortune is not able.
            
               
Then you great Lord, that were to me ſo gracious,
            In twenty weekes (a time not very ſpacious)
            To cauſe me thrice to kiſſe (me thrice your depter)
            That hand which bore the Lilly-bearing Scepter
            Yet needed none, who thinks it is too ſilly,
            His Arme the Scepter was, his Hand the Lilly,
            Command the ſeas (the ſeas you haue in keeping,
            As Admiral) to helpe vs in our weeping.
            You of the greateſt Iſle, no petty piller,
            Who beare the name of George the Dragon-killer;
            Ah! could not you, and could not all the Order?
            That Dragon-Feuer hunt out of that border?
            Was euer King, or Maritine, or Mercian,
            Before this heard to dye, but of a Tertian?
            
               
Can vulgars ſcape the dropſie, ſcape the Phthiſik?
            And is there for the Crowned head no phyſicke?
            Oh ſubject ſtate of Kings to hard condicions,
            Betwixt our flatteries, and their owne ſuſpicions!
            Whoſe mindes to practiſe on the flatterer ſpares not,
            But on their bodies the Phiſition dares not:
            Our breſts the Surgeon opens with their bowells,
            And mutes before, will then be ſounding vowells▪
            
            Malignant Feuer hence, and get thee further,
            To beaſtly men, who take delight in murther:
            Among the Turkes abide, among the Tarters;
            
            And folke that would infeſt the Chriſtian quarters
            On Infidels, or Pagans, go and glut thee,
            But if thy fellow-Canniballs rebut thee,
            
               
Then with thee take the Plague thy coſin-fury:
            Hence and in hell your ſelues for euer bury.
            But (Lord) why ſhould we liue a minute longer?
            For (ſaue the Truth) what then a King is ſtronger
            The King is dead, yet this the Law denyëth,
            And ſaith the King of England neuer dyëth:
            But Iames is dead, and he the kingdome guided,
            The Perſon and the Office are diuided:
            This and his virtues from his Seede to ſeuer,
            May Fates be able neuer, neuer, neuer.
            O would his Spirit now my ſenſes rauiſh,
            (But this deſire of mine is too too lauiſh)
            I would inchant the world with theſe my Muſes,
            That haue no Life but what his Death infuſes.
            
               
In euery Land▪ to make no long reherſall,
            Of Peace he was a Iuſtice vniuerſall.
            Peace as a preſent to the Realme he breathed,
            And as a legacy the ſame bequeathed.
            VVhich his Executor will ſee performed,
            VVhat though the Nations haue a little ſtormed?
            King Charles will folow ſtill his Fathers humor,
            And ſtop the Rage of warre, if not the Rumor.
            That Man of God, that God of man applyëd,
            His heart to peace: ſo liued, and ſo dyëd.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   