
      
         
            
            
            A Pollitique Platt for the honour of the Prince, the greate profite of the publique state, relief of the poore, preseruation of the riche, reformation of Roges and Idle persones, and the wealthe of thousandes that knowes not howe to liue. Written for an Newyeres gift to Englande, and the inhabitantes thereof: by Robert Hitchcok late of Cauerffeelde in the Countie of Buckyngham Gentleman.
               
            
            
               Imprinted at London, by Ihon Kyngston.
            
            
               1. Ianuarie.
            
            1580.
         
         
            
            
               
            
         
         
            
            THE EPISTLE TO ENGLANDE.
            
            
               FOR me O noble and renowmed Englande to write to thee, that hath bredde and brought for the so many famous, honourable, wise, and learned menne, who bee not onely moste expert, in all politique gouernement, but also moste happely furnished eache waie, with all maner of knowledge, cunnyng and wisedome, throughly seen in all the noble sciences & artes liberall. Bothe thou and thei maie thinke (and thinke it truely) ouer muche boldnesse, and meere arrogancie in me, that neither am furnished of good letters, knowledge, histories, or other meane, to make a plausable waie of that, or for that I wishe should haue good successe at thy handes, or good opiniō at theirs. Muche more I am afraid lest thou hold it outrage and presumption, for me to dedicate vnto thee, and trouble thee, with the patronage & defence of this my deuice: a frutlesse thyng

as some maie deme it, before it be throughly considered of thē. But sithence I am voide of presumption, all maner of waies (God be my record) & am one of thyne owne broode fostered vp with the fatt of thy loynes, and take not vpon me to discourse of vanities, but of the settyng out of part of thy flouyng goodnesse, that hath so enbalmed this thy Region with secret richesse, though a worlde of eyes be poryng in my face, I trust in thyne owne cause, and for thyn owne sake, and goodnesse of the matter it self, and for sutche reasons and argumentes, as I haue sette doune, to finde a greate nomber of willyng hartes, and well disposed myndes (that with open mouthe will confesse the inuention sound and good, and the meane to bryng it to passe bothe easie and profitable) to further their natiue soile, and the benefite thereof, with this my simple action I take in hande, in displeiyng parte of thy richesse. And therefore the graue and wise menne of this lande, of their good grace and fauour, I trust vndoubtedly will accepte and take in good parte, this my good will and long trauell, and shroude & defende me and my Booke, vnder the winges of their wisedome, as vnder a sure Anker holde, against the rashe opinions of those, that rather wilfully

then wisely, will imagine no politique prouision can come, from the Skonse of a Soldioure, that hath trailed the Pike. But as God raiseth instrumentes to sette out his glorie diuerse waies, and by diuerse degrees. So lette it not bee greeuous to thee O Englande, nor to the better sorte of menne, that one of thyne owne (though not so finely as others) dooe sette abroade parte of thy richesse, wealthe, and glory to enriche thy owne peculiar people with all, and hath opened the golden streame, of thy secrete store house, to the Inhabitauntes of the same. But likewise open thou, by thy Deuine prouidence the hartes of the wise, graue, and riche of this land that thei will affecte it, embrace it, putte their helpyng handes to it, and willyngly further it, by all possible meanes thei can, for the common profite of the inhabitauntes. In as mutche as by Gods meanes, so greate a benefite, is offered with small care, little toile, and no coste, to make all this lande blessed, the people therof happie, strong, and inuincible. If I should perticularly discourse the seuerall cō
               modities that flowe from it, in perticularitie, and the nomber of all sortes of people, within this land, that shall bee maintained thereby, I should but wearie you with a long tale, and keepe you from

the matter, I desire you should knowe. Therefore commendyng the goodnesse thereof to your wisedome, and me to your fauourable exposition I ende. Yours humbly in all that I maie at commaundemente duryng life, for the honour of prince and countrey.
            
               Robert Hichcocke.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ Fraunces Hitchcocke to the Readers of this his brothers booke.
            
               
                  AS they of all moste praise descrue,
               That first with pen did shewe:
               To vs the sacred worde of God,
               Whereby his will we knowe.
               So many thankes are dewe to those,
               That beates their restlesse braine:
               To profite all both olde and yong,
               That in this lande remaine.
               Amongst the rest that well deserue,
               Account the Author one:
               Who by his toyle hath here offred,
               To all excepting none.
               A banket greate that sauereth sweete,
               To such as hungry bee:
               Withouten cost, for aye to last,
               To people of eche degree.
               Shake now the Tree and taste the fruite,
               Of this his Newyeres gifte:
               Till purse be full and stringes doe brake,
               With golde and grotes of thrift.
               Prepare thee then a gratefull harte,
               And sounde the trumpe of fame:
               In recompence of his good will,
               That Hitchcocke hath to name.
               Thus loath to keepe thee fro thy meate,
               Wherewith I wishe thee fedde:
               I staye my pen and so fare well,
               The Table now is spredde.
            
            Vale.
         
         
            
            
            To the freendly Reader.
            
            
               
                  FOR asmutche as the Almightie God hath blessed and enriched this noble kingdome, with the sweete dewe of his heauely goodnesse, and stored therein many rich hidden and pleasaunte treasures for our benefites, to reueale vnto vs whē his good pleasure is. I thinke therefore, euery man is rather borne to profite his natiue soile and common weale, in reuealyng the same secretes, and hidden treasure to his countrey, (if thei be shewed hym) then to seke after his owne priuate gaine, and glorie thereby. So I haue taken vppon me good gentle Reader, to vnfolde some of the same hidden treasures to my Countrey, whiche I suppose is manifested vnto me: Albeeit there be a great nomber, that can more sweetly and with pleasanter wordes and sugred stile (then I) set out the matter to thee (if thei knewe it) in farre better Methode and order. Yet the zeale and duetie I

beare to my countrey, beyng partly fed with hope of thy good paciece (gentill reader) & partly enboldened with the fore warnyng that Eccle. ca. II. giueth, which is, That no man shalbe condempned before his tale be tolde, and inquitision thereof made: whereby righteous Iudgemente maie thereof followe, Least he (as Salomon saieth) Procure to hym selfe follie and shame, in giuyng sentence of a matter before he heare it. These thin ges I saie haus moued me, to putte forthe my simple mynde in writyng to my Countrey, and praiyng thee of thy good courtesie to peruse it, and throughly waie the depthes thereof, in the ballance of thy graue Iudgemente. And if thou finde the pithe and carnell of my labor, frutefull to thee and thy Countrey (as I doubte nothyng thereof but thou shalte) then maie it bee, that it hath pleased God to powre out his knowledge as well vppon a Soldiour, as vppon a greate Clarke, for now and then wisedome maie bee shrouded vnder an vncleane Cloke. And I doubte not also, but the same reasons and duetie that bounde me this many yeres,

to trauell in this action, to my greate coste and charge, to finde out the waie and perfection thereof, shall also binde thee, and moue thee effectually, to fauour it, to further it in the Parliament house, and to defende my imperfection, against a sorte of Momus fecte, and Zoilus bande, that can rather finde fault with the man, then with the matter, be it neuer so well, or any waie putte to their helpyng handes to amende the same (if it bee not orderly.) My care hath been to please my Countrey▪ and the honest and graue sorte thereof: whiche if this my trauell shall doe & content, I haue cause to thanke almightie God for it, and thinke my tyme well spēt For in this little booke (gentill Reader) thou shalt finde (if the same be executed accordyng to lawe) it importeth mutche matter, bryngeth greate plentie and mutche wealthe, and benefite, to all the inhabitauntes of this Realme. It prouideth for the poore, in honest and decent maner, brynging them to a good and a Godly vocation of life: with many other speciall benefites, to this Kyngdome and common wealth, whiche for tediousnesse sake, least I wearie thee, I referre thee to the booke it self, where thou maiest at large see them, with thy eye,

Iudge them by thy good discretion, wisedome, and fauour, and further them by thy good helpe and assistaunce at conuenient tyme. So fare thee hartly well.
            
               Robert Hitchcocke.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Hitchcockes Newyeres gift to Englande.
            
            
               
                  THE GREAT CARE that the Queenes Maestie, and her noble progenitors haue taken, to banishe and roote out of their Dominions, that lothesome monster Idelnesse (the mother and breeder of Uacaboundes) is moste apparaunt by their wholsome lawes and prouisions, made from tyme to tyme: Beginnyng at the woorthie reigne of Kyng Edward the third, Kyng Richard the seconde, and so descendyng to her Maiesties moste prudente and vertuous gouernement, wherein aswell publique prouisions hath been to helpe the commonweale, as some sharpe and seuere punishement prouided, if common pollicie would not serue. Yet neuerthelesse all these Lawes so circumspectly made, could not, nor cannot banishe that pestilent Canker out of this commonweale, by any degree, but that the same encreaseth daiely more & more, to the greate hurte and impouerishyng of this Realme.
            For remedie whereof, almightie GOD by the moste comodious scituation of this Islande (and his blessynges bothe of the Lande thereof, and of the Sea, wherewith it is enuironed) hath prouided a moste conuenient meane, bothe for labor for the Idle: and for food, benefite, and ritches for the Inhabitantes. Whereby: the lustie Uacabounds

and Idell persones, (the rootes, buddes, and seedes of idelnesse) shall at all handes and in al places be set on worke, and labour willyngly, and thereby proue good subiectes, and profitable members of this Commonweale. This realme and the inhabitantesReade the preamble of the statute Henrie 8. Anno 33. cap 2. bordryng aswell vpon the sea, as vpō the lande throughout thesame, in short tyme to be meruailously inriched. Nyne thousande Marriners more then now presētly there is, to serue her Maiesties shippes at all tymes if neede bee. The Coines of golde and siluer, that issues plentefully out of this Realme, to staie and abide within this lande. For restraint whereof bothe her highnesse, and her noble progenitors, haue made diuerse lawes & statutes, but yet neuer could do thesame. A redie meane to cause forrain wares to be brought hether. Her Maiesties Customes and Subsidies greatly augmented: Her Nauigation greatly increased. The Tounes borderyng vpon the Sea coastes now in ruine, and voide of Englishe inhabitauntes, to bee peopled and inhabited by her maiesties owne peculer Subiectes: to the greate strength of this Realme, and terror of the enemie. Besides the helpe that shalbe ministered to twoo hundreth twentie and fiue decaied tounes in Englande and Wales: with a stocke of two hundeth pounde to euery decaied toune, to set the poore on worke. And to eight principall Port tounes with in this lande, appointed for sondrie causes apperteinyng to this Platte eighte thousande pounde, whiche is to euery principall Porte Toune one

thousande pounde, to bee a stocke for euer. Besides fower hundreth Fishing Shippes to continue for euer. And twoo good Shippes of warre, furnished warlike, to defende the Fishyng Shippes. All whiche thynges (God willyng) maie bee perfourmed within three yeres, without coste or charges to any man, as by this plat shall appere. And also an infinite nomber of people, as well rich as poore set to worke, by diuerse meanes and degrees, whiche thynges will releeue many a poore man: and saue many a tall fellowe from the Gallowes.
            For performaunce whereof, first there must be made fower hundreth fishyng Shippes: after the maner of Flemishe Busses, of the burden of three score and tenne Tunne the Shippe, or more: but none vnder, whiche will coste two hundreth poūd the Shippe, with the furniture: if it be readie furnished to the Sea, in all thynges necessarie. Euery Shippe requireth one skilfull Maister to gouerne it, twelue Marriners or fishermen, and xii. of the strong lustie Beggers, or poore men: taken vp through this Lande. Whiche in the whole amounteth to the nomber of tenne thousande persones, at the firste mannyng of the Shippes. So that with a little experience, this Realme hath clearely increased nyne thousande Marriners, more then was in this Lande before.
            These Shippes so made, furnished and manned, must be appointed to sutche Roades and Hauen tounes, as border vppon the Sea coastes:

compassyng this Realme rounde aboute: Beginnyng an London, and so orderly proceedyng, accordyng to the Table herevnto annexed. And beyng thus placed (hauyng with theim to the Seas, for their victualles, sufficient Breade, Bere, Butter, and Cheese, with Barrelles emptie, Caske, and Salte, with order also not to retourne vntill thei bee fullie loden) shall goe yerely a fishyng: and kill Herynges vpō the coastes of Englande and Irelande, presently and alwaies as thei kille them, to gill theim, salte, pickle, and barrill theim after the Flemishe maner, with salte vpon salte, whiche is the beste kinde of Salt. And shall fishe for Herynges yerely, duryng the tyme of Heryng Fishyng: whiche is fowertene or fiftene weekes. In which tyme (by Gods grace) euery Shippe will kill (at the least) fiftie Laste of the beste sort of Herynges, amountyng in the whole to twentie thousande Laste. Euery Laste beyng sold, but for ten pound, (whiche is xvi. s. viii. d. the Barrell:) draweth to twoo hundreth thousande poundes yerely for the beste Herynges onely. Perhaps thei maie loade their Shippes yerely twice with Herynges: and then the somme is doubled, in that tyme of Herryng Fishyng.
            And to the ende the Herynges shall be wholesome for the subiecte, Straunger, or for whom so euer shall buy them, and that the good vsage therof maie get credite, where thei shall happen to bee vttered. Thei shall accompte in makyng of their Herynges vpon the Sea, so as sixtene Barrelles

made there, make but twelue Barrelles (at their home commyng, to their seuerall Portes) when thei shalbe newe sorted, seuered, couched, and truly and iustly packed, by sutche honest and substanciall men, as shalbe sworne, and purposely chosen for that intente, and thei to haue twoo pence of euery Barrell, accordyng to the Statute for that purpose prouided. Deuiding the full Heringes in to twoo seuerall sortes, markyng the beggest and beste Heringes with this seuerall marke B. The seconde, with the second marke, M. Also the shotten Herynges with this proper marke S. to the ende no man maie be abused. Euery Barrell conteinyng twoo and thirtie Gallons, accordyng to the statute made Anno 22. Edward 4. Chapiter 2. whiche twelue Barrelles makes a Laste.
            Out of whiche saied nomber of twentie thousande Laste of Herynges: nine or tenne thousand Laste, will be a sufficient rate or portion to satisfie this whole Realme. The residue beeyng tenne or eleuen thousande Laste, drawing to one hundred thousande pounde: beyng ordered as a foresaied, will be of as great estimation in Fraunce, as the Flemishe Herynges be. And will be solde and vttered in diuerse partes of that Regiō: As in Normandie, in Nantes, in Burdeux, and in Rochell. And the further South, that the Countries doe lye: the better vtteraunce for Fishe. For these Herynges: retourne will be made, of all sutche necessaries, as we want in this Realme, viz: Wine and Woades (for whiche is alwaies paied redie gold)

Salt, Canuas, Uitere, Doulas, and diuers other thynges. The Custome also for the Queenes Maiestie, beyng paied vppon euery Laste of that shall bee transported, and solde beyonde the Sea: cometh to fiue thousande pounde, after the rate of Pondage, for this nomber of Herynges onely.
            The other part of this greate blessing of God, maie aptly be taken and applied, viz: These fower hundreth Busses or fishyng Shippes, maie take Codd and Lyng, and Newlande Fishe. The aduauntage and profite whereof, this Realme and Subiectes of late yeres, for the moste parte haue loste: and suffered straungers, the Fleminges and other Nations to take, who seeyng our carelesse dealyng, haue not onely taken this beneficiall Fishyng frō vs: but verie warely doeth sell the same commoditie vnto vs. And thereby carieth out of this lande bothe Gold and Siluer, and a merueilous quantitie of double double Beere, and other thynges: satisfiyng vs, with these Fishes: whiche through our owne slothe we lose, whiche beeyng taken by our selues (as a speciall blessyng of God appointed vnto vs) and so solde to thē and others it must nedes folowe, that we should saue a great masse of gold, within this land. And for that fishe thei now vtter vnto vs: we should receiue of them the comodities of the Lowe Countries. viz: Hollande clothe, Rape oile, Hoppes, Madder, all sortes of Wier, and diuerse other Marchandize: Or els their ready Golde and Money, whereby: this realme and subiectes should be mightly enriched.

This greate benefite, is no lesse to bee valued, for the profite of this Realme and subiectes: then the benefite of the Herynges. For euery Shippe, beeyng but of the burden of lxx. tunne, if God blesse it with safe retourne, from Newfounde lande, will bryng home to his Port (in August,) twētie thousande of the beste and middle sort of wette fishe (at the leaste) called blanckfishe, and tenne thousande drie fishe, whiche beyng solde vppon the Shippes retourne, as it maie be at Newhauen in Fraunce but for fourtie shillynges the hundreth of wette fishe, whiche is not fower pence the fishe. And xxshillynges the hundreth of drie fishe, which is not twoo pence the fishe, amounteth to fiue hundreth pound at the least. Likewise any other of the shippes, but of the like burden, goyng a fishyng to the ward house, to Islande, to the North seas of Englande and Scotlande, or to Irelande, commeth home (at the same tyme) loden with fifteene thousande Codde, and tenne thousande Lyng, whiche beyng sold but for fourtie shillinges the hundreth one with an other, amounteth to fiue C. pounde. And besides that euery shippe will bryng home to his Port fower or fiue tunne of oile, made of fishe liuers, worthe to be sold for xii. pound the tunne.
            The waie how this Platte shalbe brought to passe and performed, without coste or charges to any manne: is by borowyng of fower score thousande pounde for three yeres, whiche fourtie men in a Shire will, and maie easily accomplishe, if euery man lende but fiftie pounde, vpon good assuraunce,

after the rate of tenne pound yerely vpon euery hundreth pounde lent, whiche sommes shal be repaied again within three yeres at twoo paimentes. In what sort this money shalbe leuied is set doune in the first table followyng. The second table doeth declare, to whom and to what principall Porte tounes the money shall bee deliuered, how it shal be vsed, who shall giue assuraunce for thesame, and therewith prouide the forsaied shippes. The third table doeth shewe, to what hauen tounes these fishyng Shippes shalbe placed, and how the money shalbe leuied, to make paiment of the money borowed, and to answere all charges. And in the fowerth table is set doune, how many decaied tounes in euery Shire, shall haue a continuall stocke of twoo hundreth pound a peece, to sette the poore on woorke for euer. Also how euery man shall bee pleased, and liberally considered, that shall bee appointed to the execution of this Platte. And how the paimentes of the money borowed, with the interest money for the tyme of for bearaunce, shalbe made and paied at twoo paimentes.
            
               
               ORDERS.
               
                  
                     IN primis, euery one of these eight principall Port tounes: Londō, Yarmouth, Hull, New castell, Chester, Bristow, Exeter, and Southampton, muste haue twoo honest and substanciall men of credite, to be chief and principall officers of euery these saied Portes: who shall as Treasurers and Puruiours, ioyntly deale togethers, in all causes to this Platte apperteinyng. First in receiuyng all sommes of money, that bee appointed to euery the saied Portes: laiyng it vp safely with their tounes treasure. And there with to prouide fiftie Fishyng shippes, with all thinges needefull for them, redy to the Seas: with sutche carefull consideration, as the money were their owne. And that euery shippe be bothe strong and good, and not vnder the burden of three score and tenne tunne. And then for to appoint them to the Roades and Hauen tounes, in the third Table of this Platte specified: that is to saie, fiue shippes to euery Fishyng toune. Takyng order also that euery of these shippes, maie haue one skilfull maister to gouerne it, twelue Marriners, coaste men or Fishermen, and twelue poore men taken vp, to serue in euery of them. And to take bondes of euery toune, wherevnto the saied fiue shippes shalbee deliuered, for the paiemente of one hundreth and fiftie pounde, out of euery Shippe yerely, duryng three yeres. This beyng doen, the saied fiue shippes

shall bee giuen to the Fishyng toune for euer: with Preuiso, that if any Shippe or shippes of the whole nomber miscary, or be loste by any kinde of chaunce or degree: then all the reste, viz: Euerie shippe of the nomber remainyng shall paie tenne shillynges, (towardes the newe makyng of euery shippe so wanting) to the cheef officers, where the shippe is lackyng: with whiche money thei shall prouide againe one other newe shippe, furnished with all thynges, as aforesaid. Whiche lawe shal be kept vnuiolately emongest them for euer: vpon paine euery shipp: (that shalbe found in fault at any tyme) to forfet for euery offēce fiue pound: And the same to be leuied, and receiued by the order of statute Lawe, but the whole benefite to the same toune or tounes, where the shippe or shippes bee wantyng. And the same sixteene cheef Officers shall haue allowed them for their fees yerely, duryng the saied three yeres xvi. hundreth poundes that is to euery officer one hundreth pounde yerely. Also in the ende of the thirde yere, there shall be giuen in recompence to euery of the saied eight principall Port tounes one thousande pound, to be a stocke, to remain to the same tounes for euer, as hereafter shalbe declared.
               These Busses or fishyng Shippes, thus placed in fower score fishyng tounes (as fiue shippes to euery fishyng toune) shall bee sette forthe to the Seas, by the Gouernours of euery seuerall Fishyng Toune, to take fishe: as the tymes and seasons of the yere doeth serue. Firste in Marche

hauyng victualls for fiue monethes, with hokes, lines, and salt (prouided by the saied Gouernours and their assistances) thei shalbee sette out to fishe for Lodd and Lyng, where the saied Gouernors by the consent of the Toune liketh beste: or els to Newfounde lande, for Newlande fishe. And by the grace of God, in Auguste at the furthest, thei shall come home, to their seuerall Portes: Loden with fishe, and Trane oile, made of fishe Liuers. Whiche fishe, shall forthwith be deuided into thre equall partes. The first parte to the maister, and fishermen for their paines. The seconde parte, to them that were at the charges of victualls, Salt lines, and hookes. The third parte, to be laied vp vnder safe keepyng: vntill tyme serue beste to sell the same: or to be vented, where moste profit maie bee made. Then againe with all speede, presently after the fishe is deuided, euery Ship beeyng victaled for sixe weekes, with Nettes, Laske, and Salte, thei must be set out to fishe for Herringes: tariyng vpon the Seas, vntill thei be fully loden. Then thei returne againe to their seuerall Portes (if God blesse theim with good lucke, and safe retourne) loden with fiftie Laste of the beste Herrynges. Euery Shippe (if winde and weather serue) maie returne twice loden with Herrynges: in that time of Herryng fishing. And alwaies (as the shippes with Herrynges doe come to their seuerall Portes) the saied Gouernours shall cause the saied Herrynges to bee deuided into fower equall partes. The first parte, to the Maister and

the Marriners for their paines. The secōd part, to them that prouides the Salte and Uictualles. The thirde parte, to theim that findes the Caske and Nettes. And the fowerth parte, to bee laied vp vnder safe keepyng: vntill it maie bee vented. Out of the whiche portion of Herrynges, and of the other fishe aforefaid, shalbe paied the first daie of Aprill yerely (nexte after the first yere, that the Shippes of this Platte beginneth to fishe) one hundreth and fiftie pounde, for euery Ship yerely, duryng three yeres, by the Gouernours of euery fishyng toune, that so shall haue regard of their retournes, and vse of the goods, where the Shippes be placed. Whiche paimente shall bee paied to the cheef officers of that principall Port, that did place the saied fiue Shippes to the same Toune. And then after the thre yeres be expired: the third parte of greate fishe, and the fowerth part of Herrynges shalbee, and remaine for euer, to euery Fishyng toune, where the fishyng shippes bee at the daie of the laste paimente. Out of whiche, the fiue shippes shall yerely bee repaired and maintained, by euery fishyng toune: for the profite of the same Toune, and the benefite of the Common weale. When Herryng fishyng is past, then with all conueniente speede, the Gouernours aforesaid,) shall appoint some of their Shipps) to take fishe vpon the coastes of Englande, Scotlande or Ireland. And sende other some into Fraunce, or els where with Codd, Lyng, Herrynges, and Newe lande fishe there to vtter them, makyng retourne with

sutche commodities as will be beste vttered here, or els with Salt and money. By whiche returne it will bee tyme to make ready for the Fishyng in Marche as before. Thus the whole yere is spent in Fishyng.
               There must be an Auditour for receiuyng all accomptes, that shall appertaine, and depende vpon the execution of this Plat: Sutche as it shall please the Parliamēt house to nominate and appointe. Who shall receiue of the sixtene cheef officers aforesaied, eight hundreth pounde yerely, duryng three yeres, viz: of the cheef officers of euery principall Porte (vpon his quittaunce) one hundreth pounde for his Fee. Whiche saied Auditour must ride from euery principall Porte to other, to see, and to prouide that all and euery of the fiue decaied counes, within euery Shire in England: and also twentie decaied tounes in Wales, haue the stocke of twoo hundreth poundes truly paied to euery one of them, accordyng to this Plat, and that it bee vsed accordyngly, viz: that the Gouernour of euery the decaied tounes, with the saied stocke of twoo hundreth pounde, shall diligentely and carefully prouide yerely, sutche comodities to set the poore on woorke, as the nature of the coū
                  trey dooeth yelde for moste profite. And that the poore people that laboreth, be paied weekely their wages: conuertyng the benefite of their trauell in to the increase of the same stocke. And that the said Auditour take knowledge how many there be at woorke in euery place, by that meanes: and with

what comodities, the saied poore people are set to woorke in euery Shire. And for that there shall be no percialitie in naming of the decaied tounes. The twoo Parliamente Knightes, with twoo Iustices of Peace in euery their Shire, to name and appoint the auncient decaied tounes in euery Shire, for to haue the said stocke of twoo hundreth pound, according to the fourth table of this Plat. And beyng subscribed vnder their handes, to deliuer it to the saied Auditour in the first yere, that the Fishyng shippes aforesaid, bee sette to the Sea to Fishe.
               There must also bee a Comptroler, ioyned in Commission with the cheef officers of euery principall Porte toune: for the prouidyng of all thynges needefull at the beste hande. Who muste ride to euery Port and Fishing toune, and to all other places, where these Shippes bee either made, bought, or placed, to see that all thynges maie bee iustly performed: accordyng to the true meanyng of this Platt, and to be doen with all expedition. Who maie by this order, and without greef to this Platte, receiue for his Fee eight hundreth pounde yerely duryng three yeres. viz: of the cheef officers of euery principall Port toune, one hundreth pounde vpon his quittaunce: for his paines and charges, and for the charges of his seruauntes and ministers that muste bee, and remaine in many seuerall Portes and places, to see the dewe execution of this Platte in all pointes. Whiche saied Comptroler, the aucthor wisheth should bee

sutche a man, as would bende his wittes for the Commonweale, and that he were as ripe in this matter, and could so well execute the same as hym self. For then he should bee able to declare in all places what is to be doen, and what should be doen at euery extremitie to auoide any daunger.
               The officers of euery the saied eight principall Porte townes, shall appoynt one honest vertuous discrete and learned man, to preache Gods worde, whiche Preachers shall trauaile continually (as the Apostles did) from place to place, prea chyng in all these fishyng townes, and dekayed townes, appointed to euery seuerall Porte. And euery Preacher shall receiue for his maintenance one hundreth pounde yerely during three yeares: of the cheefe officers of that same principall porte toune, where vnto he is appointed. And also that order maie bee had from the Queenes Maiestie, that two of her graces Shippes of warre, suche as yeerely be appointed to wafte the Marchants maie contineue vpon her Maiesties Seas, from the first of Marche, vntill the laste of Nouember yearely for two yeares: for the defence of these fishing Shippes. And towardes the charges of the same twoo Shippes of warre. The cheefe Officers appoynted for Yarmouth and Bristowe, shall paie yearly duryng two yeares, foure thousande pounde. Whiche Shippes if they can not be had, Then the saied Audytour and Comptroler, shall with that monic prouide twoo other Shippes of warre for the same cause. Also the saied Audytor

and Comptroler who rides all the whole circuite of this lande, for the performaunce of this platte: shall make declaration once a yeare, to the Right Honourable Lordes, the Lorde Chauncellor, the Lorde Treasarour, the Lord Admyrall of Englande, and Lorde priuie Seale of the whole state, cause and procedinges of this Plat. To the ende their Lordeshippes maie vse their honorable considerations for and in redresse of things nedefull,
               Prouided alwaies that if the cheefe Officers, of any of the saied eight principall Porte tounes, doe finde iuste cause that there is some insufficiencie, either in any of the fishyng Tounes, where the fiue Shippes are placed: or els in the Gouernours of the same Toune, suche negligence that this fishyng can not proue profitable, or that it is not vsed accordyng to the effecte and true meanyng of this Platte. Then vpon iuste proofe, or informacion made to the Lordes aforesaied, the same officers of that principall Porte, by consent of the Comptroler and Audytoure, with order from the saied Lords, maie remoue the same shippes, from any suche fishing Toune, and appoynte them elswhere within their seuerall charge, wher thei maie bee bothe better placed, and for the common weale more profitable.
               The same sixtene cheefe Officers, of the saied eight principall Porte Tounes, for the tyme being after their first yeares recept (whiche amounteth to three score thousande pounde) shall at Maie daie next following, deduct out of the same

recept, foure thousande pounde for fees and wages dewe and to be paied to them selues, to the Audytour, to the Comptroler, and to the eight Preachers, as before is appointed for that firste yere. Likwise out of the same recept, thei shall pay fortie and fiue thousande pounde to the Gouernours of two hundreth and fiue and twentie dekaied tounes, viz: to euery dekaied Toune twoo hundreth pounde, to be a stocke for euer, to set the poore people on woorke, as it is appoynted in the fourth table of this Platte. Also the Officers of Yarmouth (out of the saied recept) shall paie to two Shippes of warre foure thousande pounde, for their wages the first yere. All paiments paied for the first yeare. There remaineth of the saied recept seauen thousande pounde, whereof, the officers of Bristowe, hath in their handes foure thousande pounde (as by their paymentes appereth) whiche is for to paie the seconde yeares wages, to the two Shippes of warre, for defendyng the Fishermen the seconde yeare. The other three thousande pounde is in the handes of the officers of Yarmouth aforesaied (as by their payments likewise appereth) whiche shalbe by them bestowed, vpon makyng of twoo Shippes of warre, of the burden of eight score tunne the Shippe: after the beste and strongest manner in warlike sorte, and to furnishe them with store of all nedefull thinges to the Sea, as appertaineth to shippes of warre. And also with ordnaunce, powder, shotte, armor, Weapons, and all other prouicion necessarie.

These seuerall sommes of monnie, amounteth to three score thousande pounde, whiche is the firste yeares recept.
               The seconde yeares recept of threescore thousande pounde, beyng receiued by the saied sixtene cheefe Officers, of the foresaied eight principall Portes. They shall deduct out of the same foure thousande pounde for fees and wages, to content and paie them selues, the Audytor, the Comptroler, and the eight Preachers for the seconde yeere in like maner as aforesaied. Also they shall paie to the lenders of the money, the one halfe of the money borowed, which is fortie thousand pound and the interest money of the whole somme borowed for twoo yeares. Whiche is sixtene thousande pounde, whiche paymentes amountes to three score thousande pound. And that is the iust recept and payment of and for the seconde yeare.
               The thirde yeares recept of three score thousande pounde being receiued in like maner, by the foresaied cheefe Officers, of the saied eight principall Portes. They shall deduct out of the same foure thousande pounde for fees and wages, to be paied as aforesaied vnto them selues, the Auditour, the Comptroler, and the eight Preachers for the same third yeare. And likewise foure thousande pounde for wages to two shippes of warre for the same thirde yeare, as by the Officers of euery principall Port toune fiue hundreth pound. Then they shall paie to the lenders of the monye, the other halfe of the money borowed, whiche is

fortie thousande pounde, and the interest money for that thirde and laste yeare, whiche is foure thousande pounde. All whiche paiments amountes to fiftie two thousande pounde. This fishing platte thus being parformed, all paiments paied, and euery man that hath takē paines in the execution of the same, very well pleased and contented. There doth remaine eight thousande pound in the handes of the cheefe Officers, of the saied principall Ports, viz: one thousand pound with the cheefe Officers of euery principall Porte, as appereth by their recepts and payments, whiche shalbee allowed vnto the same eight principall Porte tounes emongest them, viz: to euery principall Porte Toune one thousande pounde, to be a stocke to remaine for euer, for the profitte and benefitte of the same Toune. And yearely to be vsed for profite, to suche Fisher tounes, and fishermen, as vpon good assuraunce will vse any parte therof in the trade or craft of fishyng.
               And when this is doen and brought to passe, I will declare a deuice appertainyng to this plat, that shall (if it please God) bee worthe tenne thousande pounde yearely for euer, without coste or charges to any man: neither offendyng or incrochyng vppon any parson with the same deuice. Whiche is to maintaine the foresaied Shippes of warre warlike yearely for euer, with wages, victualls, Soldiours, and Marrynours, and all other kinde of charges. And also to maintaine all the aforesaied officers and Preachers their yerely

fees for euer. Unto either of the same two ships of warre, there must be appointed one skilfull and valiaunt maister, the maisters mate, foure quarter maisters, a Purser, a maister Gūner, and one hundreth and twentie Soldiours and Marrynours. The Maister to haue for wages, foure shillynges the daie, euery other Officer two shillinges the daie, and euery Soldiour or Marrynour twelue pence the daie for wages. The order for their diet of victualls all the whole yeare, and what monye is to be allowed for the yearely repracions of the saied twoo Shippes of warre, and how all this shalbee mayntained for euer: I haue sette doune in writyng. And after this Plat with the greate benefits growyng vniuersall to this Realme shalbe throughly considered, drawen into perfect forme and put in execution, by authoritie of Parlament (whiche is the power of the whole comonaltie of Englande) I will deliuer the same where it shall be thought meete.
            
            
               The tymes and places of the yearly fishyng for Codde and Lyng.
               
               FIrst for Codde vpon the Coaste of Lancashire: beginnyng at Ester, and continueth vntill midsommer.
               For Hakes in the deepes, betwixt Wales and Ireland, from Whitsontyde vntill sainct Iames tyde.
               
                  For Codde and Lyng about Padsiowe, within the landes ende of Seuerne, is good fishyng from Christmas vntill midlent.
               There is an excellent good fishyng for Codde about Irelande, where doeth come yerely to fishe three or fower hundreth saile of Shippes and Barkes out of Biskey, Galiza, and Portugale, about the Southwest partes: neare to Mackertymors countrey, and doeth continewe Aprill, Maie, Iune, and Iulie.
               Also for Codde and Lyng, on the West and Northwest of Irelande, beginning at Christmas and continueth vntill Marche.
               And there is one other excelent good fishyng vpon the North of Irelande.
               Also for Newelande fishe vpon the bankes of Newfoundlande. The shippes goeth forth from Englande and Irelande in Marche, and comes home loden in August.
               There is an excelent good fishyng (for theim that will goe further) for Codd and Lyng, in the Riuers of Backlasse, continuyng Aprill, Maie, Iune, and Iulie.
               Also for Codde and Lyng, vppon the Northe coasts of England, and vpon the coasts of Scotlande, and the Northe Iles of Scotlande, continuyng from Ester vntill midsomer.
               The like for Codde, vpon the East coastes of Freselande, Norwaie and Shotlande, from Easter vntill midsomer.
               To fishe for Codde and Lyng in Islande, the

Shippes commonly must goe forthe in Marche, and returnes loden in August.
               The like maner and tyme is vsed for Cod and Lyng from Englande to the warde house, where is excelent good fishyng, Aprill, Maie, and Iune.
            
            
               The tymes and places of the yerely fishyng for Herynges.
               
               THe Herrynges shootes out of the deepes, on both sides of Scotlande and England, and beginneth vpon the Scots coaste at midsomer, and be not Marchaundable (but yet vendable) because they be so fat: by reason whereof they will growe reastie if they bee kept. And therefore they be presently solde.
               The seconde and beste fishyng beginneth at Bartholmewtyde at Skarbrough, and so procedeth alōg the coaste, vntill they come to Thames mouth, continuyng very good vntill Hollentyde. All whiche tyme they bee very good and Marchaundable, and will abide the saltyng very well.
               The thirde fishyng is from Thames mouthe through the narrowe Seas: yet not certaine, for after that tyme, they shoote sodenly through the same Seas (vpō any extreame weather) on both sides of Irelande. Whiche fishyng doth continue vntill the feast of sainct Androwe.
               Also vpon the coaste of Irelande, is very good fishyng from Michaelmasse vntill Christmasse.

For there is greate plentie of Herringes.
               Also vpon the Northwest Seas of Englande, ouer against Carlell in Cumberlande, aboute Wirkington is good fishyng for Herynges, from Bartholmewtide vntill foretene daies after Michaelmasse.
               Also from Holentyde till Christmasse vpon the coaste of Norwaie (that serues all the Easte coū
                  tries) called the Mall sande, where all straungers doe fishe: paiyng their custome (a Youghendale vppon euery Laste) to the King of Denmarke. But some tymes the Frostes bee so greate there, that the Heringes will not take salte.
               There is an other exercise to breede profitte, called the huntyng of the Whaile, whiche continueth all the Sommer. The Whaile is vpon the coastes of Rushe towardes Muskouy, and sainct Nicholasse. The killyng of the Whaile is bothe pleasaunt and profitable, and without greate charges: yelding greate plentie of Oyle, the tunne wherof is worth tenne pound. One of the Shippes maie bryng home to his Porte fiftie Tunne, the whiche is worthe fiue hundreth pounde.
            
            
               
               Obiections and aunsweres of the Author.
               
               
                  ¶ First what moues you to thinke that there will bee founde fortie men in euery Shire of Englande, that will lende fiftie pounde a man, for three yeares in this couetous tyme, when euery man is for him self.
               
               
                  
                     THis Realme of Englande and Wales is very populos, and the moste parte be the poorer sorte of people, who daiely doeth harken when the worlde should amende with them. They are indifferent in what sorte, so that their state were relieued. And so parhappes apte to assiste Rebellion, or to ioyne with whom soeuer dare inuade this noble Ilande, if any sutche attempte should bee made. Then are they meete Guides to bryng the Soldiours or men of warre, to the riche mens wealth For they can pointe with their finger, there it is, yonder it is, here it is, and he hath it, and she hath it that will dooe vs muche good. And so procure Martyrdome with murder, to many wealthie parsons for their wealth. Therfore the wise and wealthie men of this lande, had neede by greate discretion to deuise some speedy helpe herein, that his poorerer sorte of people, maie bee sette to some good Artes, Science, Occupacions, Craftes and labours, by whiche meanes they might be able to

reliue them selues of their greate nede and want. And beyng brought to suche vocation of life, hauyng some good trade to liue vppon, there is no doubt, but they will proue good and profitable subiects, and be careful to see this commō wealth florishe, and will spende their liues and bloud to defende the same, and their little wealth, their liberties, their wifes and children. For hauyng nothing they are desperate, but hauing some little goods, they will dye before thei leese it. Wherefore if this matter bee looked into with eyes of iudgement, there is no doubt of borowing the money vpon the assurance and interest. For I doe know in some Shires fower men that will gladly lende so much money as the whole Shire is appointed to lende. In Hollande and Sealande, the riche men makes so sure accounte of their fishyng, that they appointe their children Portions to bee increased by that vse.
               
               
                  ¶ I praie you shewe me by what occacion or meanes, this huge nomber of Beggers and Vacaboundes doe breede here in Englande. And why you appointe twelue of them to euery Shipp, I thinke they maie carie the Shippe awaie, & become Pirates.
               
               
                  
                     IF you consider the pouerty that is, and doth remaine in the Shire tounes, and Market tounes, within this Realme of England and Wales, which tounes being inhabited with greate store of poore householders, who by their pouertie are driuē to bring

vp their youth idlely, and if they liue vntill they come to mans state, then are they past all remedie to be brought to woorke. Therfore at suche tyme as their Parentes fayles them: they beginne to shifte, and acquainte them selues with some one like brought vppe, that hath made his shifte, with dicyng, cosenyng, picking or cutting of purses, or els if he be of courage▪ plaine robbing by the waie side, which they count an honest shift for the time, and so come they daiely to the Gallowes. Hereby growes the greate and huge nomber of Beggers and Uacaboundes, which by no reasonable meanes or lawes could yet be brought to woorke, being thus idely brought vp. Whiche perilous state and imminent daunger, that they now stande in: I thought it good to auoide, by placeyng twelue of these poore people into euery fishyng Shippe, accordyng to this Platte. Who when they shall finde and perceiue that their diet for all the whole yeare is prouided, and that twoo vyoges euery yeare will yeelde to euery man for his paines, xx. pound cleare, and for euer to continue: By which honest trade they shalbe able to liue in estimacion emongest men, whereas before they were hated, whipped, almoste sterued, poore and naked, imprisoned and in daunger daiely to be marked with a burnyng Iron for a Roge, and to be hanged for a Uacabounde. When they shall finde these daungers to be auoyded by their trauaile, and thereby an encrease of wealth to ensewe: they will be glad to continue this good and profitable vocacion of

life, and shunne the other. Besides that it is well knowen, that sixe Marryners or Seafaring mē, is able to rule and gouerne twelue lande menne, that be not acquainted with the Sea, And therfore not to bee doubted that this kinde of people will proue Pirates, they bee so base mynded. For the harte minde and value of a man is suche, and his spirite so greate, that hee will trauaile all the kingdomes of Princes to seeke interteinmente, rather then he will shew his face, to begg or craue reliefe of thousandes of people, that be vnworthie to vnbuckle his shooes. And in his greate want, will take with force and courage from them that hath to serue his necessitie, thinkyng it more happie to dye speedely, then to liue defamed and miserablely. Of whiche sorte of people at▪ the breaking vppe of warres, there is a greate nomber of worthie and valiaunt Soldiours, that hath serued in the Warres with inuinceable myndes, who through wante of liuyng either departe as aforesaied, or els if they tarie in Englande, hangyng is the ende of the moste parte of them.
               
               
                  ¶ Howe maie so many Shippes bee prouided for want of Tymber, Mastes, Cables, Pytche and Iron? And where shall Maisters and Marryners be had, with other nedefull things, as Salt, Nets & Caske?
               
               
                  
                     TO that I must put you in mynde of Hollande, Sellande, and Freeselande, that of late yeares, hath florished with Shippes

Marryners and Fisher men, and therby proued of merueilous wealthe, no Countrey more. And all the Timber they vsed for their Shippes came from the Domynions of other Princes. Their Cables, Mastes, Pytch, and Terre came from the coūtryes vnder the King of Denmarke. The Sailes for their Shippes, the threede for their Nettes, came from Normandie and Brittaine: Their Salte came from Fraunce, Portugale and Spaine. And their Iron came from the countries of other Princes: We neede not doubt of these thinges, for there are Shippes presently to be bought (for the sommes of money appointed for euery Shippe) bothe here in this Realme, and in Hollande, Fraunce, and in other places. And if there were not, I could name the places within this Realme, where is plentie of Timber: If you doe remember the greate and wonderfull woods of Tymber Trees that is in Irelande, you will shake of that doubt. And for Iron there is greate plentie made within this lande: I maie call to witnesse the inhabytaunts of the forest of Deane, the countie of Sussex with other places. And for all other needefull thinges, the Hauens, Portes, and Realme of Englande, lyeth nearer to those countries where plentie is, then the Flemminges doeth. And for Maisters, there is plentie of coaste mē, which will gladly serue that place that be sufficient men. And for Marriners, there is greate store of poore Fisher men all along the coaste of Englande and Wales, that will willyngly serue

in these fishyng shippes and vse the crafte of fishyng, their gaine will be so greate. And for Salte there is greate plentie made at the Witches in Chesshire, and in diuers other places: Besides many Salte houses standyng vpon the coaste of Englande that makes Salte, by sething of salte Sea water. And besides the greate store of salte, that wilbe brought yerely into Englande, by the Marchauntes and others to make salte vppon salte. Also for Caske, there is greate store of Oke, Ashe, and Beeche, growyng in many places of Englande, so that there can be no want of Caske, if there be vse to vse it, nor yet of any other thing aforesaied, if good consideracion be hadde. This Platte (beyng put in execution) will breede sutche store of Marryners, that when so euer the noble Nauie of Englande shalbee sette to the Seas, for the safegarde of this lande, there shalbe no wante of Marriners to serue in the same, where as now they be both scant and harde to be founde. Looke backe into Hollande, where practize is vsed, and see what store is there.
               
               
                  ¶ You appoynte ten thousande Laste of Herrynges to be solde in Fraunce. How can that be? so long as the Flemmynges, the French men and other Nations doe fishe, who hath all readie wonne the credite of their Fishe. They shall sell when wee can not. Then where shall the fishe taken by vs bee vttered?
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     THere is no doubt but there wilbee tenne thousande Laste of Heringes to spare, this Realme beyng serued, if these fowre hundreth fishing shippes with these fishermen be appointed to the Seas, for they will take their place to fishe within the Queenes Maiesties Seas: And so shall serue both England and Fraunce, plentifully and also better cheape then the Flemminges are able to doe. And the Herrynges Codde and Newlandefishe beyng vsed in sutche sorte, as the Flemminges doeth, will be of as greate estimacion as thers be, and maie yearely bee solde and vttered in Fraunce as at Deepe, that serues and victualles all Pickardie, at Newhauen that serues all base Normandie, and at the Toune of Rone, that serues all the hie con̄tries of Fraunce, for thether cometh yearely three hundreth Lighters (called Gabers) with Wines: of ten hundreth tunne or twelue a Gaber, and there beste returne is Fishe and Salte. And for the other partes of Fran̄ce, at Rochell and Burdeux: Also the Marchaunts that trauailes into Spaine, Portugale, Italy, Barbarie and Affrica, cariyng Fishe, the further South and Southweste, that the fishe well vsed is caryed, the dearer it is, and greatly desired. Wherefore lette all men fishe that will, of what couutrey so euer, for there is fishe plentie in these Northren Seas for them all, if there were a thousande saile of fishyng Shippes moe then there is. And the Englishe nation shall and maie

wearie them out, for their trauaile and labour (where they shall fishe) is not farre, their Portes Harbours and Roades bee at hande, their shippes coste the Fisher men nothing: Therefore the Englishe menne shall better bee able to sell good cheape then any other Nation, by meanes wherof they shall sell when others can not. And so the Flemminges beyng put from vttering their Herringes in Fraunce, shalbee driuen to leaue their greate Shippes, and to fishe in smaller Uesselles neare the shore, to serue their owne turnes, as hetherto they haue caused vs to dooe, for feare of them: and euery tempest triumphyng at our folly, for not takyng this greate benefite and blessyng of God powred into our laps.
               
               
                  ¶ Howe doe you knowe that nine or ten thousande Laste of Herrynges will serue all Englande? And when warres shall happen betwene Fraunce and Englande, where shall we sell the rest of our Herrynges and other fishe: The Flemmynges beyng prouided for by their owne people.
               
               
                  
                     BY estemacion fiue thousande Laste of Herrynges doeth serue London, out of which portion, all the Shires aboute London are serued. And by the like estemacion, fiue thousande laste more will serue all England. And if warres should happen betwene Fraunce and Englande, then the Italianes, Spaniardes, Flemmynges, and other Nations, doeth bryng into Englande

all sortes of Frenche commodities, as Wines, Woades, Lockromes and Canuas of all sortes. These Marchaunts will daiely looke for profite and in tyme of warres, nothing doeth passe with lesse daunger, soner is vented and made readie money, then these Herrynges, Codde, Lyng, and Newlandfish. So there is no doubt of vtterance for fishe, either in warres or in peace: Let experience of other Countries serue for this whollie. And I thinke it good to let you vnderstande how Herrynges were solde in Fraunce Anno. 1577. The beste Flemmishe Herrynges were solde for fower and twentie pounde tenne shillynges the Laste, Yarmouth Herringes (who of late doeth vse and order their Herynges as the Flemmings doeth) were solde for twentie pounde twelue shillinges the Laste. Irishe Herringes for eightene pounde the Laste: Coaste Herringes and Scottishe Herrynges for a leuen pounde the Laste. These defferences be in Heringes▪ whiche beyng vsed as is set doune in this Platte, will bee in all places (with in a little tyme) equall in goodnesse with the Flemmishe Herringes.
               
               
                  ¶ In what order doeth the Flemminges, the Frenchmen, and others fishe for Herrynges, Codde, and Newlandefishe.
               
               
                  FIrst beholde this Sea Plat or proportiture here set doune, shewing how the same Straungers doe fishe in their great Shippes vpon the Englishe coaste: And how our Englishe men (for feare of them and euery tempest as aforesaied) doe fishe in small Uesselles neare the shore.
                  
                     
                     THe Flemminges sets out of Flanders Hollande and Sealande yearely (at Bartholmewtide) fower or fiue hundreth Busses, to fishe for Heringes vppon the East coaste of Englande, where before they fishe, they aske leaue at Scarbrough (as euer more they haue doen) with which honor (and no profite) this Realme and Subiectes hath hetherto beene vainely fedde. And amongest theim this is the order, one man prouides the Shippe, an other victualls and Salte, the thirde Caske, the fowerth Nets. And when the shippes comes home deuides the Fishe. There goeth out of Fraunce commonly fiue hundreth saile of shippes yearely in Marche to Newefoundlande, to fishe for Newlande fishe, and comes home againe in August, Amongest many of theim, this is the order, tenne or twelue Marryners doeth conferre with a Money man, who furnisheth them with money to buy Shippes, Uictualls, Salte, Lines and Hookes, to be paied his money at the shippes returne, either in fishe or in money, with fiue and thirtie pounde vpon the hundreth pounde in money lent. Likewise here in Englande, in the West countrey the like order is vsed, the fishermen conferres with the money man, who furnisheth them with money to prouide victualls, salte, & all other needefull thinges to be paied twentie fiue pounde at the shippes returne, vpon the hundreth pound in money lent. And some of the same money men doth borowe money vpon ten pounde in the hundreth

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
pounde, and puts it forthe in this order to the Fishermen. And for to be assured of the money ventered, they will haue it assured, geuyng sixe pounde for the assuring of euery hundreth pound to hym that abides the venture of the Shippes returne, as thus. A shippe of Excester is gone to the Warde house, to fishe for Codd and Lyng; the venture of the Shippe, Salte, and Uictualls is three hundreth pounde, for eightene pound all is assured. So that if the ship neuer returne, yet the money man gaineth declaro, fortie and eight pon̄d and his principall againe. So by these reasons, there seameth greate good to bee doen by fishyng, when other men beyng at such charges doe proue riche by vsing this trade. Shall not the Englishe nacion that thus shall fishe (the greatest charges cut of) bee more able to sell good cheape, then any others maie? and so wearie thē out as aforesaied.
               
               
                  ¶ You saie that muche golde goeth forthe of this lande for Wynes and other Frenche commodities: I praie you to what value in the yeare, doth the Wynes of Fraunce brought into England amounte vnto? And what seuerall sortes of Englishe wares bee solde in Fraunce to buy the same.
               
               
                  
                     I doe esteeme to come into Englande euery yeare, ten thousande Tunne of Gascoine and Rochell Wines, which at twentie Crounes the Tunne, amounteth in Englishe paymente to threescore thousande pounde. The flete that goeth from London to Burdeux, carieth commonly

victualls, Ballace, and some Cloth, for the money is alwaies made ouer by exchaunge, out of London out of Flaūders and out of Spaine. And the ships that goeth frō other places of this Realme, as from Bristowe, Wales, Westchester, Newcastle, Hull, and elswhere to the Uintage, caryeth (contrary to the law) Lether, Calueskins, Butter, and Tallowe, with readie golde, as they maie prouide it all the whole yeare before. At Rone in Fraūce which is the chefest vent, be solde our Englishe wares, as Welche and Manchester Cottons, Northerne Carseis, Whites, Leade, and Tinne: Whiche money is commonly imployed in Normandie and Brittaine, in all sortes of Canuasses with other small wares, & in Lockromes, Uiterie, and Dowlasse, Pouldauis, Olyraunce and Myndernex: parte for readie money, parte for commoditie. And Woades is commonly lodē at Burdeux, and vttered there to our Natiō, and others, for money and Clothe, or els not. These sortes of wares bought in Fraunce, besides the Wines, amounts (by estimacion) to sixe tymes so muche as all the Englishe wares bee solde for in Fraunce euery yeare. And for a truthe, this trade of fishyng is the best (and of lightest coste that can bee founde) to counteruaile the valewes of the Frenche commodities. Experience doeth shewe the same, by the Flemminges: Who with their greene fishe, barreled Cod and Heringes, caryeth out of Englande for the same yearely, both golde and siluer and other comodities: and at the leaste

tenne thousande tunne of dubble dubble Beare, and hath also all kinde of Frenche commodities, continually both in tyme of warres and peace, by their trade onely of fishyng. Thus the greate summes of golde, that is caried yerely out of this lande to the vintage (as appeareth by this Plat following) will staie: And the Wines neuerthelesse, and other frenche waires of all sortes, wilbe had and obteyned for Herrynges and fishe.
                  
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  ¶ When you put your fishyng Platte into the Parliament house, what did you conseaue by the speache of suche Burgesses, as you conferred with of the same?
               
               
                  
                     IN the eightene yeare of the Queenes Maiesties raigne, fiue or sixe daies before the Parliamēt house brake vp, I hadde the Burgesses (almoste) of all the stately Porte tounes of Englande and Wales, at a Dynner with mee at Westminster, emongest whom the substaunce of my Platte was red, and of euery man well lyked, so that some were desirous to haue a Lopie of the same, and saied, that they would of their owne coste and charges set so many Shippes to the Sea: as was to their tounes appointed, without the assistaunce of any other. Of the like minde were the Burgesses of Rye, and some saied it were good to leuye a subsidie of twoo shillynges lande, and sixteene pence goods, for the makyng of these fishyng Shippes. Of whiche minde the speaker maister Bell was, saying a Parliament hath beene called for a lesse cause, other some saied, it were good to giue a subsidie for this purpose, to shippe these kinde of people in this sorte, for if they should neuer retourne, and so auoided: the land were happie, for it is but riddaunce of a nomber of idle and euill disposed people. But these men that so doth thinke, wilbee of an other minde with in two yeares nexte after this Platte take effecte, as when they shall see by this occacion onely: such a nomber of Larpenters and Shipwrightes set on worke, suche a nomber

of Cowpers imployed, suche nombers of people makyng Lynes, Ropes and Cables, dressors of Hempe, spinners of threede, and makers of Nets, so many Salte houses set vp to make salte, and salte vpon salte: And what a nomber of Marryners is made of poore men, and what a nomber of poore people is set on woorke in those Shires all along vpon the Sea coaste in Englande and Wales: in splettyng of fishe, washyng of fishe, packyng of fishe, salting of fishe, caryng and recaring of fishe, and seruing all the countries in England with fishe. And to serue all those occupacions aforesaied, there must depende an infinite nomber of seruaunts, boyes, and daie laborers for the vse of thinges needefull: And with all to remember how that aboute Englande and Wales, there is established in fower score Hauen tounes fiue fishyng Shippes to euery toune, to continue for euer: whiche will breede plentie of fishe in euery (Market, and that will make fleshe good cheape) And that by the onely helpe of God and these fishermen, there shalbe established within Englande and Wales, to two hundreth fiue and twentie decaied tounes, a stocke of two hundreth pounde to euery decaied toune, whiche shall continue for euer to set the poore people on worke: And to conclude I doe carie that minde, that with in fewe yeares, there will bee of these fishyng tounes of suche wealth, that they will cast Ditches aboute their Tounes, and walle the same defensiue against the Enemie, to garde them & their wealthe

in more saiftie. What Englishe man is he thinke you, that will not reioyce to see these things come to passe: And for my parte I perceiue nothing but good successe is like to come of this Platte. To further thesame I gaue a Copie hereof to my Lorde of Leicester, sixe yeares paste, one other copie to the Queenes Maiestie, fower yeares paste. Also to sundrie of her Maiesties priuie Councell certaine copies. And in the ende of the laste Parliament, holden in the saied eightene yeare of her Maiesties Raigne: I gaue twelue Copies to Councellors of the lawe, and other men of greate credite, hopyng that God would stirre vppe some good man to set out this woorke, whiche the Author (beyng a Soldiour, trained vp in the warres and not in scholles, with greate charges, and trauaile of mynde for his countrie sake) hath deuised and laied as a foundacion, for them that hath iudgement to buylde vppon. Amongest whome, Maister Leonerd Digges, (a proper Gentilman and a wise) had one Copie, who (being a Burgesse of the house) tooke occasion there vppon, to desire licence to speake his mynd, concerning this Plat, saieyng he spake for the common wealthe of all England, and for no priuate cause: He (by report) did so worthely frame his speach, for the common weale of his countrye: that he hath gained thereby, bothe fame and greate good likyng of all the hearers, and so concluded, desiryng that this deuice might be red, whiche for want of tyme, was deferred vntill their next assembly in Parliamēt.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
            
         
         
            
            
               
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  
                     THE FIRST TABLE
                     THE SECOND TABLE.
                     THE THIRD TABLE.
                     THE FOVRTH TABLE.
                  
                  
                     The order of borowyng lxxx. thousande pound for three yeres, not chargyng aboue xl. persones in any one Shire, to lende fiftie li. a man, of the lordes Bushops, Knightes, Gentlemen, Merchauntes, and other riche men, Spirituall and temporall, in these Shires folowyng: accomptyng London for a shire, all Southwales for a shire, and all North wales for a shire. And for that it is, for the commō weale, the twoo Parliament Knightes, and twoo Iustices of the peace of euery Shire, to name the parties in euery their Shires, that shall lende the maney: and appoint one sufficiēt man of good credite, in euery shire, to collect the same money, and then to deliuer it, to the chéef officers of euery the eight principall Port tounes in the next Table.
                     The cheef officers of euery of these eight principal Port tounes herevnder writtē, shall giue the seale of euery Port toune, for the assurance of euery seuerall sonnne borowed, to be repaied againe within iif, yeres at twoo paintentes. And with the saeid money to them deliuered: shall prouide I. fishyng ships redy furnished to the sea: accordyng to the true meanyng hereof. And deliuer them to the hauen tounes in the nexte table, as thei be there appointed, takyng bondes of euery the same hauen tounes, or fishyng tounes within their charge, for the paiment of Cl. l. for euery ship yerely duryng three yeres: with whiche paiment this Platte shall bee performed, and euery man well pleased, that shall take paines in the execution of the same Platte.
                     These ships must be placed within the roades and fishyng tounes▪ all a lòg the sea coastes, beginning at London, and cōpassyng this lande by sea, according to this table. The gouernors of euery fishing toune, must prouide one skilfull maister, xii. fisher men, or Mariners, and xii. poore men to serue in euery shipp, with all needefull thinges: and then set them to the sea to take fishe, for the profite of their toune, and the common weale. At whose returnes the gouernours afore saied shall see that the fishe of euery shippe be vsed, as is declared in the orders of this Platt. Out of whiche thei shall paie for euery ship yerely, duryng three yeres, Cl. li. to the cheef officers of that principall Porte toune, that placed the saied shippes, to these their Roades followyng.
                     The cheef officers of the said eight principall Port tounes, at Maie daie next after their first yeres receipte, shall yerely paie and discharge all fees and wages, with other paimentes in the orders more ar large mentioned, bothe of the money borowed, with the interest money, and for makyng of twoo Shippes of warre with their wages, as also to the saied eight Port tounes viij. M. l. to be a stocke for euer. And to the ende the poore people in all places maie spedely be releeued, thei shall (out of the firste yeres receipt) paie to the gouernours of v. decaied tounes in euery shire followyng one M. li. to bee a stocke of CC. li, to euery toune for euer, to sett the poore on woorke, Somme xlv. M. li. for CCxxv. decaied tounes, accordyng to this Table,
                  
                  
                     The money to be leuied.
                     The principall Portes.
                     Roades. Shippes.
                     Paimentes.
                     Paimentes by the cheef officers.
                  
                  
                     in
                     
                        
                           London.
                           Middlesex.
                           Hartforshire.
                           Cambridgeshire.
                           Huntyngtonshire.
                        
                     
                     x.iii.
                     whiche said sume vnder assurance muste bee deliuered vnto the chéef officers.
                     of London, whose seale, as aboue written, must be giuē vp the said cheef officers for the repaiement of the said somme to theim deliuered, whiche somme is,
                     
                        li. .iii.
                     wherewith the saied cheef officers muste prouide l. Fishyng Shipps of lxx. tunne the ship, and place them
                     at
                     
                        
                           
                              London. 5
                           
                              Stepney parishe.  5
                           
                               Grenewiche.  5
                           
                               Wolwiche.  5
                           
                               Anthe  5
                           
                               Grauesende.  5
                           
                               Quinborough  5
                           
                               Rochester  5
                           
                               Lee.  5
                           
                               Malden.  5
                        
                     
                     Euery Toune to paie for euery ship yerely, duryng three yeres, Cl. li. to the cheef officers of London, Somme.
                     
                     M. C. vii. v. l.
                     
                     of London, for fees fiue C. li. and to the decaied tounes in Middlesex one M, li. in Essex, one M. li. in Suffolke, a M. li. in Hartforshire, one M. li. in Cambridgeshire a M. l. in Huntingtonshire a M. l. in Norffeolk a M. l.
                     
                     M. C. vij. v. l.
                     
                  
                  
                     in
                     
                        
                           Essex.
                           Suffolke.
                           Norfolke
                           Bedfordshire.
                           Buckinghamshire.
                        
                     
                     
                        li x.iii.
                     whiche said sūme vnder assurance, muste bee deliuered vnto the chéef officers.
                     of Yarmouthe, whose seale as aboue written, muste bee given by the cheef officers, for the repaimente of the money to them deliuered, whiche somme is
                     
                        li. x.iii.
                     wherewith the saied cheef officers must prouide l. Fishyng Shipps of lxx. tunne the shipp and place them
                     at
                     
                        
                           
                              Colchester 5
                           
                              Harwiche 5
                           
                              Ipswiche. 5
                           
                              Dunidge 5
                           
                              Yarmoth. 5
                           
                              Orforde. 5
                           
                              Alborough. 5
                           
                              Blackney 5
                           
                              Dasyngham. 5
                           
                              Burnam. 5
                        
                     
                     Euery Toune to paie for euery ship yerely, dueryng three yeres, C l. li. to the cheef officers of Yarmouth, Somme.
                     
                     M. C. vij.v.l. 
                     
                     
                        Yarmouthe, for fees v. C. pounde, and for wages to twoo shippes of warre, for the first yere iiij. M. l. and for the makyng and furnishyng of ij. shipps of warre to the sea warlike iii. M. li.
                     
                     M. C. Vij. v. l.
                     
                  
                  
                     in
                      
                        
                            Yorkshire.
                            Ritchmondshire.
                            Lincolneshire.
                            Rutlandshire.
                            Lecestershire.
                        
                     
                     
                        li. x.iii.
                     whiche said sūme vnder assurance, must bee deliuered vnto the chéef officers.
                     of Hull, whose Seale as aboue written, must be giuen by the cheef officers, for the repaiment of the money theim deliuered, whiche sūme is
                     
                        li. x.iii.
                     wherewith the saied cheef officers must prouide l. Fishing shippes, of lxx. tunne the ship, and place them
                     at
                     
                        
                           
                              Welles 5
                           
                              Lynne 5
                           
                              Saltflete. 5
                           
                              Wansflete 5
                           
                              Boston. 5
                           
                              Grimsbie. 5
                           
                              Barton 5
                           
                              Hull. 5
                           
                              Beuerley. 5
                           
                              Yorke. 5
                        
                     
                     Euery Toune to paie for euery ship yerely, dueryng three yeres, Cl. li. to the Cheefe Officers of Hull, Somme.
                     
                     M. C. vij.v.l.
                     
                     of Hull, for fees v. C. li. and to the decaied tounes in Yorkeshire a M. l. in Ritchmondshire a M. l. in Lincolneshire a M, li, in Rutland shire a M. li, in Lecestershire a M, li, in Northampton shire a M, li, and in Warwickeshire one thousande pounde.
                     M. C. Vij. v. l.
                     
                  
                  
                     in
                        
                        
                           Northumberlande.
                           Cumberlande.
                           Westmerlande.
                           Bishopricke.
                           Darbishire.
                           Nottynghamshire.
                           Warwickeshire.
                           Northamptonshire.
                        
                     
                     
                        li. x. m.
                     whiche saide sūme vnder assurance, must be deliuered vnto the chéef officers.
                     of Newcastle, whose Seale, as aboue written, must bee giuen by the ché officers, for the repaimente of the money to theim deliuered, whiche fourme is,
                     
                        li. x. m.
                     wherewith the saied cheef officers must prouide l. Fishyng shippes, of lxx. tunne the ship, and place them
                     at
                     
                        
                           
                              Bridlyngton 5
                           
                              Whitbye 5
                           
                              Scarborough
                           
                           
                              Flamborough 5
                           
                              Hartlepoole 5
                           
                              Durham cū Sheelds. 5
                           
                              Newcastell. 5
                           
                              Tynmouth 5
                           
                              Holy Ilande 5
                           
                              Sarwicke 5
                        
                     
                      Euery Toune to paie for euery ship yerely, dueryng three yeres, Cl. li. to the Cheefe Officers of Newcastle.
                     
                     M. C. vii.v.l.
                     
                     of Newcastle, for fees v, C, L, to the decaied tounes in Northumberlande v. M. l. in Cūberlande a M.l. in Westmerlād a M.l. in Bishoprick a M.l. Nottingamshire a M.l. Darbishire a M.li. and in Lankashire a M,li.
                     M.C.vij.v.l.
                  
                  
                     in
                        
                        
                           Lankashire.
                           Cheshire.
                           Staffordshire.
                           Shropshire.
                           Worcestershire.
                           The sixe Shires in North Wales.
                        
                     
                     li. x m.
                     whiche said sūme vnder assurance, must be deliueered vnto the chéef officers.
                     of Westchester, whose Seale as aboue written, must be giuen by the cheef officers for the repaimente of the money to them deliuered, whiche somme is
                     li.x.m.
                     wherewith the saied cheef officers must prouide l. Fishing shippes, of lxx. tunne the ship, and place them
                     at
                        
                        
                           
                              Carlell 5
                           
                              Warkyngton. 5
                           
                              Ile of Man. 5
                           
                              Lyrpoole. 5
                           
                              Westchester 5
                           
                              Bewmarres 5
                           
                              Bangor 5
                           
                              Holly Hedde 5
                           
                              Carnaruan 5
                           
                              Punthelle 5
                        
                     
                     Euery Toune to paie for euery ship yerely, dueryng three yeres, Cl. li. to the Cheefe Officers of Westchester.
                     
                     M. C. vij.v.l.
                     of Westchester,, for fees v.C.l. to the decaied tounes in Chesshire, a M.li. in Northwales ij.M.li. and in Southwales ij.M.l. in Monmouthe shire a M.li. and in Herefordshire a M,li.
                     M.C.vij.v.l.
                  
                  
                     in
                        
                        
                           Somersetshire.
                           Herefordshire.
                           Glocestershire.
                           Monmouthshire.
                           The six Shires in South Wales.
                        
                     
                     li. x.iii.
                     which said sūme vnder assurance, must bee deliuered vnto the ché officers.
                     
                        Bristowe, whose Seale as aboue written, must be giuen by the cheef officers, for the repaimente of the money to them deliuered, which summe is
                     li. x.m.
                     wherewith the saied cheef officers must prouide l. Fishing shippes, of lxx. tunne the ship, and place them
                     at
                        
                        
                           
                              Glocester. 5
                           
                              Bristowe. 5
                           
                              Newporte. 4
                           
                              Bridgewater. 5
                           
                              Chipstowe. 5
                           
                              Cardiff. 5
                           
                              Penbroke. 5
                           
                              Hartforde 5
                           
                              Carmarden 5
                           
                              Padstowe 5
                        
                     
                     Euery Toune to paie for euery ship yerely, dueryng three yeres, Cl. li. to the Cheefe officers of Bristowe.
                     
                     M. C. viij.v.l.
                     of Bristowe, for Fees v.C.l. and to the decaied Tounes in Somersetshire a M.l. in Shropshire, a M. li. in Staffordshire M. li. And for the wages of twoo shippes of warre for the second yeres seruice iiii. thousande pounde.
                     M.C. vij.v.l.
                  
                  
                     in
                        
                        
                           Cornewall.
                           Deuonshire.
                           Dorcetershire.
                           Wiltshire.
                           Oxfordshire.
                        
                     
                     xi.x.m.
                     whiche said sum̄e vnder assurance, must bee deliuered vnto the cheé officers.
                     of Excester, whose Seale, as aboue written, must be giuen by the cheef officers, for the repaiemente of the money to them deliuered, whiche summe is
                      li. x.m.
                     wherewith the saied cheef officers must prouide l. Fishyng shippes, of lxx. tunne the ship, and place them
                     at
                        
                        
                           
                              Foye. 5
                           
                              Truro 5
                           
                              Melbroke 5
                           
                              Saltashe. 5
                           
                              Perin. 5
                           
                              Sawkom. 5
                           
                              Excester. 5
                           
                              Plimmouthe. 5
                           
                              Dartemouth. 5
                           
                              Poole. 5
                        
                     
                     Euery Toune to paie for euery ship yerely, dueryng three yeres, Cl. li. to the Cheefe Officers of Excester.
                     
                     M: C. vij.v.l.
                     of Excester, for fees v. C. li. and to the decaied tounes in Cornwall a M.li. in Deuonshire a M.l. in Wiltshire a M.l. in Oxfordshire a M.l. in Glocestershire a M.l. in Worcestershire a M.li. and in Docestershire a M.li.
                     M. C. vij.v.l.
                  
                  
                     in
                        
                        
                           Hampshire.
                           Barckeshire.
                           Surrie.
                           Sussex.
                           Kent.
                        
                     
                     li. x.m.
                     shiche said sūme vnder assurance, must bee deliuered vnto the chéef officers.
                     of Southampton, whose Seale, as aboue written, must be giuen by the cheef officers, for the repaimente of the money to them deliuered, which somme is
                     li. x.m.
                     wherewith the saied cheef officers must prouide l. Fishyng shippes, of lxx. tunne the ship, and place them
                     at
                        
                        
                           
                              Lyne. 5
                           
                              Waimouthe. 5
                           
                              Newport. 5
                           
                              Southampton 5
                           
                              Portesmouthe 5
                           
                              Checester 5
                           
                              Rye. 5
                           
                              Douer 5
                           
                              Feuersam 5
                           
                              Sandwiche 5
                        
                     
                     Euery Toune to paie for euery ship yerely, dueryng three yeres Cl. li. to the cheef Officers of Southhampton.
                     
                     M.C. vij.v.l.
                     of Southampton, for fees v. C.li. to the decaied tounes in Hampshire a M.li. in Sussex a M.l. in Kent a M.l. in Surrie a M.li. in Barkeshire a M.li. in Buckinghamshire, a M.l. and in Bedfordshire a M.li. Somme.
                     
                     M.C.vij.v.l.
                  
                  
                      
                     
                        Somme paied by the cheef officers the firste yere lx.M.li. With the seconde yeres recipt, the cheef officers of the said eight principll Port tounes whall discharge and paie all fees and wages, as be forsaid-for the second yere, which is iiij.M.li. And also shall make paiemente of the one half of the money borowed, whiche is xl.M.l. And for the interest mony of the whole sōme borowed for twoo yeres xvi.M.li.
                      
                  
                  
                      
                     
                        Somme of the paiments the second yere lx.M.l. And the saied cheef officers with the third yeres receipt, in like maner aforsaid, shall discharge & paie all fees and wages of the third yere, which is iiij M.l. & the wages of the ij. ships of warre for the same yere, which is also iiij. M.l. And like wise thei shall paie the other halfe of the money borowed, whiche is xl.M.l. and iiij.M.li. for the interest money for that third yere. And also one M.ll. to euery one of the eight principall Porte Tounes, to bee a stocke for euer. All whiche in the orders more at large doeth appeare.
                      
                  
                  
                     Shires xliiiij.
                     Somme collected lsss.M.li.
                     Portes viij.
                     Shippes to bee made iiij.c.
                     Roades lxxx.
                     Somme yerely lx.M.li.
                     Somme of the third yeres paimentes lx. M. l.
                  
               
            
         
      
   