
      
         
            
            
            THE HOLIE HISTORIE OF OVR LORD AND SAVIOVR Ieſus Chriſt natiuitie, life, actes, miracles, doctrine, death, paſſion, reſurrection and aſcenſion: Gathered into Engliſh meeter, and publiſhed to withdraw vaine wits from all vnſauerie and wicked rimes and fables, to ſome loue and liking of ſpirituall ſongs and holy Scriptures.
            
            By ROBERT HOLLAND maiſter of Arts, and Miniſter of the Church of Prendergaſt.
            
               Be filled with the ſpirit, ſpeaking to your ſelues in Pſalmes and hymnes and ſpirituall ſongs, ſinging and making melodie to the Lord in your hearts.
               Epheſ. 5.18.
            
            
            LONDON, Printed by George Tobie, 1594.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL, MISTRES ANNE PHILIPS OF PICTON, R. H. wiſheth increaſe of worſhip, continuance of godlineſſe, and health in Chriſt Ieſus.
            
               AS the higheſt tides haue their falles and ebbes, & after greateſt tēpeſts and darkeſt dayes, the ſunne ſhineth: ſo fareth it with me, (right Worſhipfull) it pleaſed God the author of all goodneſſe (when I had bene foure yeares or more toſſed with ſundrie troubles & aduerſities able euerie way to oppreſſe me, had not the ſame mightie Iehouah, Iacobs God,
                  Exod. 2
                     •
                  
                  ▪ 
                  
                     ••
                  . Leuit. 
                  
                     ••
                  .12. Pſal. 50.14. Pſal. 116.1. the hope and ſtrength of Iſrael (who by the mouth of his holy Prophet hath willed all men in their troubles to call vpon him, promiſing euen then to deliuer them) ſo ſtirred vp and opened the harts of my worſhipful good friends,

               
                  •
               o fauor my innocencie & to releeue my caſe, to Gods holy name be all praiſe, honor and glorie for it,) to graunt me at length a breathing time after my trauels, yet intermingled with remembrances of my former miſeries, & with ſpeciall warnings of the Lord: all which I moſt ioyfully receiue, and with my hart embrace, conſidering,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 12.5.6. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 3.11.12. 
                     
                        •
                     u. 3.19. that he correcteth whom he loueth: and that the race of my youth was ſo vnaduiſedly run, that I haue merited much more grieuous puniſhment for it. In which time of reſt (if I may terme it a reſt that we enioy while we remaine here in this world) I haue beſtowed ſuch vacant time as my neceſſarie buſineſſe letted not, in penning the whole hiſtory of Chriſt our Sauiour plainly & as I could, according to my ſimple capacitie and knowledge in Engliſh me
                  •
               ter, to be applied to the tunes of ſundrie of Dauids Pſalmes: following therein the foure Euangeliſts, diſſenting from them in nothing, though in the diſpoſing of Chriſt his acts and doctrins (as neare as I could) to their proper places, and as they were done in order of time, I follow other directions. Which worke (howſoeuer) to Gods glorie I hope, I haue finiſhed, and

for two eſpeciall cauſes haue determined (though the workmanſhip be but as it were rough hewen, yet in reſpect of the matter that is ſo worthie) to dedicate the firſt fruits of my labors vnder your worſhips name.
            The firſt is, your godly zeale and forward affection to the hearing & reading of Gods word, much like that noble Romane Caecilia, which let no day paſſe without reading ſome parte of Gods booke, and euer caried about her, whither ſoeuer ſhe went (the 
                  Rom. 10.17. Deut. 6.6. Cap. 11.18. Luc. 1
                     •
                  .26. Io
                        •
                     . 5.39. Act. 17.11. touchſtone of our faith) the new Teſtament, which rare vertues of her minde much more adorned and beautified her, then either her birth, though borne of honorable parentage, or her attire how coſtly ſo euer. The booke of God is in deed to be eſteemed of greater value then all other iewels: in it is the heauenly manna, that 
                  Ioh. 6.48. Cap. 4.14. Cap 7.38. bread of life, and the waters whereof whoſoeuer drinketh ſhall neuer thirſt, offred vs: in it is the 
                  Ioh. 14.6.way, the truth, and the life taught vs, and by this way onely haue we acceſſe vnto the Father.Homer. Odyſſ. lib. 12.
                The Poets faigne that Vlyſſes ſayling betweene Italie and Sicilie, was driuen to ſtop the eares of his companie with wax,

and to be bound him ſelfe to the maſt of his ſhip, leaſt by hearing the ſongs and ſweete melodie of the Syren that lay in his way, he and his ſhould f
                  •
               ll into their danger: but whoſoeuer ſa
                  •
               leth in this ſhip, may ſafely vnbound, and with open eares, paſſe by all the Syrens of Italie at this day, which exceed (I dare auouch it) for number and craft, an hundred to one that all Italie and Sicilie affoorded in the dayes of Vlyſſ
                     •
                  s. In the booke of God is the true and beſt triacle found, which deliuereth the receauer from the poyſoned cup of that great Circe the Biſhop of Rome,
                  Reue. 
                  
                     •
                  8.3▪ 
                  Mar. 16.18. who hath infected ſo many thouſands, and transformed them into ſwine: in it is that notable whore of Babylon, ſitting on a ſcarlet coloured beaſt full of names of blaſphemy,
                  Reuel. 17 3. with ſeuen heads & ten hornes, notably deſcribed: frō whoſe fornications the Lord deliuer vs. While your Worſhip doth (as that kingly prophet Dauid did) exerciſe your ſelfe in the ſame booke of the lawe of the Lord day and night,
                  Pſal. 1.2. Pſal▪
                   119. Ioſhua 1.8. you ſhall eaſily perceiue that vaine and wicked are the traſh and trumperies that Rome doth offer vs, the which I know and can iuſtly report, that with all your heart you vtterly abhorre them:

which gift of grace as God hath begun in you for your good, ſo I beſeech him to continue the ſame to his glorie. In the booke of God you ſhall ſee that 
                  Rom. 1.20. Cap. 10.18. Pſal. 19.4. Wiſd. 13. ignorance (which the Romaniſts do accompt the mother of deuotion) can not excuſe them: that deuotion without knowledge is dotage, and knowledge without vertue oſtentation. And therein you ſhall ſee and find it indeede, that 
                  Pſal. 97.7. Exod 20.3. Iohn 14.13. Cap. 16.23. Matth. 7.7. Reu. 19.10. Cap. 22.9. to pray to Angels or Saints, or for the dead (which they make no ſmall point of their religion) is plaine ſuperſtition, and their counterfet holineſſe hypocriſie.
            Nouelties in theſe dayes delight daintie eares, and fine filed phraſes ſo fit ſome fantacies, that no booke except it abound with the one or th'other, or both of theſe, is brookt of them. Some reade Gaſcoine, ſome Gueuar
                     •
                  , ſome praiſe the Pallace of pleaſure, and the like whereon they beſtow whole dayes, yea ſome whole moneths and yeares, that ſcarce beſtow one minute on the Bible, albeit the booke of God. And no maruell though hypocritical Papiſts delight in anie other booke rather then the Bible, ſeeing that this (as the Sunne ſcorcheth the naked Ethiopians skin) ſo grieueth the galled conſciences

of ſome that whē it diſcouereth their diſſembling, they neuer leaue kicking while any Chriſtian is in their company. Other there be that are more mild, who for feare their offices ſhould flie, or their liuings be loſt, haue learned ſuch conformitie, that they can diſſemble with deare friends in deepe points of religion, and ſeeme outwardly that which inwardly in heart they vtterly abhor: theſe ſnakes are moſt venimous when they caſt their old skins. Are not they groſſe, & drunke with the dregges of their ſuperſtition, that dare vtter this blaſphemie againſt God and his word (to terrifie and withdraw as much as they may, the well meaning man from ſo godly and comfortable an exerciſe) that it is dangerous for the vnlearned to reade the Bible? If they would conſideratiuely wai
                  •
               h what great and grieuous puniſhment the Lord layd on Sennacherib king or Aſſyria,2 King. 18.30. Eſay. 37.1. 1. Mac. 7.43. Leuit. 24.11. 
               Nicanor and others, for blaſpheming his name, they would not ſo raſhly do the like. If their forefathers had conſidered that the word of God is a ſea,
                  Ezec. 47.1. wherein both the elephant may ſwimme and the lambe may wade, the greateſt Doctour may dayly learne in, and the ſimpleſt man may cō
               continually

haue comfort; and that in the ſame there is a ſoueraigne ſalue for euery ſore, they would not (as I thinke) haue forbidden the reading of Gods booke, & in ſtead thereof commaunded to be read (yea and that openly in churches) the legend of lyes, rather then liues of Saints: not vnlike in moſt places, for method & matter, to the monſtrous fables of Garragantua, Huon of Burdeaux, & the like.
            Whoſoeuer will (as Iſaac) continually meditate on Gods booke,
                  Gen. 24.63. he ſhal as Dauid ſaith, find it a lanterne to his feet,
                  Pſal. 119. and a light to his paths: yea Gods word will be in his mouth ſweeter then honie and the hony combe. When I perceiued how deſirous your Worſhip was, to heare & reade Gods word, it greatly moued me to write this booke, perſwading my ſelfe that it will be to you and all the godly, a recreatiō, to apply ſome part of this heauenly hiſtorie of Chriſt our Sauiour to the tune of one of the Pſalmes of Dauid, that being (as S. Paule aduiſeth all men) filled with the ſpirit of God, you may ſtil be ſpeaking vnto your ſelf in Pſalmes & hymnes and ſpiritual ſongs,
                  Epheſ. 5.18. ſinging and making melodie vnto the Lord in your heart, and giuing thanks alwayes for all

things vnto God euen the Father, in the name of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
            The ſecond reaſon that moued me to take this worke in hand (beſides the hope that I haue thereby to benefit many, and eſpecially ſuch as haue delight to be reading and ſinging of Ballades and other Engliſh meeters, by giuing them better matter to reade and ſing, then ſuch commonly do yeeld vnto them) is to ſignifie in ſome part, my gratefulneſſe to God and your Worſhip, for the manifold benefites and fauours that I and mine haue receiued at your hands: to God (I ſay) firſt, as the author, and your ſelfe the inſtrumēt that he hath vſed to do me much good. For if God had not opened your heart,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 16.14. as he did the heart of Lydia to heare the preaching of S. Paule, you had not regarded my miſerie. And therfore with Dauid I will as long as I liue receiue the cup of ſaluation,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ſal. 116.12. and call vpon the name of the Lord: for as nothing pleaſeth God more then thankfulneſſe, ſo nothing can diſpleaſe God and man more then vngratefulneſſe. But leſt ſome Sicophant ſhould (ſeeking to deface my good meaning) note or charge me with adulation, I will rather paſſe ouer the ſundrie and

daily benefites I haue and do receiue by your Worſhips meanes, with this ſlight remembrance of them, thē giue him anie ſuch-aduantage, or the leaſt occaſion to carpe at the ſame. But if any of Momus mates miſlike with my doings, either in this or the reſt of my booke, (ſo that the godly & well diſpoſed, & of them chiefly your Worſhip, to whom I offer my book and my ſelfe to be patronized and defended, do like and allow of it) I eſteeme not his detractions but as trifles, and his floutes as follies, and therefore let him content himſelf with this anſwer, I tooke not this trauel for his ſake. And thus deſiring your Worſhip to accept in good part this my humble dutie and remembrance of you, as glad by this meanes to impart the effect of my affection towards you, as the widow was by two mites to manifeſt her good meaning to the treaſurie, I beſeech Almightie God to bleſſe you and all yours with continuall and daily increaſe of the riches of his graces & gifts, that you may euer go forward from faith to faith, readie with all your endeuours to maintaine the quarell of Chriſt and his Church, vntill you bee

ſummoned to raigne with him in glorie without end. Amen.
            From Prendergaſt the firſt day of Auguſt, 1594.
            
               
                  Your Worſhips in all dutie, Robert Holland.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE GODLY and Chriſtian Reader.
            
               GEntle Reader, I thinke my labour well beſtowed if the ſame may benefite any, and my reward ſufficient, if the godly like and allowe of my booke. I muſt confeſſe, and do, that this worke would haue required one of greater reading and of farre deeper iudgement then my ſelfe to vndertake it: neither can I any way make thee amends for my raſhneſſe herein, vnleſſe thou accept of my good will, for the recompence.
            Many will miſlike with it, becauſe it is in meeter (Beza. Georg. Fabr
                     •
                   hiſt. de nat. pa
                     •
                   & reſur. Chr
                     •
                   carmina. Barthol. Freu
                     •
                   celij od. ſacra
                     •
                   lib. 3. de inca
                     •
                   reb. geſtis, & 
                     〈◊〉
                   Chriſti. Witt
                     •
                   berg. an. 159
                     •
                   1. Cor. 2.2. though ſundrie haue done the like in Latine verſe:) and many with the meeter, becauſe it is rudely handled. The firſt I hope will excuſe me, if they conſider that I ſeeke not herein to ſet foorth my ſelfe to the ſhew, but as much as I may to win if not many, yet ſome, to know Chriſt Ieſus crucified. Although this hiſtorie is ſo briefe and plaine in the writings of the foure Euangelistes, as no mortall man may preſume to amend it: and that many worthy and famous men, both

for their learning and knowledge, haue in ſundrie languages commented at large, and made verie godly and profitable expoſitions vpon the ſame: yet hath it not wonne all men to ſuch liking thereof, that they can affoord much time to reade the one or the other. If I may any way ſatisfie ſuch, and hereby draw them to ſauour of the Sauiour, our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, I ſhall thinke my time well spent, and my ſelfe not deceiued of my deſire. Which reckening of mine if it be allowed for good payment of my godly hoſteſſe, I meane the Chriſtian congregation and church of God: there ſhall none of the children of Belial, the brood of darkneſſe, driue me to anie new accompts. I care not who carpe at it, ſo that Chriſt may be glorified by it, and the Chriſtian and godly Reader ſatisfied with it: to whoſe cenſure I ſubmit it and my ſelfe, humbly deſiring the learned with fauour to find out all faults, & charitably to amend where I haue miſt. Farewell.
            
               
                  Thine in the Lord Ieſus, R. Holland.
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  〈…〉
                Chronographiam carmen.
            HEſperiae vaſto nox (proh dolor) incubatorbi,
            Veſanos magica faſcinat arte viros:
            Integer inſano diuiſus orbe Britannus
            Sublimi tuitur ſydera fronte poli:
            Syderis aetherij vulgo ſpeculantur ouantes
            Ortum, ſanati coelica verba libri:
            Coſmicus, haud obitum metuens, hic ſyderis ortus
            Nubeculas Papae, ſcripta nefanda, fugat.
            Nec radijs rutilae tantum calet Anglia ſtellae:
            Sed calet haec gemini terra ſub axe poli:
            Haec pluuialis Hyas, aeterni ſermo Iehouae,
            Viuifico cunctos irrigat imbre pios.
            Paſſim ſacrorum ſacrata volumina vatum
            Lingua profert genti conſona quae
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ſuae.
            Anglus at errantes ſtellas videt orbe cadentes,
            Infoelix Babylon ſtella maligna ruit:
            Et coniuratos coelum affectare gygantes
            Deſerit Almannus, Gallus, & Anglus atrox,
            Anglus & aeternas cernit ſtellas Orientes,
            Anglica ſtella nitet regia, Sermo Dei,
            At chronicus clari ſpectandus ſyderis ortus,
            Hollandi Chronicon, carmine ſcripta ſalus:
            Ardua molitur, laeto canit acta triumpho
            Prototoci Mariae, tempore quae
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ſuo:
            Ortum decantat, vitam, tunc funera Chriſti:
            Cum petijt coelos victor, & ordo docet.
            Ergo manent Hollande tibi coeleſtia ſerta,
            Carpere námque Theon, nullus obeſſe, queat.
            
               H. Smartus Oxonienſis.
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  〈…〉
                of the Author.
            IF Maro who did treate of Mars,
            And Lucan ciuill warres,
            If Naſo for his wanton verſe,
            And change of men to ſtars,
            Poſſeſt great praiſe and endleſſe fame,
            What then deſerueth he,
            That treats of him who brought vs bliſſe,
            And bond did make vs free?
            Whoſe life he lou'd not as our health,
            And vs transforms to Angels wealth.
            Lo let his praiſe the braſen poſts
            And Pyramis outweare,
            Nor let not Momus canckred tooth,
            The worke praiſe worthie teare:
            But as the Phoenix ſhall it liue,
            Though birth renuing new:
            And as the fire which waterie thorns,
            And greene wood doth ſubdue,
            Doth flame at length: ſo maugre ſpite,
            It flouriſh ſhall to goods delight.
         
         
            Io. Pine in eiuſdem.
            LEt fame take now her flight,
            From place to place, and ſay,
            That if men looke to find aright,
            To life a readie way,
            Or ſeeke the ſou'raigne pearle,
            That farre ſurpaſſeth gold,
            They may herein find either well,
            Sent free to them, not ſold.
            Let him in lue of paine,
            Reape this reward therefore,
            That giues what wit (not wealth) did gaine,
            A name for euermore.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE FIRST PART OF THE HISTORIE OF CHRIST OVR SAVIOVR, AS IT IS WRITTEN BY the Euangeliſts Mathew, Marke, Luke and Iohn.
            Written in Engliſh meeter by R. H.
            to the tune of the Pſal. 81.
            
               The promiſed Meſſiah.
               
                  
                     BE light, and glad, in God reioyce,
                        Pſal. 81.1.
                  
                  Which is our ſtrength and ſtay,
                  Confeſſe alſo with heart and voyce,
                        Gen. 3.15. & 12.3. & 28.14▪ 
                        Act. 3.25. Ga. 3.8. Num. 24.17. Eſay. 40.9.
                  
                  His goodneſſe eu'rie way:
                  Whoſe promiſe to the Patriarks paſt
                  So oft, and long before,
                  God hath performed at the laſt;
                  To him be praiſe therefore.
               
               
                  His word into the world he ſent,
                        Ioh. 1.1.3.10. Coloſ. 1.16. Hebr. 11.3.
                  
                  By whom he made the ſame:
                  Who vs to ſaue, (as then was meant)
                  A perfect man became▪
                  
                  Chriſt is that light, that lightneth all,
                        Iohn 1.9. Mat. 4.1. mar. 1.12. luc 
                        
                           •
                        . 1. cor. 15.
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                     
                  
                  That in the world do dwell:
                  Of him the deu'll had a fall;
                  He hath vs freed from h
                        •
                     ll.
               
            
            
               
               The Angell Gabriell ſaluteth the virgine Marie.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           uc. 1.26.27.To Naz'reth Gabriell came from God,
                  A towne in Galilie:
                  Sixe monethes after, (and no odd,)
                  He ſpoke to Zacharie.
                  To bleſſed Marie, then he went,
                  A mayde and virgine pure:
                  And ſaid (all haile) to thee is meant,
                  Much happineſſe be ſure.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Luc. 1.31. Math. 1.21. Eſay. 7.14.The Lord thy God, hath thought it good,
                  That thou ſhalt beare his ſonne:
                  Which when ſhe heard and vnderſtood,
                  She ſaid his will be donne.
                  I nothing doubt what thou haſt ſaid,
                  But do the ſame beleeue:
                  No fond conceipt ſhall cauſe men feare,
                  All thankes to God I geue.
               
            
            
               Marie viſiteth her coſin Elizabeth.
               
                  
                     Luc. 1.39.When he was gone from her away,
               Moſt ioyfull, and moſt glad
               The virg
                     ••
                   was, to ſee that day,
               And h
                     ••
                  e the newes ſhe had.
               Straightway ſhe thence went haſtily,
               Her coſin for to ſee:
               They did reioyce moſt hartily,
               Such mothers both to bee.
            
            
               Ioſeph diſpoſed to leaue Marie, was ſatisfied by an Angell, and ſo tooke her.
               
                  
                     Math. 1.19. Deu. 24.1.But this amazed Ioſephs minde.
               That was a man ſo iuſt:
               He thought his ſpouſe had bene vnkind,
               And had abus'd his truſt.
               
                  Yet when he meant to ſhift away
               With her, his worldly ſhame:
               An Angell warnde him where he lay,
               And then he tooke the dame.
            
            
               The taxing of the world vnder Aug. Caeſar.
               
                  And in Auguſtus Caeſars raigne,
                        Luc. 2.1.
                  
                  When all the world ſo wide,
                  He ſo commanding, this is plaine,
                  Was taxt on eu'ry ſide.
                  Cirenius ouer Syria,
                  Was gouernour alſo:
                  When to be taxt in Iudea,
                  They thither both did go.Ioſeph and Marie.
                  
               
               
                  With Marie, his eſpouſed wife,
                        Luc. 2.
                           •
                        . Math. 2.6. Ioh. 7.42. Micah. 5.2.
                  
                  From Nazareth he came:
                  To Bethlehem; to lead his life,
                  To anſwere to the ſame.
                  Of Dauids houſe and line they weare,
                  And therefore thought it good:
                  Among all ſuch their taxe to beare,
                  As were of Dauids blood.
               
            
            
               The birth of Chriſt in Bethlehem.
               
                  While they were there her dayes were donne,Luc. 2.6. An. mundi. 4142. An. Aug. Caeſar. 42. An. Herod. Ant. 33. Chriſtus natus.
                  
                  Her child-bearing did hye:
                  So ſhe brought forth, and bare a ſonne;
                  Such was their pouertie,
                  A ſtable roome they onely had,
                  This heau'nly babe to lay:
                  Whoſe birth hath made ſo many glad,
                  Within a cratch of hay.
               
               
                  His clothes were clouts, they wrapt him in,
                  And layd in cratch he was:
                  
                     Although his weedes were very thin,
                  Betweene an Oxe and Aſſe.
                  Thus poorely came our mighty king,
                  into the world ſo vaine:
                  Without all pompe, our prince did bring
                  His people out of paine.
               
               
                  Chriſt, our Meſſiah, God and man,
                  Borne of a virgin pure,
                  Contented (though no princes can,
                  Such pouertie endure:)
                  For kingly court, with ſtable was,
                  For bed of Downe, with hay:
                  A while in manger by an Aſſe,
                  The king of kings he lay.
               
            
            
               An Angell declareth to the ſheapheards the birth of Chriſt, and they are made witneſſes of it.
               
                  
                     
                        Luc. 2.8.His birth the Lord did firſt bewray,
                  To ſhepheards poore and baſe:
                  Which day and night in field did ſtay,
                  Their flocke of ſheepe to graſe.
                  An Angell came moſt gloriouſlie,
                  Vnto thoſe ſilly men,
                  Saluting them, (though gratiouſlie)
                  Yet were they fearefull then.
               
               
                  Let not your mindes be ſo affraid,
                  For tidings of great ioy
                  I bring to you: the Angell ſaid,
                  Nothing ſhall you annoy.
                  All people may reioyce at this,
                  And praiſe their God for aye:
                  For Chriſt the Lord is borne iwis,
                  in Bethlehem this day.
                  
                     And this (as ſigne) you ſhall eſpie,
                  The ſauiour ſhall be laid,
                  All ſwadled, in a cratch to lie,
                  In pooreſt ſort araid.
                  Diſdaine not you his pouertie,
                  The Sauiour is the ſame;
                  He will his ſaue moſt certainly,
                  From euerlaſting blame.
               
               
                  Then with the Angell ſtraightway were,
                  A multitude ſurely:
                  Of heauenly ſouldiours, praiſing there
                  One God in trinitie.
                  All glorie be to God on high,
                  And in the earth be peace,
                  And towards men continually,
                  Good will may ſtill increaſe.
               
               
                  So when the Angels all were gone,
                  To heau'n melodiouſlie:
                  The ſhepheards of their newes anone
                  Would trie the veritie.
                  They went, and ſaw what they had heard,
                  And publiſhed the ſame:
                  All wondred at what they declarde,
                  Though few beleeu'd the fame.
               
               
                  They praiſing God, not now affraid,
                  Did thence againe depart:
                  But Marie kept what they had ſaid,
                  And pond
                        •
                     ed in her heart.Euſeb. lib. 1. ca. 4. probat Chr. regem, ſacerd. & propheta
                           •
                         eſſe.
                  
                  For ſhe brought foorth the Lord, the Prince,
                  The prophet, and the prieſt:
                  That did the diuell, and death conuince,
                  Our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt.
               
            
            
               
               The Circumciſion of Chriſt.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        uc. 2.21.When eight dayes were accompliſhed,
               Becauſe they ſtood in awe:
               The child was then Circumciſed,
               According to the law.
               Then Ieſus was he calde by name,
               His friends ordaining ſo:
               Becauſe the Angell will'd the ſame,
               To Ioſeph long ago.
            
            
               The wiſemen, the firſt fruite of the Gentiles, came from the Eaſt and worſhipped Chriſt.
               
                  
                     Math. 2.1. L. Codomānus. Epipha. & alij dicunt magos Chr. adorauiſſe 12. die poſt eius natiuitatem.Next, after this came from the Eaſt,
                  The wiſemen by a ſtarre:
                  To ſee this babe; for euer bleaſt,
                  The wiſemen came ſo farre.
                  In Herods dayes theſe wiſemen came,
                  And asked (him) this thing:
                  We ſaw his ſtarre, yet heard no fame,
                  Of Chriſt your Prince and King.
               
               
                  
                     Babilonij & Perſae magos: Graeci Philoſophos: Indi, Brachmenas: Aegiptij gymnoſophi. Iudaei Prophetas homines doctos & ſapientes vocant.Where is he borne? that we may ſee,
                  And worſhip him they ſay?
                  King Herod, what is knowne to thee,
                  Declare without delay.
                  This troubled all Hieruſalem,
                  (as it had done the King:)
                  Yet many knew in Bethlehem,
                  Should be this child-bearing.
               
               
                  But Herod fearing his eſtate,
                  So doubtfull to endure:
                  Did of this matter much debate,
                  His Crowne it was not ſure.
                  Therefore, he ſent the men away,
                  To ſearch where Chriſt ſhould be:
                  
                     That Chriſt (ſaith he) without delay,
                  May worſhip't be by me.
               
               
                  Now as the chiefe Prieſts, Scribes, and reſt,
                  Had therein taught to them:
                  The wiſemen ſo were ready preſt,
                  To go to Bethlehem,
                  Yet warned by the king they were,
                  To make returne againe:
                  Thereby he thought, to end his feare,
                  When he the child had ſlaine.
               
               
                  So they depart, and loe the ſtarre,
                  Which they had ſeene before:
                  (By which they had now iourneyd farre,
                  And were to trauaile more,)
                  Did ſtill direct them in their way,
                  Each day by day and night,
                  Till they had ſeene (it did not ſtray,)
                  The onely Lord of might.
               
               
                  Whom, when they found, they fell downe flat,
                  To worſhip him, and theſe
                  Gaue to him treaſures, each one what
                  Each one of them did pleaſe.
                  Or as their countrey yeelded then,
                  They vnto him did bring
                  Gold, incenſe, mirrhe: thoſe ſage wiſemen,
                  Did offer to that king.
               
               
                  And ſo being warned in a night,
                  (For God an Angell ſent)
                  Another way with all their might,
                  They to their countrey went.
                  Then they perceiu'd, that Herods drifts,
                  Was onely him to ſlay:
                  
                     Whom they adored with their gifts,
                  Therfore they went their way.
               
            
            
               Chriſt was preſented in the temple at Ieruſalem: where Simeon and Anna witneſſed of him. Marie purified according to the law.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           c. 2.22. 
                           
                              •
                           uit. 12.6.When Maries daies were finiſhed,
                  Full thirtie daies and three:
                  She afterward was purified,
                  As women wont to be.
                  And then the child they did preſent,
                  Meekely before the Lord:
                  For to Ieruſalem then went,
                  His friends with one accord.
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           uc. 2.23. 
                           
                              •
                           xod. 13 2. 
                           
                              •
                           euit. 12.8.This was a law they did obſerue,
                  The firſt that opened
                  The mothers wombe; they did reſerue
                  To God as hallowed.
                  And offer'd an oblation,
                  Of turtle Doues a paire,
                  Or pigeons young: this portion
                  They would not ſure appaire.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Luc. 2.25.Then Simeon ſurnamed iuſt,
                  That long had liued there:
                  For Iſraels comfort he did truſt,
                  He liu'd of God in feare.
                  The holy Ghoſt him this foretold,
                  No death ſhall dint on thee,
                  The Lord his Chriſt (though thou art old)
                  Before thou ſurely ſee.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Luc. 2.27.He then into the temple came,
                  When Ieſus there was brought:
                  And ſpeaking plainly of the ſame,
                  
                     As in his minde he thought,
                  Said, Lord, now letteſt thou in peace,
                  Thy ſeruaunt to depart:
                  According to thy promiſe, eaſe
                  Is hapned to my hart.
               
               
                  For with mine eyes, I ſure haue ſeene,
                  Saluation ſent by thee:
                  And in mine armes, thy ſonne hath beene,
                  That workes the ſame for me.
                  Him thou prepared hadſt before,
                  To be the Gentiles light:
                  And eke to Iſraell euer more,
                  Their glory and their might.
               
               
                  Then Ioſeph and his mother milde
                  Did maruaile much, to heare
                  The wordes he ſpake there of the child,
                  And pondred them with feare.
                  Yet Simeon bleſſing them, could ſay,
                        Luc. 2.34. Pſal. 118.22. Eſay. 8.14. Cap. 28.16. Math. 21.42. Act. 4.11. Rom. 9.33. 1. Pet. 2.7.
                  
                  Oh Marie be content,
                  This fall to many, is the ſtay,
                  To Iſraell was meant.
               
               
                  Old Anna was a Propheteſſe,
                  Which prayed day and night:
                  This likewiſe did the child confeſſe,
                  To be the Gentiles light.
                  She came by chance, the ſame to ſee,
                        Luc. 2.36.
                  
                  That ſhe ſo much deſirde,
                  The rites, performed orderly,
                  They home-wardes all retir'de.
               
            
            
               Ioſeph warned of an Angell flieth into Egipt.
               
                  After all this; was Ioſeph warnde,
                        Math. 2.13, Hoſea. 11.1.
                  
                  That he ſhould take the child,
                  
                     And mother; then, all three vnharmde,
                  Leaſt they ſhould be beguilde.
                  For Herod, as the Angell ſaid,
                  Would ſeeke to take his life:
                  Wherefore to Egipt all affrayd,
                  Went Ioſeph and his wife.
               
            
            
               The infants ſlayne.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 2.16.Herod (as mockt) did take a ſcorne,
                  And in his angrie moode,
                  Slue infants all in Bethlehem borne,
                  And ſpilt their guiltleſſe blood.
                  The children there of two yeares old,
                  Or vnder as they were;
                  He ſlue them all; his act was bold,
                  It wanted grace and feare.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 2.18. 
                           
                              •
                           erem. 31.15.This act was foretold long before,
                  In Ieremie we reade,
                  That Rachell ſhe ſhould ſo deplore,
                  Her children being dead.
                  Which was accompliſhed in deed,
                  By Herod in his ire:
                  Who made ſo many infants bleed,
                  Yet miſt of his deſire.
               
               
                  For Chriſt was gone from thence away,
                  To Egipt to remaine:
                  Whence he till Herods dying day,
                  Did not returne againe.
                  That it which earſt the Prophet ſaid,
                  Might certainly be donne:
                  
                     
                        Hoſea. 11.1. Math. 2.15.I out of Egipt vnaffrayd,
                  Haue called backe my ſonne.
               
            
            
               
               Ioſeph warned againe by an Angell, returneth out of Egipt, after the death of Herod.
               
                  When Chriſt was now full fiue yeares old,Math. 2.19. Epiphan. ſupp
                           •
                        
                        ſeth that Chr
                           •
                         was 6. yeare
                           •
                         old at his returne out of 
                           •
                        
                        gipt: other thinke but fiu
                           •
                         becauſe he w
                           •
                         but 3. going 
                           〈◊〉
                         ſtaid there tw
                           •
                         Math. 2.20.
                     
                  
                  And had in Egipt beene
                  Two yeares or more, as authors hold,
                  The Angell there was ſeene,
                  To warne Ioſephus thence to come,
                  Againe to Iſraell:
                  And bring his wife, and ſonne, (as ſome
                  Suppoſed) there to dwell.
               
               
                  For now they were both dead and gone,
                  That ſought the child his life:
                  Then he and his ſuppoſed ſonne
                  Returned and his wife.
                  But Archelaus Herods ſonne,
                  That held his fathers place,
                  Made Ioſeph thinke they were vndonne,
                  He doubted of his grace.
               
               
                  He went and turned then aſide,
                  Another part vnto,
                  Of Galilie; there to abide,
                        Math. 2.23.
                  
                  As he was wild to do.
                  In Nazareth he did remaine,
                  That it might come to paſſe:
                  What earſt the Prophets verie plaine
                  Foretold: and ſo it was.
               
            
            
               Ieſus being twelue yeares old diſputeth with the elders in the Temple at Ieruſalem.
               
                  His parents yeare by yeare they went,
                        Luc. 2 41. Deut. 16.2.
                  
                  Their paſſeouer to hold:
                  And did the ſame with like intent,
                  When Chriſt was twelue yeares old.
                  They to Ieruſalem did go,
                  
                     And there abode the dayes
                  Appointed for that feaſt; no mo,
                  For then they went their wayes.
               
               
                  Yet Chriſt the Lord abode behind,
                  Whom they with ſorow ſought
                  Three dayes, not knowing well his mind,
                  What then our Sauiour thought.
                  For he began to ſet abroch
                  The buſineſſe he had:
                  Who did perceiue the time approch,
                  To make his choſen glad.
               
               
                  Among the Doctors as he taught,
                  And poſed them withall,
                  His parents found him, that were fraught
                  With griefe vnto the gall.
                  Yet were they eaſd; and pleaſd to heare
                  Each one to geue him prayſe:
                  Though hey had ſought their ſonne with feare,
                  And ſorow ſundry wayes.
               
               
                  Then he againe obediently,
                  To Nazareth did come:
                  And ſeru'd his parents reu'rently,
                  Moſt like a louing ſonne.
                  And he increaſd in ſtature ſo,
                  In wiſedome, and in grace
                  With God and men, where he did go,
                  That happie was the place.
               
            
            
               Sixe things ſpecially to be noted in this firſt part of the Hiſtorie.
               
                  Sixe things, we may eſpecially,
                  In this part marke and ſee:
                  
                     Pertaining to Chriſtes infancy,
                  As authors do agree.
                  1 Firſt, of what line Chriſt Ieſus came:
                        Luc. 2 4. 2. Sam. 7.12. Luc. 1.35.
                  
                  He was of Dauids ſeede,
                  2 The holy Ghoſt conceiu'd the ſame
                  That Marie bore in deede.
               
               
                  3 The wiſemen thirdly, came to ſee,
                        Math. 2 3.
                  
                  And ſeeke to finde a king:
                  Then found, confeſt him ſo to be,
                  For whom they treaſure bring.
                  4 Fourthly, by flight Chriſt ſcapeth ſure,
                        Math. 2 14.
                  
                  King Herods heauie hand:
                  5 For him, the infants death indure,
                        Math. 2.16.
                  
                  When Chriſt had left the land.
               
               
                  6 Sixtly, being warnd to come againe,
                        Math. 2.21.
                  
                  For ſundry cauſes good,
                  From Egipt where they did remaine,
                  Ioſephus paſt the flood,
                  And came to lurie for to dwell,
                  Thus toſſed cruellie,
                  Was Chriſt the king of Iſraell,
                  From his weake infancie.
               
               
                  Thus did our good and louing God,
                        Luc. 1.31.
                  
                  Send downe his onely ſonne:
                  To ſaue vs ſinners from his rod,1. Theſſ. 
                        
                           •
                        .9.
                  
                  That elſe had bene vndonne.
                  There was no merites left for man,
                        Act. 4.12.
                  
                  His ſillie ſoule to ſaue;
                  But onely this, Chriſt onely can,
                        Ioh. 11.25.43.44. Gal. 4.4.
                  
                  Reuiue vs in the graue.
               
               
                  This Chriſt at the appointed time,
                  Tooke fleſh, of Adams ſeede:
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . 3.19.Whoſe ſubſtance was but earthie ſlime,
                  This fleſh, he tooke in deede.
                  And in this fleſh, that did offend,
                  This ſecond Adam hee
                  Did all our former faults amend,
                  And fully made vs free.
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . 1.12. 
                           
                              ••
                           l. 2.32. 
                           
                              •
                           ct. 2, 21. 
                           
                              •
                           m. 10.13. 
                           
                              •
                           ct. 3.16. 
                           
                              •
                           ſal. 81.1.As many as vnfainedly
                  Beleeue and ſay the ſame,
                  They finde ſaluation certainly,
                  In Ieſus Chriſt his name.
                  Therefore be glad, in God reioyce,
                  He is our ſtrength and ſtay:
                  Be ioyfull, and lift vp your voyce,
                  To Iacobs God alway. Amen.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE SECOND PART OF THE HISTORIE OF OVR LORD AND SAVIOVR IESVS CHRIST, containing thoſe things which he did the firſt yeare after his Baptiſme: which was the xxx. of his age, according to the foure Euangeliſtes.
            To the tune of the Lordes Prayer.
            
               Christ Baptized the time when, and where he was Baptized.
               
                  
                     CHriſt, thirtie yeares of age at leſt,Luc. 3.23. Euſeb. lib. 1. Cap. 11. Carion. Chron. lib. 3. de 4. Monarch. fol. 110
                     
                  
                  Began to preach the Goſpell then:
                  Our ſauiour Chriſt, was ready preſt,
                  To bring glad tydings vnto men:
                  But ere he would this enterpriſe,
                  In Iordan Iohn did him Baptiſe.
               
               
                  Tiberius Caeſar as we read,
                        Luc. 3.1.
                  
                  Then raigned full the fifteenth yeare:
                  Iudea Pylate rulde as head.
                  In Galilie, it doth appeare,
                  That Herod raigned in the place:
                  And in Iturea Phillip was.
               
               
                  Lyſanias ruled Abylen,
                  Annas and Cayphas high Prieſts were:
                  Th'Euangeliſtes agree that then,
                  
                     Iohn preached and Baptized there.
                  Among the reſt, he did Baptiſe
                  Our Sauiour Chriſt, but on this wiſe.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Mat. 3.13. Mar. 1.12. Luc. 3.21.Chriſt Ieſus came from Galilie,
                  To Iordan, where Iohn did Baptiſe:
                  Iohn Chriſt fore-running certainly,
                  His office did well exerciſe
                  With diligence, whoſe time then came,
                  To yeeld to Chriſt, and leaue the ſame.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Mat. 3.11. Mar. 1.8. Luc. 3.16. Ioh. 1.26. Act. 1.5. Cha. 2.4. Cha. 8 17. Cha. 19.4.5.With water I Baptiſe, ſaid he,
                  Mens liues t'amend I teach the way:
                  But he that commeth after me,
                  To Baptiſe his, will not delay,
                  With fire and with the holy Ghoſt,
                  To whom I yeeld; his might is moſt.
               
               
                  Therefore, when Chriſt Baptiſde would be,
                  
                     
                        Mat. 3.13. Mar. 1.9. Luc. 3.
                              •
                           1.
                     Iohn put him backe, and ſaid, I need
                  To haue thy helpe, com'ſt thou to me?
                  Chriſt ſaid againe, we muſt in deed,
                  Both thus all righteouſneſſe fulfill:
                  Then Iohn obeyd Chriſt Ieſus will.
               
               
                  Chriſt needed not at all to haue
                  This badge of penitence: but he
                  That meant his choſen for to ſaue,
                  Moſt humble ſhowes himſelfe to be.
                  Chriſt Baptiſme did receiue therefore,
                  That he might honour it the more.
               
               
                  When Chriſt out of the water went,
                  Straightway the heau'ns were opened:
                  Iohn ſaw the ſame incontinent,
                  Aſſoone as it then happened,
                  The holy Ghoſt, Iohn like a doue,
                  
                     Did ſee deſcending from aboue.
               
               
                  He heard withall from heau'n this voyce,
                        Math. 3.17 Mar. 1.11. Luc. 3.22. Ioh. 1.32. Math. 17.5. 2 Pet. 1.17. Colloſſ. 1.13
                  
                  This is my welbeloued ſonne,
                  In whom I onely do reioyce,
                  By him my will is truly donne;
                  The Father, Sonne, and Spitite he
                  Then heard, and ſaw, at once all three.
               
               
                  The voyce, and ſight, Iohn heard, and ſawe,
                        Ioh. 1.33.
                  
                  Aſſured him, that this was he,
                  Of whom, all men ſhould ſtand in awe,
                  By whom, all men muſt ſaued be.
                  He that ſent Iohn for to Baptiſe,
                  Said, thou ſhalt ſee him in ſuch wiſe.
               
               
                  Iohn then, diſcharging well his place,
                  Was glad in heart to leaue the ſame,
                  And yeeld to Chriſt, ſo full of grace;
                  Of whom he publiſhed the fame.
                  I came before, ſaid Iohn, to tell,
                  And ſpread his name in Iſraell.
               
            
            
               Chriſt by the ſpirite was lead into the wilderneſſe where he faſted forty dayes and 40. nights.
               
                  After all this,
                        Math. 4.1. Mar. 1.12. Luc. 4.8. the ſpirite lead
                  Chriſt Ieſus, to the wilderneſſe:
                  Where he troad downe the Serpents head,
                  To bring vs out of heauineſſe.
                  There firſt, he did both pray and faſt,
                  While fortie dayes and nights did laſt.
               
               
                  Among wild beaſts he liued then,
                  This was his comfort all thoſe dayes:Auguſt. in Pſal. 85.
                     
                  
                  (So farre from companie of men,)
                  In prayer to talke with God alwayes.
                  Chriſt thus with reu'rent care did take,
                  
                     In hand his office for our ſake.
               
               
                  But after that thoſe dayes were donne,
                  To ſhow him perfect man to be,
                  An hungred was Gods onely ſonne,
                  Though farre from foode as then was he.
                  The tempter thought this place moſt fit
                  And time to ply his wilie wit.
               
            
            
               Chriſt was tempted of the deuill three wayes, and thriſe himſelfe ouercome by Chriſt.
               
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 8.44.He like himſelfe, is alwayes found
                  Moſt falſe, and faine would Chriſt deceiue:
                  This firſt demaund he did propound,
                  (As doubting (though he did perceiue)
                  That Chriſt the ſonne of God ſhould bee;
                  And tryes it with deuiſes threee.)
               
               
                  
                     The firſt temptation.Firſt, to diſpaire he Chriſt would bring,
                  As then to doubt of helpe at need:
                  His wants he knew, and vrg'd that thing,
                  If thou be Chriſt, Gods ſonne in deed,
                  Command theſe ſtones made bread to bee:
                  For other foode I can not ſee.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 4.4. Deut. 8.3.Chriſt anſwereth, man doth not liue
                  By bread alone, as thou doeſt deeme,
                  Gods word is bread, which I beleeue
                  Doth feede all his, this I eſteeme.
                  By it, mans life preſerued is:
                  
                     Sathans firſt fall.I will not tempt my God in this.
               
               
                  
                     The ſecond temptation.Then next, the deuill deuiſed ſo
                  From doubt, to confidence as vaine,
                  Chriſt to prouoke, they both thence go
                  The temple to, from top againe
                  Sathan willd Chriſt to take a fall:
                  
                     Angels will aide thee if thou call.
               
               
                  For this is written ſure, ſaid he,
                        Pſal. 91.11.12.
                  
                  That God hath charg'de them ſo to do,
                  If thou doeſt fall, then ſhall I ſee,
                  And ſhew it vnto many moe.
                  Thus did the deu'll Gods word abuſe:
                  Which God hath willd vs well to vſe.
               
               
                  Chriſt ſaid againe, this written is,
                        Deut. 6.16.
                  
                  Thou ſhalt not tempt the Lord thy God:
                  Who ſo doth ſo, deſerueth this,
                  For ſuch a fault, to feele his rod.Sathans ſecōd fall.
                  
                  I will not ſo deceiued be:
                  Depart therefore, thou deu'll from me.
               
               
                  Laſtly, by wealth and worldly gaine,The third tēptation.
                  
                  The ſubtil'ſt ſhift of all the reſt
                  Man to deceiue, whoſe minde is vaine,
                  This wile as then the deuill addreſt,
                  To tempt our Sauiour Chriſt withall:
                  Not doubting him therewith to fall.
               
               
                  He brought him to a mountaine high,
                  Theſe worldly kingdomes to behold:
                  The deuill was in his maieſtie,
                  This act of his was verie bold.
                  All theſe (ſaid he) will I giue thee,
                  If thou fall downe and worſhip me.
               
               
                  But Ieſus could no more abide,Sathans third fall.
                  
                  To heare him vaunt ſo much amiſſe:
                  Chriſt did conuince him then of pride,
                  To offer him that was not his.
                  Voyde Sathan; get thee hence away:
                        Deut. 6.13. Chap. 10.20.
                  
                  Worſhip the Lord; thy God obay.
               
               
                  You ſee therefore Chriſt Ieſus was
                  
                     So by the ſpirite led away:
                  He faſted, in a deſert place.
                  
                     Aret. in Cap. 4. Math. fol. 28.
                     He practis'd prayer day by day,
                  And Sathans ſleights did ouerthrow,
                  All this the Scripture, doth vs ſhow.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Hebr. 2.18.And in that he was tempted ſo,
                  And ſuffered: S. Paule doth ſay,
                  He is well able to helpe mo,
                  That tempted are by any way.
                  We need not therefore ſtand in feare,
                  When we do call, Chriſt will giue eare.
               
               
                  Though Sathan, had three drifts diuiſde,
                  By fraud our Sauiour Chriſt to foyle:
                  Yet naked then, and all diſguiſde,
                  He gained ſhame for his great toyle.
                  Three wayes he tempted Chriſt withall,
                  And thrice himſelfe he had the fall.
               
               
                  This conqueſt of th'infernall foe,
                  Chriſt Ieſus made ere he began
                  In open ſight himſelfe to ſhoe,
                  The Sauiour of mortall man.
                  That his might euermore boldly,
                  The deuill and all his workes dofie.
               
               
                  When Sathan felt his force, he flead,
                  And left Chriſt Ieſus all alone:
                  
                     
                        Gen. 3.15.The womans ſeede, on Serpents head
                  In his good time, did tread vpon,
                  And then the Angels to him came,
                  To be as witneſſe of the ſame.
               
            
            
               Iohns teſtimonie of Chriſt.
               
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 1.15.While Chriſt was in the wilderneſſe,
                  And vnreturned backe againe,
                  
                     The Scripture plainly doth expreſſe,
                  That idle Iohn did not remaine.
                  The Iewes ſent to him, for to ſee,
                  They thought him ſure that Chriſt to be.
               
               
                  But Ieſus he confeſt to be,
                        Ioh. 1.15.
                  
                  Before him, and his greater to:
                  All grace in him receiued we,
                  Said he, and ſo all faithfull do.
                  The law by Moſes giuen was:
                  By Ieſus Chriſt came truth and grace.
               
               
                  God was not ſeene of any man,
                        Ioh. 1.18. 1. Tim. 6.16. 1. Ioh. 4.12.
                  
                  His ſonne hath him declared ſure:
                  Which beſt and onely do it can,
                  And doth both God and man endure.
                  Which in the fathers boſome ſtill
                  Doth reſt, and knoweth all his will.
               
               
                  One day ere Chriſt came backe againe,Lau. Codomā
                        nus ſaith that Iohn gaue this anſwer to the Prieſts & Leuits the day before Chr. came frō the wilderneſſe. Febr. 14.
                     
                  
                  To Bethabara where they were,
                  The Prieſts and Leuites anſwer plaine
                  Of Iohn receiue, backe home to beare.
                  What art thou, they to Iohn did ſay?
                  Tell vs, let vs go hence away.
               
               
                  Confeſſing, he did not deny,
                  That Chriſt whom ye ſuppoſe I am,
                  I am not he aſſuredly.
                  Tell whom thou doeſt thy ſelfe then name?
                        Ioh. 1.20. Mar. 1.7. Act. 13.25.
                  
                  Art thou Elias? no ſaid he.
                  Whom makeſt thou thy ſelfe to be?
               
               
                  Art thou that Prophet? Iohn ſaid no.
                  What art thou then the Leuites ſay?
                  Giue anſwer now and let vs go,
                  So anſwer others that we may.
                  
                     For hither they for this intent,
                  Vs from Ieruſalem haue ſent.
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           oh. 1.23. Eſay. 40.3. Math. 3.3. Luc. 3.4.I ſurely am (ſaid Iohn) the voyce,
                  That in the wilderneſſe doth cry,
                  Vnto all ſuch as do reioyce,
                  That their redemption is nye.
                  Make ſtraight the pathes, prepare the way,
                  Of God the Lord, without delay.
               
               
                  They which were ſent were Phariſies,
                  They asked him then, thus againe,
                  Why Baptiſeſt thou now all theſe,
                  If thou be none of both thoſe twaine?
                  That Chriſt, nor yet Elyas he;
                  How can this worke agree with thee?
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 1.27. Math. 3.11. Mar. 1.7. Luc. 3.16. Act. 1.5. Cap. 11.16. Cap. 19.4.Iohn ſaid, with water I Baptiſe,
                  But there doth ſtand among you one,
                  Whom ye acknowledge in no wiſe,
                  For all that I to you haue donne:
                  He was before me, and his ſhoes,
                  I am not worthie to vnlooſe.
               
               
                  Theſe things in Bethabara were
                  So donne, as you do heare the ſame:
                  For Iohn Baptiſed euen there,
                  As many then as to him came:
                  And Chriſt returned the next day,
                  When Iohn had ſent thoſe men away.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 1.29.At Chriſts returne, Iohn ſure ſaid this,
                  Forthwith as Ieſus came that way,
                  Behold, the lambe of God it is,
                  That commeth here, this man I ſay,
                  He of this world, and all therein,
                  Away will onely take the ſinne.
               
            
            
               
               Iohn the 17. of February, An. mundi 4170. ſent Diſciples to Chriſt, this was Iohn Baptiſt.
               
                  A few dayes after this was donne,
                        Ioh. 1.35.
                  
                  Chriſt as before then paſſing by,
                  Behold, ſaid Iohn, here is the ſonne,
                  And lambe of God aſſuredly.
                  This his Diſciples heard him ſay,Andrew and Iohn called.
                  
                  And two of them went ſtraight away.
               
               
                  Andrew and Iohn were the ſame twaine.Aret. in Cap. 1 Ioh fol. 147. This was Iohn Euangeliſt, he that wrote this Goſpell.
                  
                  That follow'd Chriſt, to them ſaid he,
                  What ſeeke ye? where doeſt thou remaine
                  Rabbi, ſaid they? he ſaid come ſee.
                  They went and ſaw, and both did ſtay
                  With Chriſt our Sauiour all that day.
               
               
                  His brother Simon Andrew found,Peter called. Ioh. 1.41.
                     
                  
                  And brought to Chriſt, to whom Chriſt gaue
                  Cephas to name, which men expound
                  To be a ſtone, and this we haue
                  To note, that as his name ſo was,
                  His faith for firmneſſe it would paſſe.
               
               
                  In this diſcourſe, well may we ſee,
                  As Iohn, ſo his, themſelues did ſhow,
                  Moſt willing, that all men might be
                  Brought the Meſſiah for to know,
                  To Chriſt Iohn ſent ſuch as he wonne,
                  For then he knew his time was donne.
               
               
                  In Chriſtes returne to Galilie,Phillip called. Ioh. 1.43.
                     
                  
                  He finding Phillip by the way,
                  Said, follow me: he preſentlie
                  Chriſtes call moſt humbly did obay;
                  This Phillip of Bethſaida was,
                  And Andrew alſo of that place.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           en. 49.10. 
                           
                              •
                           eut. 18.18. 
                           
                              ••
                           ay. 4.2. 
                           
                              •
                           erem. 23.5. 
                           
                              •
                           zek. 34.23. 
                           
                              •
                           an. 9.24.Then Phillip found Nathanaell,
                  And ſaid the Sauiour is heare:
                  The onely king of Iſraell,
                  A Nazarite he doth appeare.
                  Can any good come, I pray thee,
                  From Nazareth (Phillip) ſaid he?
               
               
                  
                     Nathanaell 
                           •
                        alled. 
                           •
                        oh. 1.46.
                     Then Phillip ſaid, come thou and ſee.
                  When Ieſus ſaw Nathanaell,
                  Oh Iſraeli
                        •
                     ie, no guile in thee,
                  Or deepe deceipt (ſaid he) doth dwell.
                  Whence know'ſt thou me, ſaid he againe?
                  I neuer ſaw thee, this is plaine.
               
               
                  Then Ieſus ſaid, I did thee ſee,
                  Ere Philip came and calde thee thence,
                  When thou waſt vnder the figge tree.
                  Nathanaell ſaid in their preſence,
                  Gods ſonne thou art, I ſee it well,
                  And eke the king of Iſraell.
               
               
                  Becauſe I ſaid ſo, vnto thee,
                  Said Ieſus to Nathanaell;
                  I ſaw thee vnder the figge tree,
                  Beleeueſt thou? thou doeſt well.
                  Thou ſhalt ſee greater things then theſe:
                  Thy plainneſſe, me ſaid Chriſt, doth pleaſe.
               
               
                  Hereafter, ſhall ye verely,
                  The heau'ens ſee open all aboue,
                  And Angels comming certainly,
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 1.51. Gen. 28.12.Vpon his ſonne, whom God doth loue.
                  Aſcending and deſcending they,
                  The ſonne of man will all obey.
               
            
            
               
               The firſt miracle that Christ wrought was in Cana in Galilie at the mariage,Bonauentura Mantuan. as ſome ſuppoſe of Iohn the Euangeliſt, turning water to wine.
               
                  In Cana was a mariage made,
                        Ioh. 2.1.
                  
                  (This Cana was in Galilie,)
                  Three dayes after Phillip had
                  Bene cald of Chriſt ſo louingly:
                  And eke Nathanaell alſo:
                  Or after Chriſt did thither go.
               
               
                  Marie vnto the mariage came,
                  So Chriſt withall was bidden there,
                  And his Diſciples to the ſame,
                  As Iohn reportes, all called were.
                  Of miracles the firſt this was,
                  That Chriſt then wrought in the ſame place.
               
               
                  But Marie there preſumed ſo,
                  That Chriſt gaue her a grieuous checke;
                  In thought man may not God out-go,
                  Preſcribe not him, obey his becke.
                  They haue no wine (oh ſonne) ſaid ſhe:Said Christ to her.
                  
                  Oh what haue I to do with thee?
               
               
                  He turned yet (as he before
                  Had with himſelfe in mind decreed)
                  Sixe water pots (to mend their ſtore)
                  Of water full, to wine in deed.
                  And ſhew'd his glorie, that he might
                  So ſtrength their faith, that ſaw the ſight.
               
            
            
               Chriſt went from Cana to Capernaum.
               
                  From Cana to Capernaum he,Ioh. 2.12. Aret. in Ioh. 2 Theophilact. Chriſoſt.
                  
                  His mother, and his brethren went:
                  Becauſe he there vſde oft to be,
                  To leaue his mother there he meant.
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                     For it would wearie her to go
                  From place to place, though Chriſt did ſo.
               
               
                  For her Chriſt Ieſus did prouide,
                  (To teach vs all the like to do,)
                  Where he was wont for to abide,
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           ath. 9.1.And liked of the place alſo,
                  For where his mother placed he,
                  His Citie, it was namde to be.
               
               
                  Yet there (as then) he taried not,
                  But verie ſhortly went away,
                  For nothing could make him forgot,
                  Or then his fathers workes delay,
                  The more he car'de for his in deed,
                  He did the more about this ſpeed.
               
            
            
               Chriſt went thence to Ieruſalem to the feaſt of the paſſeouer, and there droue the buyers and ſellers out of the Temple.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           h. 2.13.From Capernaum Chriſt did go,
                  Vp to Ieruſalem; for he,
                  As other, alwayes vſed ſo,
                  Not ſayling, at that feaſt to be.
                  The paſſeouer was then at hand,
                  A feaſt obſerued through the land:
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           h. 2.14. 
                           
                              •
                           ath. 21.12. 
                           
                              •
                           ar. 11.15. 
                           
                              •
                           uc. 19.45.When Chriſt came there, as he did vſe,
                  Into the Temple then he went,
                  Where he reprouing their abuſe,
                  All ſuch out of the Temple ſent,
                  As did therein then buy or ſell,
                  And told them plaine they did not well.
               
               
                  A whip of cordes Chriſt Ieſus made,
                  Wherewith both oxen, ſheepe and men,
                  He droue out, he low'd there no trade,
                  
                     No not money ſtrangers then,
                  Thoſe thence he forſt to packe away,
                  And ſuffred none of them to ſtay.
               
               
                  Such as ſold doues, they had a check,
                  He did command them quickly thence;
                  Perforce they muſt obey his beck,
                  He not regardes their ware or pence,
                  But ſaid my fathers houſe make ye,
                  No houſe of marchandiſe to be.
               
               
                  They were amazed all at this,
                  Yet none of them durſt diſobay,
                  Reſiſt, or ſay thou doeſt amiſſe,
                  They yeelded all and went away.
                  But his Diſciples thought in mind,
                  This zeale God ioyes in him to find.
               
               
                  When this was donne,
                        Ioh. 2.17. Pſal. 69.9. the Iewes began
                  To queſtion with him thus againe:
                  What ſigne ſhew'ſt thou? oh ſonne of man,
                  That thou doeſt this? declare it plaine:
                        Ioh. 2.19. Math. 26.6▪ 
                        Cap. 27.42. Mar. 14.58. Cap. 15.29.
                  
                  Deſtroy this Temple, in three dayes,
                  The ſame againe I will vp raiſe.
               
               
                  The Temple-ſixe and thirtie yeares
                  In building was; thus anſwer they,
                  This vnto vs no truth appeares,
                  That did thy wordes and workes obey.
                  They meant the Church of lyme and ſtone,
                  Chriſt meant his body, fleſh and bone.
               
               
                  When he was riſen from the dead,
                  Then his Diſciples cal'de to mind
                  What he foretold, and how he ſpread,
                  A truth in him they ſtill did find,
                  The ground of their beliefe, they make
                  
                     The Scripture; and the word he ſpake.
               
               
                  While he did at that feaſt remaine,
                  Many beleeued in his name:
                  They ſaw his workes, they were not vaine,
                  His wonders wanted not their fame.
                  He gaue to them no credit then:
                  For he knew well that vaine were men.
               
            
            
               Chriſt inſtructeth Nicodemus in the regeneration by water and the holy Ghoſt.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         3.1.There was a man, a Phariſie,
                  A ruler, one of chiefeſt fame,
                  Nam'd Nicodemus verely:
                  This man by night to Ieſus came.
                  He had a minde for to amend,
                  Yet men he feared to offend.
               
               
                  Maſter he ſaid, we know thou art,
                  A teacher come from God aboue:
                  Such ſignes and workes none can impart,
                  But ſuch a one as God doth loue.
                  Thoſe miracles that he had donne:
                  Approued him to be Gods ſonne.
               
               
                  Said Ieſus, I do ſay to thee,
                  Except a man be borne againe,
                  Of water and the ſpirite, he
                  Shall not Gods kingdome ſure obtaine.
                  Can this be true, as thou haſt told,
                  May man be borne that once is old?
               
               
                  Aſſuredly, except a man
                  Be borne as I haue ſaid to thee:
                  Heauen be neuer enter can,
                  Gods kingdome he ſhall neuer ſee.
                  Of fleſh, but fleſh is borne ywis:
                  
                     The ſpirite yeeldes that ſpirite is.
               
               
                  Thou know'ſt not whence commeth the wind,
                  Whoſe going in and out to thee,
                  Though by thine eare the ſound thou find,
                  The ſeate thereof thou doeſt not ſee.
                  Who of the ſpirite is borne heare,
                  Is ſo, though ſtrange it doth appeare.
               
            
            
               Nicodemus ſaid, how can theſe things be.
               
                  A teacher greater things ſhould know,
                  I teſtifie that I haue ſeene,
                  When earthly things to thee I ſhow,
                  If dull and faithleſſe thou haſt bene;
                  What wilt thou be, when I declare
                  Of heau'nly things? and what they are.
               
               
                  No man aſcendeth vp aboue,
                  But he that did deſcend from thence:
                  The ſonne of man, whom God doth loue,
                  And is in heau'n in his preſence.
                  He muſt be lift,
                        Ioh. 3.14. Nomb. 21.9. as by Moſes
                  The Serpent was in wilderneſſe.
               
               
                  That who ſo doth in him beleeue,
                        Ioh. 3.16. 1. Ioh. 4.9.
                  
                  Eternall life the ſame may haue:
                  For God his onely ſonne did giue,
                  The faithfull from hell fire to ſaue.
                  The world to ſaue Gods ſonne was ſent:
                  It to condemne God was not bent.
               
               
                  Condemned ſhall he neuer be,
                  That doth beleeue in him, the ſame
                  Condemned is already he,
                  Whoſe faith is not firme in his name.
                  The light is come, yet darkneſſe more
                  Do worldly men loue, then before.
               
               
                  
                  The euill euer hate the light,
                  By it their deeds reproued are,
                  He loues the truth, that with his might
                  His deedes by day ſeekes to declare.
                  Oh Nicodemus, all I ſay,
                  A faithfull heart muſt beare away.
               
            
            
               Chriſt returning into Iudea preached the Goſpell, and Baptiſed the people by his Diſciples neare Iohn, of purifying a queſtion did then ariſe.
               
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 3.22.After this donne, came Chriſt againe,
                  With his Diſciples as we reade,
                  Into Iudea, this is plaine,
                  Where he Baptiſing taried,
                  Iohn did Baptiſe in Enon by,
                  And ply'de his office carefully.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 3.25.Of water there they had great ſtore▪
                  
                  And Iohn was not in priſon caſt,
                  But as the number waxed more,
                  Of Diſciples, ſtrife grew as faſt,
                  The Iewes, and Iohns Diſciples, craue
                  Of purifying the truth to haue.
               
            
            
               Iohns teſtimonie againe of Ieſus.
               
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 3.26.They alſo came to Iohn, and ſaid,
                  Moſt men to Chriſt (Baptiſing) go.
                  Iohn bad them be no whit diſmayd,
                  From heau'n it is appointed ſo:
                  Ye know, I ſaid, I am not he;
                  Chriſt muſt increaſe, as you do ſee.
               
               
                  He that is come from God on hye,
                  Doth teſtifie what he hath ſeene,
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 3.33. Ro
                              •
                           . 3 4.He that receiues it, verely,
                  Doth ſeale how true our God hath beene,
                  
                     Whom God ſent, ſpeakes Gods word, Iohn ſaith,
                  And plenteouſly Gods ſpirite hath.
               
               
                  The Father lou'd the ſonne,
                        Iohn. 3.35. Math. 11.27 Habac. 2.4. 1. Ioh. 5.1. and gaue
                  All things he had into his hand,
                  He that beleeues in him ſhall haue
                  Eternall life, this vnderſtand,
                  They dead are that him diſobay,
                  The wrath of God all ſuch will ſlay.
               
            
            
               Ieſus to auoyde danger departed out of Iudea into Galilie.
               
                  When he, that knew of all things well,
                        Ioh. 4.1.
                  
                  Perceiued by relation,
                  Or of himſelfe, for he could tell
                  His enemies intention,
                  How that the Phariſies did heare,
                  That he was famous eu'ry wheare:
               
               
                  And that he made Diſciples more,
                  And more Baptiſed then likewiſe,
                  Then Iohn, that had gone him before.
                  Marke ye now well Chriſt Ieſus guiſe,
                  He did his office earneſtly,
                  Yet voyded danger warily.
               
            
            
               Chriſt paſſing through Samaria towardes Galilie, conferred with a woman at the well of Sichar: and conuerted many Samaritanes.
               
                  Chriſt leauing Iurie, did depart,
                        Ioh. 4.3.
                  
                  And went againe to Galilie,
                  He knew what loue or hate in heart
                  Men bare him hidden outwardly,
                  Chriſt through Samaria needs would go,
                  He had himſelfe decreed ſo.
               
               
                  
                  What workes for him did there abide,
                  To bring the Gentiles to the light,
                  He did foreknow, and then did guide
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 4.5. Gene. 48.22. Cap. 33.19. Ioſua. 24.32.His companie to Si
                        •
                     har right,
                  Neare to the place that Iacob gaue,
                  Where Ioſeph ſhould poſſeſſion haue.
               
               
                  And there on faithfull Iacobs well,
                  Chriſt Ieſus ſate about midday:
                  A woman, that thereby did dwell,
                  For water came while he did ſtay.
                  But his Diſciples they were gone,
                  Into the Citie, eu'ry one.
               
               
                  
                     The Iewes agreed not with the Samaritanes, becauſe they profeſſed thēſelues to be Iewes, come of the ſeede of Iacob and kept Moſes law, while the Iewes were in proſperitie: and in their aduerſitie denied thē ſaying, that they were Syrians, Medes and Babyloniās the Iewes enemies, and hereof grew their hatred.Then to the woman Ieſus ſaid,
                  For me to drinke ſome water giue:
                  So ſhe againe then vndelayd,
                  Said, thou a Iew art I beleeue;
                  Iewes with Samaria diſagree,
                  And water askeſt thou of me?
               
               
                  Then Ieſus ſaid, oh woman, ſee:
                  If thou the gift of God didſt know,
                  And who it is that asketh thee,
                  Thou woldeſt not then ſeeme ſo ſlow,
                  To aske of him, for he can giue
                  Water of life, if thou beleeue.
               
               
                  The woman ſaid, the well is deepe,
                  And thou haſt nought to draw withall:
                  Where doeſt thou then thy water keepe?
                  Or doeſt of me for water call?
                  This well our father Iacob gaue,
                  Whoſe name in reu'rence here we haue.
               
               
                  Art thou greater then Iacob was?
                  He dranke of it, and ſo did then
                  
                     His children, in this very place,
                  His cattell, and his houſhold men.
                  But Ieſus ſaid, who ſo doth drinke
                  Of this, will thirſt, thou ſo muſt thinke.
               
               
                  The water I giue, who drinke will,
                  Thirſteth no more while he doth liue,
                  It ſhall in him be ſpringing ſtill
                  To euerlaſting life; this giue
                  That I thirſt not, oh ſir ſaid ſhe,
                  Nor to draw here more driuen be.
               
               
                  Then Ieſus ſaid, thy husband call,
                  And come againe with him to me.
                  Husband I haue now none at all,
                  To Ieſus then thus anſwered ſhe.
                  Thou haſt well ſaid; thou haſt had fiue,
                  This is not thine, that is aliue.Ioh. 4.19. ca. 6 14. Luc. 7.16. Moūt Ierizim wherein a tēple was built by the Samaritanes of enuie to the temple at Ieruſalē. Ioſeph. li. 11. ca. 7.8
                     
                  
               
               
                  Thou art a Prophet I do ſee:
                  Our fathers worſhipt in this mount,
                  But now Ieruſalem ſay ye,
                  To worſhip in, men moſt account,
                  The houre is come, now ſhines the light,
                  Yet here, nor there, ye worſhip right.
               
               
                  Ye worſhip that ye do not know,
                  We worſhip that we know and ſee:
                  Saluation is, I ſay to you,
                        Ioh. 4.22. Deut. 12.5. 2. King. 17.29.
                  
                  Come of the Iewes, and now ſaid he,
                  In truth and ſpirite men haue need,
                  The father to adore in deed.Rom. 1.8.
                  
               
               
                  God is a ſpirite, and they muſt,
                  In ſpirite and in truth withall,
                  Worſhip him, that in him truſt,
                        Ioh. 4.24. 2. Cor. 3.17.
                  
                  And on his name for mercy call.
                  
                     Meſſiah comes (ſaid ſhe againe,)
                  And he will teach vs all things plaine.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 4.26. Cap. 9.37. Ca. 10.11 Math. 26.64. Mar. 14.62. Luc. 21.69.He ſaid to her, lo I am hee;
                  And his Diſciples came with that:
                  When Chriſt ſo talke with her they ſee,
                  They all did maruaile much thereat.
                  They of their meate did offer make,
                  But he as then no meat would take.
               
               
                  
                     Christ anſwered his Diſciples, that his harueſt was ripe. Ioh. 4.35. Math. 9.37. Luc. 10.2.
                     His meat, was to accompliſh then
                  His fathers will, and worke to end,
                  The harueſt is among all men
                  Moſt ripe, where to God did you ſend:
                  The reaper wages ſhall receiue,
                  And ſower ioy thereof perceiue.
               
               
                  Herein the prouerbe true is found,
                  That one doth ſow, another reape,
                  You reape where other tild the ground,
                  Their labours all on you I heape.
                  The woman all this while was gone,
                  And left Chriſt there, though not alone.
               
               
                  She went into the Citie then,
                  Come ſee, ſaid ſhe, one that told me,
                  All I haue done; and ſtraight the men
                  Went out our Sauiour Chriſt to ſee;
                  Whom when they ſaw, they did beleeue,
                  For wordes that ſhe to them did giue.
               
               
                  When the Samaritanes were come,
                  They prayed him to tarie there,
                  And he abode (as ſaith ſome,)
                  Two dayes with them, and they with feare,
                  When they had heard, and ſeene alſo
                  His wordes, and workes, beleeued tho.
               
               
                  
                  Then ſaid they to the woman, we
                  Do now beleeue, not for thy ſake,
                  But for the wordes, and workes we ſee,
                  For Chriſt the Sauiour we him take.
                  So two dayes after, thence he went,
                  To Galilie; for ſo he ment.
               
            
            
               Chriſt paſſing from Samaria to Galilie, turned aſide to Nazareth, where he preached on the Sabboth day, &c.
               
                  When from Samaria he was gone,
                        Luc. 4.16. Math. 13.5 Mar. 6.1. Ioh. 4.43.
                  
                  To Nazareth he tooke his way,
                  Chriſt knew what beſt was to be done,
                  No time he would at all delay:
                  About his fathers worke he went,
                  In which his time he wholy ſpent.
               
               
                  Then to their Sinagogue to preach,
                  Vpon the Sabboth day he came;
                  Eſayas booke they did him reach,
                        Luc. 4.18. Eſay. 61.1.
                  
                  That he might reade vpon the ſame.
                  Whereout he taught them what he was,
                  What he ſhould teach, and bring to paſſe.
               
            
            
               Chriſt reproueth the ingratitude of his countreymen: affirming that a Prophet is eſteemed leaſt in his owne countrey.
               
                  His doctrine ſo aſtonied ſome,
                        Ioh. 6.42. Luc. 4.22. Mar. 6.3. Math. 13.55
                  
                  That they did wonder at his words,
                  Whence doth (ſay they) this wiſedome come?
                  Or who to him theſe works affoords?
                  Is not that Ioſephes ſonne (we pray,)
                  The Carpenter, we heard this day?
               
               
                  His mother Marie we do call,
                  His brethren be they not with vs?
                  
                     As men amazed were they all,
                  To heare him ſo that text diſcuſſe.
                  
                     
                        Luc. 4 24. 
                           
                              •
                           ob. 4.44.Saue in his countrey, then ſaid he,
                  A Prophet ſure ſhall honor'd be.
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           am. 5.17. Luc. 4.25. 
                           •
                         
                        King. 17.9.Wherefore he ſaid to them againe;
                  When famine plagued Iſraell,
                  And they for three yeares wanted rayne,
                  And moneths ſix, as ſtories tell,
                  Eliah then was ſent to none,
                  Saue in Sarepta vnto one.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Luc. 4.27. 2. King. 5.14.Oh Iſraëll, thy leproſie,
                  Was great in Eliſeus time,
                  Yet none could find a remedie,
                  But Naaman was cur'de by him.
                  When they heard this it grieu'd them ſore,
                  And they deuiſde his death therefore.
               
               
                  So riſing▪ they out thruſt him all,
                  And lead him on that verie hill,
                  Where they might geue him ſuch a fall,
                  As might haue pleaſde their wicked will.
                  He freely yet from them did go,
                  Eſcaping for all they could do.
               
            
            
               Chriſt went from Nazareth to Cana in Galilie, where he reſtored the rulers ſonne to health, the noble man and all his houſhold beleeued.
               
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 4.46.To Cana Chriſt from Naz'reth came,
                  The Galileans him receiu'd,
                  And ioyfully they did the ſame,
                  His Godhead there was well perceiu'd,
                  Of water wine he made before,
                  Now one to life he did reſtore.
               
               
                  A ruler, that thereby did dwell,
                  
                     At Capernaum, had a ſonne
                  Sore ſicke: when he of Chriſt heard tell,
                  And what he eu'ry where had donne,
                  He came to Chriſt, and him did pray,
                  To go with him without delay.
               
               
                  His ſonne was ready now to dye,
                  Therefore he made the greater haſt.
                  Your vnbeliefe aſſuredly,
                  Doth make you many wordes to waſt,
                  But go thy way, thy ſonne doth liue.
                  He went, and did Chriſts word beleeue.
               
               
                  And as he iourneyd, by the way,
                  He heard his ſonne recouered,
                  And by accompt that houre and day.
                  That Ieſus health had promiſed:
                  So he and his beleeued all.
                  Chriſt when he will, can thus men call.
               
            
            
               Chriſt hearing of Iohns impriſonmēt went to Capernaū, after he called ſundry of his Apoſtles, preached the Goſpell in Galilie, and healed the diſeaſed.
               
                  When Iohn was then impriſoned,
                        Math. 4.13.
                  
                  Or much about that tyme, I ſay,
                  Chriſt went and he inhabited
                  Capernaum; and there did ſtay▪
                  
                  The ſea of Zabulon was nye,
                  And Nepthalim aſſuredly.
               
               
                  Eſayas Prophecid before,
                        Math. 4.15. Eſay. 9.1.
                  
                  That there the Gentiles ſhould haue light,
                  Whoſe darkneſſe ſtill increaſed more,
                  Vntill of Chriſt they had a ſight,
                  Who doth vnto all that beleeue,
                  Eternall life moſt freely giue.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           ath. 4.18. 
                           
                              •
                           ar. 11.Chriſt paſſing throughout Galilie,
                  As he did walke by the ſea ſide,
                  Apoſtles called verely,
                  Of ſuch men as did there abide,
                  Poore fiſher men without reſpect,
                  By whom he would his works effect.
               
               
                  With whom about from place to place,
                  Throughout all Galilie he went,
                  Heaping on his all gifts of grace,
                  And teaching them with like intent,
                  He made thoſe fooliſh weaklings riſe,
                  For to confound the worldly wiſe.
               
               
                  And as he paſt, continually
                  He euery where did dayly teach,
                  Their Synagogues to openly
                  He went, the Goſpell for to preach.
                  
                     The ſumme of 
                           •
                        hriſtes do
                        
                           •
                        trine.Amend your liues, for now ſaid he,
                  Gods kingdome is at hand you ſee.
               
               
                  He alſo healed each diſeaſe,
                  And ſickneſſe that the people had,
                  Afflicted folke by him found eaſe,
                  And eu'ry one of him was glad.
                  When once abroad was ſpread Chriſts fame▪
                  
                  In multitudes they to him came.
               
               
                  From all the regions round about,
                  Thoſe then that had infirmities,
                  As palſie, gripings, or the gowt,
                  Came to him in great companies:
                  And each was eaſed of his ſore,
                  To God alone be prayſe therefore. Amen.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE THIRD PART OF THE HISTORIE OF OVR LORD AND SAVIOVR IESVS CHRIST▪ containing thoſe things which he did the ſecond yeare after his Baptiſme, which was the xxxj. yeare of his age, according to the foure Euangeliſtes, the yeare after the creation of the world. 4172. beginning at the Sermon, which Chriſt made in the mount. CODOMANNVS.
            To the tune of the Lordes Prayer, vt ſup.
            
               
                  
                     CHriſt did prepare all his in mind,
                  To ſeeke for treaſure vp on hye,
                  In heau'n; where as the godly find,
                  All happineſſe eternally,
                  It is not health, wealth, ſhape, or age,
                  That brings men to the heau'nly ſtage.
               
               
                  Therefore cleane contrary to thoſe,
                  That taught true happineſſe to be
                  In earthly things, this heau'nly roſe,
                  A ſweeter ſent hath giuen thee,
                  To trace the tract that leadeth ſure,
                  Where happineſſe doth ſtill endure.
               
               
                  When Chriſt the multitude did ſee,
                        Math. 5.1.
                  
                  A mountaine he went vp into:
                  
                     When he was ſet, where he would be,
                  To his Diſciples he ſpake tho,
                  
                     The 9. beati
                        
                           •
                        des. Math. 5.3. 
                        
                           •
                        uc. 6.20.
                     1 The poore in ſpirite bleſſed are,
                  A kingdome God did them prepare.
               
               
                  2 Bleſſed are they that mourne for good,
                  
                     
                        Math. 5.4. Eſay. 61.2. Cap. 65.13.For they ſhall ſurely comfort haue,
                  Such to their power ill withſtood,
                  And for amendment dayly craue.
                  3 Bleſſed are they that meeke are found,
                  
                     
                        Math. 5.5. Pſal. 37.11.The earth they ſhall inherite round.
               
               
                  
                     
                        M
                              •
                           th. 5.6.4 Bleſſed are they which ſuffer thirſt,
                  And hunger after righteouſneſſe:
                  For they (ſaid Chriſt) ſhall as the firſt,
                  
                     
                        Math. 5.7.Be filled with all happineſſe.
                  5 The mercifull are bleſſed all,
                  They ſhall haue mercy when they call.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 5.8.6 Bleſſed are all the pure in heart,
                  They ſhall ſee God vndoubtedly.
                  
                     
                        Math. 5.9.7 Peace makers they play ſuch a part,
                  As pleaſeth God aſſuredly:
                  Bleſſed are they therefore ſaid he,
                  Gods children they ſhall called be.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 5.10. 1. Peter. 3.14.8 Bleſſed are they, which patiently
                  Do ſuffer perſecution
                  For righteouſneſſe, they verely
                  Shall after their affliction,
                  Gods kingdome in heauen poſſeſſe,
                  For ſo he will their griefes redreſſe.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 5.11. Act. 5.41. 1. Peter. 4.14.9 When men reuile you moſt of all,
                  And perſecute you for my ſake,
                  And falſly ſpeaking ill withall,
                  If patiently you do it take,
                  
                     You ſhall therefore find happineſſe,
                  The ſalue to eaſe your heauineſſe.
               
               
                  Reioyſe alſo, I ſay, be glad,
                  When they haue done you greateſt wrong,
                  You haue no cauſe for to be ſad,
                  In heau'n ſhall you the Saints among
                  Rewarded be, as were before,
                  The Prophets, whom they grieued ſore.
               
            
            
               Chriſt contrarie to the opinion of fleſh and bloud, and the doctrine of the Philoſophers, pronounceth a woe to thoſe whom they thought happie.
               
                  But woe to them that are rich here,
                        Luc. 6.24. Amos. 6.1. Eccl. 31.8. Eſay. 65.13.
                  
                  And do therein repoſe their truſt:
                  The day will come it ſhall appeare,
                  They dearely bought ſuch droſſe and duſt.
                  True treaſure in the heau'ns are found,
                  Each thing corrupteth in the ground.
               
               
                  Woe be to you that now are full,
                        Luc. 6.25. Eſay. 65.14. Gene. 25.30.
                  
                  For ye ſhall hunger after this,
                  If you were not exceeding dull,
                  For meate ye would not morgage bliſſe.
                  Woe be to you that now laugh ſo,
                  For you ſhall waile and weepe for wo.
               
               
                  Woe be to you whom men do prayſe,
                  And ſpeake well of, deſeruing ill,
                  When you haue driuen out your dayes,
                  You ſhall bewray your wicked will:
                  Falſe Prophets were by like deuice,
                  Among your elders, had in price.
               
            
            
               
               Chriſt teacheth his Diſciples, and in them all other Miniſters, what liues they ſhould leade, ſeeing they were appointed to be the ſalt of the earth, and light of the whole world.
               
                  Next, his Diſciples he did teach,
                  What they ſhould be in word and deed,
                  Leſt when to others they did preach,
                  They to be taught ſhould ſtand in need;
                  In life and manners he would haue,
                  Them honeſt, wiſe, and very graue.
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           ath. 5.13. 
                           
                              •
                           ar. 9.50. 
                           
                              •
                           c. 14.34.Ye are the ſalt the earth doth yeeld▪
                  
                  If in the ſalt no ſauour be,
                  It doth no good in houſe or field,
                  Men caſt ſuch out of doores we ſee:
                  As it could ſalt nothing before,
                  So it cannot be ſeaſoned more.
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           ath. 5.15. 
                           
                              •
                           ar. 4.21. 
                           
                              •
                           c. 8.16. 
                           
                              •
                           p. 11.33.Of all the world ye are the light,
                  A Citie ſet vpon an hill,
                  Can not be hid, by wile or might;
                  And light a candle no man will,
                  To hide it with a buſhell then,
                  When it ſhould giue moſt light to men.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 5.16. 
                           •
                         
                        Pet. 2.12.Let your light ſhine before men ſo,
                  That your good workes they all may ſee,
                  Your modeſt manners where ye go,
                  Example muſt to others be:
                  Your father that doth ſit on hye,
                  In heau'n, ſee you ſo glorifie.
               
            
            
               Christ came to fulfill the law.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 5.17.I am not come for to deſtroy
                  The law or Prophets, but fulfill,
                  I take in nothing ſo much ioy,
                  
                     As to obey my fathers will,
                  Till heau'n and earth do all decay,
                        Math. 5.18. Luc. 16.17.
                  
                  The law ſhall not be done away.
               
               
                  The leaſt commandement expreſt
                        Math. 5.19. Iames. 2.10.
                  
                  Who breakes, and teacheth other ſo,
                  In heau'n he ſhall be counted leaſt:
                  The contrarie who ſo will do,
                  Obſeruing them, and teach the ſame,
                  In heau'n he 
                        〈◊〉
                      receiue a name.
               
               
                  I ſay, except your righteouſneſſe,
                        Math. 5.20. Luc. 11.39.
                  
                  Exceede the rigeteouſneſſe of theſe,
                  You ſhall be voyde of happineſſe,
                  And heau'n (as they) for euer leeſe;
                  The Phariſies are verely,Scribes and Phariſies.
                  
                  Full fraught with all hypocriſie.
               
            
            
               Chriſt interpreteth certaine Commandements or Lawes: and firſt thou ſhalt not kill, correcting the falſe interpretations of the Scribes and Phariſies.
               
                  Here Chriſt correcteth very well,
                  The doctrine of the Phariſie,
                  Ye haue ofttimes (ſaid he) heard tell,
                  How they expounded ſenſuallie
                  Theſe wordes, which haue bene ſaid of old,
                        Math. 5.21. Exod. 20.13. Deut. 5.17.
                  
                  To kill another be not bold.
               
               
                  Who ſo (ſay they) doth kill, ſhall be
                  By iudgement therefore puniſhed,
                  But ma
                        •
                     ke what I ſay vnto thee,
                  Without cauſe who ſo is moued
                  (Againſt his brother) angerly,
                  Is ſubiect to iudgement thereby,
               
               
                  Who Racha ſaith his brother to,
                  By counſell ſhall be puniſhed,
                  
                     Take heede therefore before ye do,
                  Ye may hereby be terrified,
                  Who ſo his brother foole will call,
                  In daunger of hell fire doth fall.
               
               
                  With hand, with hart, and ſo in word,
                  We often ſpill our neighbours life,
                  The hand doth vſe to weild a ſword,
                  The heart deuiſeth bate and ſtrife,
                  And wordes when one diſdainfu
                        •
                     ,
                  Reuileth as an enemy.
               
            
            
               Chriſt would haue men to reconcile them ſelues one to another.
               
                  The greedy Phariſies, they ſay,
                  That offrings and oblations pleaſe,
                  Which now men offer day by day,
                  Yet no man knowes his owne diſeaſe.
                  I ſay, who doth his brother hate,
                  His gift is naught, and worſe his ſtate.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 5.23.If to the altar thou do bring,
                  Thy gift remembring ſome offence,
                  Againſt thy brother the leſt thing,
                  Leaue there thy gift departing thence,
                  Go reconcile thy ſelfe againe,
                  Thine offring then is not in vaine.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 5.25. Luc. 12.58.Agree while thou art in the way
                  With him that is at ſtrife with thee,
                  Leſt to the iudge without delay,
                  Deliuered by him thou be:
                  If Sergeant thee in priſon ſet,
                  Thence, till thou pay, thou ſhalt not get.
               
            
            
               
               Of Adultery.
               
                  It was of old time, alſo ſaid,
                        Math. 5.27. Exod. 20.14. Rom. 13.9.
                  
                  Commit not thou adultery.
                  But I ſay, looke you be affrayd,
                  To gaze on women luſtfully.
                  Who ſo doth ſo, doth for his part,
                  Commit adult'rie in his hart.
               
               
                  If thy right eye, or hand offend,
                  Plucke out, or cut, and caſt away,
                  For it is to a better end,
                  One member periſh and decay,
                  Then all thy body thou know'ſt well,
                  Should wholly ſo be caſt to hell.
               
            
            
               Of Diuorcement.
               
                  It hath bene ſaid,
                        Math. 5.31. Cap. 19.7. Mar. 10.4. Luc. 16.18. Deut. 24.1. 1. Cor. 7.10. who ſo had ſent
                  His wife away, he giuing her
                  A letter of their diuorcement,
                  Had not bene then an offender;
                  Except the wife a whore be found,
                  To liue with her, the man is bound.
               
               
                  Who ſo commits adultery,
                  The man or woman doth amiſſe,
                  And for that fault may verely,
                  Diuorced be as reaſon is:
                  No ſuch offender may therefore,
                  While th'other liues, match any more.
               
            
            
               Of Othes.
               
                  Againe of old they did forbid,
                        Math. 5.33. Exod. 20.7. Leuit. 19.12. Deut. 5.11.
                  
                  Forſwearing, for the ſame is ill,
                  Of othes each man his houſe ſhould rid,
                  So to obay Iehouahs will.
                  Othes rightly made do not delay,
                  
                     For to performe the ſame alway.
               
               
                  But otherwiſe ſweare not at all,
                  No not by heau'n the throne of God,
                  Nor by the earth, for ſo ye fall
                  In danger to deſerue his rod.
                  Nor by Ieruſalem, for this,
                  The Citie of the king it is.
               
               
                  Nor by thine head, thou canſt not make,
                  One haire thereof as blacke or white,
                  Moſt vaine are they that othes do take,
                  And vaine thoſe that in othes delight,
                  
                     
                        Math. 5.37. Iames. 5.12.Let ye and nay declare your will,
                  What ſo is more doth come of ill.
               
            
            
               Of Reuenge.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 5.38. Exod. 21.24. Leuit. 24.20. Deut. 19.21.Reuenge not though the law be ſo,
                  That eye or tooth muſt be repayde;
                  When one doth ſmite thee as a foe.
                  Vſe patience, be not diſmay'd.
                  And he that for thy coate will ſue,
                  Giue him thy cloake, and more then due.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 5.42. Deut. 15.8.If one compell thee for a myle,
                  Do thou at leaſt go with him twaine;
                  The asker do thou not reuile,
                  Giue thou and lend without diſdaine;
                  To do men good be ready ſtill,
                  And ſlow to do thy neighbour ill.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     Math. 5.43. L
                           •
                        uit. 19.18.Loue thine enemie.
               
                  Loue thou (ſay they) thy neighbour well,
                  Thine enemy thy ſelfe may hate,
                  Of vertues, loue, doth all excell,
                  What ſo the Phariſies do prate,
                  Your enemies loue not the worſe,
                  
                     And bleſſe you them that do you curſe.
                        Math. 5.44. Luc. 6.27.35.
                  
               
               
                  Do good to them that do you hate,
                  Pray for them that you perſecute:
                  They ſure ſhall haue a bleſſed ſtate,
                  My fathers will that execute:
                  He makes his ſunne and rayne to fall,
                        Math. 5.45. Luc. 6.35.
                  
                  On good and bad, alike to all.
               
               
                  If man do loue,
                        Math. 5.45. Luc. 6.32. or frendly be
                  To him, that doth to him the ſame,
                  What thankes for that deſerueth he?
                  Each ſinner muſt do this for ſhame.
                  Haue you therefore regard of this,
                  Be perfit as your father is.
               
            
            
               Almes.
               By ſound of trumpe, and in mens ſight,
                     Math. 6.1. Rom. 12.8.
               
               As hypocrites are wont to do,
               To giue thine almes is not aright,
               They gape for prayſe, and get no mo.
               In ſecret giue what God hath ſent,
               God will reward thy good intent.
            
            
               Prayer.
               
                  Pray not as hypocrites do pray,
                        Math. 6.5.
                  
                  All open to be ſeene of men;
                  But when thy prayers thou will ſay,
                  Shut cloſe in chamber be thou then:
                  Pray to thy father ſecretly,
                  He will reward thee openly.
               
               
                  Much babling ſee thou do not vſe,
                  Nor repetitions, they are vaine,
                  The heathen hope for like abuſe,
                  Some great reward thereby to gaine.
                  Be not like them, for God in deed,
                  
                     Before ye aske, doth know your need.
               
            
            
               The Lordes Prayer.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 6.9. Luc. 11.2.Pray thus when ye do pray therefore;
                  Our father which in heauen art.
                  Thy name be hallow'd euermore,
                  Thy kingdome we deſire in hart,
                  Thy will in earth make vs to do,
                  As it in heau'n is, euen ſo.
               
               
                  Giue vs this day our dayly bread,
                  Our debtes forgiue vs we thee pray,
                  As we our debters do: and lead
                  Vs not (Oh Lord) by any way
                  Into temptation, but ſee,
                  
                     
                        Math. 6.13. Cap. 13.19.From euill we deliu'red be.
               
               
                  For thine (good Lord) the kingdome ſure,
                  The power and the glorie is,
                  For euermore for to endure,
                  Which liueſt in eternall bliſſe.
                  Let this be done (oh Lord) we pray
                  In heart, whereto Amen we ſay.
               
            
            
               To forgiue one another.
               
                  
                     Math. 6.14. Mar. 11.25. Eccl. 28.2.If ye mens treſpaſſes forgiue,
               Your heau'nly father will againe
               Forgiue you yours: you while you liue,
               In loue and concord muſt remaine.
               If you forgiue not other men,
               Your faultes God will not forgiue then.
            
            
               Faſt.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 6.16.Moreouer when that ye do faſt,
                  Looke not ſowre, as the hypocrite,
                  That time as vayne, they vainly waſt,
                  For God therein hath no delite,
                  
                     Their faces they disfigure to,
                  That men may ſee what then they do.
               
               
                  When thou doeſt faſt, annoint thy head,
                  And let thy face then waſhed be:
                  Seeme not to men as one halfe dead,
                  Let God thy deedes in ſecret ſee.
                  Thy heau'nly father, both regards
                  Thy faſt, and theirs, haue their rewards.
               
            
            
               The carefull ſeeking of worldly things forbidden.
               
                  On earth hoord vp no treaſure ſo,
                        Math. 6.19.
                  
                  Where moath and canker eate apace:
                  Leſt with them you do heape on woe.
                  There theeues (men voyde of better grace)
                  Breake vp, thus they for riches deale,
                  When digging through, mēs wealth they ſteale.
               
               
                  But lay your treaſures vp aboue,
                        Math. 6.20. Luc. 12.33. 1. Tim. 6.19.
                  
                  In heau'n; where none of theſe are found:
                  You on your treaſures ſet your loue,
                  Lay not your loue ſo on this ground.
                  But lay it where is no decay:
                  Earth will corrupt and fade away.
               
               
                  The eye, doth giue the body light,Math. 6.22. Luc. 11.34. The light of the body is the eye.
                  
                  And reaſon rules the inner man:
                  If cleare and ſound remaine the ſight,
                  No darkneſſe hurt that body can.
                  If thine eye wicked be, then marke,
                  Sure all thy body ſhall be darke.
               
               
                  Two maſters, well, no man can ſerue:Math. 6.24. Luc. 16.13. No man can ſerue two maſters.
                  
                  For truly he the one will hate,
                  And for the other loue reſerue:
                  This of mans life is right the ſtate.
                  God and your riches, diſagree:
                  
                     They may not both, then ſerued be.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 6.25. Pſal. 55.22. Luc. 
                        
                           •
                        2.22. Phil. 4.6. 1. Tim. 6.8. 1. Pet. 5.7.Set not your care on meate and drinke,
                  Nor yet on your apparell ſo:
                  You with your ſelues muſt alwayes thinke,
                  That howſoeuer here ye go,
                  He that gaue life and body, will
                  Prouide you meate and clothing ſtill.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 6.26.The fowles of heau'n, ye may behold,
                  To ſow or reape they haue no care:
                  
                     Fowles.They neither want, nor ſuffer cold,
                  Much better farre then them ye are.
                  Your heau'nly father feedeth theſe:
                  And ſo will you, if you him pleaſe.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 6.28.Which of you can by taking care,
                  One cubite ad vnto his length?
                  Clothing you know what things they are,
                  Who giueth them and giueth ſtrength.
                  
                     Lyllies.Learne of the lyllies how they grow,
                  To ſpinne or carde they do not know.
               
               
                  Yet Salomon, to you I ſay,
                  Was not aray'd like one of theafe.
                  The graſſe if God do ſo aray,
                  Can he not cloth you if he pleaſe?
                  The faithfull neuer fayle to ſpeed:
                  God more regards you then a weed.
               
               
                  For meate, for drinke, for cloth alway,
                  Take ye no thought at all therefore:
                  The Gentiles ſeeke theſe day by day,
                  Your heau'nly father euermore
                  Will all your wants relieue in deed:
                  He knoweth well what things ye need.
               
               
                  Gods kingdome, if ye do ſeeke firſt,
                  
                     You can not wiſh but you ſhall haue.
                  If for his righteouſneſſe ye thirſt,
                  He will giue you, the things you craue.
                  Care not then for to morow day,
                  The griefe with it ſhall paſſe away.
               
            
            
               Chriſt forbiddeth raſh iudgement.
               
                  Iudge not leſt that ye iudged be,
                        Math. 7.1. Luc. 6.37. Rom. 2.1. 1. Cor. 4.3. Mar. 4.24.
                  
                  Like iudgement you ſhall haue be ſure:
                  Like meaſure ſhall be meaſur'd thee,
                  Looke that thine eye be cleare and pure;
                  A moate in others do not ſpye,
                  While that a beame is in thine eye.
               
            
            
               Holie things may not be giuen to dogges.
               Giue not to dogges, that holy is:
                     Math. 7.6.
               
               Nor caſt your pearles before the ſwine.
               The wicked they regard not this,
               And Epicures to luſt incline.
               When vnder feete they them haue tread:Pearles.
               
               They will not reſt till you be dead.
            
            
               Aske, ſeeke, knocke.
               
                  Aske, and it ſhall you giuen be:
                        Math. 7.7. Cap. 21.22. Mar. 11.24. Luc. 11.9. Ioh. 14.13. Cap. 16.24. Iames. 1.5.
                  
                  So they that ſeeke ſhall ſurely find:
                  Knocke, I will open vnto thee:
                  To them that call God he is kind,
                  He loueth ſuch men verely,
                  As pray vnto him hartily.
               
               
                  If you for bread, giue not a ſtone,
                  Nor for a fiſh, a Serpent ſend,
                  When that your ſonnes for want do mone,
                  If good things you do giue and lend;
                  How much more ſhall the father be,
                  Giue good things (if thou aske) to thee?
               
            
            
               
               The ſcope of the Scripture, and of the ſtrait and wide gate.
               
                  
                     Math. 7.12. Luc. 6.31. 
                        
                           ••
                        bie. 4.15. Luc. 13.24.What you would men to you ſhould do,
               Do euen ſo to them againe:
               The ſtrait gate enter in vnto,
               The way to death is broad and plaine,
               And many find that path (I ſay)
               But few do go the better way.
            
            
               Falſe Prophets.
               
                  
                     Math. 7.15.Falſe Prophets flye with all your might,
               Whoſe clothing pleade ſimplicitie:
               But inwardly their minds are dight,
               
                  
                     Math. 7.16. Luc. 6.43.With rau'ning and all villanie.
               Such by their fruites ye may well know:
               For grapes on thornes did neuer grow.
            
            
               The good and euill tree.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 7.18.A good tree, good fruit it will beare,
                  The euill yeeldes no fruit as this:
                  Ill fruit on good trees growes no where,
                  By fruit, the tree beſt knowen is.
                  
                     
                        Math. 7.19. Cap. 3.10.The ill, men hew, with fire to burne:
                  The good ſerue for a better turne.
               
               
                  Not eu'ry one that faith to me,
                  Lord, Lord, but he that doth Gods will,
                  In heau'n be ſure ſhall ſaued be.
                  My father gardes all his from ill;
                  The wicked that their good workes tell:
                  Shall miſſe of heau'n, and go to hell.
               
            
            
               The houſe on the rocke or ſand, the concluſion of this Sermon.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 7.24. Luc. 6.47.All that I haue declared now,
                  Who ſo doth heare with good intent:
                  
                     Is like to one that did beſtow
                  His money well, that he had ſpent,
                  To build a houſe for him and his,
                  Where rayne and wind hurt not ywis.
               
               
                  But who ſo heareth theſe my words,
                  And doth them not, is like a man,
                  That charges great in deed affoords:
                  To build a houſe where no man can,
                  Vpon the ſandes, where ſea and wind,
                  Do ſpoyle and ſwallow all they find.
               
               
                  When Ieſus, thus had finiſhed
                  This Sermon which he there did preach,
                  The people were aſtoniſhed,
                  To heare what doctrine Chriſt did teach.
                  He taught as with authoritie,
                  Vnlike the Scribe or Phariſie.
               
            
            
               Chriſt after his Sermon deſcending from the hill and going to Capernaum, healed a leaper by the way.
               
                  Deſcending downe then from the hill,
                        Math. 8.1. Mar. 1.40. Luc. 5.12.
                  
                  A leaper met him by the way:
                  And cryed, maſter if you will,
                  Both helpe, and heale me here you may.
                  I will, ſaid Chriſt, be cleane, and gone,
                  See that thou tell it vnto none.
               
               
                  Go to the Prieſt thy ſelfe to ſhow,
                  That he may iudge if thou be cleane,
                  And offer there that thou doeſt owe,
                  What Moſes did appoint I meane:
                  Giue them their due of all thy wealth,
                        Math. 8.4. Leuit. 14.4.
                  
                  That they may witneſſe of thy health.
               
            
            
               
               Chriſt healed the Centurions ſeruant of the palſie.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           ath. 8.5. 
                           
                              •
                           uc. 7.1.As Chriſt came Capernaum to,
                  A Captaine there, a Gentile borne,
                  Who for his ſeruant was ſo woe,
                  That he ſeemed a man forlorne;
                  He ſought all meanes his health to haue:
                  Chriſt with a word his life did ſaue.
               
               
                  The Captaines great humilitie,
                  And faith: Chriſt Ieſus did commend.
                  In Iſraell then verelie,
                  Like prayſe to none he did extend.
                  Of theſe ſaid Chriſt ſhall many come:
                  To heau'n, and haue the childrens roome.
               
            
            
               Chriſt caſt out a deuill at Capernaum, and diliuered the poſſeſſed from that infirmitie.
               
                  
                     
                        Mar. 1.21. Math. 4.13. Luc. 4.31.And ſo vpon the Sabb
                        •
                     th day,
                  Into the Synagog
                        ••
                      
                     
                        •
                     e went:
                  Thoſe workes to do without delay,
                  For which he to the world was ſent;
                  The people did vpon him gaze,
                  His doctrine did them ſo amaze.
               
               
                  He taught as with authoritie,
                  Not as the Scribes were wont to do.
                  Or the diſſembling Phariſie,
                  To whom Chriſt oft pronounced woe.
                  But as Gods onely ſonne in deed:
                  Sent man to ſaue, as God decreed.
               
               
                  And in the Synagogue there was,
                  A man poſſeſſed, euen then:
                  Whoſe cure Chriſt Ieſus brought to paſſe,
                  Yea in the fight of all thoſe men.
                  His doctrine he confirmed ſtill:
                  
                     With wonders, which he wrought at will.
               
               
                  Sathan that wicked ſpirite he,
                  Began within the man to cry;
                  Oh what haue we to do with thee?Oh Ieſus of Nazareth.
                  
                  I know thou art aſſuredly
                  The holy one of God, his ioy:
                  Art thou come vs for to deſtroy?
               
               
                  Ieſus rebuked him, and ſaid,
                  Come out of him and hold thy peace.
                  Sathan of Chriſt was all affrayd,
                  Yet loath the man for to releaſe.
                  But forced thence, the deuill did fly,The man.
                  
                  Crying; and tare him cruelly,
               
               
                  When he came out, the ſtanders by,
                  Were much amazed at the fight:
                  Asking each other buſily,
                  How they ſuppoſed that this might
                  Be done of him? what thing is this?
                  What thinke you that this doctrine is?
               
               
                  The ſpirites with authoritie,
                  He doth commaund; and they obay.
                  His fame was ſpread immediatly,
                  Throughout that region eu'ry way.
                  All Galilie did heare his fame:
                  And countreys bord'ring on the ſame.
               
            
            
               Chriſt raiſed Peters mother in law.
               
                  Chriſt from the Synagogue did go,
                        Math. 8.14. Mar. 1.29. Luc. 4.38.
                  
                  To Symons houſe as doth appeare:
                  With Andrew, Iames, and Iohn alſo;
                  His Godhead he declared there.
                  Men taſted ſtill in eu'ry place,
                  In ample meaſure of his grace.
               
               
                  
                  For when to Peters houſe he came,
                  Peters wife mother ſicke there lay:
                  A feauer vexed ſore the dame,
                  Which Chriſt rebuking, went away.
                  By touch of hand Chriſt helped her,
                  And ſhe to them did miniſter.
               
            
            
               Chriſt caſt out deuils, and healed all that came vnto him.
               
                  
                     Math. 8.16. Mar. 1.32. Luc. 4.40. Eſay. 53.4. 1. Peter. 2.24.When euen came he healed all
               They brought to him that vexed were;
               And the poſſeſſed there withall,
               Of deuils, among the people there.
               That what the Prophets ſaid before,
               Might be approued euermore.
            
            
               Ieſus paſſed thence to preach to other Cities.
               
                  
                     
                        Luc. 4.42.So he that night went to take reſt,
                  But roſe againe by breake of day:
                  For to go thence he thought it beſt,
                  Into a deſert place away.
                  
                     The people.Chriſt then they ſought, and found, kept ſo,
                  As men loath he ſhould from them go.
               
               
                  But Chriſt ſaid vnto them, I muſt
                  To others preach aſſuredly
                  The kingdome of God, this my truſt
                  I will diſcharge moſt faithfully.
                  And ſo he preaching dayly went
                  Through Galilie, as he was ſent.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Luc. 5.1. Math. 4.18. Mar. 1.16.It came to paſſe as Ieſus taught,
                  The people preſſed on to heare:
                  Some faithfull, ſome with faults full fraught,
                  Both good and bad to him drew neare.
                  The word of God Chriſt did not let,
                  
                     To preach then by Genezaret.
               
               
                  And ſeeing ſhippes by the lake ſide,Two ſnippes.
                  
                  Although the Fiſhermen were gone
                  To waſh their nets then in the tide:
                  Yet Chriſt went boldly into one.
                  The ſame was Symons ſhip in deed,
                  To aske him leaue he had no neede.
               
               
                  Yet Chriſt required him that he,
                  Would thruſt a little from the land;
                  That of the preaſſe he might be free,
                  He left them on the banke to ſtand:
                  And ſitting downe he taught them there,
                  That to his doctrine did giue care.
               
            
            
               After Chriſt had preached out of the ſhip, at the lake of Genezareth, he miraculouſlie tooke a great multitude of fiſhes.
               
                  When Chriſt left ſpeaking, then he ſaid
                  To Symon; launch the deepe into:
                        Luc. 5.4.
                  
                  Caſt out your nets, be not diſmaid,
                  Make heare a draught before ye go.
                  Trauailde we haue maiſter indeed,
                  All night, and yet we could not ſpeed.
               
               
                  Neuertheleſſe, at thy commaund,
                  I will let downe the net againe:
                  Oh maiſter, thou ſhalt vnderſtand,
                  That I let not for any paine.
                  Which done, of fiſhes they did take
                  So many, that their nets they brake.
               
               
                  Then beckned they for helpe vnto
                  Their partners, in the other boate:
                  To come, for they had much adoe,
                  
                     To ſaue what they as then had got.
                  The ſhips they filled when they came:
                  They both almoſt ſunke with the ſame.
               
               
                  When Symon ſaw it, all affraid
                  At Ieſus knees downe flat he fell:
                  Go from me Lord, withall be ſaid,
                  I am a ſinner, I know well.
                  For he and they aſtonied were,
                  That draught had put them in ſuch feare.
               
               
                  And ſo was Iames and Iohn alſo
                  Amazed, wondring all at this:
                  And Ieſus ſaid to Symon tho,
                  Thou ſhalt henceforth catch men iwis.
                  When they the ſhips had brought to land,
                  They followed Ieſus out of hand.
               
            
            
               Chriſts anſwer to a Scribe that would follow him.
               
                  When Ieſus then had finiſhed
                  
                     
                        Math. 8.18.The myracle yee heard before:
                  Perceiuing that him followed,
                  Then companies ſtill more and more,
                  Chriſt his diſciples did command,
                  To paſſe the riuer out of hand.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 8.19. Luc. 9.57.Then came a Scribe to him and ſaid,
                  Oh maiſter, I will follow thee:
                  For aunſwer he was not delaid,
                  The Foxes haue their holes ye ſee:
                  And fowles (ſaid Chriſt) their neſts; but I
                  Haue not a place wherein to lie.
               
            
            
               Chriſts aunſwer to one of his diſciples that would go burie his Father.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 8.21.Then a diſciple leaue did pray,
                  
                     He might go firſt, and in his graue
                  (As cuſtome was) his father lay,
                  Him ſo to do Chriſt would not haue;
                  Thine office and thy call ſee thou,
                  (Not worldly workes) go follow now.
               
               
                  The greater worke thou maiſt not leaue,
                  To take the leſſer worke in hand:
                  They that do ſo themſelues deceiue,
                  Thy charge learne thou to vnderſtand;
                  And let the dead therefore, ſaid he,
                  Their dead burie, and follow me.
               
            
            
               Chriſt as he paſſed the lake to the Gergeſens, ſtilled with his word a tempeſt.
               
                  When Chriſt aboord the ſhip was gone,
                  Him his diſciples followed:
                  Where ſuddainly to them anon,
                  A cruell tempeſt happened.
                  But Ieſus then ſlept very faſt,
                  Whom they were forſt to wake at laſt.
               
               
                  For as they paſſed then the lake,
                  Vnto the Gergeſens to goe:
                  The winde and weather ſore did ſhake
                  Their ſhip, and they all full of woe,
                  Calde Chriſt to helpe, whoſe word, I ſay,This hiſtorie, though the Euang. differ in ſome things: yet is the ſame that all the 3. recite, & but one hiſtorie. Math. 8.28. Mar. 5.1.
                     
                  
                  The wind and weather did obay.
               
            
            
               Chriſt paſſing ouer into the countrey of the Gergeſens, met two men there poſſeſſed with deuils: which he healed, and gaue the deuils leaue to go into the heard of ſwine. It is ſuppoſed of ſome, that this heard contained 2000. ſwine, for they were many.
               
                  When to the other ſide they came,
                  There two poſſeſſed met them then,
                  
                     
                     
                        Luc. 8.26.Out of the graues: for in the ſame,
                  Then commonly remain'd thoſe men.
                  Their fierceneſſe ſo did men affray,
                  That no man might go by that way.
               
               
                  And yet behold immediatly,
                  Aſſoone as Ieſus Chriſt they ſawe
                  They all began on him to crie;
                  (Sathan of him did ſtand in awe)
                  Oh Ieſus (ſaid they) what haue we,
                  Thou Sonne of God to do with thee?
               
               
                  Before the time what art thou come,
                  To torment vs, hither this way?
                  This time ſuppoſed is of ſome,
                  That Satan meant the iudgement day.
                  A heard of Swine fed certainly
                  Farre off from where the men did lie.
               
               
                  The deuils beſeeching Chriſt did ſay,
                  If thou do caſt vs out giue leaue,
                  That go into thoſe ſwine we may.
                  Chriſt Ieſus did their ſute receiue:
                  He bid them go, and ſo they went
                  Into the Swine as they were ſent.
               
               
                  And the whole heard with violence,
                  Into the ſea ranne from the hill:
                  The heardmen alſo fled from thence,
                  Their loſſe they tooke it verie ill.
                  They of the ſwine they had before,
                  Then of their health regarded more.
               
               
                  Theſe newes, being brought the cittie to,
                  The cittizens came out apace:
                  They for their ſwine made much adoe,
                  Becauſe they had no better grace.
                  
                     They crau'd that Chriſt would leaue with ſpeed
                  Their coaſts: which he did then in deed.
               
               
                  Sending the man late cur'de away,
                  Which would ſo faine with him haue gone:
                  But Chriſt gaue charge without delay,
                  He ſhould go ſhew what God had done,
                  Among his friends, who with good will,
                  Went backe and did his charge fulfill.
               
            
            
               Chriſt returning from the Gergeſens to Capernaum, healed one of the Palſey.
                     Math. 9.2. Marc. 2.3. Luc. 5.18.
               
               
                  To his owne cittie thence he came,
                  And lo, they brought him one in bed:
                  The Palſey had made him ſo lame,
                  That he lay there as one halfe dead.
                  My ſonne ariſe, take vp, ſaid he,
                  Thy bed, thy ſinnes forgiuen be.
               
               
                  The Scribes thought theſe blaſphemous words,
                  Why thinke ye ſo (ſaid Chriſt) againe?
                  You ſee what mercy God affoords:
                  Doe you at me therefore diſdaine?
                  I ſpake that you may know I may
                  Forgiue his ſinnes: riſe go thy way.
               
            
            
               Chriſt alſo healed a leaper there.
                     Luc. 5.12.
               
               
                  Another leaper then againe,
                  Chriſt healed of his leproſie:
                  Ieſus did no diſeaſe diſdaine,
                  He helped all indifferently.
                  This leaper fell downe on his face:
                  Calling on Chriſt for helpe and grace.
               
               
                  So Ieſus ſtretching forth his hand,
                  Did touch him: ſaying, ſo I will,
                  
                     Be cleane: and ſtraight at his command,
                  The man was healed of his ill.
                  And Chriſt commaunded him to ſay
                  Nothing of this: but go his way.
               
               
                  Yet go (ſaid he) the prieſt vnto,
                  And ſhew thy ſelfe: for ſo I will.
                  The lawe this likewiſe bids thee doe,
                  And it of force thou muſt fulfill.
                  The prieſt muſt iudge (ſaid Chriſt) of thee:
                  If wholy cleanſed that thou be.
               
               
                  The more that Chriſt himſelfe kept cloſe,
                  The more hereby encreaſd his fame:
                  The bruit by this begun, ſo roſe,
                  That more and more was ſpred his name,
                  So that the ſicke from place to place,
                  Came and receiued of his grace.
               
            
            
               The calling of Mathew from the receipt of custome.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 9.9. Mar. 2.14. Luc. 5.27.As Ieſus forth from thence did paſſe,
                  Mathew he cald, and went to meate
                  Home ſtraight with him from the ſame place,
                  With whom ſome Publicans did eate.
                  The Phariſies found fault with this:
                  Chriſt told them how they thought amiſſe.
               
               
                  The whole ſeekes no phyſick at all,
                  
                     
                        Math. 9.12. Cap. 12.7. Hoſea. 6.6. 1. Tim. 1.15.The ſicke of the Phiſition
                  Haue need: and oft for him do call.
                  So ſinners I haue mercy on,
                  For the repentant me doth moue,
                  As doth the righteous, him to loue.
               
            
            
               
               Of the time and cauſes of faſting, Chriſt anſwered the Phariſies and Iohns diſciples.
               
                  Then Iohns diſciples came, and ſaid,
                  The Phariſies faſt oft, and we:
                        Math. 9.14. Mar. 2.18. Luc. 5.33.
                  
                  But thy diſciples vnaffraid,
                  Do eate and drinke abroade with thee.
                  Then Ieſus ſaid, the children ſure,
                  Mourne not: while that the feaſt endure.
               
               
                  But when the Bridegroome ſhall be gone,
                  Then they will all faſt at that day.
                  No man doth patch a new piece on
                  An old garment, it rents away.
                  The law obſerued is by thee:
                  The Goſpell makes the other free.
               
               
                  New wine will burſt the bottels ſure
                  If they be old: therefore I ſay,
                  Sith ceremonies may endure
                  No longer time, but muſt delay,
                  Let new wine haue new veſſels then,
                  And be contented with theſe men.
               
            
            
               Chriſt healed a woman that had bin ſick of a bloudie iſſue twelue yeares, and raiſed Iayrus daughter from death.
               As Chriſt with Iairus thence did go,
                     Math. 9.18. Mar. 5.22. Luc. 8.41.
               
               To raiſe his daughter lately dead:
               A woman ſick twelue yeares or moe,
               With touching him, of health was ſped.
               And after that where they did ſee,
               The maide from death deliu'red he.
            
            
               Chriſt gaue ſight to the blind.
               When Ieſus did from him depart,
                     Math. 9.27.
               
               
                  Two blind men meeting him did crie,
               Thou ſonne of Dauid eaſe our ſmart.
               Beleeue ye then ſaid Chriſt, that I
               Can helpe' yes Lord ſaid they: then he
               Did touch their eyes, and made them ſee.
            
            
               Chriſt caſteth out a deuill, and maketh the dumbe man to ſpeake.
               
                  
                     
                        Mat. 9.32.Againe, they brought a dumbe man there,
                  Poſſeſſed with a deu'll: but he
                  Caſt out the deu'll, to their great feare:
                  And the dumbe ſpake, which Chriſt made free.
                  The people maruaild, yet ſome ſaid,
                  He had done it by Satans aide.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 9.35. Mar. 6.6. Luc. 13.22.So Ieſus went from place to place,
                  Teaching and healing eu'ry one:
                  To all that ſought, he did giue grace,
                  He was of great compaſſion.
                  
                     
                        Math. 9.37. Luc. 10.2. Ioh. 4.35.The labourers are few ſaid he,
                  Yet is the harueſt great yee ſee.
               
            
            
               At the poole of Betheſda, Chriſt healed a man that had bene diſeaſed 38. yeares, and being accuſed defended his fact.
               
                  
                     Cyrill. Chryſoſ. & Theophilact as Aretius ſaith, take this feaſt rather to be Pentecoſt then the Paſſeouer.After all this, againſt the feaſt
                  Of Paſſeouer, which then was nie,
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 5.1. Leuit. 23.3. Deut. 16.1.Chriſt Ieſus that tooke little reſt,
                  Vnto Ieruſalem did hie.
                  That holy Sabaoth of the Lord,
                  The Iewes obſeru'd with one accord.
               
               
                  Chriſt at Ieruſalem then found
                  A multitude of ſicke and lame:
                  About Betheſda lying round,
                  Abiding till the Angell came.
                  
                     When as the Angell ſtird the poole,
                  The water ſtill made one man whole.
               
               
                  Chriſt by that poole a man did ſee,
                  That had lyen ſicke there very long:
                  Wilt thou be whole oh man, ſaid he?
                  Sir I want helpe among this throng.
                  Riſe thou ſaid Chriſt, thy bed vp take:
                  For perfect whole I do thee make.
               
               
                  Chriſt heal'd him on the Sabboth day,
                  Whereat the Iewes were grieued ſore:
                  And ſought our Sauiour Chriſt to ſlay,
                  Rewarded thus he was therefore.
                  The Iewes accuſing Chriſt, do moue
                  Him iuſtly them for to reproue.
               
               
                  To whom the father witneſſed,
                  And Iohn did teſtifie the ſame:
                  The Scriptures alſo verified,
                  As did his works ſo full of fame,
                  That he the ſonne of God ſhould be:
                  The ſtubburne Iewes him would not ſee.
               
            
            
               Chriſt defended his Diſciples accuſed for plucking eares of corne on the Sabboth.
               
                  Three feaſts the Iewes kept yeare by yeare,
                        Math. 12.1. Mar. 2.23. Luc 6.1. Exod. 13.3. Cap. 23.15. Numb. 3 13.
                  
                  And chiefeſt Sabboth dayes did call:
                  Of the ſame feaſts it doth appeare,
                  The Paſſeouer was firſt of all:
                  This they the feaſt of ſweet bread name,
                  On this day they from Egypt came.
               
               
                  The next was that whereon God gaue,
                        Exod. 19 20. Deut. 16.10. Actes. 2.1.
                  
                  The law by Moſes vnto men:
                  That day in reuerence we haue,
                  The holy Ghoſt was giuen then:
                  
                     This ſome the feaſt of weekes do ſay,
                  Some Pentecoſt, ſome Whitſonday.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Deut. 16.13.The feaſt of Tabernacles laſt
                  Came of theſe three in order there:
                  Thoſe feaſts were neuer fully paſt,
                  Till all their dayes accompliſht were.
                  The firſt and laſt day of each feaſt,
                  Were counted chiefe of all the reſt.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Exod. 20.8.The ſeu'nth day alſo through the yeare,
                  Is was and ſo ſhall be for aye,
                  With them and Chriſtians eu'ry where,
                  In ſolemne wiſe a Sabboth day,
                  Though theirs and ours do diſagree;
                  One day with them obſerue not we.
               
               
                  Chriſt paſſed thorough a corne field,
                  Vpon the ſecond Sabboth day,
                  This doth to many matter yeeld,
                  To reaſon when he went that way.
                  
                     Aret. in Math. Cap. 12.
                     Some ſay it was in Eaſter feaſt,
                  The laſt and chiefe day of the reſt.
               
               
                  That day the firſt, doth anſwer well,
                  And ſo the ſecond Sabboth day
                  Men might it call; it did excell,
                  The middle dayes as all men ſay.
                  And there withall time of the yeare,
                  This reaſon good makes to appeare.
               
               
                  
                     Gualt. in Luc. Cap. 6. Eraſ. in Luc. Cap. 6.
                     Some thinke it was on Whitſonday,
                  Becauſe this Sabboth ſecond was,
                  As they ſuppoſe, and that no way,
                  The firſt did the ſame Sabboth paſſe.
                  Theſe reaſons both, may pleaſe all ſuch,
                  As ſelfe-will leades not ouermuch.
               
               
                  
                  That day a Sabboth day was ſure,
                  When the Diſciples plucked corne:
                  Which thing the Iewes could not indure,
                  They did the act moſt vilely ſcorne.
                  Not knowing him that went that way,
                  To be Lord of the Sabboth day.
               
               
                  The cauſe they did not waigh withall,
                  That hunger then did cauſe the ſame:
                  The Phariſies on Chriſt did call,
                  And his Diſciples fowlie blame.
                  They did prefer tradition,
                  Before their owne ſaluation.
               
               
                  But Chriſt ſaid vnto them againe,
                        Math. 12.3. 1. Sam. 21.6. Exod. 29.33. Leuit. 8.31. Cap. 24.9.
                  
                  What Dauid did who hath not read?
                  Now his example doth remaine,
                  Though Dauid lye a good while dead.
                  Theſe do as he did them before,
                  When he and his did hunger ſore.
               
               
                  He had the meate that was forbid:
                  Theſe breake you thinke the Sabboth day:
                  They do as he and his then did,
                  Find fault with him yet no man may.
                        Math. 12.5. Num. 28.9.
                  
                  The Prieſts do in the Temple ſo
                  The Sabboth breake, yet free they go.
               
               
                  One greater then the Temple is,
                        Math. 12.7. Hoſea. 6.6. Caep. 9.13.
                  
                  And here he ſtandeth verely:
                  Mercy will I, not ſacrifice;
                  Learne what this meaneth faithfully.
                  Then will you not condemne this day,
                  Theſe innocents that hurt no way.
               
               
                  The ſonne of man is Lord likewiſe.
                  Yea euen of the Sabboth day:
                  
                     Shall I then theſe ſo much deſpiſe,
                  Or ſuffer them for foode decay?
                  Though fault with them you find ſo ſoone:
                  
                     
                        Deut. 23.25.The law allowes what they haue done.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Mar. 2.27.The day is made all men to ſerue,
                  And no man made to ſerue that day:
                  Should not man then his life preſerue,
                  Vpon the Sabboth, if he may?
                  The law that bindeth man ſo faſt,
                  To finiſh I am come at laſt.
               
            
            
               Christ healed one in the Synagogue on the Sabboth day, that had a withered hand, and anſwered his accuſers.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 12.9. Mar. 3.1. Luc. 6.6.Now Chriſt diſpoſed to beat downe,
                  Their grieuous ſuperſtition,
                  Went ſhortly after to their towne,
                  To reaſon of this queſtion.
                  And to the Synagogue he went,
                  The fitteſt place for his intent.
               
               
                  For there was alwayes moſt reſort,
                  Which was our Sauiours Chriſts deſire:
                  That many men might haue comfort,
                  All his affection was on fire.
                  This his deuiſe to further then,
                  Fell out a worke among thoſe men.
               
               
                  A man there with a withered hand,
                  Was preſent in that very place:
                  
                     The Scribes & Phariſies.They ſaid giue vs to vnderſtand,
                  If law allow men ſo much grace,
                  As to be cured on this day?
                  Chriſt to accuſe they ſought a way.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 12.11.Chriſt anſwered to them againe,
                  What man ſhall haue a ſillie ſheepe,
                  
                     Fall in a pit, and lye in payne:
                  If it were worſt of all he keepe,
                  And will not on the Sabboth day:
                  Haue care to fetch it thence away?
               
               
                  How much more may a man be then,
                  Preferd before a ſheepe I pray?
                  There is no law forbiddeth men,
                  To do good on a Sabboth day.
                  Stretch forth ſaid Chriſt, thy withered hand:
                  This heard they all that there did ſtand.
               
               
                  It was reſtored to him ſo,
                  And all the people ſaw the ſame:
                  It fild the Phariſies with woe,
                  Which ſought for to eclipſe his fame.
                  And they went out with litle ioy,
                  Deuiſing Chriſt for to deſtroy.
               
               
                  For they had miſſed their intent,
                  Which made them rage ſo much the more:
                  To trappe him in his words they meant,
                  Yet fayl'd as they had done before.
                  His worthy works they did deſpiſe:
                  And went his death for to deuiſe.
               
               
                  But he that knew their meaning well,
                  Departed thence, and went away:
                  He needed not that man ſhould tell,
                  That they ſought how they might him ſlay.
                  His fathers will he did reſpect:
                  And he his works did well effect.
               
               
                  Great multitudes him followed thence,
                  And he likewiſe them healed all:
                  Each one that came in his preſence,
                  And vnto him for helpe did call.
                  
                     Yet charged them they ſhould not tell.
                  Or make him knowne, if they did well.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 12.18. Eſay. 42.1.Eſayas Prophecie tooke place;
                  My ſeruant whom I choſe ywis,
                  And my beloued full of grace,
                  In whom my ſoule delights, is this.
                  My ſpirite put on him I will:
                  And he ſhall iudge the Gentiles ſtill.
               
               
                  He ſhall not ſtriue in word or deed,
                  None in the ſtreet ſhall heare his voyce:
                  He ſhall not breake a bruiſed reed,
                  The Gentiles ſhall in him reioyce.
                  Yea ſmoaking flaxe quench ſhall not he:
                  Till he both iudge and victor be.
               
               
                  Chriſt then had twiſe refelled ſuch
                  Opinions fond, as they did hold:
                  At firſt they had preſumed much,
                  And then againe did ſeeme as bold.
                  The Sabboth lets no man at need,
                  His wants ſupply, or do good deed.
               
            
            
               Ieſus ſeeing the multitude diſperſed as ſheepe hauing no ſhepheard, tooke compaſſion on them.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 9.35. Mar. 6.6. Luc. 13.22.And Ieſus Chriſt did not ceaſſe then,
                  But went about to eu'ry place,
                  In townes and Cities among men,
                  To preach, and he was full of grace.
                  He healed each diſeaſe they had:
                  All men of him were very glad.
               
               
                  But when he ſaw the multitude,
                  He tooke on them compaſſion:
                  The people ſeemed very rude,
                  And wanting conſolation.
                  
                     For all abroad they ſcattered were,
                  As ſheepe that had no ſhepheard there.
               
            
            
               The harueſt great and the labourers few.
               The harueſt is ſurely ſaid he,
               Now very great, yet few I ſay,
               Do labour in the ſame: pray ye
               The Lord thereof to ſend away
               Some labourers for to take paine,
               That by his harueſt he may gaine.
            
            
               Chriſt called his xij. Apoſtles, and ſent them forth to preach, giuing them power to worke miracles and heale diſeaſes.
               
                  Then his Diſciples Chriſt did call,
                        Math. 10.1. Mar. 3.13. Luc. 9.1.
                  
                  Power to them he gaue and grace,
                  That vncleane ſpirites they ſhould all,
                  Caſt out of men, in eu'ry place.
                  As free you haue, ſo likewiſe deale:
                  All ſicke-men freely ſee you heale.
               
               
                  Twelue, Ieſus did ſend fotth to preach,
                  And did command them ſaying ſo:
                  Among the Gentiles them to teach,
                  Or to Samaria do not go.
                        Math. 10.6. Actes. 13.46.
                  
                  To the loſt ſheepe of Iſraell
                  Go firſt of all theſe newes to tell.
               
               
                  Say ye, and teach that now at hand
                  The kingdome of our God doth come,
                        Math. 10.7. Luc. 10.9.
                  
                  Saluation throughout the land,
                  Is ſurely ſent to all and ſome.
                  To all that will beleeue, ſay ye,
                  That they the ſame ſhall ſhortly ſee.
               
               
                  Heale ye the ſicke, the leapers clenſe,
                  Raiſe vp the dead, the deuils out caſt,
                  
                     And ſee when ye depart from hence,
                  
                     
                        Math. 10.9. Mar. 6.8. Luc. 9.3. Ca. 22.35.Ye freely giue from firſt to laſt.
                  And in your iourney take no care:
                  What weeds ye weare, or how ye fare.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 10.10. Luc. 10.7. 1. Cor. 9.9. 1. Tim. 5.18.What houſe or Citie ye come to,
                  Among the worthy there remaine,
                  Till you from thence haue cauſe to go,
                  Let them with you in peace retaine.
                  
                     As a witneſſe vnto them that you haue not of theirs as much as the duſt.Such as do not deſerue this grace,
                  Shake of their duſt in the ſame place.
               
               
                  That duſt ſhall witneſſe againſt thoſe,
                  
                     
                        Actes 13.51. Cap. 18.6.That you deſired not their wealth:
                  And earthly treaſure, that they choſe
                  Before this proffred ſauing health.
                  They in the iudgement ſure ſhall gaine,
                  Of Sodome and Gomorh the paine.
               
               
                  As ſheepe, I ſend you ſimple men,
                  In midſt of worldly wolues to go:
                  Be ye as wiſe as Serpents then,
                  And innocent as doues alſo.
                  To kings and counſels for my ſake,
                  When you are brought, no thought then take.
               
               
                  For what ye ſpeake, it is not ye:
                  When torments for you do remaine,
                  The holy Ghoſt in you ſhall be,
                  To guide your ſpeach, and eaſe your paine.
                  
                     
                        Math. 10.21. Luc. 21.16.The father ſhall the ſonne ſaid he,
                  And friend his friend betray for me.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 10.22. Mar. 13.13. Luc. 21.17.Ye ſhall be hated for my name,
                  But he that dureth to the end,
                  Shall ſaued be, and voyde of blame.
                  From perſecution you defend,
                  
                     From Citie to another go:
                  If you haue need for to do ſo.
               
               
                  For the Diſciple is not ſure,
                        Math. 10.24 Luc. 6.40. Ioh. 13.16. Cap. 15.20. Math. 12.24.
                  
                  Nor the ſeruant his Lord aboue:
                  Like death if you as I endure,
                  A ſigne it is of perfect loue.
                  If Beelzebub they do call me:
                  Is it ſtrange then you ſo ſhould be?
               
               
                  Nothing is hid,
                        Math. 10.26. Mar▪
                         4.22. Luc. 8.17. Cap. 12.2. but that ſhall I
                  Make manifeſt, and what ye heare
                  In ſecret, preach it openly.
                  Of men ye need not ſtand in feare;
                  Feare him that ſoule and body may
                  Deſtroy in hell, feare him I ſay.
               
               
                  If that a ſparow ſhall not fall,
                        Mat. 10.30. 2. Sam. 14.11 Actes. 27.34▪
                     
                  
                  Nor any haire of yours decay,
                  But that your father cares for all,
                  And ouer all doth beare a ſway:
                  Why ſhould you care or be afrayd?
                  You ſhall be ſure to haue his ayde.
               
               
                  Who ſo ſhall me on earth confeſſe,
                        Math. 10.32▪ 
                        Mar. 8.38. Luc. 9.26. Cap. 12.8.51 2. Tim. 2.12.
                  
                  Or me deny before men here,
                  Shall haue the like and nothing leſſe,
                  In heau'n, before my father there.
                  For my cauſe peace muſt needs decay,
                  And deareſt friends their friends ſhall ſlay.
               
               
                  Who father, friend, his ſonne or wife,
                        Math. 10.37 Cap. 16.24. Mar. 8.34. Luc. 9.23. Cap. 14.26.
                  
                  Doth loue more then he loueth me:
                  Who ſo my Croſſe (to ſaue his life)
                  Doth not take vp, but ſeeks to flye.
                  The one vnworthy of me is:
                  The other ſhall not ſcape ywis.
               
               
                  
                  He that receiueth you, or me,
                  Receiueth him that vs hath ſent:
                  
                     
                        Math. 10.41. Luc. 10.16. 
                           
                              •
                           oh. 13.20. Mar. 9 41.A Prophet who receiueth, he
                  Reward ſhall haue to his content.
                  Theſe litle ones who doth relieue:
                  God ſure to him reward will giue.
               
            
            
               Chriſtes Sermon at the ſending forth of his Apoſtles to preach.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        uc. 6.17. 
                        
                           •
                        welue Apo
                        
                           ••
                        les.When Ieſus had then made an end,
                  Of giuing theſe commandements
                  To his, whom he then forth did ſend,
                  To teach the Iewes good documents:
                  The place he ſtood in was a plaine,
                  And with him many did remaine.
               
               
                  Yea multitudes of people were,
                  Out of all Iurie ſtanding by:
                  From Tyre and Sydon they were there,
                  To heare his doctrine verely.
                  And at his hands to haue reliefe,
                  Each one as he was painde with griefe.
               
               
                  And they that with fowle ſpirits ſore
                  Tormented were, Chriſt heal'd them all:
                  And ſtill they ſought him more and more,
                  (Which boldly durſt not on him call)
                  To touch his veſture as he went:
                  For health thereby to them was ſent.
               
               
                  Then Ieſus lifted vp his eyes,
                  On his Diſciples, ſaying this:
                  Ye poore are bleſſed euen thriſe,
                  For yours Gods kingdome ſurely is.
                  Ye that now hunger bleſſed are,
                  You ſhall be ſure of better fare.
               
               
                  
                  And ye that weepe, yet bleſſed are,
                  For ye ſhall likewiſe laugh againe:
                  When men hate you, take ye no care,
                  And when they do procure your paine.
                  Nor yet when they you ſeparate,
                  Reuiling at your baſe eſtate.
               
               
                  If for the ſonne of mans ſake, they
                  Your names put out as euill men,
                  Reioyce ye greatly, God obay,
                  And be in heart glad of it then.
                  Behold in heau'n reward haue ye:
                  The Prophets were, as now ye be.
               
               
                  But woe to them that rich are here,
                        Luc. 6.24. Amos. 6.1. Eccl. 31.8.
                  
                  And do repoſe thereon their truſt:
                  The day will come it ſhall appeare,
                  They dearly bought vile earth and duſt.
                  In heau'n true treaſure may be found:
                  Each thing corrupts that growes in ground.
               
               
                  Woe be to you that now are full,
                  For yee ſhall hunger after this:
                        Luc. 6.25. Eſay. 65.13. Gen. 25.30.
                  
                  If you were not exceeding dull,
                  For meate, ye would not morgage bliſſe,
                  Woe be to you that now laugh ſo,
                  For you ſhall waile and weepe for wo.
               
               
                  Woe be to you whom men do praiſe,
                  And ſpeake well of, deſeruing ill:
                  When yee haue ſpent out all your dayes,
                  You ſhall bewray what was your will.
                  Falſe Prophets were by like deuiſe,
                  Among your elders had in price.
               
               
                  But vnto you which heare, I ſay,
                        Luc. 6.27. Math. 5.4
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  Your enemies ſee that yee loue:
                  
                     To them that hate you, if ye may,
                  Shew how my doctrine doth you moue
                  To do them good, and bleſſe withall,
                  And pray for them, that wiſh your fall.
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           uc. 6.29. 
                           
                              •
                           ath. 5.39. 
                           •
                         
                        Cor. 6.7.To him that ſmiteth thee alſo,
                  Vpon one cheeke, the other giue:
                  Who ſo thy cloake would take thee fro,
                  Giue him thy coate, and do not grieue
                  To purchaſe ſo a quiet life,
                  And ſtirre thou no debate or ſtrife.
               
               
                  Giue eu'ry man that asketh thee:
                  And he that takes thy goods away
                  By force or fraude how ſo it be:
                  Aske thou them not againe I ſay.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              ••
                           c. 6.31. 
                           
                              •
                           ath. 7.12. 
                           
                              ••
                           h. 4.15.But vnto other men ſo do,
                  As thou wouldſt be of them done to.
               
               
                  If that ye loue, do good, or lend,
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              ••
                           c. 6.32. 
                           
                              •
                           ath. 5.46. 
                           
                              ••
                           ut. 15.8.To them that do requite the ſame,
                  Each ſinner ſo doth for his friend;
                  You ſhould do more then ſuch for ſhame.
                  Be mercifull to ſuch as need:
                  For ſo your father is indeed.
               
            
            
               Chriſt healed the Centurions ſeruant being abſent: the Centurions faith.
               
                  After that Chriſt had finiſhed
                  His Sermon, as you heard before:
                  From thence he likewiſe haſtened;
                  For he deſired more and more,
                  The worke he had in hand to end:
                  Which for our good did wholly tend.
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           ath. 8.4. 
                           
                              •
                           uc. 7.1.As Capernaum he came to,
                  A Captaine there a Gentile borne,
                  
                     Made for his ſeruant much adoe,
                  That ſeemed then a man forlorne.
                  He ſu'd by meanes his health to haue:
                  Chriſt with a word his life did ſaue.
               
               
                  The Captaines great humility,
                  And faith, our Sauiour did commend:
                  In Iſraëll then certainly,
                  Like praiſe to none he did extend.
                  Of theſe ſaid Chriſt ſhall many come
                  To heau'n: and haue the childrens roome.
               
            
            
               Chriſt raiſed from death the widowes ſonne at Naijm.
               The next day after, Chriſt did raiſe
               The widows ſonne to life againe:
                     Luc. 7.11.
               
               And all the people gaue God praiſe,
               That preſent then did there remaine.
               All they did ſpread abroad his fame,
               That either ſaw or heard the ſame.
            
            
               Iohn Baptiſts meſſage to Chriſt by two of his diſciples.
               
                  Iohn Baptiſt was in priſon caſt,
                        Math. 11.2. Luc. 7.18.
                  
                  Herodias had obtaind the ſame:
                  And his diſciples came in haſt,
                  And told him there of Ieſus fame.
                  Yet he in priſon as before,
                  Would winne to Chriſt diſciples more.
               
               
                  For when his workes to him were told,
                  That his diſciples might beleeue
                  In Ieſus Chriſt: Iohn ſaid; behold,
                  A meſſage vnto you I giue,
                  (Iohn knew him well aſſuredly:
                  As he oft times did teſtifie.
               
               
                  
                  But that his might alſo perceiue,
                  That Chriſt the true Meſſiah was:
                  Of whom they ſhould all grace receiue,
                  In whom they might all truth embrace.)
                  Go ye, and ſay, Iohn ſent to thee,
                  To aske if thou be euen he?
               
               
                  They went, and both to Ieſus came,
                  And ſaid to him, our maiſter ſent:
                  To know if thou be ſure the ſame,
                  Or elſe another that is meant?
                  Men knew as then that Chriſt ſhould come:
                  How, when, or where, that knew but ſome.
               
            
            
               Chriſts anſwer ſent backe to Iohn by his diſciples.
               
                  Go back ſaid Chriſt, to Iohn againe,
                  Shew him what yee do heare and ſee:
                  The blinde and halt are rid of paine,
                  The leapers and the deafe go free:
                  
                     
                        Math. 11.5. 
                           
                              •
                           uc. 4.18. 
                           
                              •
                           ſay. 61.1.The dead are raiſed vp, this day
                  The poore, the goſpell beare away.
               
               
                  And therewithall to them he gaue,
                  A gentle admonition,
                  His humbleneſſe that they might haue
                  In reu'rent eſtimation.
                  Bleſſed ſaid Chriſt, ſhall that man be,
                  That taketh no offence by me.
               
            
            
               Chriſts teſtimonie of Iohn Baptiſt.
               
                  When they were gone, then Chriſt began
                  To ſpeake vnto the company:
                  What went yee out to ſee? a man
                  Infected with inconſtancie?
                  Iohn you in wilderneſſe did finde:
                  
                     Not as a reede, ſhakt with the winde.
               
               
                  What went ye then out for to ſee?
                  A man cloathed in ſoft raiment?
                  Such men in kings courts vſe to be:
                  Iohn is with meaner weed content.
                  Iohns raiment ſhowes him to be plaine:
                  He flattred not, he could not faine.
               
               
                  But what went yee out then to ſee?
                        Math. 11.10. Luc. 7.27. Malach. 3.1.
                  
                  A prophet? I ſay to you more.
                  Of whom is written, (this is he)
                  My meſſenger ſhall go before.
                  This is Elias, whom they ſay,
                  Should come for to prepare the way.Either becauſe he is in heauen already, & Iohn aliue: or the leaſt is beare taken for Chriſt, as he is made leſſe then the angels. Pſal. 8. Math. 11.12. Luc. 16.16.
                     
                  
               
               
                  No greater among men did riſe
                  Then Iohn the Baptiſt, verely,
                  Not any that you can deuice.
                  Yet this I ſay, aſſuredly
                  The leaſt in heau'n goes him before:
                  And doth enioy Gods graces more.
               
               
                  Gods kingdome ſuffreth violence,
                  Since Iohns time to this very day:
                  The Gentiles with all diligence
                  Without the law, new cald, obay.
                  The lawe and Prophets haue their end:
                  For he is come whom yee attend.
               
               
                  He that hath eares to heare, may heare.
                  Marke what I ſay therefore, amend,
                  Sith that Elyas did appeare,
                  The law and Prophets made an end.
                  Yet you remaine both deafe and blind,
                  That may your true Meſſiah find.
               
            
            
               
               Chriſt reprooueth his auditorie.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 11.16. Luc. 7.31.This generation it is,
                  Like children that their fellowes call:
                  And ſay we piped haue iwis,
                  And yet yee daunced not at all.
                  So you deferre from day to day,
                  For to repent for all we ſay.
               
               
                  Hard was the life that Iohn did lead,
                  For meate and drinke he tooke no care:
                  He had a deuill, men ſuppoſed.
                  The ſonne of man they do compare,
                  With gluttons, and with drunkards, when
                  He eateth meat as other men.
               
            
            
               Chriſt vpbraideth the vnthankefull citties, wherein he had taught and done ſo many miracles, and yet they repented not.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 11.20. Luc. 10.13.Then Chriſt began for to vpbraid,
                  The citties that ſo oft had ſeene
                  His workes: and yet for all delaid
                  For to repent, as they had beene
                  Cleane void of ſinne, or had no will,
                  To learne the good, and leaue the ill.
               
               
                  Chorazin wo be vnto thee,
                  And to Bethſayda woe likewiſe:
                  The great works that were done by me
                  In you, yee greatly did deſpiſe.
                  If they in Tyrus had bene done,
                  It had repented long agone.
               
               
                  If Tyre and Sidon had, I ſay,
                  Both ſeene, and heard what ye did heare:
                  Sac
                        •
                     loth and aſhes eu'ry day
                  
                     Had beene their weed: ye buy it deare,
                  For at the iudgement then to thee,
                  To them more eaſie ſhall it be.
               
               
                  Thou Capernaum lift ſo hie,
                  Yea raiſed vp to heau'n aboue,
                  To hell thou ſhalt be brought to lye,
                  Becauſe my works thee neuer moue.
                  If they in Sodome had bene wrought,
                  It had not yet bene brought to nought.
               
               
                  For Sodome it ſhall eaſier be,
                  Oh Capernaum be thou ſure,
                  At the laſt iudgement, then for thee,
                  Thy puniſhment for to endure.
                  Tyre, Sydon, and Sodom ſhall haue
                  More eaſe then theſe, though then they craue.
               
            
            
               Chriſt his gratulation for the ſucceſſe of the Goſpell by his Apoſtles.
               
                  Then Ieſus ſaid,
                        Math. 11.25. Luc. 10.21. I giue to thee
                  (Oh mightie Lord and Father deare)
                  Moſt hartie thanks, thou heareſt me,
                  And to my call thou giueſt eare.
                  Theſe things thou hideſt from the wiſe,
                  Their worldly wit thou doeſt deſpiſe.
               
               
                  Thy ſecrets vnto babes withall,
                  And humble men, thou doeſt declare:
                  Theſe do on thee for mercy call,
                  Theſe, theſe, oh God thy choſen are.
                  This thy good pleaſure was, and is:
                  Oh Father none can alter this.
               
               
                  All things to me now giuen are
                        Math. 11.27. Ioh. 3.35. Cap. 6.46.
                  
                  Of my father, the ſonne and he,
                  No mortall man can well declare
                  
                     One of them both, except he be
                  Taught by the ſonne, and ſo he may
                  Learne both to know, this onely way.
               
            
            
               Chriſts exhortation to beare the Croſſe.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 11.28.Ye that are laden, come to me,
                  Come all that wearie are likewiſe:
                  And you ſhall all refreſhed be,
                  They ſhall haue wo, that me deſpiſe.
                  I am the life, the light, the way:
                  They that ſeeke me ſhall not decay.
               
               
                  Take vp my yoke, and learne of me,
                  
                     
                        Math. 11.29. Ierem. 6.16.For meeke and lowly ſure I am:
                  Reſt to his ſoule ſo find ſhall he,
                  Whoſe necke, my yoke, doth onely tame.
                  
                     
                        Math. 11.30. 1. Ioh. 5.3.My yoke is eaſie day and night,
                  And ſo my burthen verie light.
               
            
            
               Chriſt dined in the houſe of Symon the Phariſie, was annointed of a ſinfull woman, and being accuſed, defended himſelf, and her fact.
               
                  
                     
                        Luc. 7.36. Mar. 14.3.Then of the Phariſies came one,
                  Which bid Chriſt to his houſe to meate:
                  And Ieſus went with him anone,
                  And at the table ſate to eate.
                  While he was there, came by and by,
                  A ſinfull woman verely;
               
               
                  And when ſhe knew he was ſet downe,
                  At table with the companie:
                  (Becauſe ſhe dwelled in that towne,
                  No man miſlikt her modeſtie:)
                  With boxe in hand of ointment ſweet,
                  She came and fell at Ieſus feete.
               
               
                  
                  To ſhew withall her miſerie,
                  She ſtood Chriſt Ieſus backe behind:
                  And there ſhed teares abundantly,
                  The tokens of a wofull mind.
                  With teares his feete ſhe waſhed faire,
                  And then did wipe them with her haire.
               
               
                  And oftentimes ſhe kiſt his feete,
                  That ſo ſhe walked with ſuch care:
                  Her boxe of ointment very ſweet,
                  To ſpend on them ſhe did not ſpare.
                  Her ſinnes ſo great, ſhe did beleeue,
                  That Chriſt would them to her forgiue.
               
               
                  And Symon ſeeing what was donne,
                  By her ſince ſhe his houſe came to:
                  This to conceiue, he then begonne,
                  If this man were a Prophet lo,
                  He would know that this woman is
                  A ſinner, that his feete doth kiſſe.
               
               
                  Then Ieſus vnto Symon ſayd,
                  Somwhat I haue to ſay to thee.
                  No longer let it be delayd,
                  Oh maſter, this againe ſaid he.
                  Though Chriſt perceiued Symon well,
                  Yet knew not he what Chriſt would tell.
               
               
                  There was a certaine lender had,
                  Two debters, and their ſtate was ſuch,
                  That neither of them could be glad,
                  Their debt to either was ſo much.
                  The one fiue hundred pence, I know,
                  The other fiftie pence did owe.
               
               
                  When neither knew what ſhift to make,
                  For they had not wherewith to pay,
                  
                     The lender did then pitie take,
                  Forgaue them, and ſent both away.
                  Oh Symon ſhew me if thou can,
                  Which of them will loue moſt this man?
               
               
                  He anſwered, and ſaid againe,
                  He vnto whom he moſt forgaue:
                  For he was rid of greateſt paine,
                  And had moſt need of both to craue.
                  Then Ieſus ſaid, thou iudgeſt right:
                  Behold this woman in thy ſight.
               
               
                  Into thy houſe when firſt I came,
                  Thou gau'ſt thy feete no water tho:
                  Yet ſhe with teares hath waſht the ſame,
                  And wipt them with her haire alſo.
                  No kiſſe of thee I had, I ſay,
                  She kiſſed hath my feete this day.
               
               
                  Thou diddeſt not mine head annoint,
                  But ſhe annointed hath my feete:
                  (Chriſt reaſoned from point to point,
                  Of her and of her odours ſweet:)
                  Wherefore her ſinnes, I ſay to thee,
                  (Though many) all forgiuen be.
               
               
                  Whom much or litle men forgiue,
                  Like meaſure they do yeeld of loue:
                  It will no good man therefore grieue,
                  That men his mercy ſo ſhould moue.
                  And to the woman, then ſayd he,
                  Thy ſinnes they are forgiuen thee.
               
               
                  But they that ſate with him at meate,
                  Began within themſelues to ſay,
                  How can this man that here doth eate,
                  Forgiue ſinnes? this God onely may.
                  
                     Chriſt ſaid to her, from labour ceaſe:
                  Thy faith hath ſau'd thee, go in peace.
               
            
            
               The women that Chriſt had deliuered from euill ſpirites and healed of ſundry infirmities, followed him as he went from place to place to preach the Goſpell, and miniſtred vnto him of their ſubstance.
               
                  And afterward, it came to paſſe,
                        Luc. 8.1.
                  
                  That Chriſt from towne to towne would go,
                  Preaching, and publiſhing apace,
                  The kingdome then of God alſo.
                  The twelue Apoſtles with him were,
                  And certaine women eu'ry where.
               
               
                  Some of them Chriſt had helpt before,
                  And rid of their infirmities:
                  He cured with his word their ſore,
                  And healed all their maladies.
                  Yea deu'ls he out of many ſent:
                  Seuen out of Magdalen there went.Marie Magdalen was one of thē that followed Chriſt.
                  
               
               
                  Ioanna, alſo Chuzas wife,
                  King Herods ſteward then was there,
                  A woman of a godly life,
                  And one that ſtood of God in feare.
                  Suſanna, and a number mo,
                  From place to place with Chriſt did go.
               
               
                  They for their health receiu'd, reſtore
                  To Chriſt all kind of thankfulneſſe:
                  To him and his they of their ſtor
                        •
                     
                  
                  Did miniſter with ioyfulneſſe.
                  Thoſe women all with full intent,
                  To heare and learne Gods word were bent.
               
               
                  And when into a houſe they came,
                  The multitude met ſo againe:
                  
                     (So farre abroad was ſpread his fame,)
                  He could no ſpace alone remaine.
                  Both he and his, though they had meate,
                  Had then no time the ſame to eate.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 12.22. Luc. 11.14.Then they brought vnto Ieſus one
                  Poſſeſſed with a deuill, I find,
                  And him for helpe they call vpon,
                  The man withall was dumbe and blind.
                  Theſe three impediments had he:
                  Yet with his word Chriſt made him free.
               
               
                  The multitude amazed were,
                  And prayſed God with hart and voyce:
                  The ſonne (ſaid they) of Dauid here,
                  Doth geue vs cauſe for to reioyce:
                  And now we all aſſured be,
                  This Chriſt the Lord is euen he.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 12.24. Cap. 9.34. Mar. 3.22. Luc. 11.15.But the hard hearted Phariſies,
                  When they heard this, began to ſay:
                  He fils you full of phantaſies,
                  For Beelzebub this part doth play;
                  Without his helpe he neuer can
                  Caſt out the deu'll out of a man.
               
            
            
               A kingdome or a Citie deuided within it ſelfe cannot endure.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 12.25.But Ieſus knew their thoughts before,
                  And therefore vnto them did ſay:
                  What kingdome warreth very ſore
                  Within it ſelfe, without decay?
                  What Citie or what houſe may ſtand,
                  Deuided ſo, in any land?
               
               
                  If Sathan caſt out Sathan ſure,
                  Or I by Beelzebub do ſo,
                  
                     His kingdome cannot long endure:
                  One thing I aske you and no mo;
                  By whom do your ſonnes caſt them out?
                  They ſhall you iudge in this no doubt.
               
               
                  If through God caſt out the ſame,
                  Then is his kingdome come this day:
                  If one man to a ſtrong man came,
                  To ſpoile his houſe, and runne away,
                  Can he his purpoſe bring to paſſe,
                  Ere he be bound that owner was?
               
               
                  But I by force gaue him the foyle,
                  Whoſe helpe you ſay, I daily vſe:
                  The more for you that I do toyle,
                  The more you ſtill do me abuſe.
                  He that on my ſide is not, he
                  Againſt me fully ſure muſt be.
               
            
            
               Blaſphemie.
               
                  Each ſinne, and ſo each blaſphemy,
                        Math. 12.31. Mar. 3.28. Luc. 12.10. 1. Ioh. 5.16.
                  
                  Shall be forgiuen men, I ſay,
                  If they repent it hartely,
                  And for remiſſion do pray;
                  Except againſt the holy Ghoſt,
                  Of all, this ſinne offendeth moſt.
               
               
                  The ſinne againſt the ſonne of man,
                  Which oftentimes doth hap and chance:
                  Both francke and free remit I can,
                  For it may come of ignorance.
                  The works Gods ſpirit works are ſuch,
                  That they cannot be hidden much.
               
               
                  Take heed ye do not then offend,
                  Or ſinne againſt the holy Ghoſt:
                  God will not ſure world without end▪
                  
                  
                     Forgiue that ſinne, he hates it moſt.
                  The tree and fruit make good I ſay,
                  Or make both 
                        •
                     it to caſt away.
               
               
                  As by the fruit we know the tree,
                  So by your wordes, ye knowen are:
                  Oh vipers, you that euill be,
                  Your ſpeaches do your workes declare.
                  
                     
                        Math. 12.34. Luc. 6.45.The hart it ſtoreth good or ill,
                  Whereof the mouth doth ſauour ſtill.
               
               
                  Both good men and the euill ſhow,
                  What treaſure they haue hid in hart:
                  At the laſt iudgement you ſhall know,
                  How well or ill you plaide your part.
                  Vaine talke who ſo doth here affoord,
                  Shall anſwer for each idle word.
               
            
            
               Chriſt denied the Iewes any ſigne, ſauing onely the ſigne of Ionas.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 12.38. Cap. 16.1. Luc. 11.29. 1. Cor. 1.22.The Scribes and Phariſies withall,
                  Came tempting Chriſt, and ſought a ſigne,
                  As if on ſight thereof they all,
                  From former faults would then decline.
                  But Chriſt that knew the inward mind,
                  With words they could not ſo make blind.
               
               
                  Chriſt anſwered, and ſaid againe,
                  Thou wicked generation,
                  Adulterous, and very vaine,
                  Though ſignes thou doeſt depend vpon,
                  No ſigne ſhall geuen be to thee,
                  But that of Ionas thou ſhalt ſee.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 12.40. Ionas. 1.17. Cap. 2.10.As three dayes and three nights he was,
                  Within the whale all couered:
                  So ſhortly it will come to paſſe,
                  
                     I ſhall in earth be buried.Ionas in the belly of the whale was a figure of Chriſ
                           •
                         in his graue.
                  
                  Three dayes and three nights verely,
                  In graue the ſonne of man ſhall lye.
               
            
            
               Chriſt argued the Iewes of impenitencie.
               
                  The men of Niniuie ſhall riſe
                  With theſe, and ſhall condemne them to:
                        Math. 12.41. Ionas. 3.5.
                  
                  They Ionas words did not deſpiſe,
                  But did repent, as you ſhould do.
                  One greater then Ionas is here,
                  Yet ſmall repentance doth appeare.
               
               
                  The Queene of Saba ſhe ſhall riſe,Math. 12.42. 1. King. 10.1. 1. Chron. 9.2. Saba is full South from Ieruſalem.
                  
                  In Iudgement, with theſe men alſo:
                  And them ſhe ſhall condemne likewiſe,
                  That ſo farre from her home would go
                  To heare king Salomon; I ſay,
                  His greater yet you heare this day.
               
            
            
               Chriſt prnounced an heauie ſentence againſt ſuch as reuolt from the truth receiued.
               
                  They which are once deliuered
                        Math. 12.43. Luc. 11.24.
                  
                  From vncleane ſpirits, free and well:
                  Are after iuſtly puniſhed,
                  If in them they againe do dwell.
                  Their laſt end ſure farre worſe ſhalbe,
                  Then was the firſt, take this of me.
               
               
                  The vncleane ſpirit places dry,
                  Doth walke throughout ſeeking a reſt:
                  Where faith, where hope, where charitie,
                  Is ſetled ſure within mans breſt,
                  It is ſo dried with Gods grace,
                  That deuils haue there no reſting place.
               
               
                  Then he returneth home againe,
                  Into the houſe from whence he went:
                  
                     (For all this while he walkt in vaine,
                  And miſſed ſtill of his intent)
                  This houſe he findeth ſwept within,
                  Cleane voide of vertue, deckt with ſinne.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 12.45. 
                           •
                        . Pet. 2.20. 
                           
                              •
                           ebr. 6.4. Cap. 10.26.Then taketh he ſeauen ſpirits more,
                  As ill as he in euery thing:
                  And dwels where he did dwell before,
                  His end is worſe then beginning.
                  So ſhall it with this people be,
                  They mend not for all that they ſee.
               
               
                  This ſpirit is the deuill indeed,
                  His houſe is man where he doth dwell,
                  The drie place where he cannot ſpeed,
                  Mans heart it is, heat by God well
                  With godly zeale, and hate of ſinne;
                  He reſts not there though he come in.
               
            
            
               Chriſt ſhewed who his mother, ſiſters, and brethren are.
               
                  While Chriſt ſpake to the company,
                  
                     
                        Math. 12.46. Mar. 3.31. Luc. 8.20.His mother and his brethren were
                  Without: deſiring earneſtly,
                  To talke with him as may appeare.
                  Then one of them that was there, came
                  And told our ſauiour of the ſame.
               
               
                  But he preferring farre before,
                  The worke that he then had in hand,
                  Encreaſing daily more and more;
                  He ſaid, to ſuch as there did ſtand,
                  My mother and brethren be they,
                  That do my doctrine ſtill obey.
               
               
                  My mother, whom I loue ſo well,
                  My brethren, whom I like alſo,
                  
                     Are theſe: and they (marke what I tell)
                  For brother and ſiſter ſhall go.
                  My friends they are who ſo do ſtill,
                  Performe and keepe my fathers will.
               
            
            
               The ſtate of the kingdome of God, ſet forth by ſeauen parables, and firſt of the ſeed.
               
                  By parables Chriſt taught men plaine,
                  The ſtate, nature, and worthineſſe
                  Of Gods word: he did not diſdaine,
                  To ſhew alwaies his readineſſe,
                  His choſen in all things he may
                  To helpe; and winne them eu'ry way.
               
               
                  Chriſt though of late he had bene let,
                  And interrupted by his friends,
                  His office he did not forget,
                  For their great fault he made amends.
                  To the ſea ſide from thence he went,
                  To preach againe with like intent.
               
               
                  And the ſame place,
                        Math. 13.1. Mar. 4.1. Luc. 8.4. was the ſea ſide
                  That by Genezaret doth lie,
                  Where he ſat downe for to abide;
                  But preaſed on with company,
                  He tooke a ſhip wherein he ſate,
                  And taught them as he had done late.
               
               
                  The people ſtanding on the ſhore,
                  With diligence did giue him eare:
                  The multitude encreaſing more,
                  The more of him did ſtand in feare.
                  Whoſe words and workes they all did ſee,The firſt par
                           •
                        
                        ble, wherein ſhewed the 
                           •
                        
                        dition of the word of God
                  
                  In eu'ry thing ſo well agree.
               
               
                  Behold, ſaid Chriſt, a ſower went
                  To ſowe his ſeed; but ſome ſeed fell
                  
                     Farre otherwiſe then he had meant
                  By the way ſide, which could not well
                  Yeeld fruite: the fowle without delay
                  Deuour'd them all ſo cleane away.
               
               
                  Some fell on ſtonie ground alſo,
                  Where they of earth had little ſtore:
                  They ſprung the rather there, but lo
                  The ſunne roſe vp and parcht them ſore
                  And ſo for lack of roote, I ſay,
                  Anon they witherd all away.
               
               
                  Among the thornes ſome other fell,
                  Which ſpringing vp were choakt withall:
                  Some fell in good ground and did well,
                  The ſame brought fruite where they did fall,
                  One corne an hundreth fold or moe,
                  Some ſixtie, ſome thirty alſo,
               
               
                  He that hath eares to heare, may heare,
                  For herein the condition
                  Of Gods word may to thee appeare,
                  The rule of thy ſaluation.
                  Three ſorts decayed all, you ſee,
                  The fourth yeelds onely fruite to me
               
               
                  Then his diſciples askt him, why
                  By parables he taught them then?
                  To you ſaid Chriſt this verely
                  Giu'n is to know, not to thoſe men.
                  The ſecrets of Gods kingdome ye,
                  Shall learne, and know alwaies of me.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 13.12. Cap. 25.29.To you that haue, more will I giue▪
                  
                  That you may haue abundance ſtill:
                  He that hath not, although he greeue,
                  Shall looſe all that, againſt his will.
                  
                     For ſeeing, they ſhall neither ſee,
                  Nor hearing heare, as you heare me.
               
               
                  This Propheſie Eſayas ſpake,
                        Math. 13.14. Eſay. 6.9. Mar. 4.12. Luc. 8.10. Ioh. 12.40. Act. 28.26. Rom. 11.8.
                  
                  Which now in them fulfilled is:
                  I will this people ſurely make,
                  By hearing ſo to heare iwis,
                  That they ſhall not yet vnderſtand,
                  Nor thinke on that which is at hand.
               
               
                  This peoples heart is waxen fat,
                  Their eares of hearing deaffe and dull,
                  They with their eyes haue winked at
                  The truth, leaſt they ſhould ſee it full,
                  Heare, and perceiue it, as yee doe,
                  And turne, that I might heale them to.
               
               
                  But bleſſed are your eyes, they ſee,
                  Your eares alſo do heare the ſame:
                  All you thereto appointed be,
                  For you and ſuch I ſurely came.
                  The reſt of ſinne are very full,
                  And ſhall remaine both blind and dull.
               
            
            
               Chriſt interpreted to his diſciples the parable of the ſeed.
               
                  This Parable heare yee therefore,
                        Math. 13.18. Mar. 4.15. Luc. 8.11.
                  
                  When that a man Gods word doth heare,
                  And vnderſtands thereof no more
                  Then ere he heard, it may appeare
                  The deuill did catch the word away,
                  That ſeed by the way ſide it lay.
               
               
                  He that had ſeed in ſtonie ground,
                  Did heare the word, and that with ioy,
                  Yet had no roote, he was not ſound,
                  He dured not, for eu'ry toy
                  
                     When trouble for the word ſhall be,
                  Offended very ſoone is he.
               
               
                  He that receiueth ſeed alſo,
                  Among the thornes, are they that heare
                  The word of God; yet go it fro,
                  For worldly cares in them appeare.
                  Deceitfulneſſe of riches make
                  Gods word in them no place can rake.
               
               
                  But he that doth receiue the ſeed,
                  In the good ground; is euen he
                  That heares the word, and doth indeed
                  Gods word perceiue it for to be.
                  This beareth fruite an hundreth fold,
                  Some ſixtie, ſome thirtie, be bold.
               
            
            
               The ſecond parable of the good ſeed, and of the tares declaring likewiſe the ſtate and condition of Gods word.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 13.24.Another parable Chriſt ſpake,
                  The kingdom of heau'n is, I ſay,
                  Much like one that good ſeed did take,
                  And ſowed it, and went away:
                  But while men ſlept, the enemy,
                  Did ſowe tares there immediatly.
               
               
                  And when the blade ſprung vp in ſight,
                  And brought forth fruite, then did appeare
                  The tares that he had fowne by night:
                  The ſeruants ſeeing, ſaid with feare,
                  Didſt not thou (Maiſter) ſowe good ſeed?
                  Whence commeth then this filthie weede?
               
               
                  He ſaid, the enuious man it is
                  That hath done this: the ſeruants ſay,
                  Wilt thou that we go gather this,
                  
                     And plucke it vp to caſt away?
                  Nay, while about the tares ye go,
                  Leſt ye plucke vp the wheate alſo.
               
               
                  Let both grow till the harueſt come,
                  Then will I to the reapers ſay,
                  The tares now gather to one roome,
                  And binde them in the fire to lay.
                  My wheate ſee yee that reapers are,
                  It be brought to my barne with care.
               
               
                  This parable declareth well,
                  The ſtate and the condition
                  Of Gods word writ in the Goſpell,
                  The doctrine of ſaluation.
                  The houſholder ſoweth the ſeeed:
                  The deu'll ſowes tares and other weed.
               
            
            
               The 3. parable of the muſtard ſeed, wherein is ſet foorth the nature of Gods word.
               
                  Another parable againe,
                  Chriſt put forth to them, ſaying this,
                        Math. 13.31. Mar. 4.30. Luc. 13.19.
                  
                  Gods kingdome like vnto a graine
                  Of muſtard ſeed aſſured is:
                  Which man doth ſow within his field,
                  That it ſome fruit to him may yeeld.
               
               
                  This ſeed, of ſeedes is leaſt of all,
                  Of hearbes it growes the greateſt one
                  And is a tree (though not ſo tall)
                  Yet birds may breed his branch vpon.
                  The nature of Gods word iwis,
                  Is very well comparde to this.
               
               
                  For though this ſeed is very ſmall,
                  And ſubiect to contempt therefore,
                  
                     Yet it of hearbes growes great'ſt of all,
                  And birds therein do breed ſome ſtore.
                  Gods word at firſt ſeemes ſo, I ſay,
                  Yet groweth great each day by day.
               
               
                  And ſharpe in taſt is muſtard ſeed,
                  Yet heateth man, though bitingly:
                  So is Gods word in very deed
                  Sharpe to the minde, yet ſoule healthy.
                  Of him that takes of this a graine,
                  It ſharply heateth eu'ry vaine.
               
            
            
               The fourth parable of the leauen, declaring alſo thereby the nature of Gods word.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 13.33. Luc. 13.21.A parable then like the laſt,
                  Ieſus put forth to them againe,
                  To proue the nature, force, and taſt,
                  That in Gods word doth ſure remaine.
                  It is like leauen laide in meale,
                  That leaueneth it eu'ry deale.
               
               
                  As little leauen leaueth not,
                  Till it haue leauened the meale:
                  So Gods word ſearcheth eu'ry knot
                  Or vaine in man, his ſores to heale.
                  The one makes bread taſt well in deed,
                  The other man which moſt hath need.
               
               
                  In parables ſpake Ieſus then,
                  Vnto the people that were there:
                  He would not ſpeake vnto thoſe men,
                  This otherwiſe: as may appeare,
                  That it might be fulfilled ſo,
                  Which Dauid ſpake ſo long ago.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 13.35. Pſal. 78.2.My mouth I will open, ſaith he,
                  In parables; and ſhew to man,
                  
                     The things that now ſo hidden be,
                  And haue bene ſince the world began.
                  Then Ieſus ſent the men away,
                  For there he made no longer ſtay.
               
            
            
               Chriſt went into the houſe, where he declared to his Diſciples, deſiring it, the meaning of the two parables of the tares.
               
                  When Chriſt into the houſe was come,
                        Math. 13.36.
                  
                  Then his Diſciples to him ſay;
                  Declare to vs the very ſumme,
                  And certaine meaning we thee pray,
                  Of the ſame tares ſo in the field,
                  We can no reaſon of them yeeld.
               
               
                  Then Chriſt did anſwer them againe,
                  He that there ſowed the good ſeed,
                  It was the ſonne of man certaine,
                  The field, it is the world in deed,
                  The good ſeed, are Gods children ſure,
                  The tares, the wicked and vnpure.
               
               
                  The enemie, the deuill it is,
                        Math. 13.39. Ioel. 3.13. Reuel. 14.15.
                  
                  The harueſt of the world is end:
                  The Angels are reapers iwis,
                  Which to his harueſt God will ſend:
                  And as the tares are burnt in deed,
                  The wicked ſo in hell ſhall ſpeed.
               
               
                  The ſonne of man then forth ſhall ſend
                  His Angels, for to gather all
                  That in his kingdome do offend,
                  And ſtill from ſinne to ſinne do fall.
                  Theſe to hell fire ſhall be caſt tho,
                  Where they ſhall gnaſh their teeth for wo.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        Math. 13.43. Dan. 12.3. Wiſ. 3.7.Then ſhall the iuſt men ſhining be,
                  As is the Sunne in greateſt light,
                  In the kingdome of heau'n, ſaid he,
                  Abiding in their fathers ſight.
                  See ye theſe words receiue in feare,
                  With humble heart, and open eare.
               
            
            
               The fift parable of the treaſure hid in the field, declareth the worthineſſe of Gods word.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 13.44.While Chriſt did in the houſe remaine,
                  (As he had done by the ſea ſide)
                  He ſpake in parables againe,
                  To ſuch as did with him abide.
                  The worthineſſe declared he,
                  And of what price Gods word ſhould be.
               
               
                  Like treaſure hid within a field
                  Gods kingdome is, which when one found,
                  In hope it would much profit yeeld,
                  He hid the ſame within the ground;
                  For ioy and hope ſuch wealth to wield,
                  That man ſold All that he bad. all to buy that field.
               
            
            
               The ſixt parable of the pearles, declaring as before the worthineſſe of Gods word.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 13.45.Againe he ſaid, Gods kingdome is
                  Like to a warie marchant man,
                  That ſought pearles, and found one of price,
                  To buy the which this marchant can
                  Find in his heart to ſell away
                  All that he hath without delay.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Gen. 12.1. Actes. 7.3.Old Abraham was ſuch a one,
                  He left his countrey, friends and all:
                  His wealth he neuer thought vpon,
                  But did obey when God did call.
                  
                     And Dauid that Gods word diſt taſt,
                        Pſal. 1.2. Pſal. 1 19.
                  
                  As ſweet as hony to his laſt.
               
               
                  And the Apoſtles they were ſuch,
                  And ſo the godly Martyr all:
                  Theſe did eſteeme nothing ſo much,
                  As to obey, when God did call:
                  Theſe marchants, all they had they ſold,
                  To buy this pearle, ſurpaſſing gold.
               
            
            
               The ſeuenth parable of the draw-net, declaring the ſtate and condition of Gods word.
               
                  Gods kingdome is like a draw net,
                        Math. 13.47
                  
                  Which one into the ſea doth caſt:
                  Things of all ſorts when it doth get,
                  He drawes it full from thence at laſt.
                  The good he doth in veſſels lay,
                  But caſteth all the bad away.
               
               
                  So ſhall it be at the worlds end,
                  The Angels ſhall ſeuer the bad,
                  And ſuch as by no meanes amend,
                  From iuſt men, which ſhall then be glad:
                  Though wicked men in fire then do
                  Both waile and gnaſh their teeth for wo.
               
               
                  Then Ieſus asking them could ſay,
                  All theſe things vnderſtand ye yet?
                  Yea Lord, for ſo ſay they we may,
                  Thy words we neuer ſhall forget.
                  By this Chriſt did teach them againe,
                  The ſtate of Gods word verie plaine.
               
               
                  The godly may not ſeuer now,
                  Themſelues away from wicked men,
                  But as the tares in wheate muſt grow
                  Till harueſt time; the reapers then
                  
                     Shall ſaue the wheate, and for their hire,
                  Shall burne the tares in flaming fire.
               
               
                  And eu'ry Scribe ſaid Chriſt, that is
                  Taught to Gods kingdome, I compare
                  Vnto a houſholder iwis,
                  Whoſe treaſure houſes ſtored are:
                  And doth (to whom himſelfe ſo wold)
                  Bring forth (to giue) both new and old.
               
               
                  As theſe, ſo more of Chriſt were donne,
                  Then we in writing left vs haue,
                  Approuing him to be Gods ſonne,
                  Come to the world mans ſoule to ſaue.
                  Yet here the meeke and godly mind,
                  Of heau'nly foode his fill ſhall find.
               
               
                  All glorie be to thee on hye,
                  Oh Father, Sonne and holy Ghoſt:
                  One mightie God in Trinitie,
                  Which ſaued vs, that elſe were loſt.
                  To thee be laud oh God therefore,
                  And prayſe, and honour, euermore. Amen.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE FOVRTH PART OF THE HISTORIE OF OVR LORD AND SAVIOVR IESVS CHRIST, contayning thoſe things which he did the third yeare after his Baptiſme, which was the two and thirtieth yeare of his age, according to the foure Euangeliſtes: the yeare after the creation of the world 4173. beginning at the death of Iohn Baptiſt.
            To the tune of the Lords Prayer. 
            
               Iohn Baptist was beheaded, his head giuen to Herodias daughter, and his body buried by his Diſciples the 13. of Aprill. Anno Domini. 32.
               
               
                  THe yeare of Chriſts Natiuitie,
                        Math. 14.1. Mar. 6.14. Luc. 9.7.
                  
                  The thirtie two, as then it was,
                  And thirteenth day aſſuredlie
                  Of Aprill, thus it came to paſſe,
                  That Iohn the Baptiſt loſt his life,
                  To pleaſe Herodias, Philips wife.
               
               
                  For Iohn had ſaid to Herods face,
                  Herodias may not be thy wife:
                  Which wrought in her that wanted grace,
                  Such feruent hate, ſhe ſought his life.
                  She neuer reſted night nor day,
                  
                     Till ſhe had got his head away.
               
               
                  His doctrine ſhe miſliked ſo,
                  
                     Two brethren may not mary 
                           •
                        ne woman, nec 
                           〈◊〉
                         conuerſo, Leuit. 18.16. Cap. 20.21.
                     Becauſe he ſaid; ſhe could not be
                  King Herods wife and Phillips to,
                  Two brethren may not mary thee.
                  And though ſhe did him much deſpiſe,
                  Yet could not ſhe his death deuiſe.
               
               
                  For Herod heard Iohn willingly,
                  And feared much him to offend:
                  For he confeſſed Iohn to be
                  Both iuſt and holy to his end,
                  This was a let, to worke her will,
                  Her malice ſhe could not fulfill.
               
               
                  Till it befell when Herod had
                  Encloſed Iohn in priſon faſt,
                  And on his byrth day to be glad,
                  As he had vſed in times paſt,
                  A Royall feaſt he cauſd to be
                  Made for the ſtates of Galilie.
               
               
                  Whereat what hap'ned you ſhall heare,
                  Though Herod knew it in his hart,
                  That Iohn was iuſt, and ſtood in feare,
                  To play with him that bloudie part:
                  For oft he heard him ioyfully,
                  And did obay him willingly.
               
               
                  Yet at that feaſt a daintie Dame,
                  Herodias daughter daunc'd ſo well,
                  That all that to the banquet came,
                  Commended her, and then befell
                  The thing that was deſired ſo,
                  By the maydes mother long ago.
               
               
                  
                  For Herod ſo was pleaſd withall,
                  That ſtraight he gaue without aduiſe,
                  (Hap what might happen to befall,
                  He did not recken of the price)
                  What gift ſoeuer ſhe would craue,
                  The ſame he promiſd ſhe ſhould haue.
               
               
                  She quickly went and Counſell had,
                  Or elſe was taught to aske before:
                  This made her mother verie glad,
                  For this ſhe thirſted had ſo ſore.
                  Aske thou Iohn Baptiſts head ſhe ſaid:
                  Which done, was graunted to the mayd.
               
               
                  Though Herod grieued at the ſame,
                  Yet would not he the gift deny:
                  For feare of fooliſh worldly ſhame,
                  And for their ſakes that then ſtood by.
                  Therefore he to the hang-man ſaid,
                  Go fetch his head, giue it the mayd.
               
               
                  The minion with Iohn Baptiſts head,
                  Vnto her mother ſtraightway went:
                  When his Diſciples law him dead,
                  His death they greatly did lament;
                  And they his body buried,
                  And thereof Ieſus certified.
               
               
                  Then Ieſus fame ſo farre was ſpread,
                  That many wondred at his name:
                  King Herod knew that Iohn was dead,
                  Yet ſcarſly could beleeue the ſame.
                  Iohn riſen is againe ſaid he,
                  By whom are wrought the works you ſee.
               
               
                  Some other ſaid Elyas was,
                  Or elſe ſome Prophet come againe:
                  
                     By whom ſuch workes were brought to paſſe,
                  To name him Chriſt they thought it vaine.
                  Yet Herod him deſir'd to ſee,
                  That he might learne what he ſhould be.
               
            
            
               Chriſt preaching in his owne countrey, was deſpiſed of his countreymen.
               
                  
                     
                        Luc. 4.16. Math. 13.54. Mar. 6.1. Ioh. 4.44.When as Chriſt Ieſus for to preach,
                  To Nazareth his countrey came,
                  Eſayas booke they did him reach,
                  That he might reade vpon the ſame:
                  Whereout, he taught them what he was,
                  What he ſhould teach, and bring to paſſe.
               
               
                  His doctrine ſo aſtonied ſome,
                  That they did wonder at his words:
                  Whence doth (ſay they) this wiſedome come?
                  Or who to him theſe works affoords?
                  Is not that Ioſephs ſonne I pray,
                  The Carpenter, we heard this day?
               
               
                  His mother Marie we do call,
                  His brethren be they not with vs?
                  As men amazed they were all,
                  To heare him ſo that text diſcuſſe.
                  Saue in his countrey then, ſaid he,
                  A Prophet ſhall ſure honor'd be.
               
               
                  
                     Luc. 4.25. 1. King. 17.9. Iam. 5.17. Elyas was ſent to a poore widow in Sarepta. Luc. 4.27. 2. King. 5.14.
                     Wherefore he ſaid to them againe,
                  When famine plagued Iſraell,
                  And they for three yeares wanted raine,
                  And moneths fixe as ſtories tell,
                  The Prophet then was ſent to none,
                  Saue in Sarepta vnto one.
               
               
                  Oh Iſraell, thy leproſie,
                  So great in Elyſeus time,
                  
                     Though few could finde a remedie,
                  Naaman yet was cured by him.
                  When they hard this, it grieu'd them ſore,
                  And they deuis'd his death therefore.
               
               
                  No greater workes there then did he,
                  Then on few ſicke his hands to lay:
                  When he their vnbeliefe did ſee,
                  He maruaild much, and went away,
                  Teaching in eu'ry towne and place,
                  Where he came, and had gotten ſpace.
               
            
            
               Chriſt ſent forth his Apostles by two and two to preach.
               
                  And he the twelue did call againe,
                        Mar. 6.7. Math. 10.1. Luc. 9.1.
                  
                  And ſent them forth by two and two:
                  Power of him they did obtaine,
                  And charge withall what they ſhould do;
                  For clothing, or how they ſhould fare,
                  He willed them to take no care.
               
               
                  What houſe ye enter to, ſaid he,
                  There tarrie till ye thence depart:
                  If that you there deſpiſed be,
                  They worke themſelues the greater ſmart.
                        Actes. 13.15. Cap. 18.6.
                  
                  Shake ftom your feet the duſt away,
                  As witneſſe againſt ſuch I ſay.
               
               
                  That cittie, houſe, or man be ſure,
                        Mar. 6.11. Math. 10.14. Luc. 9.5.
                  
                  That will not you receiue or heare,
                  A harder iudgement ſhall endure,
                  (When all in one place ſhall appeare)
                  Then Sodome and Gomorhe ſhall haue,
                  Where worldly wealth can no man ſaue.
               
               
                  So they went forth, and preaching told,
                  That all men ſhould their liues amend▪
                  
                  
                     They caſt out deuils with courage bold,
                  And as their maiſter did them ſend,
                  Of griefes each grieued did relieue,
                  And to the ſick they health did giue.
               
            
            
               The Apoſtles returning, ſhewed Chriſt what great things they had done.
               
                  
                     Luc. 9.10. Math. 14.13. Mar. 6.30.When the Apoſtles came againe,
               They told to Chriſt all they had done,
               Aſwell where moſt they did remaine,
               As how to preach they had begonne,
               Relieuing all mens miſeries,
               And helping their infirmities.
            
            
               Chriſt went aſide into the wilderneſſe with his diſciples, where he fed 5000. men with fiue l
                     •
                  aues and two fiſhes.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 14.13. Mar. 6.31. Luc. 9 10.And Ieſus ſaid, come hence, depart
                  By ſhip into another place:
                  He thought he might in the deſart
                  Haue had ſome eaſe a little ſpace:
                  For he and his Apoſtles were
                  Much cloide with preaſe then eu'ry where.
               
               
                  This was not done ſo ſecretly,
                  The people ſoone eſpide the ſame:
                  In multitudes they after hie,
                  So great was growne Chriſt Ieſus fame,
                  That from the citties all about
                  They follow'd, till they found him out.
               
               
                  Bethſayda was neare to the place,
                  Where Chriſt did meane to take ſome eaſe:
                  The people thither ran apace,
                  Each to be cur'd of his diſeaſe.
                  
                     Like ſcattred ſheepe the people were,
                  All ready for the Wolfe to teare.
               
               
                  To pittie them it did him moue,
                  And that he might expreſſe the ſame,
                  And giue them tokens of his loue,
                  He heald their blind, their ſick, and lame;
                  And of his kingdome verely,
                  He taught to them the certainty.
               
               
                  And now becauſe the time was ſpent,
                        Math. 14.15. Mar. 6.35. Luc. 9.10. Ioh. 6.5.
                  
                  And that they had farre way to go,
                  Chriſt thought it was expedient,
                  With meate to feed thoſe men alſo,
                  Leaſt that they going by the way,
                  Should faint, and of his helpe diſmay.
               
               
                  When his diſciples came him to,
                  Willing the people might be gone:
                  For elſe ſaid they, how ſhall they do,
                  The night apace now draweth on.
                  And this is deſert where we are:
                  For vittailes therefore let them care.
               
               
                  They haue no need to go away,
                  Said Ieſus, vnto them againe:
                  See therefore that yee do them ſtay,
                  Let them a while with vs remaine:
                  And giue you them now of your meate,
                  For I would haue them heare to eate.
               
               
                  Then the diſciples ſaid, we haue
                  Fiue loaues, two fiſhes, and no more.
                  Giue thanks to God that the ſame gaue,
                  He daily will encreaſe your ſtore:
                  Bring the ſame hither vnto me,
                  That your prouiſion I may ſee.
               
               
                  
                  Then Chriſt commanded on the graſſe,
                  The multitude to ſit downe round,
                  Where he brought that thing then to paſſe,
                  Which did their reaſons all confound.
                  When he had prai'd and bleſt the bred,
                  Fiue thouſandBeſide women 
                           •
                        nd children. 
                           •
                        ohn. 6.13.
                      men therewith he fed.
               
               
                  And of that broken meate had they,
                  Twelue baskets full among them all:
                  This was to warne men to obey,
                  And to depend on him withall.
                  They that his kingdome ſeeke to haue,
                  Shall want nothing that they do craue.
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           oh. 6.5.For Chriſts demaund to Phylip was,
                  Where bread for all them might be bought▪
                  
                  He knew not what would come to paſſe,
                  And therefore ſpake as then he thought;
                  Two hundreth peniworth will not be,
                  To each of them a bit; ſaid he.
               
               
                  And Andrew ſaid, here is a boy
                  That hath fiue loaues, and fiſhes two,
                  And thought it but a very toye,
                  To offer that, all thoſe vnto.
                  Yet with the ſame, Chriſt fed as then,
                  As I haue ſaid, fiue thouſand men.
               
               
                  The multitude when they did ſee,
                  The miracle that Chriſt had done:
                  Did ſtraight confeſſe him then to be,
                  (As ſure he was) Gods onely ſonne.
                  This Prophet (ſay they) certainly,
                  We looked for ſo earneſtly.
               
               
                  When Ieſus therefore did perceiue,
                  That they would ſeeke to make him king,
                  
                     Worldly conceits could not deceiue,
                  (Or worke in him 
                        •
                     o baſe a thing.)
                  Therefore he did himſelfe conuay
                  Into a mount out of the way.
               
            
            
               Christ ſtilled the raging of the ſea, walked on the ſea, and ſaued Peter, when through infidelitie he was ready to ſincke.
               
                  Then Ieſus ſent by ſhip before,
                        Math. 14.22. Mar. 6.45. Ioh. 6.16.
                  
                  All his diſciples thence away,
                  And eke the people from the ſhore,
                  And went alone aſide to pray.
                  But they were toſſed too and fro,
                  The winde and waues then raged ſo.
               
               
                  All this he ſaw, that ſeeth all,
                  And therefore went ro eaſe their paine:
                  Who ſo doth come when he doth call,
                  Or ſent doth go, ſhall ſure remaine
                  Amidſt all troubles ſafe and free:
                  For Chriſt with ſuch will euer be.
               
               
                  About the fourth watch of the night,
                  Chriſt walked on the ſea as then:
                  And paſſing by them, at the ſight
                  They cried out like fearfull men,
                  Suppoſing he had bene a Or ſpirit. ghoſt,
                  And that they ſurely had bene loſt.
               
               
                  Comfort your ſelues then Ieſus ſaid,
                  It is my ſelfe, you need not feare:
                  Though want of faith made you affraid,
                  Yet none of you ſhall looſe a haire;
                  Reioyce therefore, regard no paine,
                  You ſhall haue eaſe for this againe.
               
               
                  
                  Then Peter minding him to trie,
                  Said; maiſter, bid me come to thee.
                  Then Ieſus ſaid; Come by and by,
                  And walke on foote along to me.
                  Out of the ſhip he ſtept ſtraight way,
                  As one that would his Lord obay.
               
               
                  But when he ſaw a mightie winde,
                  He ſore afraide began to ſinke:
                  If helpe (he cride) I do not finde,
                  I ſhall be drowned as I thinke.
                  So want of faith, did let him fall,
                  And faith againe, gaue grace to call.
               
               
                  Him Ieſus then reproued ſore;
                  When they into the ſhip were come:
                  The ſea and wind did ceaſſe to roare,
                  Which ſeem'd a maruell vnto ſome:
                  Yet all confeſſed verely,
                  By this, Chriſt Ieſus deity.
               
            
            
               When Chriſt had landed in the countrey of Genezareth, they brought vnto him all that were ſicke, and as many as touched the hemme of his veſture were healed.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 14.34. Mar. 6.54.Chriſt to Genezareth then went,
                  Where when he came firſt to the ſhore,
                  The countrey all with one conſent,
                  (Yea ſuch as ſaw him not before,)
                  Deuiſed how to bring him there,
                  All ſuch as then diſeaſed were.
               
               
                  All which deſired but to tuch
                  His garments, as he paſſed by:
                  His ſhadow did relieue all ſuch,
                  
                     As ſhadowed were, where they did lye.
                  Thus did their faith bring forth much fruit,
                  For they obtained all their ſuite.
               
               
                  Lo he that lately with diſdaine,
                        Math. 13.54. Mar. 6.1. Luc. 4.16.
                  
                  Among his owne had no regard:
                  He whom his kinſmen would haue ſlaine,
                  Him truly, ſtrangers gladly heard.
                  His doctrine theſe men did embrace,
                  And he on them ſhed forth his grace.
               
            
            
               Chriſts Sermon of Manna from heauen, and of the bread of life, at Capernaum.
                     Ioh. 6.24.
               
               
                  The people that Chriſt Ieſus fed,
                  Sought him till they found him againe:
                  They ſought not for the heau'nly bread,
                  For earthly meate they tooke that paine.
                  Striue not ſo for that meate, ſaid he:
                  Striue for the meate I ſhall giue thee.
               
               
                  Then ſaid they all what ſhall we do,
                  That worke the works of God we might?
                  Chriſt Ieſus anſwered thereto,
                  And taught them how to do it right;
                  The worke of God (with good intent,)
                  Is to beleeue in whom he ſent.
               
               
                  Shew vs ſome ſigne that we may ſee,
                        Ioh. 6.31. Exod. 16.14. Nomb. 11.7. Pſal. 78 24. Wiſ. 16.20.
                  
                  And ſo beleeue in thee: they ſay,
                  Our fathers Manna had, to be
                  Their meate, in the deſert alway:
                  God gaue them bread from heau'n to eat,
                  And it was long our fathers meat.
               
               
                  And Ieſus then ſaid verely,
                  Not Moſes but my father he
                  Doth giue to you aſſuredly,
                  
                     True bread from heau'n: beleeue yee me;
                  The bread of God came downe I ſay,
                  And to the world giues life alway.
               
               
                  Then they againe to Ieſus ſaid,
                  Giue vs this bread, Lord, euermore:
                  The bread of life (be not affraid)
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 6.35. Cap. 4.14. Eccl. 24.24.I am: he ſhall not hunger ſore,
                  Nor thirſt, that doth beleeue in me,
                  So do not you, for all you ſee.
               
               
                  They come to me whom God doth giue,
                  And them I do not caſt away:
                  I looſe not one that doth beleeue,
                  But raiſe him vp at the laſt day.
                  My fathers will, not mine to do,
                  I came from heau'n this earth vnto.
               
               
                  The Iewes did murmure he ſaid ſo,
                  (I am the bread that downe did come.)
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 6.42. Math. 13.55.What is this Ioſephs ſonne or no?
                  Is not he knowne to vs, ſaid ſome?
                  No man can come (be ſure ſaid he)
                  But whom the father drawes, to me.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Iohn. 6.45. Eſay. 54.13. Iere. 31.33. Ioh. 6.46. Math. 11.27.Whom God hath taught, come vnto me,
                  Not that the father ſure hath bene
                  Of any one, ſaue onely he
                  Which is of God (ſaid Ieſus) ſeene.
                  To him that doth in me beleeue,
                  Life euerlaſting I do giue.
               
               
                  I am the bread of life in deed,
                  
                     
                        Iohn 6.49. Exod. 16.15.Your fathers Manna long did eate,
                  Yet are they dead: ſo ſhall not ſpeed,
                  Such as feed on this heau'nly meate.
                  My fleſh it is the bread I giue,
                  
                     Which is life to all that beleeue.
               
               
                  How can this man giue vs to eate
                  His fleſh ſay they? can it ſo be?
                  My fleſh except it be your meate,
                  Add that ye drinke my bloud, ſaid he,
                  Eternall life I ſay againe,
                  Doth not at all in you remaine.
               
               
                  Who ſo doth eate my fleſh, I ſay,
                        Ioh. 6.54. 1. Cor. 11.27.
                  
                  And drinkes my bloud, hath life in deed:
                  Him I will raiſe at the laſt day,
                  But ſo ſhall not the wicked ſpeed.
                  My fleſh and bloud is faithfully,
                  Both meate and drinke aſſuredly.
               
               
                  He that doth eate my fleſh, is he,
                  And he that drinkes my bloud withall,
                  In whom I dwell, and he in me,
                  As God the Father eternall
                  Hath ſent me; ſo, by him I liue,
                  And life to others I do giue.
               
               
                  From heau'n aboue came downe this bread,
                  Not as your fathers that did eate
                  The Manna ſent them, yet are dead,
                  For he that eateth of this meate
                  Shall liue, and he ſhall neuer dye,
                  As ſinners do eternally.
               
               
                  At Capernaum ſpake he this,
                  Where ſome of his Diſciples were,
                  That ſaid, a hard thing ſure it is,
                  Who can abide the ſame to heare?
                        Ioh. 6.62. Cap. 3.13.
                  
                  Doth this offend you then, ſaid he?
                  What, if I ſhould aſcend, will ye?
               
               
                  
                  It is the ſpirit that in deed
                  Doth quicken, not the fleſh be ſure:
                  In ſpirit, this both life doth breed
                  And nouriſh, euer to endure:
                  For what I ſpeake (to end all ſtrife)
                  To you is ſpirit and is life.
               
               
                  Yet ſome of you beleeue not this,
                  (He knew them, and the traitour to)
                  Therefore I told you how it is,
                  That come vnto me any do:
                  The father onely giues this grace
                  To him, that doth enioy the place.
               
               
                  So ſome went cleane from him away,
                  Then Ieſus ſaid, vnto the reſt;
                  Will ye depart from me this day?
                  And walke as they where you thinke beſt?
                  Shall we ſaid Peter, then at laſt?
                  Words of eternall life thou haſt.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 6.69. Math. 16.10. Math. 26.16.And we beleeue, and know thou art
                  The Chriſt, the Sonne of God in deed:
                  And if we did from thee depart,
                  We ſhould be ſure, full ill to ſpeed.
                  Chriſt did againe the traitour note:
                  Leaſt his Apoſtles ſhould forgote.
               
            
            
               Chriſt rebuked the Scribes and Phariſies, for trangreſſing Gods commandements, and anſwered their accuſation againſt his Diſciples, for eating meate with vnwaſhen hands.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 15.1. Mar. 7.1.The Scribe and faithleſſe Phariſie,
                  Came then our Sauiour Chriſt vnto,
                  Suppoſing by their ſubtiltie,
                  For to deface what he would do.
                  
                     They from Hieruſalem then came,
                  That ſo faine would his works defame.
               
               
                  Why thy Diſciples do tranſgreſſe,
                  Of elders the tradition,
                  Do thou now vnto vs expreſſe;
                  This was at firſt their queſtion:
                  For they (ſay they) waſh not a hand,
                  When they eate meate, we vnderſtand.
               
               
                  O hypocrites, ſaid Chriſt againe,
                  You do Gods word ſtill diſobay,
                  Suppoſing you ſhall ſcape the paine,
                        Math. 15.4. Exod. 20.12. Deut. 5.16. Epheſ. 6.2.
                  
                  That you do merite day by day.
                  He that his parents (ſure ſaith God)
                  Diſhonoreth, ſhall feele my rod.
               
               
                  In words you worſhip, but in vaine,
                  Lip labour, liketh not the Lord,
                  A double heart, he doth diſdaine:
                  When words and deeds do well accord,
                  Then prayſe and prayer he will heare,
                  Which neuer doth in you appeare.
               
               
                  It is not meate that hurteth man,
                  Which with the mouth he doth conſume:
                  But euill thoughts which now and than,
                  Do moue the heart to fret and fume,
                  Or elſe deuiſe ſome euill deed▪
                  
                  Of this ye ſhould take greateſt heed.
               
               
                  Each plant my father planteth not,
                  Shall by the roote be pluckt againe:
                  Our God will not all his forgot,
                  When hypocrites do ſuffer paine.
                  Theſe blindly ſtill, the blind do lead,
                  You haue no cauſe, their craft to dread.
               
            
            
               
               Chriſt caſt a deuill out of the daughter of a woman of Canaan, and healed many other.
               
                  From thence likewiſe did Ieſus paſſe,
                  Of Tyre and Sydon through the coſt,
                  Of ſuch great care our Sauiour was.
                  To ſaue that elſe might there be loſt:
                  He ceaſſed not but day by day,
                  Did good to all that would him pray.
               
               
                  Behold a woman, came to him,
                  That did within thoſe borders dwell,
                  Whoſe daughter was in eu'ry lymme
                  Sore vexed with a deu'll of hell.
                  Chriſt ſhe moſt earneſtly did pray,
                  From her to driue the deu'll away.
               
               
                  Whoſe ſuite, though ſeeming to deny,
                  Chriſt graunted vnto her at laſt,
                  When that he ſaw how faithfully,
                  She hop't his fauour for to t
                        •
                     ſt.
                  He gaue to her to do her good,
                  Some portion of the childrens food.
               
            
            
               Chriſt returned thence againe into the coſtes of Galilie, healed a deaffe man that ſtammered in his ſpeach and many others, and fed. 4000. men beſides women and children with ſeuen loaues.
               
                  
                     
                        Mar. 7.31. Math. 15.29.Chriſt did returne yet then againe,
                  Into the coſtes of Galilie,
                  Their late contempt and deepe diſdaine,
                  Withdrew not ſo his pietie.
                  Among the middeſt of wolues he ſtill,
                  Protecteth ſafe his flocke from ill.
               
               
                  A deaffe man vnto Chriſt they brought,
                  That ſtamb
                        •
                     ed in his ſpeach alſo:
                  
                     He graunted them, what then they ſought,
                  And healed him, and let him go:
                  So that amazed in great feare,
                  They gaue God prayſe all that were there.
               
               
                  He then vp to a mountaine went,
                  And ſate him downe vpon the ſame:
                  And the people with full intent,
                  By multitudes vnto him come,
                  To heare his doctrine, and to craue
                  That they ſome helpe of him might haue.
               
               
                  They thither brought the lame, the blind,
                        Math. 15.30. Eſay. 35.5.
                  
                  The deaffe, the dumbe, and maymed ſort:
                  Theſe had as they did hope to find,
                  Their former health, to their comfort:
                  So that the people did reioyce,
                  And prayſed God with heart and voyce.
               
               
                  Which cauſed Chriſt to pitie theſe,
                  As he before had done alſo,
                  When in the deſert to their eaſe,
                  He fed fiue thouſand men and mo.
                  This did he that they might perceaue,
                  That Chriſt would not his choſen leaue.
               
               
                  Wherefore he fed now once againe,
                  Foure thouſand men ſure at the leaſt,
                  Neare Galilie on that mountaine,
                  Where he had healed all the reſt,
                  With ſeu'n loaues and few fiſhes ſmall,
                  Chriſt Ieſus fed thoſe men withall.
               
            
            
               The Phariſies and Saduces tempted Chriſt, and deſired him to ſhew them a ſigne.
                     Math. 16.1. Mar. 8.12. Luc. 12.54.
               
               
                  To Magdala, when this was done,
                  By ſhip our Sauiour did ſayle,
                  
                     To whom the Saducees did ſoone,
                  And Phariſies without all fayle
                  Reſort, which faine a figne would ſee
                  From heau'n aboue, if it would be.
               
               
                  They could diſcerne the outward face,
                  And each appearance in the skie:
                  Theſe hypocrites had yet no grace,
                  But needs they would Chriſt Ieſus trie.
                  Thoſe that by tempting, Chriſt aſſayle,
                  Do moſt in all their fetches fayle.
               
               
                  For thoſe no figne at all could haue,
                  But that of Ionas, which we reade,
                  That lay three dayes as in a graue,
                  Within a whale, as he were dead:
                  The ſonne of man ſhall euen ſo,
                  Lye in the graue, and riſe therefro.
               
            
            
               Chriſt commanded his Diſciples to beware of the leauen of the Phariſies.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 16.5. Mar. 8.14. Lu
                              •
                           . 12.1.They thence went to the other ſide,
                  But had forgot to buy them bread,
                  So farre mens fancies wander wide,
                  When they do ſtray from Chriſt their head.
                  Theſe minded not that Ieſus could
                  Prouide them meate when that he would.
               
               
                  Chriſt warning them to ſhunne alway
                  The leauen of the Phariſie,
                  Made them conceiue, this doth he ſay,
                  Sith we forgot ſome bread to buy.
                  They neuer thought how he had fed
                  Foure thouſand men with litle bread.
               
               
                  This leauen of the Phariſie,
                  The Saducees, and Herod to,
                  
                     Then his diſciples warned he,
                  They ſhould in any wiſe forgo
                  Falſe teachers, and their doctrine flee,
                  For they mens ſoules do ſlay yee ſee.
               
            
            
               Chriſt healed a blind man in Bethſayda.
               
                  Then Ieſus to Bethſayda came,
                        Mar. 8.22.
                  
                  Where they vnto him brought one blind,
                  Deſiring him to heale the ſame,
                  For other helpe they could not finde.
                  Out of the towne the blind led he,
                  Where afterward he made him ſee.
               
               
                  Chriſt Ieſus ſpat his eyes into,
                  And put his hands vpon him then,
                  And ſaid, now tell it, if thou do
                  See any thing among theſe men.
                  I ſee them walke as trees, ſaid he,
                  Though perfectly I cannot ſee.
               
               
                  Chriſt put his hands on him againe,
                  And bad him looke then all about.
                  He looked, and ſaw each thing plaine,
                  He ſtood of nothing then in doubt.
                  Go home ſaid Chriſt, ſith thou art well,
                  Of this in towne to no man tell.
               
            
            
               Peter in the name of all the Apoſtles, confeſſed Chriſt to be the ſonne of the liuing God: to which confeſſion Chriſt anſwered, and in his name promiſed vnto them all the keyes of the kingdome of heauen.
               
                  When to Caeſarea Ieſus came,
                        Math. 16.13 Mar. 8.27. Luc. 9.18.
                  
                  Called Philippi, as we reade:
                  Of his diſciples then what fame
                  He askt, of him abroad was ſpread?
                  
                     The ſonne of man I am ſaid he:
                  What do men ſay therefore of me?
               
               
                  Iohn Baptiſt, ſome name thee, they ſay,
                  Elias ſome do thee ſuppoſe,
                  Or Ieremias, or ſome way,
                  That of the Prophets one of thoſe
                  That in the elder times haue beene,
                  Is riſe againe, and of them ſeene.
               
               
                  But whom ſay ye, ſaid Chriſt againe,
                  That I the ſonne of man ſhould be?
                  
                     
                        Mat. 16. Ioh. 6.69.Then Simon Peter ſaid certaine,
                  The ſonne of God we knowledge thee.
                  Then Chriſt ſaid, Simon verely,
                  Bleſſed thou art, and worſt thou why?
               
               
                  To mens opinions ſubiect I,
                  Moſt willingly my ſelfe do giue:
                  Yet mine do know me perfectly,
                  And as they know, do ſo beleeue;
                  This knowledge thou couldſt neuer haue,
                  Of fleſh and bloud, but God it gaue.
               
               
                  O Peter, this confeſſion,
                  The ground worke of my Church ſhall be:
                  For vpon that foundation,
                  I meane to build a Church for me.
                  The gates of hell ſhall not preuaile
                  Againſt the ſame, but ſtill ſhall fayle.
               
               
                  To you of heau'n I giue the key,
                  That is the preaching of my word:
                  All men that will not it obey,
                  Againſt all ſuch, draw out this ſword;
                  What ſo in earth ye looſe or bind,
                  The like in heau'n, the ſame ſhall find.
               
               
                  
                  Then charged he that they ſhould tell,
                  As then to no man what he were:
                  E
                        ••
                      Chriſt we learne to know full well,
                  We may not preach him, without feare;
                  For though no more but man we ſee,
                  Yet muſt we know him God to be.
               
            
            
               Chriſt taught the faithfull to beare his Croſſe, and rebuked Peter for diſſwading his death.
               
                  From that time forth Ieſus began,
                        Math. 16.21.
                  
                  To ſhew that he himſelfe muſt go
                  Vnto Ieruſalem, for man
                  To ſuffer and abide much wo:
                  The elders, Prieſts, and Scribes had plaine
                  Deuiſed all, to haue him ſlaine.
               
               
                  And though he told them this before,
                  The third day I will riſe againe:
                  Yet Peter thought it wiſedome more,
                  To keepe him thence to ſhunne the paine.
                  And therefore he tooke him aſide:
                  But Chriſt would not his words abide.
               
               
                  So he that late reueal'd by God.
                  Did know and knowledge Chriſt his ſonne,
                  Doth ſtraightway here deſerue a rod,
                  Not knowing yet what he had donne.
                  When ſelfe-will caſts Gods word behind,
                  Our weakneſſe then we quickly find.
               
               
                  Here Peter doth preſume to teach
                  His maſter Chriſt himſelfe to ſaue:
                  Chriſt him of follie did appeach,
                  And ſo a ſore rebuke him gaue.
                  Oh Sathan come (ſaid he) behind,
                  On earth, not heau'n, thou ſet'ſt thy mind.
               
            
            
               
               The faithfull muſt beare the Croſſe.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 16.24. Math. 10.38. Mar. 8.34. Luc. 9.23. Cap. 14.27.Then Ieſus ſaid to them againe,
                  If any man will follow me,
                  He muſt forſake himſelfe at vaine,
                  And beare my Croſſe though vext he be:
                  If his afflictions ſhall be ſore,
                  Yet in the ſame I go before.
               
               
                  Who ſo would liue ſtill lothing paine,
                  And yet doth ſeeke his life to ſaue,
                  Doth looſe his labour, this is plaine,
                  Life without me he cannot haue.
                  He that for my ſake yeelds to dye,
                  Shall ſaue his life eternally.
               
               
                  What profit ſhall that man obtaine,
                  That winnes the world his ſoule to looſe?
                  When he hath reckned all his gaine,
                  Moſt vaine it is that he doth chooſe.
                  For he that will not for me dye,
                  Shall dye a death perpetually.
               
               
                  For ſure the ſonne of man, he ſhall
                  In glorie of his father deare,
                  (The Angels him attending all)
                  
                     
                        Math. 16.27. Pſal. 62.12. Rom. 2.6.In iudgement here againe appeare.
                  And then according to his deed,
                  Shall eu'ry man be ſure to ſpeed.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 16.28. Mar. 9.1. Luc. 9.27.Yet truly vnto you I ſay,
                  That ſome of them which here do ſtand,
                  Shall not by death be fetcht away,
                  Vntill the time be neare at hand,
                  That in his kingdome they do ſee
                  The ſonne of man ſo come to be.
               
            
            
               
               Chriſt was tranſfigured on mount Thabor, in the preſence of Peter, Iames, and Iohn, & talked with Moſes and Elyas.
               
                  Saint Mathew after ſixe daies ſaid,Math. 17.1. Mar. 9.2. Luc. 9.28. Mathew ſaith that this was the ſixt day after the preaching of the croſſe remēbred before. Luke ſaith it was eight daies after, which both agree thu
                           ••
                         Mathew reckoneth neither the day he preached, nor the day he wa
                           •
                         transfigured, Luke doth both▪
                     
                  
                  That Ieſus was tranſfigured:
                  The order of it made affraid,
                  All ſuch as ſaw what happened;
                  For he appear'd in maieſtie,
                  Surpaſſing their capacitie.
               
               
                  Chriſt, Peter, Iames, and Iohn then tooke
                  Into mount Thabor all apart:
                  Where on his glory they ſhould looke,
                  That they might ponder it in hart:
                  He tooke them three, for againſt three,
                  Exceptions may not taken be.
               
               
                  
                     Moſes, Elias, and the voice of the father, were three witneſſes of his deity or Godhead.So as the ſunne, did ſhine his face,
                  His clothes were white as is the light,
                  And two men ſtanding in the place,
                  With whom to talke he tooke delight:
                  They Moſes, and Elias were,
                  That ſtood and talked with him there.
               
               
                  But his diſciples were afraid
                  To looke vpon ſo ſtrange a ſight,
                  This voice withall made them diſmaid,
                  That came out of the cloud forth-right,
                  This is my ſonne I loue ſo deare,
                  Happy are they that do him heare.
               
               
                  And Peter was amazed ſo,
                  That he knew not the words he ſpake;
                  Come Maiſter ſaid he, ere we go,
                  Three tabernacles let vs make.
                  Be not affraid ſaid Chriſt of me,
                  
                     For now alone you may me ſee.
               
               
                  So as he came the mountaine fro,
                  He ſaid to them, this viſion
                  You may declare all men vnto,
                  After my reſurrection:
                  Till then to no man may you ſay,
                  What you haue ſeene all three this day.
               
               
                  Why do the Scribes ſaid they tell vs,
                  Come needs muſt firſt Elyas be?
                  Then Chriſt to them gaue anſwer thus,
                  Elyas came, they could not ſee.
                  And his Apoſtles well then wiſt,
                  He had ſpoke this of Iohn Baptiſt.
               
            
            
               Chriſt comming downe from the mountaine, cured a child that was lunatike.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 17.15. Mar. 9.14. Luc. 9.38.When from the hill come downe they were.
                  Among the multitude was one
                  That ſaid, oh maſter, pitie here,
                  And helpe I pray my vexed ſonne:
                  Of thy Diſciples I can haue
                  No helpe at all, my ſonne to ſaue.
               
               
                  Oh crooked generation,
                  Bring here ſaid Chriſt, the child to me:
                  How long ſhall in this nation,
                  Such vnbeleefe ingraffed be?
                  Chriſt then the deu'll rebuked ſo,
                  That from the child he made him go.
               
               
                  Then his Diſciples ſecretly,
                  Askt why they could not caſt him out?
                  It was your infidelitie,
                  Elſe you had done it without doubt.
                  Prayer and faſting it the way,
                  
                     Whereby this deu'll caſt out you may.
               
            
            
               They came thence into Galilie, where he fore-told them of his paſſion, and payd tribute.
                     Math. 17.22. Cap. 20.17. Mar. 9.31. Luc. 9.44. Cap. 24.7.
               
               
                  Chriſt told them this in Galilie,
                  The ſonne of man ſhall giuen be,
                  Into mens hands aſſuredly,
                  For to be ſlaine as you ſhall ſee:
                  Yet he the third day, ſhall againe
                  Reuiue, and ſo for ay remaine.
               
               
                  Then they which tribute did receiue,Peter was a Citizen at Capernaū, where Chriſt thē lay.
                  
                  Came vnto Peter ſecretly,
                  And ſaid to him, we do perciue,
                  Thy maſter at thy houſe doth lye,
                  Tell vs therefore and if he do
                  Pay tribute, vnto Caeſar to?
               
               
                  Whoſe anſwer (as he thought in deed,)
                  Was that his maſter payd the ſame:
                  Wherefore he hy'de him home with ſpeed,Chriſt declared his deitie in that he told Peter his thought.
                  
                  And to his maſter quickly came.
                  Who then preuenting him tooke paine,
                  To aske of him the ſame againe.
               
               
                  What thinkeſt thou, oh Peter ſhow
                  Of whom do kings their tribute take?
                  Of children? or of ſtrangers now?
                  Of ſtrangers, he did anſwer make.
                  By this thy reaſon then ſaid he,
                  Both thou and I may well go free.Another infallible tokē of his deity, in that h
                           •
                         fore-told Peter of the money in the fiſh mouth.
                  
               
               
                  Yet leſt we ſhould them ſo offend,
                  Go to the ſea, and angle there:
                  Where if thou do a while attend,
                  A fiſh thou ſhalt take, do not feare,
                  That in his mouth ſhall ſurely haue
                  
                     What they for thee and me do craue.
               
               
                  Thus Chriſt to Peter twiſe did ſhow,
                  That eu'ry thing what ſo it were,
                  Himſelfe the ſame before did know:
                  Whereby his Godhead did appeare.
                  And therewithall example gaue,
                  To pay the king what he ſhould haue.
               
            
            
               The contention of the Apoſtles for the primacie, Chriſtes anſwere, and warning againſt offences.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 18.1. Mar. 9.34. Luc. 9.16.Then his Diſciples did demand,
                  Who ſhould in heau'n the greateſt be?
                  Chriſt did a litle child command
                  To ſtand, and ſaid, lo here you ſee,
                  In heau'n the greateſt is the mild,
                  That humbleth him as doth a child.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 18.10. Pſal. 34.7.Offend not theſe, whoſe Angels ſee,
                  And do behold my fathers face:
                  
                     
                        Math. 18.8. Cap. 5.30. Mar. 9.45.Though that offences needs muſt be,
                  Yet ſure offenders do want grace.
                  Cut of the hand, plucke out the eye,
                  If that offences come thereby.
               
            
            
               
                  Math. 18.15. 
                     
                        •
                     f a man being 
                        •
                     arned pri
                     
                        •
                     atly, & again 
                        •
                     efore one or 
                        •
                     wo, & thirdly 
                        •
                     efore the 
                        •
                     hurch, do not 
                        •
                     mēd, then let 
                        •
                     im be excommunicated, not 
                        •
                     therwiſe.Of forgiuing our brethren.
               
                  But if thy brother thee offend,
                  Seeke thou to winne him priuatly:
                  If thee he heare not, nor amend,
                  Go yet, and warne him earneſtly:
                  If then he do not heare the ſame,
                  Before the Church let him haue blame.
               
               
                  Then Peter came to him, and ſaid,
                  When that my brother doth offend,
                  Shall I when he doth ſeeme affrayd,
                  Forgiue him ſeu'n times, if he mend?
                  
                     Not ſeu'n times, but as oft (ſaid he)
                  As he repents, let him go free.
               
               
                  By you on earth what ſo is bound,
                  Or looſed likewiſe by you is,
                  The ſame in heau'n ſhall ſo be found.If they aske to Gods glory, the profit of their neighbours, and the ſaluatiō of their owne ſoules.
                  
                  Two their requeſts ſhall haue iwis,
                  Where in my name meete two or three,
                  I in the middſt will ſurely be.
               
            
            
               The example of the king receiuing accounts of his ſeruants, and the reward of crueltie.
               
                  A certaine king would take accounts,
                        Math. 18.23.
                  
                  Among his ſeruants Ieſus ſaid:
                  And one was brought whoſe debt ſurmounts
                  Ten thouſand talents, all diſmayd.
                  Of this, the mightie king could ſay,
                  Sell him and his, my debts to pay.
               
               
                  But when the ſeruant cryed grace,
                  Deſiring him a longer day:
                  He ſaid not, go thou for a ſpace,
                  But I forgiue, go hence away.
                  This king ſo full of pietie,
                  May teach vs to vſe clemencie.
               
               
                  But the ſame ſeruant met his mate,
                  That ought to him an hundred pence:
                  He ſtraight not waighing his eſtate,
                  Nor yet regarding the offence,
                  Put him in priſon that did pray,
                  Without reſpect, till he would pay.
               
               
                  His felowes ſaw, and ſorie were,
                  And told their maſter of the ſame,
                  Who would not long this fact forbeare,
                  But payd him like for like, with ſhame.
                  
                     Till all were payd, withouten fayle:
                  He ſent that ſeruant then to iayle.
               
               
                  So likewiſe ſhall my father do,
                  (Said Chriſt) except you do forgiue,
                  Yea from your hearts your brethren to,
                  Their faults, whereat you ſo much grieue:
                  For as you hope of him to haue,
                  So graunt them grace, that grace will craue.
               
            
            
               Christ his iourney out of Galilie into Iudea, and his Sermons in the Temple at the feaſt of Tabernacles.
               
                  
                     
                        Mat. 19.1. Mar. 10.1.Chriſt did depart from Galilie,
                  And to Iudea came againe,
                  Where as he paſſed Iordan by:
                  While in that coſt he did remaine,
                  (As gratiouſly he vſd to deale)
                  Their ſicke and lame he then did heale.
               
               
                  Then came to him the Phariſie,
                  Full fraughted both in hart and minde,
                  With craft, and cloakt hypocriſie,
                  Hoping in Chriſt ſome fault to find.
                  But ſtill for all his taken toyle,
                  Ere he departs he hath the foyle.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 7.2. Leuit. 23.34.The feaſt of Tabernacles then,
                  Was kept with great ſolemnitie,
                  Vnto the which thoſe countrey men,
                  Did vſe to go continually:
                  That feaſt was euen then at hand,
                  Which they gaue Chriſt to vnderſtand.
               
               
                  His brethren to him therefore ſay,
                  Depart hence, and to Iurie go,
                  That thy Diſciples there they may,
                  See all thy works, that here we do.
                  
                     For none in ſecret workes the ſame,
                  That being know'n ſets forth his fame.
               
               
                  My time it not yet come, ſaid he,
                  But your time alwayes ready is:
                  The world loues you, and hateth me,
                  Becauſe it doth all things amiſſe.
                  Go ye that are thereto addreſt:
                  I will not yet go the feaſt.
               
               
                  Theſe things he ſaid, abiding ſtill
                  In Galilie, behind the reſt,
                  Till he his time might there fulfill:
                  Yet after he came to the feaſt,
                  Though ſecretly, which made the Iewes
                  To muſe, they heard of him no newes.
               
               
                  Some cald' him good, ſome other bad,
                  And ſaid he doth but men deceiue:
                  When halfe the feaſt was done, yet glad
                  Were ſome our Sauiour to receiue.
                  Chriſt taught, the Iewes did maruaile how
                  He ſhould vntaught the Scriptures know▪
                  
               
               
                  My doctrine is his that ſent me,
                  If any man will do his will,
                  Gods word he ſhall know it to be,
                  And that I muſt the ſame fulfill.
                  Vnrighteouſneſſe in him was none,
                  He ſought Gods glorie not his owne.
               
               
                  Did Moſes geue to you a law?
                        Ioh. 7.19. Exod. 2
                           •
                        .
                           •
                        .
                  
                  And none of you doth keepe the ſame?
                  And yet as men that ſtood in awe,
                  For breach therefore ye do me blame.
                  Yea more then that, ye would me kill,
                  That onely do my fathers will.
               
               
                  
                  Thou haſt the deu'll, ſaid they againe,
                  Who goeth about to kill thee here?
                  One worke I did, I tell you plaine,
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 7.22. Leuit. 12.3. Gen. 17.10.You maruell at, on may with feare.
                  You Circumciſe them Sabboth day:
                  I made one whole, ye would me ſlay.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 7.24. Deut. 1.16.Iudge not as outwardly you ſee,
                  But righteous iudgement iudge withall.
                  Is not this man (ſaid ſome) eu'n he
                  Whoſe death they haue decreed all?
                  Do not the rulers ſee plainly,
                  That he now ſpeaketh openly?
               
               
                  This man from whence he is know we,
                  Whence Chriſt ſhall come we cannot tell▪
                  
                  Whence I am come ye know, ſaid he,
                  Him that ſent me ye know not well:
                  But I know him, and he ſent me;
                  I am of him, ſo are not ye.
               
               
                  They ſought to take him, but did lay
                  No hands on him, his houre as then
                  Was not come, to make him away.
                  Some ſaid, beleeuing of thoſe men,
                  When Chriſt comes ſhall his works be mo?
                  Or greater then we ſee him do?
               
               
                  The Phariſies and high Prieſts ſent
                  Their officers Chriſt for to take:
                  A litle while now be content,
                  Said Chriſt, my iourney hence I make:
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 7.34. Cap. 13.33.To him that ſent me will I go,
                  You (leeking) ſhall find me no mo.
               
               
                  Now whither will he, ſaid the Iewes?
                  That we ſhall not find him againe?
                  
                     If to the Grecians that were newes.
                  This thing they would haue learned faine;
                  Ye ſhall ſeeke me, but ſhall not find,
                  Nor come to me, in deed or mind.
               
               
                  Now in the laſt day of the feaſt,
                        Ioh. 7.37. Leuit. 23.36.
                  
                  Chriſt ſtood, and cryde to them, and ſaid,
                  If any thirſt, lo I am preſt
                  To giue him drinke, be not affrayd,
                  In him that doth beleeue in me,
                  A well of life ſhall ſpringing be.
               
               
                  This of the ſpirit they ſhould receiue,
                        Ioh. 7.39. Ioel. 2 28. Act. 2.17.
                  
                  That would beleeue in, him he ſpake,
                  Although the Iewes did not perceiue,
                  Nor great account of Ieſus make.
                  When Chriſt was glorified then,
                  The holy Ghoſt was giuen men.
               
               
                  So many when they heard this, ſaid,
                  This is the Prophet certainly:
                  Some other not ſo much affrayd,
                  Said, he was Chriſt apparantly.
                  Of other minds againe were ſome,
                  From Galilie Chriſt ſhould not come.
               
               
                  Saith not the Scripture,
                        Ioh. 7.42. Micah. 5.2. Math. 2.5. of the ſeed
                  Of Dauid, Chriſt ſhall come to thee?
                  And out of Bethlehem in deed,
                  Where Dauid was, thou ſhalt him ſee?
                  Each lik't his owne opinion
                  
                     
                        •
                     f Chriſt, which bred diſſention.
               
               
                  Some would he ſhould then taken be,
                  Yet no man layd on him a hand:
                  The rulers all did ſo agree,
                  And ſo their officers command.
                  
                     Of whom they askt the reaſon why,
                  Chriſt was not taken by and by?
               
               
                  The ſeruants ſaid, aſſuredly,
                  Man neuer yet like this man ſpake.
                  The rulers anſwerd bitterly,
                  Ye are deceiu'd and much miſtake.
                  What truſt do wiſemen to him giue,
                  Though the vnlearned him beleeue?
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 7.50. Cap. 3.1. Deut. 17.8. Cap. 19.15.Then Nicodemus ſaid, our law
                  Doth iudge no man, before it heare
                  What he hath done of him in awe.
                  Art thou ſaid they? what doeſt thou feare:
                  Search well and looke, from Galilie
                  Comes not one Prophet verely.
               
               
                  
                     Bethany where Lazarus, Martha and Marie dwelt, was in the moūt of Olyues.Then eu'ry man went to his home,
                  And to the mount of Oliues he
                  That night did go, it ſeemes to ſome,
                  He went to pray, yet other be
                  Of mind, he went to take his reſt
                  In Bethanie, where he thought beſt.
               
            
            
               A woman taken in adulterie brought to Chriſt, we deliuered by him from her accuſers.
               
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 8.1.And early in the morning came
                  Into the temple Chriſt againe:
                  Yea all the people ſaw the ſame,
                  Chriſt ſate him downe and taught them plaine.
                  But marke the craft and ſubtiltie,
                  Of Scribe and froward Phariſie.
               
               
                  Though they had by temptation,
                  Aſſaild him oft, and had the fall:
                  A new deuiſe they hammer on,
                  To tempt our Sauiour Chriſt withall.
                  
                     A woman in adulterie
                  Was found, the act did verifie.
               
               
                  They brought her vnto him, and ſaid,
                        Ioh. 8.5. Leuit. 20.10.
                  
                  Moſes commandeth in the law,
                  No time therein ſhould be delayd,
                  To ſtone ſuch as liue not in awe.
                  But maſter what doeſt thou ſuppoſe,
                  That God would haue vs do with thoſe?
               
               
                  Then Ieſus ſtouped to the ground,
                  And with his finger wrote thereon:
                  The Scribes ſtill asking him were found,
                  Some anſwer to their queſtion.
                  He that ſinnes not, let him Said Chriſt. Ioh. 8.7. Deut. 17.6.
                      not ſtay.
                  Caſt the firſt ſtone at her he may.
               
               
                  They hearing this, no longer muſe,
                  They go out eu'ry one away:
                  Their conſcience did them ſo accuſe,
                  To puniſh her they would not ſtay.
                  And Ieſus was there left alone
                  With her, and ſhe condemn'd by none.
               
               
                  Sith no man hath condemned thee,
                  Go hence ſaid Chriſt, and ſinne no more:
                  Miſliking her adulterie,
                  Which ſure he would haue puniſht ſore,
                  But that repentance by her face,
                  He ſaw in her, had got his grace.
               
            
            
               Chriſt is the true light of the world.
                     Ioh. 8.12. Cap 1.5. Cap. 9.5.
               
               
                  Of this world ſure I am the light,
                  For him to walke that followeth me:
                  Yea cleare ſhall be the darkeſt night,
                  The light of life that man ſhall ſee.
                  Thou of thy ſelfe doeſt record beare,
                  
                     It is not true, we therefore feare.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 8.14. Cap. 5.31.Then Ieſus ſaid, though I do ſo,
                  My record yet is true in deed:
                  For whence I came, and where I go,
                  I know, to learne I haue no need.
                  This thing from you ſo hidden is,
                  Becauſe ye iudge each thing amiſſe.
               
               
                  I iudge no man, yet if I do,
                  My iudgement ye the truth ſhall find:
                  For I alone do nothing ſo,
                  I ſtill am of my fathers mind.
                  The father is alwayes with me,
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 8.17. Deut. 17.6. Cap. 19.15. Math. 18.16. 2. Cor. 13.1. Heb. 10.28. Two witneſſes allowed be.
               
               
                  Where is thy father then, ſay they?
                  Ye know him not, nor will know me:
                  You all the ſonne do diſobey,
                  And yet the father faine would ſee.
                  He that doth ſeeke the ſonne to know,
                  To him I do the father ſhow.
               
               
                  Ieſus ſpake in the treaſurie,
                  As he within the Temple taught,
                  Theſe ſayings all moſt conſtantlie,
                  And yet no man Chriſt Ieſus caught.
                  His houre vncome, no man there could
                  (For all their ſpight) on him take hold.
               
               
                  Then Ieſus ſaid, I go my way,
                  Ye ſhall ſeeke me, yet dye in ſinne:
                  You cannot come to me I ſay,
                  Your wickededneſſe ſo wraps you in.
                  Will he ſaid they himſelfe go kill,
                  That he ſaith ſo? what is his will?
               
               
                  Ye from beneath, I from aboue,
                  
                     Ye of this world, I am not thence:
                  Your ſinnes, ſaid Chriſt, I cannot loue,
                  In them you dye, departing hence,
                  Except your faith vnfained be,
                  And ye beleeue that I am he.
               
               
                  Who art thou then, ſaid they againe?
                  The ſame ſaid he, I told before:
                  And many things of you remaine
                  To ſay, and iudge, that grieue me ſore.
                  Yet true is he that ſent me here,
                  Whoſe words to ſpeake I do not feare.
               
               
                  They vnderſtood not, he ſpoke this
                  To them as of the father then:
                  When ye lift vp the ſonne iwis,
                  Then ſhall I be well knowne to men,
                  That of my ſelfe I do, nor ſay,
                  But as my father makes the way.
               
               
                  For he that ſent me is with me,
                  The father left me not alone:
                  My doings all directeth he,
                  Him pleaſe I, and we both are one.
                  As he ſpake theſe things, many were,
                  That then beleeued on him there.
               
               
                  Chriſt ſaid, to thoſe that did beleeue,
                  In my word if ye do abide
                  Ye my Diſciples are, I giue
                  You knowledge of the truth beſide,
                  And the ſame truth ſhall make you free,
                  That are ſo ioynd in league with me.
               
               
                  They ſaid we be of Abrahms ſeed,
                  And neuer yet to any bound:
                  Why ſayſt thou then ye ſhall be freed,
                  
                     As we had bene in ſlau'rie found?
                  I ſay, ſaid he, who ſo doth ſinne,
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 8.34. 
                           
                              •
                           am. 6.20. 
                           •
                        . Pet. 2.19. Sinnes ſeruant is, it wraps him in.
               
            
            
               Of freedome, or the difference betweene the ſonne and the ſeruant.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           oh. 
                        
                           •
                        .35.The ſeruant doth but ſoiourne here:
                  The ſonne doth in the houſe abide.
                  They that the ſonne ſhall free, are cleare▪
                  
                  And ſhall be free at eu'ry tide.
                  I know ye are of Abrahms ſeede,
                  Ye ſeeke to kill me yet in deede.
               
               
                  And why, in you can take no place
                  My words, I ſpeake that I haue ſeene
                  With my father: you voyde of grace,
                  With your father to long haue beene,
                  Ye follow him, the deuill I ſay,
                  And therefore ſeeke ye me to ſlay.
               
               
                  Abrah'm ſaid they, our father is.
                  Chriſt ſaid, if ye his children were▪
                  
                  Ye would his works then do, not this,
                  Ye would to kill me ſtand in feare,
                  This did not Abraham, ſure I haue
                  Told you the truth, which God me gaue.
               
               
                  Your fathers works you do in deed:
                  They ſaid, of fornication
                  We were not borne, we are Gods ſeed,
                  And other father haue we none.
                  If God were he, ye would loue me:
                  For I came forth from, God ſaid he.
               
               
                  I came not of my ſelfe, but ſent,
                  My talke why do you not perceiue?
                  Becauſe my word with good intent,
                  
                     Ye do not heare nor yet receiue.
                        Ioh. 8.44. 1. Ioh. 3.8.
                  
                  The deu'll your father is, whoſe luſt
                  You do, and in him onely truſt.
               
               
                  A murtherer he euer was,
                  And did the truth moſt deadly hate:
                  For lyes all other he doth paſſe,
                  This is your fathers dreadfull ſtate.
                  Becauſe I tell the truth ſaid he,
                  Ye wickedly beleeue not me.
               
               
                  Who can of ſinne rebuke me here?
                  The truth why do ye not beleeue?
                  He heareth Gods word with much feare,
                        Ioh. 8.47. 1. Ioh. 4.6.
                  
                  That is of God, and ſo doth liue.
                  Ye heare it not therefore ſaid he,
                  Becauſe of God none of you be.
               
               
                  The Iewes then anſwering ſaid againe,
                  Samaritan, deuill thou haſt:
                  I haue no deuill I tell you plaine,
                  My father whom away ye caſt,
                  I honour, ye diſhonour me,
                  Which your decay no doubt will be.
               
               
                  And I ſeeke not ſo much my prayſe,
                  But there is one that ſeeks the ſame:
                  And iudgeth you, and all your wayes,
                  Whoſe iudgement you may neuer blame.
                  The man that keeps my word, I ſay,
                  Shall ſee no death, nor dying day.
               
               
                  A deu'll we know thou haſt in deed,
                  For Abraham is dead and gone:
                  So did the Prophets likewiſe ſpeed,
                  And yet thou ſayſt, there ſhall not one
                  That keeps thy word, death taſt or ſee,
                  
                     But from his dart thou keepſt him free.
               
               
                  Then Abraham which now is dead,
                  And all the Prophets, dead alſo,
                  Whoſe fame ſo farre abroad was ſpread,
                  Art thou greater then they or no?
                  Whom makeſt thou thy ſelfe to be?
                  Tell vs, that we may honour thee.
               
               
                  Ieſus ſaid, if I honour me,
                  My honour is nought worth at all:
                  My father doth the ſame, ſaid he,
                  Which you your God in vaine do call;
                  Ye know him not: but him know I,
                  If I ſaid no, then ſhould I lye.
               
               
                  I know him, and his word I keepe,
                  Your father Abrahm did reioyce,
                  To ſee before he fell on ſleepe,
                  My day, and ſo to heare my voyce.
                  He ſaw it, and thereof was glad:
                  Ye want the grace your father had.
               
               
                  Thou art not old yet fiftie yeare,
                  Haſt thou our father Abrahm ſeene?
                  Though this ſo ſtrange to you appeare,
                  Before he was, I ſure haue beene.
                  They tooke vp ſtones to ſtone him then:
                  But Ieſus hid him from thoſe men.
               
            
            
               Chriſt gaue ſight to one that was borne blind.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           oh. 9.1.And as Chriſt Ieſus paſſed by,
                  When he out of the Temple went,
                  Where then the Iewes moſt cruelly,
                  To ſtone our Sauiour Chriſt had ment.
                  He ſaw a blind man by the way,
                  That had bene blind from his birth day.
               
               
                  
                  And his Diſciples asked thus,
                  Oh maſter, who did ſinne we pray?
                  He or his parents, tell it vs?
                  That he is blind, what doeſt thou ſay?
                  Then Ieſus ſaid, nor they, nor he,
                  But that all men Gods works might ſee.
               
               
                  His works, I muſt worke, that ſent me,
                  While it is day, the night comes on:
                        Ioh. 9.5. Cap. 1.9. Cap. 8.12. Cap. 12.35.
                  
                  I am the light while here I be,
                  When I go hence, the light is gone:
                  And ſo he ſpat and made the clay,
                  Which curde his blindneſſe cleane that day.
               
               
                  Then Chriſt ſaid, go, in Siloam waſh,
                  Lo, I haue ſent thee ſo to do:
                  Which when he did, his eyes as glaſſe
                  Were made as cleare, and ſeeing to.
                  The neighbours that knew him before,
                  To ſee him ſee, did wonder ſore.
               
               
                  Some ſaid, and thought that it was he,
                  Some other thought him like the ſame:
                  But he confeſt himſelfe to be,
                  Borne blind, and ſpread Chriſt Ieſus fame.
                  For whom (ſaid he) you Ieſus call,
                  Hath made me ſee, as you ſee all.
               
               
                  They ſaid, how op'ned he thine eyes?
                  Mine eyes he did annoint with clay:
                  And then he ſaid to me ariſe,
                  Go waſh the ſame from thee away.
                  I waſht, and then receiued ſight,
                  Which neuer ſaw before the light.
               
               
                  Where Chriſt was then, he could not tell,
                  They brought him to the Phariſies:
                  
                     Though Chriſt had done but all things well,
                  In opening the blind mans eyes,
                  They chaft, that Chriſt ſhould worke the clay,
                  To heale him on the Sabboth day.
               
               
                  The Phariſees askt him the ſame,
                  He anſwer'd, as he did before.
                  From God (ſaid they) he neuer came,
                  That makes not of the Sabboth more.
                  Some ſaid, how can he ſinfull be?
                  That workes ſuch workes as we do ſee?
               
               
                  Then asked they the blinde againe,
                  Tell vs of him what doeſt thou ſay?
                  He ſaid he is a Prophet plaine,
                  That wrought this worke on me this day.
                  They ſcarſe beleeu'd he had beene blind,
                  Till they had knowne his parents mind.
               
               
                  Of them his parents were afraid,
                  Becauſe they had decreed ſo,
                  Who ſo confeſſed Chriſt, they ſaid,
                  Out of their Sinagogue ſhould go.
                  Our ſonne he is, borne blinde he was,
                  Let him tell how this came to paſſe.
               
               
                  Then called they the blind againe,
                  And ſaid to God the glory giue:
                  He is a ſinner this is plaine,
                  Though he thy griefe did ſo relieue▪
                  
                  I know not if he ſinfull be:
                  Once I was blind, and now I ſee.
               
               
                  How op'ned he thine eyes, ſay they?
                  I told you once, and hard you not?
                  Would yee his doctrine now obey?
                  Or elſe haue yee ſo ſoone forgot?
                  
                     They checkt him, ſaying, Moſes we,
                  Not his diſciples, ſure will be.
               
               
                  God ſpake to Moſes, this we know,
                  This man we know not whence he is.
                  The blinde man anſwer'd, now I trow,
                  Ye doubt not that he hath done this:
                  And this to all men may appeare,
                  That God will not a ſinner heare.
               
               
                  It was not ſince the world began,
                  Hard that his eyes were opened,
                  That was borne blind; and now a man,
                  But that of God it happened.
                  If he were not of God, ſaid he,
                  He could not haue done this for me.
               
               
                  In ſinnes (they ſaid) borne ſure thou art,
                  Doeſt thou teach vs what we ſhall do?
                  They caſt him out: he did depart,
                  When Ieſus heard they had done ſo,
                  He ſaid to him, wilt thou beleeue,
                  Now in the ſonne of God and liue?
               
               
                  Who is he Lord, that ſo I may,
                  Beleeue in him as thou would'ſt haue?
                  It is my ſelfe, Chriſt did then ſay.
                  Lord I beleeue, helpe me I craue.
                  Chriſt ſaid, I make the blind to ſee,
                        Iohn 9.39. Cap. 3.17. Cap. 12.46▪
                     
                  
                  And ſeeing blind, that loue not me.
               
               
                  Some of the Phariſies were there,
                  Which hard theſe words, and thus ſaid then,
                  Are we blinde? how doth that appeare?
                  The blinde are not ſuch ſinfull men;
                  But now ye ſay that yee do ſee,
                  Your ſinnes remaine therefore, ſaid he.
               
            
            
               
               Of the true ſhepheard and the hireling.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           ohn. 10.1.And that they might the better know
                  Their ſtate, and ſo conſider his,
                  Chriſt in a parable did ſhowe
                  The faithfull Shepheard who he is:
                  The hireling Ieſus did bewray,
                  And theefe, that liues vpon the pray.
               
               
                  Verely, verely, I do ſay,
                  He that into the ſheepfold goes,
                  Beſide the doore ſome other way:
                  May well be counted one of thoſe,
                  That comes to rob and ſteale the ſheepe,
                  Which other men haue charge to keepe.
               
               
                  But he that goes in by the doore,
                  Is ſure the ſheepheard of the flocke:
                  To him the porter euermore,
                  Doth ope aſſoone as he doth knock;
                  To call his ſheepe he doth reioyce,
                  The ſheepe likewiſe to heare his voyce.
               
               
                  When that his owne ſheepe forth a 
                        •
                     nt,
                  He goeth before: they follow faſt,
                  His voice they know, and what he mea
                        •
                     
                  
                  Their perill he before doth caſt.
                  A ſtranger they will ſurely flee,
                  By voice they know him ſtrange to be.
               
               
                  They vnderſtood not all he ſaid,
                  Therefore Chriſt ſaid to them againe,
                  My ſheepe may ſafely vnaffraid,
                  Voide of all dangers ſo remaine.
                  I am the doore of all my ſheepe,
                  And care moſt ſafely them to keepe.
               
               
                  
                  All that before me came, ſaid he,
                  (That is, ſuch as I haue not ſent,
                  And ſuch as faine them Chriſt to be)
                  The theeues and robbers are I meant.
                  But ſure the ſheepe heare not their voice,
                  Though to heare mine, my ſheepe reioyce.
               
               
                  By me (the doore) if any do
                  Enter therein, ſhall ſaued be:
                  He in and out ſhall freely go,
                  And paſture finde that followes me.
                  The theefe doth ſteale, deſtroy, and kill,
                  I came to ſaue my ſheepe from ill.
               
               
                  I the good ſhepheard ſurely am,
                        Iohn. 10.11. Eſay. 40.11. Ezech. 34.23.
                  
                  That giue my life to ſaue my ſheepe:
                  An hireling hath thereof no ſhame,
                  To ſee the Wolfe, and take no keepe;
                  He leaueth them: the Wolfe doth catch,
                  Deſtroying one at eu'ry ſnatch.
               
               
                  The hireling fleeth, he ſerues for hire,
                  And therefore cares not for the ſheepe,
                  But that th
                        •
                      is not my deſire:
                  The good 
                        •
                     pheard takes little ſleepe,
                  And I am 
                        〈◊〉
                      my ſheepe I know,
                  And ſo 
                        〈◊〉
                      knowne of mine, I trow.
               
               
                  So as the father knoweth me,
                  So I do him: and for my ſheepe
                  My life I lay downe;
                        Iohn. 10.16. Ezech. 37.22. and there be
                  Another flocke that I muſt keepe:
                  As yet of this flock are not they,
                  When I call them, they will obey.
               
               
                  My Father loueth me the more,
                  Becauſe I do my life downe lay,
                  
                     That I might it againe reſtore.
                  
                     
                        Iohn. 10.18. Eſay. 53.7. Act. 2.24.No man takes it from me away:
                  To lay and take I power haue,
                  But this precept my father gaue.
               
               
                  Among the Iewes diſſention grew,
                  For theſe his ſayings then againe:
                  He ſhould be mad, if ſome ſaid true,
                  And haue a deuill: ſome other plaine
                  Confeſt his words and workes to be
                  No deuilliſh deeds, to make men ſee.
               
               
                  
                     Feaſt of dedication was an. mundi. 3118. 1. King. 8.65. 2. Chro. 7.1.
                     Three feaſts of dedication,
                  We finde in ſcripture there haue beene▪
                  
                  The firſt, ſolemniz'd Solomon,
                  In harueſt time this feaſt was ſeene.
                  Then Ezra. 6.16. This feaſt was anno mundi 3627. anno. 6. Darij Hyſtapſis reg. & menſis martij. 3. die. Ezra next, did keepe the ſame
                  In Spring, when they from Babell came.
               
               
                  
                     
                        1. Mac. 4.59 This feaſt was anno mundi. 3967. & menſis Decemb. die. 25.
                     Then Iudas Macchabeus he,
                  Laſtly this feaſt ſolemnized
                  In winter: and the ſame decree,
                  Till Chriſtes time ſo continued.
                  When Ieſus walkt (which tooke ſmall reſt)
                  In Solomons porch, this was the feaſt.
               
               
                  The Iewes came there him round about,
                  If thou be Chriſt, now tell vs plaine,
                  How long doeſt thou keepe vs in doubt?
                  Then Ieſus anſwerd againe;
                  Ye truſt not what I told: yet ſee
                  That my works do witneſſe with me.
               
               
                  Yea, yee beleeue not, for ye are
                  Not of my ſheepe: mine heare my voice;
                  I know them, and for them I care,
                  To follow me they will reioyce.
                  
                     Eternall life to them I geue,
                  They periſh not, Or in me. with me they liue.
               
               
                  My father which gaue them to me,
                  Is greater then all, this I know.
                  And in my fathers hand they be,
                  None can thence take them as I trow.
                  I and my father ſure are one.
                  The Iewes againe thought him to ſtone.
               
               
                  Then Ieſus ſaid, good works I haue
                  Shewd from my father verely:
                  For which of them now do I craue,
                  Would you ſtone me ſo cruelly?
                  For the good worke no ſtone caſt we;
                  Thou being but man, God makeſt thee.
               
               
                  If that the Pſalmiſt Gods them call,
                        Ioh. 10.34. Pſal. 82.6.
                  
                  To whom Gods word then giuen was,
                  The Scripture faultleſſe yet withall,
                  Do I blaſpheme? or ſo treſpaſſe?
                  To ſay that I Gods ſonne ſhould be?
                  Sent to the world, as here ye ſee.
               
               
                  If I do not my fathers workes,
                  Beleeue me not: but if I do,
                  In you ſome hidden hatred lurkes,
                  That wilfully the truth forgo.
                  Beleeue the works that ye do ſee,
                  The father works the ſame by me.
               
               
                  So then ye ſhall know and beleeue,
                  That ſure in me the father is:
                  And I in him, yea he doth giue
                  To me all power that is his.
                  They ſought then to put him in bands:
                  But he eſcapt out of their hands.
               
               
                  
                  Now when the Iewes he ſcaped fro,
                  He paſſed Iordan, then againe
                  Where Iohn Baptized he did go,
                  And there a while he did remaine.
                  There many did to him reſort,
                  And did receiue of him comfort.
               
               
                  Though all Ieruſalem of pride,
                  And deepe diſdaine did Chriſt refuſe,
                  Yet there where then he did abide,
                  They did our Sauiour better vſe.
                  What Iohn of him had ſpoke before,
                  They knowledgd, prayſing God the more.
               
               
                  Thus many conflicts Ieſus had,
                  With froward fooliſh Phariſies:
                  All which might make his choſen glad,
                  That he obtaind ſuch victories.
                  To God let vs the honour giue.
                  That did our weakeneſſe ſo relieue.
               
               
                  Giue glorie vnto God on high,
                  To Father, and ſo to the Sonne:
                  See that the ſame perpetually,
                  Vnto the holy Ghoſt be donne,
                  Which is, and was, and ſo ſhalbe,
                  One mightie God in perſons three. Amen.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE FIFTH PART OF THE HISTORIE OF OVR LORD AND SAVIOVR IESVS CHRIST, containing thoſe things which he did the fourth yeare after his Baptiſme, which was the three & thirtieth yeare of his age, according to the foure Euangeliſtes: the yeare after the creation of the world. 4174.
            To the tune of the Lordes Prayer.
            
                The time of Chriſts departure approching, he confirmed himſelfe to go to Hieruſalem.
               
                  WHen Chriſt had now accompliſhed
                        Luc. 9.51.
                  
                  The time appointed him before,
                  And that his death then haſtened,
                  He did prepare himſelfe therefore:
                  His minde he fully ſetled tho,
                  Thence to Ieruſalem to go.
               
               
                  Wherefore he did before him ſend,
                  A lodging for him to prepare,
                  Of ſuch as did him then attend,
                  Which they did with exceeding care.
                  Within Samaria entred they,
                  Into a towne for to puruey.
               
               
                  
                  But the Samaritans in deed,
                  Their meſſage would not then receiue,
                  When him and his they (with ſuch ſpeed)
                  Go to Ieruſalem perceiue.
                  This was the cauſe, for all their care,
                  They could no lodging there prepare.
               
               
                  When Iohn and Iames that then were ſent,
                  Saw they could not prouided be:
                  Shall we ſaid they, incontinent,
                  Command as did Elias he,
                  That fire come downe from heauen hye,
                  And ſo conſume them vtterly?
               
               
                  Ieſus rebuking them, did ſay,
                  Know ye not yet what men ye are?
                  The ſonne of man came not to ſlay,
                  But ſaue mens liues, whereof haue care.
                  So to another towne they went,
                  For then the day was almoſt ſpent.
               
            
            
               Chriſtes anſwer to the Scribe that would haue followed him.
               A Scribe came then to Chriſt and ſaid,
               
                  
                     Luc. 9.57. Math. 8.19.Oh maſter I will follow thee.
               For anſwer he was not delayd;
               The foxes haue their holes ye ſee,
               And fowles their neaſts, ſaid he, but I
               Haue not a place wherein to lye.
            
            
               Chriſtes anſwer to the Diſciple that would go burie his father firſt.
               
                  
                     
                        Luc. 9.59.But to another Chriſt ſaid then,
                  Come thou forthwith and follow me:
                  Thus calleth he vs mortall men,
                  
                     Whom when, and how beſt liketh he.
                  
                     Ioh. Caluin. in Cap Math. 8. verſ. 21.
                     My dutie firſt diſcharge muſt I,
                  To my old father till he dye.
               
               
                  And Ieſus ſaid to him againe,
                  Let thou the dead their dead bury:
                  For my Diſciple muſt remaine,
                  And do his office carefully.
                  Go thou therefore abroad, I ſay,
                  Preach the kingdome of God alway.
               
            
            
               Chriſtes anſwer to a third that would follow him, but would firſt 
                     ••
                  d his houſhold farewell.
               Another ſaid, 
                     ••
                  e follow thee,
                     Luc. 9.61.
               
               But firſt I muſt go bid farewell,
               To ſuch as be in houſe with me;
               But Ieſus ſaid, be doth not well,
               That to the plough doth put his hand,
               And looketh backe, and lets it ſtand.
            
            
               Chriſt ſent forth the ſeuentie Diſciples to preach.
               
                  After theſe things appointed he,
                        Luc. 10.1. Math. 10.1.
                  
                  Of his Diſciples ſeuentie mo,
                  That ſtill were wont with him to be,
                  And ſent them forth by awd two,
                  Where he would come, before they went,
                  To do and teach, as they were ſent.
               
               
                  The harueſt is ſurely ſaid he,
                  Now verie great, yet few I ſay,
                  Do labour in the ſame, pray ye
                  The Lord thereof to ſend away
                  Some labourers for to take paine,
                  That by his harueſt he may gaine.
               
               
                  Behold, I ſend you, go away,
                  As lambes among the wolues ye be:
                  
                     As ſimple as the doues, I ſay,
                  And as the Serpent wiſe be ye.
                  Do in your iourney take no care,
                  What weeds ye were, or how ye fare.
               
               
                  What houſe, or Citie ye come to,
                  Among the worthie there remaine,
                  Till you from thence haue cauſe to go,
                  Let them with you my peace retaine.
                  Such as do not deſerue this grace,
                  Shake of their As a witneſſe 
                           •
                        hat you haue 
                           ••
                        t of theirs as much as the duſt. duſt in the ſame place.
               
               
                  This duſt ſhall witneſſe againſt thoſe,
                  That you deſired not their wealth;
                  And that they earthly treaſure choſe,
                  
                     
                        Luc. 10.11. Math. 10.14. Act. 13.51. Cap. 18.6.Before this proffred ſauing health.
                  And in the iudgement they ſhall gaine,
                  Of Sodome and Gomorh the paine.
               
               
                  Chorazin wo be vnto thee,
                  And to Bethſayda wo likewiſe:
                  The great works that were done by me
                  In you, ye greatly did deſpiſe:
                  If they in Tyrus had bene done,
                  They had repented long agone.
               
               
                  If Tyre and Sydon had, I ſay,
                  Both ſeene and heard what ye do heare,
                  Sack-cloth and aſhes eu'ry day
                  Had bene their weed: you buy it deare,
                  For at the iudgement, then to thee,
                  To them it ſhall more eaſie be.
               
               
                  Thou Capernaum lift ſo hye,
                  Yea raiſed vp to heau'n aboue,
                  To hell thou ſhalt be brought to lye,
                  Becauſe my works thee neuer moue:
                  
                     If they in Sodom had bene wrought,
                  It had not yet bene brought to nought.
               
               
                  For Sodom it ſhall eaſier be,
                  (Oh Capernaum be thou ſure)
                  At the great iudgement, then for thee,
                  The puniſhment for to endure.
                  Tyre, Sydon, and Sodom ſhall haue,
                  More eaſe then theſe, though then ye craue.
               
               
                  He that doth heare you, heareth me:
                  He that deſpiſeth you alſo
                  Deſpiſeth me, and likewiſe he
                  Deſpiſeth God whom I came fro.
                  They do aright in God reioyce,
                  That in his Preachers heare his voyce.
               
            
            
               The ſeuentie returned, and told Chriſt all that they had done.
               
                  The ſeu'ntie did returne with ioy,
                        Luc. 10.17.
                  
                  And told the Lord what they had done:
                  The deuils (ſaid they) could none annoy
                  Or hurt, where we to preach begonne:
                  For eu'ry where we through thy name,
                  His rage and furie ſoone did tame.
               
               
                  Chriſt ſaid, I Sathan did behold,
                  Like lightning downe from heauen fall:
                  To you I power giue (be bold)
                  To tread on Serpents great or ſmall,
                  And Scorpions: yea the enemy
                  
                     
                        •
                     hall not hurt you aſſuredly.
               
               
                  In this yet do not ye reioyce,
                  T
                        ••
                     t ſpirits to you ſubiect are,
                  But lift both hands, both heart, and voyce
                  To God which hath of you ſuch care.
                  
                     That he your names hath written ſure,
                  In heau'n, for euer to endure.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Luc. 10.21. Math. 11.25.Then Ieſus ſaid, I giue to thee,
                  Oh mightie Lord and father deare,
                  Moſt hartie thankes, thou heareſt me,
                  And to my call thou giueſt eare:
                  Theſe things thou hideſt from the wiſe,
                  Their worldly wit thou doeſt deſpiſe.
               
               
                  Thy ſecrets vnto babes withall,
                  And humble men thou doeſt declare:
                  Theſe do on thee for mercy call,
                  Theſe, theſe oh God thy choſen are.
                  This thy good pleaſure was, and is,
                  Oh father, none can alter this.
               
               
                  All things to me now giuen are
                  Of my father, the ſonne, and he,
                  No mortall man can well declare
                  The one of them, except he be
                  Taught by the ſonne, and ſo he may
                  Learne both to know, this is the way.
               
               
                  To his Diſciples turned he,
                  And ſecretly to them did ſay,
                  The eyes are bleſſed that do ſee,
                  As ye do ſee, now at this day.
                  Prophets and Kings wiſht to ſee ſo
                  And here what you do long ago.
               
            
            
               A Scribe or Lawyer tempting Chriſt, was anſwered hi
                     •
                   queſtion, and taught who his neighbour was.
               
                  
                     
                        Luc. 10.25. Math. 22.35. Mar. 12.28.A certaine Lawyer ſtood vp then,
                  And tempting Chriſt began to ſay:
                  Oh maſter, thou doeſt teach theſe men,
                  To euerlaſting life the way.
                  
                     Vouchſafe to tell it I do craue,
                  Eternall life how I may haue.
               
               
                  What is written ſaid Chriſt againe?
                  And in the law what doeſt thou reade?
                  Thou ſhalt (ſaid he) with Or all the ſtrength. euery vaine
                  The Lord thy God both loue and dread:
                  And next the Lord thy God aboue,
                  Thy neighbour, thou ſhalt likewiſe loue.
               
               
                  Thou haſt ſaid well▪ ſaid Chriſt in deed,
                  Go thou and do th
                        ••
                     
                     ▪ thou ſhalt liue:
                  But he in hope of better ſpeed,
                  A new aſſault to Chriſt would giue.
                  Who is my neighbour then ſaid he?
                  This thing I would faine learne of thee.
               
               
                  Then Ieſus anſwering, ſaid ſo,
                  A certaine man went by the way
                  That leadeth downe From Ieruſalem. to Iericho,
                  Where among theeues he fell 
                        •
                     hat day:
                  Robbed, and wounded, there he was,
                  And left halfe dead ſo on the graſſe.
               
               
                  By chance a Prieſt came by that way,
                  Which when he ſaw him, paſſed by:
                  Likewiſe a Leuite where he lay,
                  Did looke on him, and let him lye.
                  But a Samaritan by chaunce,
                  Came by, and ſaw him in his traunce.
               
               
                  Which ſight, ſo mouing then his heart,
                  He tooke on him compaſſion:
                  Whereof before he did depart,
                  He made full declaration.
                  He powred in (and alſo bound)
                  Both wine and oyle into his wound.
               
               
                  
                  And not contented yet with this,
                  He ſet him vp, on his owne beaſt,
                  And brought him to an inne of his,
                  Where he prouided for his reſt:
                  And on the morow ere he went,
                  He told the hoſt his whole intent.
               
               
                  Lo take theſe two pence that I giue,
                  Haue care of this man I thee pray:
                  His wants therewith do thou relieue,
                  What more he ſpends, I will thee pay.
                  Which thinkeſt thou now of theſe three,
                  To him moſt neighbour▪ like to be?
               
               
                  The Lawyer anſwering, did ſay,
                  The mercifull was euen he.
                  Go thou ſaid Chriſt, then hence away,
                  And do as this man teacheth thee;
                  To eu'ry one in miſerie,
                  Shew thou like liberalitie.
               
            
            
               Marie and Martha entertaine Chriſt.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           c. 10.38.Now as they further paſſed on,
                  Into a certaine towne they came,
                  Where was the habitation,
                  Of one that Martha had to name:
                  Who to her houſe receiued tho,
                  Chriſt and thoſe that with him did go.
               
               
                  Her ſiſter, Marie men did call,
                  Which alſo ſate at Ieſus feete
                  And heard his preaching as then all
                  Moſt heedfully, as it was meete.
                  But Martha was moſt buſily
                  Prouiding for the company.
               
               
                  
                  Martha therefore to Ieſus ſaid,
                  Maſter regardeſt not thou this?
                  That all the care on me is layd,
                  And that my ſiſter ſitting is?
                  Bid her therefore that ſhe helpe me,
                  So ſhalt thou better ſerued be.
               
               
                  And Ieſus anſwerd her againe,
                  Oh Martha, Martha thou haſt care,
                  For many things put thee to paine,
                  And helpers very needfull are:
                  The good It ſhall not be taken from her. part Marie choſe in deed,
                  And ſhe there after ſure ſhall ſpeed.
               
            
            
               Chriſt riſing from prayer, was requeſted of one of his Diſciples, to teach them, as Iohn taught his Diſciples, to pray.
               
                  As Ieſus was praying with his,
                        Luc. 11.1.
                  
                  In the deſert as ſome ſuppoſe,
                  Which vnto Ephraim neareſt is,
                  And from his prayers as he roſe,
                  Of his Diſciples one, did ſay,
                  Teach vs (as Iohn taught his) to pray.
               
               
                  He ſoone of him had his requeſt,
                  He was not long enforc'd to craue:
                  Chriſts readineſſe, this well expreſt,
                  As he to them example gaue:
                  In their diſtreſſe both night and day,
                  That they (as he them taught) ſhould pray.
               
               
                  Our father which in heauen art,
                  Thy name be euer ſanctified:
                  Thy kingdome come: withall my heart,
                  I wiſh the ſame accompliſhed.
                  Thy will in earth be done we pray,
                  
                     As thine, in heau'n do it alway.
               
               
                  Our daily bread giue vs this day,
                  Our ſinnes alſo to vs forgiue:
                  As we our debters do, I ſay,
                  That vs in any wiſe do grieue.
                  Let vs by no illuſion,
                  Be lead into temptation.
               
               
                  But Lord, from euill vs defend,
                  And gratiouſly deliuer all:
                  That we which do on thee depend,
                  By frailtie from thee neuer fall.
                  Graunt theſe requeſts (oh Lord) we pray,
                  To vs and thy whole Church alway. Amen.
               
               
                  Moreouer Chriſt vnto them ſaid,
                  Which of you all ſhall haue a friend,
                  And ſhall when he in bed is layd,
                  Haue cauſe to go to him, or ſend,
                  And ſay a friend to me is come,
                  Bread I haue none now lend me ſome.
               
               
                  And he within ſhould anſwer ſo,
                  Why doeſt thou trouble me I ſay,
                  I pray thee to ſome other go,
                  I muſt at this time ſay thee nay;
                  The doore is ſhut, my children be
                  In bed, I cannot come to thee.
               
               
                  I ſay though he would not ariſe,
                  Nor thee regard as ſhould a friend,
                  Yet when he ſeeth thee in ſuch wiſe,
                  Importunat he will thee lend▪
                  
                  Of bread or meate what thou doeſt craue,
                  Or what thy need requires to haue.
               
               
                  
                  Aske then it ſhall be giuen thee,
                        Luc. 11.9. Math. 7.7. Cap. 21.22. Mar. 11.24. Iohn. 14.13. Cap. 16.23. Iam. 1.5.
                  
                  And they that ſeeke, ſhall ſurely finde,
                  Knock, I will open then, ſaid he,
                  For God to them that call is kinde:
                  He loueth ſuch men verely,
                  As pray vnto him heartely.
               
               
                  If you for bread, giue not a ſtone,
                  Nor for a fiſh, a ſerpent ſend,
                  When that your ſonnes for want do mone;
                  If good things you do giue and lend,
                  How much more ſhall the father he,
                  Giue good gifts if thou aske, to thee?
               
            
            
               Christ cast out a deuill, and the dumbe man ſpake.
               
                  Then they brought vnto Ieſus one,
                        Luc. 11.14.
                  
                  Poſſeſſed with a deuill, that day,
                  And him for helpe they call vpon,
                  The man was dumbe withall▪ I ſay.
                  Though theſe impediments had he,
                  Yet with a word, Chriſt made him free.
               
               
                  The multitude amazed were,
                  And p
                        •
                     a
                        ••
                     ed God with heart and voice:
                  The ſonne ſaid they of Dauid here,
                  Doth giue vs cauſe for to reioyce;
                  And now aſſured all we be,
                  That Chriſt the Lord▪ the ſame is he.
               
               
                  A woman that his workes did ſee,
                  And heard how he taught great and ſmall,
                  
                     
                        ••
                     id, bleſt is the wombe that bare thee,
                  And pappes that gaue thee ſuck withall.
                  But Chriſt ſaid, bleſt they rather are,
                  That Gods word heare, and keepe with care.
               
            
            
               
               The Iewes required aſigne.
               
                  
                     
                        Luc. 11.29. Math. 12.38.Chriſt to the people ſaid againe,
                  This wicked generation,
                  Adulterous and verie vaine,
                  Though ſignes they do depend vpon,
                  No ſigne to them ſhall giuen be,
                  But that of Ionas they ſhall ſee.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Luc. 11.30. Ionas. 1.17. Cap. 2.10.As to the Niniuites was he,
                  That three dayes in the Whale did lie:
                  The ſonne of man ſhall ſhortly be,
                  The like to theſe aſſuredly:
                  The ſigne that Ionas to them gaue,
                  I ſhall giue theſe, ſo long in graue.
               
               
                  The men of Niniuie ſhall riſe,
                  And theſe condemne aſſuredly:
                  
                     
                        Luc. 11.32. Iam. 3.5.They did not Ionas words deſpiſe,
                  But did repent immediatly.
                  A greater then Ionas is here,
                  Yet ſmall repentance doth appeare.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Luc. 11.31. 1. King 10.1. 2. Chron. 9.1.The Queene of Saba ſhe ſhall riſe
                  In iudgement with theſe men alſo:
                  And them ſhe ſhall condemne likewiſe,
                  That ſo farre from her home would go,
                  To heare king Solomon: I ſay,
                  His greater you do heare this day.
               
            
            
               Chriſt dining with one of the Phariſies, and miſliked for eating with vnwaſhen hands, anſwered them, and rebuked their hypocriſie.
               
                  
                     
                        Luc. 11.37.As Ieſus taught the people then,
                  There came to him a Phariſie,
                  Requeſting him and all his men,
                  To dine with him immediatly.
                  
                     Then he went in with him to meate,
                  And ſitting downe, began to eate.
               
               
                  But when the Phariſie did ſee,
                  That Chriſt ſat downe, vnwaſht before,
                  He maruaild what the cauſe might be,
                  For they did vſe it euermore.
                  They ſit not downe at all to meate,
                  But firſt they waſh before they eate.
               
               
                  Indeed ſaid Chriſt to him againe,To drinke wine in a cup vnwaſhen, defileth not a man, but to drinke wine gotten by fraude, or for exceſſe, and no
                           •
                         of neceſſitie defileth a man.
                  
                  Ye do make cleane the vtter ſide
                  Of cup or platter, all in vaine,
                  Bewraying ſtill your fooliſh pride:
                  But they within are not the leſſe,
                  Of bribrie full, and all exceſſe.
               
               
                  Ye fooles made not the very ſame,
                  The inſide and the out alſo?
                  Giue almes therefore, and leaue for ſhame,
                  To be ſo tied your toyes vnto.
                  Relieue the poore when they do craue,
                  And cleane ſhall be all that ye haue.
               
               
                  Woe be to you ye Scribes, I ſay,
                  And Phariſies ſo full of guile:
                  Ye hypocrites is this the way,
                  To cloake your curſed craft ſo vile?
                  Ye keepe the leaſt the law doth will,
                  And leaue the great things vnkept ſtill.
               
               
                  Mint, Anniſe, and Cummin tith'd be,
                  And waightier matters left alone;
                  The law commaundeth theſe to thee,
                  But laſt of all to thinke vpon.
                  For iudgement, mercy, and faith are
                  The chiefeſt things ſhould be your care.
               
               
                  
                  Woe be to you ye Scribes alſo,
                  The higheſt ſeats ye all do loue
                  In Synagogues, and where ye go,
                  And that men in the markets moue
                  With reuerence to greete you there,
                  Or giue you place, and praiſe elſewhere.
               
               
                  Woe be to you, for ſure ye be,
                  Like painted tombes in outward ſight,
                  Appearing faire, to them that ſee
                  No part within, how they are dight.
                  For dead mens bones lie there doubtleſſe,
                  Within them full; and filthineſſe.
               
               
                  A Lawyer anſwer'd him againe,
                  Oh maiſter, thou in ſaying ſo,
                  Rebukeſt vs likewiſe as vaine,
                  And ſubiect with them to like woe.
                  Chriſt ſaid to him it cannot be,
                  That you of all men ſhould go free.
               
               
                  For heauie burdens ye do binde,
                  And on mens ſhoulders them do lay,
                  Moſt greeuous to be borne in minde,
                  Intollerable eu'ry way:
                  But you your ſelues will not once proue,
                  With any finger them to moue.
               
               
                  Woe be to you that build ſo braue
                  The Prophets tombes that were before,
                  And garniſh outwardly each graue
                  Of righteous men now more and more.
                  And more then that, you verely
                  Thus vtter your iniquitie.
               
               
                  If we had bene aliue, ye ſay,
                  In our forefathers time, had we
                  
                     Conſented ſo to be the day,
                  That ſo much bloud then ſpilt ſhould be?
                  No, no, the Prophets ſhould not ſo
                  Haue di'de or ſuffred any wo.
               
               
                  So then ye are as witneſſes
                  Vnto your ſelues, how that ye be
                  Their children (as ye do confeſſe)
                  That murdred them: therefore do ye
                  VVhat lacked of their cruelty,
                  Performe with all dexterity.
               
               
                  God ſaid, behold, I will you ſend
                  Both Prophets, and Apoſtles ſure,
                  To ſee if that you will amend,
                  Yet you will not their words endure:
                  You will them kill and crucifie,
                  And perſecute moſt buſily:
               
               
                  That on you all the bloud may come,
                  Which was ſhed vpon earth, I ſay,
                  From righteous Abell Adams ſonne,
                  To Zacharias bloud, which lay
                  Betweene the temple verely,
                  And the Altar, ſlaine cruelly.
               
            
            
               Martha and Marie ſent Ieſus word that their brother Lazarus was ſicke.
               
                  Lazarus ſure as then did lie
                  Sore ſicke, and neare his death indeed:
                        Ioh. 11.1.
                  
                  This man he dwelt in Bethany,
                  His ſiſters both of him tooke heede:
                  Martha the firſt, then Marie ſhee,
                  They were belou'd of Chriſt all three.
               
               
                  (Chriſts feete annointed Mary ſure,
                        Ioh. 12.3.
                  
                  And wiped with her haire the ſame:
                  
                     The oyle was coſtlie, ſweete and pure,
                  Her fact Chriſt did defend from blame:)
                  Theſe women did for Ieſus ſend,
                  And ſaid, come helpe thy ſickly friend.
               
               
                  This ſickneſſe Ieſus then did ſay,
                  (Is for Gods glory) not to death:
                  The ſonne of God muſt by this way,
                  (Who takes and giues men life and breath)
                  Aſſure your ſelues be glorifi'd,
                  Which thing Chriſt ſhortly verifi'd.
               
               
                  Now Ieſus loued Martha well,
                  Her ſiſter and her brother to:
                  Yet he there after this did dwell
                  Two daies ere he to them would go:
                  And did as he had done before,
                  There, heale and teach men more and more.
               
            
            
               The Phariſies queſtion of diuorcement and mariage, anſwered of Chriſt.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 19.1. Mar. 10.1.As Chriſt departed Galily,
                  And to Iudea came againe:
                  And as he paſſed Iordan by,
                  While in that coaſt he did remaine,
                  As graciouſlie he vſ'd to deale,
                  Their ſicke and lame he there did heale.
               
               
                  Then came to him the Phariſie,
                  Full fraughted both in heart and minde
                  With craft and cloakt hypocriſie,
                  Hoping in Chriſt ſome fault to finde:
                  But ſtill for all their taken toile,
                  The Phariſies receiu'd the foile.
               
               
                  May man his wife, Sir, put away
                  For euerie cauſe he can deuiſe?
                  
                     Haue ye not read, then Chriſt did ſay,
                  (Or Gods decree do ye deſpiſe?)
                  That they were male and female fram'd,
                        Math. 19.
                           •
                         
                        Gen. 1.27.
                  
                  When Adam the firſt man was nam'd?
               
               
                  Therefore a man ſhall loue his wife,
                        Math. 19.5▪ 
                        Gen. 2.24. 1. Cor. 6.16. Epheſ. 5.31.
                  
                  Though he his father ſhould forſake:
                  With her he needs muſt lead his life,
                  They both by promiſe that they make
                  Become one fleſh; and ſo remaine,
                  Though they in perſons ſtill are twaine.
               
               
                  Let no man put a ſunder then,
                  All ſuch as God hath coupled ſo,
                        Math. 19.7. Deut. 24.1.
                  
                  Though Moſes haue allow'd ſome men
                  Their maried wiues for to forgo:
                  From the beginning (ſure I ſay)
                  It was not as it is this day.
               
               
                  Truly for whoredome ſhe may be
                        Math. 19.
                           •
                         
                        Cap. 5.32. Mar. 10.11▪ 
                        Luc. 16.18. 1. Cor. 7.11.
                  
                  Diuorced, and ſo may the man,
                  If he commit adultery,
                  Nor afterward well mary can:
                  For which of both this part doth play,
                  Should ſingle liue, till death ſay nay.
               
               
                  If it be ſo, of man and wife,Said his Diſ
                           •
                        
                        ples. Chriſts anſw
                           ••
                        
                     
                  
                  It were not good to mary then:
                  Yet ſome ſo borne, chaſt lead their life:
                  Some are made chaſt alſo by men.
                  Some chaſt themſelues, who can perceiue,
                  Let him this doctrine ſo receiue.
               
            
            
               Ieſus among other other things that he taught his Diſciples, declared vnto them the parable of the rich man that ſo much delighted and truſted in his riches.
               
                  While Ieſus his Diſciples taught,
                  
                     
                     
                        Luke. 12.1. Mat. 16.5. Mark. 8.14.The Leauen of the Phariſie
                  To ſhunne with care, for it was naught.
                  He called it Hypocriſie,
                  And will'd them to teach openly,
                  What he had taught them priuatly.
               
               
                  Feare ye not man, but God, ſayd he,
                  Before men likewiſe me confeſſe,
                  And you ſhall well aſſured be,
                  I will to you like loue expreſſe:
                  Before Gods Angels verily,
                  I will confeſſe you conſtantly.
               
               
                  Blaſphemous words auoide withall,
                  And for your ſelues take ye no care,
                  God will heare you when ye ſhall call,
                  Of him your haires all numbred are.
                  When Princes vexe you for my ſake,
                  In worth do you your troubles take.
               
               
                  Then ſayd one of the company,
                  Maiſter, command I do pray thee,
                  The liuing now immediatly,
                  My brother may deuide with me.
                  A Iudge, or a deuider who
                  Made me, ſayd Chriſt, I ſhould do ſo?
               
               
                  Wherefore ſaid Chriſt to them againe,
                  Take heed beware of greedineſſe,
                  Abundance here is all but vaine,
                  It worketh man but heauineſſe;
                  A man for all his riches may
                  Prolong his life, no, not a day.
               
               
                  The grounds of a rich man, ſaid he,
                  Brought him forth fruites moſt plenteouſly,
                  Therefore he thought, what then might be
                  
                     Done, in ſuch great proſperity.
                  I haue (ſaid he) no roome to lay
                  My fruits, ſuch ſtore I haue to day.
               
               
                  This thing (ſayd he) ſure will I do,
                  I will now all my barnes downe pull,
                  And greater build: and thereunto
                  Gather my fruits, till they be full;
                  I haue deuiſed this therefore,
                  Becauſe my grounds do yeeld ſuch ſtore.
               
               
                  I to my ſoule will alſo ſay,
                  Soule, thou haſt much goods layd in ſtore
                  For many yeares: liue now I may
                  At more eaſe then I did before:
                  From henceforth ſoule eate, drinke and play,
                  This worke ſhalt thou do euerie day.
               
               
                  But God ſaid vnto him againe,
                  Thou foole, this night ile fetch from thee,
                  That ſoule of thine, that is ſo vaine,
                  Whoſe then ſhall all thy riches be?
                  So ſhall it euer be with thoſe,
                  That too much truſt in wealth repoſe.
               
               
                  Therefore take you no thought I ſay,
                  How you ſhall make prouiſion,
                  But giue your ſelues to learne the waye,
                  That leadeth to ſaluation
                  Almes, watching, and all wiſedome ye
                  Shall vſe, and with all men agree.
               
            
            
               The parable of the watchfull ſeruant.
                     Luk. 12.42. Math. 24.45.
               
               
                  A faithfull ſeruant and a wiſe,
                  Made ruler of his maiſters men,
                  His maiſters truſt will not deſpiſe,
                  But feedeth them in ſeaſon then
                  
                     When he is abſent; as he were,
                  Still preſent with his ſeruants there.
               
               
                  That ſeruant happy is in deed,
                  Whom his maſter when he doth come,
                  Shall finde ſo doing, he ſhall ſpeed,
                  Be ſure of ſome eſpeciall roome.
                  His maſter will make him therefore,
                  Ruler of all he hath in ſtore.
               
               
                  But if the euill ſeruant ſay,
                  My maſter will not come as yet,
                  And ſmite his fellowes day by day,
                  And ſtill with drunkards drinke and eate,
                  His maſter will come, when that he
                  Expecteth not him for to ſee.
               
               
                  And will cut him of from the reſt,
                  And giue to him his portion
                  With hypocrites, this is the leaſt,
                  That after condemnation
                  He ſhall both weepe and gnaſh for wo,
                  His teeth that he applyed ſo.
               
               
                  Wake therefore, and be warie men,
                  For ye know not what houre or day
                  Your maſter comes, leaſt ſleeping then
                  You with the reprobates decay.
                  And watch that with th'elected ſort
                  Receiu'd ye be, to your comfort.
               
            
            
               Chriſt receiued infants brought vnto him and bleſſed them.
               
                  
                     
                        Mar. 10.13. Math. 19.13. Luc. 18.15.At that time ſome did children bring,
                  That Chriſt his hands on them ſhould lay:
                  But his Diſciples did the thing
                  Diſlike, and would haue ſaid them nay.
                  
                     But Ieſus ſaid, forbid not theſe,
                  For ſuch my heau'nly father pleaſe.
               
               
                  Aſſuredly to you I ſay,
                  Gods kingdome who receiueth not
                  As doth a child, there ſhall not ſtay,
                  Of him no place may there be got.
                  In armes Chriſt tooke the infants tho,
                  And bleſſed them and let them go.
               
            
            
               Chriſt conferred with a rich young man, that would be iuſtified by the law.
               
                  When Ieſus was gone on the way,
                        Mar. 10.17. Math. 19.16. Luc. 18.18.
                  
                  There came one after him apace:
                  Which kneeling downe, to him did ſay,
                  Good maſter ſhew me ſo much grace,
                  That I may know, how I may haue
                  Eternall life good Lord I craue.
               
               
                  Then Ieſus anſwerd him againe,
                  Why doeſt thou call me good, ſaid he?
                  There is none good, this thing is plaine,
                  Saue God alone, I tell it thee:
                  Eternall life thou mayſt not ſee,
                  If broken theſe commaund'ments be.
               
               
                  Thou ſhalt not kill, by word or deed,
                        Mar. 10.19. Exod. 20.13. Deut. 5.17. Rom. 13.9.
                  
                  Nor yet commit adulterie:
                  Thou ſhalt not ſteale, for all thy need:
                  Falſe witneſſe, is plaine trecherie.
                  Thy parents honour, not for pelfe:
                  Thy neighbour loue thou, as thy ſelfe.
               
               
                  I haue, ſaid he, obſerued all
                  That thou commandeſt from my youth:
                  What lacke I yet, before I ſhall
                  
                     Haue life, I pray thee tell me truth?
                  Sell all, if thou wilt perfect be,
                  And giue the poore that want by thee.
               
               
                  This made the yong man very ſad,
                  Who then with ſorrow went away:
                  The great poſſeſſions that he had,
                  His feruent zeale did ſoone allay.
                  The rich t'enioy eternall bliſſe,
                  Said Ieſus, ſure a hard thing is.
               
               
                  Whereat amazed as they were,
                  And thought that few could ſaued be:
                  Chriſt ſaid to them, do you not feare,
                  But marke and liſten vnto me,
                  What men impoſſible do take,
                  God poſſible the ſame can make.
               
            
            
               Life euerlaſting, promiſed to all them that follow Christ.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           ar. 10.28. 
                           
                              •
                           ath. 19.27. 
                           
                              •
                           uc. 18.28.Then Peter ſaid, we follow thee
                  Forſaking all: what ſhall we haue?
                  When I in throne of maieſtie
                  Shall ſit: though you do nothing craue,
                  Vpon twelue thrones you ſhall ſit by,
                  And iudge all Iſraell certainly.
               
               
                  For who ſo ſhall his houſe forſake,
                  His parents, or what other friend
                  For my name: and doth well it take,
                  Or wife, or wealth, what God doth lend,
                  The ſame an hundreth fold ſhall he
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           ath. 19.30. 
                           
                              ••
                           p. 20.16. 
                           
                              •
                           ar. 10 31. 
                           
                              •
                           uc. 13.30.Enioy, and life eternall ſee.
               
               
                  And Chriſt pronounced in this place,
                  That many firſt ſhould be the laſt:
                  And that the laſt obtaining grace,
                  
                     Should be the firſt; the firſt outcaſt;
                  And that this ſentence is certaine,
                  By parable Chriſt made it plaine.
               
            
            
               The parable of the labourers ſent to the vineyard.
               
                  The kingdome ſure of heau'n, is ſo,
                        Math. 20.1.
                  
                  Much like to a houſhoulder heare,
                  That to hire labourers would go,
                  Aſſoone as day light did appeare:
                  With whom for pence he did agree,
                  All day to worke, this was their fee.
               
               
                  About the third houre of the day,
                  When he came to the market place,
                  The idle thence he ſent away
                  Into his farme, to worke apace.
                  Likewiſe the ſixt and ninth houre he
                  With other moe did ſo agree.
               
               
                  Againe th'eleu'nth houre there he found,
                  Some other idle ſtanding by:
                  Go hence he ſaid to my farme ground,
                  Why ſtand vee thus ſo idlely?
                  No man hath hired vs, you ſee.
                  Go to my Vineyard, then ſaid he.
               
               
                  When eeuen came, the maiſter ſaid
                  Vnto his ſteward, call them ſoone:
                  For I would haue the workemen paid,
                  That all this day my worke haue done;
                  Begin and pay the laſt of all,
                  As he is ſeru'd, the other ſhall.
               
               
                  A pennie then each of them had,
                  From laſt, to firſt, as he did go:
                  Which made the firſt men very ſad,
                  They thought their pay ſhould not be ſo.
                  
                     Go to ſaid he, this is your hire,
                  You may no more of me require.
               
               
                  This parable may teach vs all,
                  (As Peter) true humilitie,
                  Not to preſume on Chriſt to call.
                  As meriting felicitie:
                  Leaſt we of firſt the laſt may be,
                  And laſt be firſt in each degree.
               
            
            
               The crueltie of Pylate towards certaine Galileaas, and of the Towre of Siloam.
               
                  When Chriſt had ended thus the ſame,
                  Which neuer ſhunned any paine,
                  Though in Iudea was a fame,
                  That he ſhould of the Iewes be ſlaine,
                  He went about his fathers will,
                  Therefore the Iewes ſought him to kill.
               
               
                  Then ſome told him how cruelly,
                  Thoſe Galileans vſed were,
                  Whom Pylate cauſed for to die,
                  Without reſpect he ſlew them there,
                  And mingled with their ſacrifice
                  Their bloud; which was a ſtrange deuice.
               
               
                  Then Ieſus ſaid, ſuppoſe ye theſe
                  Were greater ſinners then the reſt?
                  I tell you nay, your ſinnes doubtleſſe,
                  May cauſe that you ſhall ſo be dreſt.
                  So of the eighteene whom the towre
                  Of Siloam ſlue, all in an houre.
               
            
            
               The parable of the barren Figge tree.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           uc. 13.6.This parable Chriſt did declare;
                  A certaine man a Figge tree had,
                  Which for three yeares he ſtill found bare,
                  When fruite would make the owner glad.
                  
                     Come Gardiner, cut downe ſaid he,
                  Why are we combred with this tree?
               
               
                  The Gardiner then ſaid againe,
                  Lord let it ſtand this yeare alſo,
                  Till I once more haue taken paine,
                  To dig it round, and dung it to;
                  If then no fruite this tree do beare,
                  It ſhall no longer tarrie there.
               
            
            
               Chriſt healed a woman that had had a ſpirit of infirmitie xviiij. yeares, and was ſo bowed together, that ſhe could not lift vp her ſelfe.
               
                  As Chriſt taught on a Sabboth day,
                        Luc. 13.10.
                  
                  A woman whoſe infirmity
                  Had bow'd her long, ſhe could no way,
                  Lift vp her ſelfe, then certainly.
                  Chriſt ſaid be looſd of thy diſeaſe,
                  Laying on his hand, ſhe ſtraight found eaſe.
               
               
                  The ruler of the Synagogue,
                  Was fill'd with indignation,
                  As if his conſcience had a clogge,
                  Or of a proud preſumption;
                  Six dayes ye may well healed be,
                  And reſt the Sabboth day, ſaid he.
               
               
                  Then ſaid the Lord, thou hypocrite,
                  Do ye not on the Sabboth day,
                  Your oxe and aſſe without reſpite,
                  Looſe from the ſtall and driue away?
                  And ſhould not This daughter of Abrahā
                      ſhe whom Sathan bound,
                  The Sabboth day go ſafe and ſound?
               
               
                  When Chriſt ſaid this, his enemy
                  Was ſore aſhamed, and the reſt
                  Reioycing, did God glorifie,
                  
                     Which by their words was well expreſt:
                  For they gaue God the onely prayſe,
                  That wrought ſuch works in thoſe their dayes.
               
            
            
               The parable of the muſtard ſeede, and of the leauen.
               
                  
                     
                        Luc. 13.18. Math. 13.31. Mar. 4 31.What is the kingdome of God like?
                  Or whereto ſhall I it compare?
                  (Chriſt ſaw that ſome did not miſlike
                  His deeds, and doctrine which were rare)
                  It is like to a muſtard ſeed,
                  That man doth ſow, to ſerue his need.
               
               
                  This ſeed of ſeeds though ſure the leaſt,
                  Yet ſowne, it waxeth to a tree,
                  Wherein the litle birds may neaſt,
                  As oftentimes we do them ſee.
                  Or leauen in three peckes of flowre,
                  Till all be leauend and made ſowre.
               
               
                  This muſtard ſeed, that is ſo ſmall,
                  And therefore ſubiect to diſdaine:
                  And eke the leauen there withall,
                  Doth ſignifie Chriſts Goſpell plaine;
                  Gods word though weake it ſeeme to be,
                  Works great effects in ſome we ſee.
               
            
            
               The parable of the ſtrait and broad way.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           uc. 13.22. Math. 9.35. Mar. 6.6.And as through eu'ry towne he went,
                  And taught going to Hieruſalem:
                  That few be ſaued is it ment,
                  Said they? thus anſwerd Chriſt to them;
                  The ſtrait gate ſtriue to enter to,
                  Though many faile that ſo would do.
               
               
                  The goodman of the houſe when he
                  Is riſen vp and ſhuts the gate,
                  Your might or merite litle be,
                  
                     To cry Lord open, is to late.
                  
                     
                        Luc. 13.27. Pſal. 6.8. Math. 7.23. Cap 25.41. Depart ſaith he, hence ſpeedily,
                  You workers of iniquitie.
               
               
                  We eaten haue, ſay you againe,
                  And dronke, oh Lord, ſo oft with thee,
                  And thou haſt taught vs, but in vaine.
                  Depart (ſaith he) away from me.
                  Your ſinnes are onely cauſe of this,
                  That you ſhall looſe eternally bliſſe.
               
               
                  There ye then weeping all ſhall be,
                  And gnaſhing of your teeth full ſore,
                  When Abraham in heau'n ye ſee,
                  And ye ſhut out, as is before.
                  The Patriarks, and the Prophets, reſt
                  In heau'n aboue, for they are bleſt.
               
               
                  And many ſhall come from the Eaſt,
                  And from the North, and South alſo:
                  And many likewiſe from the Weſt,
                  The heau'nly kingdome come vnto:
                  And then the firſt, the laſt ſhall be,
                        Luc. 13.30. Math. 19.30▪ 
                        Cap. 20.16. Mar 10.31.
                  
                  And ſo the laſt, firſt you ſhall ſee.
               
            
            
               Chriſt called Herod a ſoxe, and cryed againſt Hieruſalem.
               
                  The Phariſies to Chriſt did ſay,
                        Luc. 13.31.
                  
                  King Herod doubtleſſe will thee kill:
                  Depart therefore and get away,
                  Ere he do worke on thee his will.
                  Thus would they ſeeme his friends to be,
                  That ſought his death aſwell as he.
               
               
                  Go tell the foxe, ſaid Chriſt, from me,
                  Behold, I caſt out deu'ls to day,
                  And eke to morow I make free
                  
                     And heale the ſicke that do me pray.
                  The third day I do make an end,
                  I care not what the foxe intend.
               
               
                  To morow as to day I muſt,
                  And yet the third day walke alſo:
                  It cannot be, you may giue truſt
                  To this that now declare I do,
                  Saue at Ieruſalem alone,
                  Shall of the Prophets periſh none.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Luc. 13.34. Math. 23.37.Hieruſalem that oft doeſt kill,
                  And ſtone thoſe that are ſent to thee,
                  Thy childrens good I wiſhed ſtill,
                  Yet canſt not thou thy ſaftie ſee:
                  But from thee when I ſhall be reſt,
                  Thy houſe then deſolate is left.
               
            
            
               Chriſt healed one of the dropſie on the Sabboth day.
               
                  
                     
                        Luc. 14.1.Againe as Ieſus would eate meate
                  With one of the chiefe Phariſies,
                  They friendly ſeeme him to intreate,
                  To colour out ſome braue deuiſe:
                  Their ſnares and traps for him they lay,
                  And watch him on the Sabboth day.
               
               
                  Behold, a certaine man was there,
                  Infected with a dropſie ſore:
                  Some Lawyers there at that time were,
                  Which watched him ſo much the more.
                  Chriſt asked if it lawfull be,
                  The man on that day to make free.
               
               
                  They held their peace: for to reproue
                  His words and deeds they did intend:
                  
                     The matter he no more did moue,
                  But healed him, and made an end.
                  Who doth ſaid Chriſt his oxe eſpy
                  In pit, this day, and lets him lye?
               
            
            
               Chriſt forbad men to preſſe for the higheſt roomes at feaſts, taught men lowlineſſe, and to vſe liberalitie vnto the poore.
               
                  A parable Chriſt Ieſus ſpake▪
                     
                        Luc. 14.7.
                  
                  When he the gueſts had marked well,
                  How each the higheſt roome would take.
                  See that (ſaith Chriſt) you do not mell
                  With chiefeſt roomes, when you are bid,
                  Leaſt thence your betters do you rid.
               
               
                  When thou art bidden to a feaſt,
                        Luc. 14.10. Prou. 25.5.
                  
                  Go and ſit loweſt in the place:
                  Then ſaith the Or he that bad thee. Luc. 14.11. Cap. 18.14. Math. 23.12.
                      maſter, come my gueſt,
                  Sit higher vp; this giueth grace:
                  For who ſo him exalteth hye,
                  Shall be brought low reprochfully.
               
               
                  When thou doeſt make a feaſt, command
                  To call the poore, the maim'd, the lame,
                  And blind, to ſuch ſtretch forth thy hand,
                  This will gaine thee deſerued fame:
                  And thou thy recompence, this truſt,
                  Shalt haue in heau'n, among the iuſt.
               
               
                  And one of them that then there ſate,
                  Said he is bleſt that eateth bread
                  In heau'n, and happy are their ſtate,
                  That their liues there might alwayes lead.
                  In heau'n as (this man doth confeſſe)
                  Sure reſteth all true happineſſe.
               
            
            
               
               Chriſt declared how a certaine man made a great ſupper, and bade many: of the excuſes of certaine guestes, and their vnworthineſſe.
               
                  
                     
                        Luke. 14.16. Mat. 22.2. Reu. 19.9.Chriſt Ieſus ſaid, a certaine man
                  Made a great ſupper or a feaſt.
                  Come ye as ſoone now as ye can,
                  His ſeruants ſaid vnto each gueſt:
                  For all things are now readie made,
                  To welcome whom our maiſter bade.
               
               
                  But they began to make excuſe:
                  The firſt ſaid, I haue bought a farme,
                  I muſt go ſee it, as they vſe,
                  Thou maiſt excuſe me without harme.
                  The next, of Oxen bought yokes fiue,
                  And muſt go proue how they do thriue.
               
               
                  The third had married then a wife,
                  Sure he might well excuſed be:
                  For he was bound to lead his life
                  With her, and liue no longer free.
                  You know what wilfull men deſerue,
                  All their excuſes may not ſerue.
               
               
                  The ſeruants told their maiſter, theſe
                  Whom thou haſt bid, come not at all:
                  Which did him verie much diſpleaſe,
                  And ſaid, another ſort goe call;
                  Go bid the poore, the lame, the blinde,
                  And ſuch as in the ſtreetes ye finde.
               
               
                  The ſeruants ſaid, Lord, it is done,
                  Yet there are roomes vnfurniſhed.
                  In the high waies ſeeke ſome out ſoone,
                  That my houſe be repleniſhed:
                  For thoſe men that were bid before,
                  
                     Shall neuer taſt my ſupper more.
               
               
                  Then to the multitude that went
                        Luc. 14.26. Math. 10.37. Cap. 16.24.
                  
                  With him, Chriſt turned backe, and ſayd;
                  If any man with good intent,
                  Come after me, now vnaffrayd,
                  He muſt hate father and each friend,
                  To beare my croſſe vnto the end.
               
               
                  Who meanes to build a ſtately towre,
                        Luc. 14.28.
                  
                  And doth not caſt the coſt before,
                  He may repent him in that houre,
                  When he can make thereof no more:
                  Or when he heares one mocking ſay,
                  This man did worke well for a day.
               
               
                  What king alſo will purpoſe warre,
                        Luc. 14.31.
                  
                  Ere he know what his ſtrength may proue:
                  And will not rather ſend ſo farre,
                  And ſee if he ſome peace may moue?
                  He my Diſciple that will be,
                  Forſaking all, muſt follow me.
               
               
                  And ſure what ſalt this earth doth yeeld,
                        Luc. 14.34. Math. 5.13. Mar. 9.50.
                  
                  If in the ſame no ſauour be,
                  It doth no good in houſe or field,
                  Men caſt it out at doores we ſee.
                  In ſalt of man, this doth appeare,
                  He that hath eares to heare, may heare.
               
            
            
               The parable of the loſt ſheepe and the groat.
               
                  Then to Chriſt Ieſus did reſort,
                        Luc. 15.1.
                  
                  Both Publicans and ſinners to:
                  Such in his doctrine found comfort,
                  As ſtill the penitent may do.
                  The Scribes and Phariſies diſdain'd,
                  That Chriſt with ſinners ſo remain'd.
               
               
                  
                  Then Ieſus ſaid, I came to ſaue
                  That which my deareſt bloud muſt coſt:
                  How thinke ye if a rich man haue
                  An hundred ſheepe, if one be loſt,
                  Will he not leaue the reſt behind,
                  And ſeeke that one till that he find?
               
               
                  Or elſe, what woman doth not ſo,
                  If ſhe ten ſiluer peeces had,
                  And looſe but one, will ſhe not go
                  Search till ſhe finde, and found is glad?
                  The Angels ioy as theſe in heart,
                  When that one ſinner doth conuert.
               
            
            
               The historie of the prodigall ſonne.
               
                  
                     
                        Luc. 15.11.Moreouer, marke ye this, ſaid he,
                  Two ſonnes a certaine rich man had,
                  Who cared much that they might be
                  A cauſe to make his laſt age glad.
                  The younger led by luſt, would go
                  To trauell farre, his father fro.
               
               
                  Wherefore he to his father ſayd,
                  Giue me that is my portion:
                  My ſuite, let it not be denayd,
                  But make a iuſt diuiſion.
                  His ſubſtance he diuided tho,
                  And gaue him his, and let him go.
               
               
                  This younger ſonne did gather all
                  His father gaue, and went away,
                  From place to place as did befall,
                  In countreys ſtrange, this ſonne did ſtray:
                  Till riot waſted all his wealth,
                  As whordome had impaird his health.
               
               
                  
                  When he had ſpent all wilfully,
                  There roſe a dearth throughout the land,
                  And he there pincht with penurie,
                  Was forc'd to go then out of hand
                  To ſerue, nor durſt the man repine,
                  To keepe and feede his maſters ſwine.
               
               
                  Where oft for want of better food,
                  Huskes with the ſwine this youth did eate,
                  And then the ſame thought very good,
                  For no man gaue him better meate:
                  And ſometimes in his miſery,
                  He wanted huskes aſſuredly.
               
               
                  Then came he to himſelfe, and ſayd,
                  How many hired ſeruants be,
                  That finde my fathers houſe an ayde,
                  And there haue meate inough ſaid he,
                  While I do liue thus lothſomely,
                  And neare for hunger daily dye?
               
               
                  I will vnto my father go,
                  And ſay to him, I ſinned haue
                  Againſt both heau'n and thee alſo,
                  Forgiue me father now I craue,
                  And me receiue yet I thee pray,
                  No ſonne but ſeruant from this day.
               
               
                  So he vnto his father went,
                  Who did his ſonne from farre eſpy,
                  And ran to him incontinent,
                  Much pitying his miſery.
                  And then vpon his necke he fell,
                  And kiſt him, that he lou'd ſo well.
               
               
                  The ſonne then to his father there,
                  Sayd I haue ſinned againſt thee,
                  
                     And am not worthie to be here,
                  Or call'd thy ſonne that I ſhould be:
                  For heau'n and earth can witneſſe this,
                  That I haue runne my race amiſſe.
               
               
                  The father ſaid his ſeruants to,
                  Bring forth my beſt robe vnto me,
                  To put on him, this ring alſo,
                  And ſhoes on his feete, I will ſee:
                  The fat calfe kill, and make vs meate,
                  That this my ſonne, and we, may eare,
               
               
                  For this my ſonne of late was dead,
                  And now he is aliue againe:
                  The loſt, I found, ſo well I ſped,
                  He ſhall henceforth with me remaine.
                  This they performed ſpeedily,
                  And paſt the time moſt merily.
               
               
                  Abroad the elder brother was,
                  And comming home, he heard a noyſe,
                  Yet knew not who was in the place,
                  Nor why his father did reioyce:
                  He onely heard the mynſtrelſie,
                  With dauncing, and much melodie.
               
               
                  He call'd, and bad a ſeruant come,
                  And tell him what all thoſe things ment▪
                  
                  Thy brother is ſaid he come home,
                  And was receiu'd incontinent:
                  Thy father ſpareth for no coſt,
                  To welcome him that late was loſt.
               
               
                  All angrie when he heard the ſame,
                  He would not in vnto them go:
                  Therefore to him his father came,
                  Requeſting him not to do ſo.
                  
                     Now he vnto his ſonne doth ſtand
                  (That ſhould command) with cap in hand.
               
               
                  The ſonne his father anſwered,
                  I haue vnto thee ſeruice donne,
                  Yet haſt thou not conſidered,
                  How though I were thy eldeſt ſonne,
                  And many yeares now night and day,
                  I ſtill at thy command did ſtay;
               
               
                  Yet all this time I neuer had,
                  A kid of thee that I might ſpend,
                  When I was willing to be glad,
                  And welcome any honeſt friend:
                  Yet thou the fat calfe killed haſt,
                  For him that worſe thy goods did waſt.
               
               
                  Sonne vnto him againe, ſaid he,
                  All that I haue is thine in deed:
                  Thou euer didſt abide with me,
                  And ſhalt therefore the better ſpeed;
                  Yet ſhould we ioy and mery be,
                  The dead aliue, and loſt to ſee.
               
            
            
               The parable of the vniust Steward.
                     Luc. 16.1.
               
               
                  And Chriſt to his Diſciples then,
                  Said that a certaine rich man had
                  A Steward, charged by ſome men,
                  That he did vſe his office bad:
                  For he (ſaid they) doth day by day,
                  Conſume and waſt thy wealth away.
               
               
                  He called him, and ſaid withall,
                  How do I heare this ill of thee?
                  For thine accounts I needs muſt call,
                  Thou mayſt no longer Steward be.
                  The Steward then began to muſe,
                  
                     How he might beſt the matter vſe.
               
               
                  What ſhall I do? my maſter will
                  Mine office take from me away:
                  I cannot digge nor delue but ill,
                  And begge for ſhame I neuer may;
                  Wherefore I muſt deuiſe, ſayd he,
                  That I of ſome receiued be.
               
               
                  His maſters debters he did call,
                  And askt the firſt, what oweſt thou?
                  Declare at once the ſumme of all,
                  For I muſt looſe mine office now.
                  Of oyle an hundreth meaſures he
                  Confeſt, at leaſt, his debts to be.
               
               
                  The Steward ſaid to him againe,
                  Vpon thy bill downe fiftie lay:
                  The next in debted did remaine,
                  And hundreth meaſures, he did ſay,
                  Of wheate, to whom the Steward ſayd,
                  Write foureſcore downe, be not affrayd.
               
               
                  The Stewards wiſdome Chriſt did prayſe,
                  Though he vniuſtly dealt in deed:
                  For when he knew none other wayes,
                  He this deuiſd, to helpe his need.
                  The worldlings in their kind, ſaid he,
                  Are wiſer then the godly be.
               
               
                  Make you ſo friends, Chriſt to them ſayd,
                  With riches of iniquity:
                  That when ye want, they may giue ayde,
                  And then receiue you readily.
                  The iuſt or vniuſt in the ſmall,
                  Will proue the very ſame in all.
               
               
                  
                  If then ye haue not faithfull bene
                  In wicked riches, who will truſt,
                  That you (whoſe triall men haue ſeene)
                  In treaſures true may be found iuſt?
                  If falſe to other men ye were,
                  Who ſhall giue you that yours is there?
               
               
                  Two maſters well no man can ſerue,
                        Luc. 16.13. Math. 6.24.
                  
                  For truly he the one will hate,
                  And for the other loue reſerue,
                  This of mans life is right the ſtate:
                  God and your riches diſagree,
                  They may not both then ſerued be.
               
               
                  All theſe things heard the Phariſies,
                  Whoſe greedineſſe was very great:
                  They mocked Chriſt, for phantaſies
                  They do account his words as yet.
                  Before men ye, you iuſtifie,
                  Though fraught with fowle hypocriſie.
               
               
                  Gods kingdome ſuffreth violence,
                        Luc. 16.16. Math. 11.12.
                  
                  Since Iohns time to this very day:
                  The Gentiles with all diligence,
                  Without the law, now call'd obay.
                  The law and Prophets haue their end,
                  And he is come whom you attend.
               
               
                  I came not ſure for to deſtroy
                        Luc. 16.17. Math. 5.18.
                  
                  The law, or Prophets, but fulfill:
                  I take in nothing ſo much ioy,
                  As to obey my fathers will,
                  Till heau'n and earth do all decay,
                  The law ſhall not be done away.
               
            
            
               The hiſtorie of the rich glutton and of poore Lazarus.
               
                  Chriſt ſaid, a certaine rich man he,
                        Luc. 16.19.
                  
                  
                     Was cloth'd in purple and fine white:
                  His fare moſt daintie vſd to be,
                  For he therein did take delite.
                  As coſtly was the mans aray,
                  So fa
                        •
                     'd he ſumptuous eu'ry day.
               
               
                  There was a certaine begger that
                  Was named Lazarus alſo,
                  Which was layd at the rich mans gate,
                  All full of grieuous ſores and wo:
                  This man therewith had more annoy,
                  Then Diues had in heart of ioy.
               
               
                  And he deſired for to haue,
                  (Wherewith his body for to feed)
                  The broken meate, yet no man gaue
                  One crumbe for to relieue his need:
                  The dogges yet came and lickt each ſore,
                  Theſe then their maſter, eaſd him more.
               
               
                  It came to paſſe the begger he,
                  Dying, was carried thence away,
                  In Abrahms boſome for to be,
                  The Angels there this man did lay:
                  Thoſe meſſengers God ſent to fetch
                  To heau'n to him, that ſilly wretch.
               
               
                  The rich man alſo ſhortly dyed,
                  His wealth could not deaths dart withdraw,
                  But needs he muſt be buried,
                  Each man muſt yeeld to natures law:
                  And as the begger was on hye,
                  So Diues deepe in hell did lye.
               
               
                  From whence as he in torments lay,
                  And looked vp, he might eſpy,
                  Aboue from him ſo farre away,
                  
                     Where Lazarus in heau'n did ly
                  (With Abraham:) ſo was he bleſt,
                  For there Gods choſen all ſhall reſt.
               
               
                  Then cried Diues loud, and ſayd,
                  Oh father Abrah'm pitie me,
                  Let not thy mercie be delayd,
                  My cruell torments thou doeſt ſee:
                  The firie flame doth frie me ſo,
                  That here I wallow full of wo.
               
               
                  Send Lazarus, that once he may
                  His finger in the water dip,
                  This feruent heate for to allay,
                  If it were but the verie tip.
                  One drop to coole my tongue withall.
                  That ſo his finger would let fall.
               
               
                  But Abraham ſaid thus againe;
                  The pleaſures (ſonne) thou didſt receiue,
                  Remember now and this mans paine:
                  Thy wealth at will did thee deceiue,
                  Therefore art thou (as doth appeare)
                  In paine, and he in pleaſure here.
               
               
                  Comforted now is Lazarus,
                  And thou in hell tormented art:
                  There is ſet likewiſe betweene vs
                  A mightie gulfe, no litle ſtart,
                  So that none hence go to you may,
                  Nor come from thence to vs away.
               
               
                  Here Chriſt did ſpeake of heau'n and hell,
                  No Purgatorie then was found:
                  Or elſe Chriſt Ieſus could not well,
                  As ſchoole men can, all things expound.
                  But wo to them that thinke them wiſe,
                  
                     And do Chriſts doctrine ſo deſpiſe.
               
               
                  Him, Diues ſaid, I pray thee ſend,
                  (Oh father) to my fathers houſe:
                  To warne my brethren to amend,
                  And force no wealth ſo friuolous.
                  Vaine truſt therein hath wrought my fall,
                  And will do theirs, I feare me all.
               
               
                  Send him therefore (father) I pray,
                  For fiue of them I left behind:
                  Which warned may amend their way,
                  And become of a better mind;
                  Oh father ſhew them ſo much grace,
                  Leaſt they ſhould come into this place▪
                  
               
               
                  Then Abraham ſaid thus againe,
                  They Moſes and the Prophets haue:
                  If they do not heare them, in vaine,
                  They ſhall obtaine what thou doeſt craue.
                  They warne all men to ſeeke for grace▪
                  
                  While they haue time, to ſhunne that place.
               
               
                  Nay father Abraham, ſaid he,
                  But if one from the dead do come
                  To them, repentant they will be,
                  And be affrayd then of this dome:
                  They will not ſinning wilfully,
                  Be ſubiect to ſuch miſery.
               
               
                  Then Abraham ſaid to him, ſonne,
                  If that thoſe men they will not heare,
                  But do as thou before haſt donne,
                  No more will they to this giue eare:
                  For truth in Gods word ſeeke they muſt,
                  And not on dead men vainly truſt.
               
               
                  Here heau'n is the appointed place,
                  
                     Where Gods elect for aye ſhall reſt:
                  In hell we ſee ſuch as want grace,
                  All torments are for them addreſt.
                  Gods word not dead men muſt vs guide,
                  Vnleſſe we meane to wander wide.
               
               
                  As for all Dunſes drowſie dreames,
                  Or Monkiſh toyes to mocke an ape,
                  Or franticke Friers, for all their theames,
                  They now want nayles new pits to ſcrape:
                  Their Purgatories had a fall,
                  There is not one now left of all.
               
            
            
               Offences are to be auoyded, and our brothers treſpaſſes forgiuen.
               
                  Though that offences needs muſt be,
                        Luc. 17.1. Math. 18.7. Mar. 9.42. Pſal. 34 7.
                  
                  Yet ſure offenders do want grace:
                  Offend not theſe whoſe Angels ſee
                  And do behold my fathers face;
                  He that doth ſo, were better ſure,
                  In ſurging ſeas death to endure.
               
               
                  And if thy brother thee offend,
                  Seeke thou to winne him priuatly:
                  Or if he heare not thee, and mend,
                  Take two or three in company;
                  But if he heare not then the ſame,
                  Before the Church let him haue blame.
               
               
                  But if he do repent, he ſayd,
                  As oft as he doth thee offend,
                  And ſeemeth ſtill to be affrayd,
                  And ſeekes all meanes for to amend,
                  Not ſeu'n times, but as oft (ſaid he)
                  As he repents, let him go free.
               
               
                  And the Apoſtles all ſaid then,
                  
                     O Lord increaſe our faith we pray.
                  If ye had faith as much (ô men)
                  As is a muſtard ſeed, I ſay,
                  You might command this mulb'rie tree,
                  So growing in the ſea to be.
               
               
                  Which of you if his ſeruant were
                  At plough, or did his cattell feede,
                  When he came home, would ſay, ſit here?
                  And ſo ſerue him at boord with ſpeed.
                  And would not rather bid him dreſſe
                  (That he him ſelfe might eate) a meſſe?
               
               
                  Or who doth thanke his ſeruant then,
                  When he perfourmeth readily
                  What he commandeth, that his men
                  Should ſee accompliſht faithfully?
                  I trow the ſeruant may be 
                        •
                     lad,
                  That he did what his maiſter bad.
               
               
                  So likewiſe ye, when ye haue done
                  What you are bid, although with care:
                  Say, that ſmall profit may be wonne
                  By ſuch ſlacke ſeruants as ye are.
                  We haue done, you may ſay alſo,
                  What was our dutie, and no mo.
               
            
            
               Chriſt healed ten leapers.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           uc. 17.11.As to Ieruſalem he went,
                  And paſſed thorough Galilie,
                  Ten leapers did them ſelues preſent
                  To Ieſus Chriſt immediatly,
                  Which ſtood farre off, and cried thus,
                  Haue mercie maiſter now on vs.
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              ••
                           c. 17.14. 
                           
                              •
                           uit. 14.2.And when he ſaw them, then ſayd he,
                  Vnto the Prieſts go ſtraight way now,
                  
                     That they may iudge you cleane to be,
                  And haue what law doth them allow.
                  And as they went they cleanſed were,
                  While Chriſt remained euen there.
               
               
                  Then one of them when he did ſee,
                  That he was healed verie well:
                  Returning backe, with loud voyce he
                  Gaue praiſe to God for what befell.
                  He falling downe vpon his face,
                  Gaue thanks to Chriſt, that ſhewd him grace▪
                  
               
               
                  The ſame was a Samaritan,
                  Which cleanſed came ſo backe againe:
                  Of ten, returned but this man,
                  Though all were eaſed of their paine.
                  This in Samaria verily
                  By Chriſt was done, or Galilie.
               
               
                  Are not ten cleanſed? Ieſus ſayd,
                  The other nine where be they gone?
                  Ariſe therefore, go vnaffrayd,
                  Thy faith ſau'd thee that cam'ſt alone.
                  Of all the ten this ſtranger came
                  To giue God praiſe, that wrought the ſame.
               
            
            
               The Phariſies demanded of Chriſt, when the kingdome of God ſhould come, and his anſwer.
                     Luc. 17.20.
               
               
                  Then of the Phariſies when ſome
                  Demanded Chriſt when it would be,
                  That the kingdome of God would come▪
                  
                  To them againe thus anſwerd he;
                  With obſeruation verily
                  It comes not, though with maieſtie.
               
               
                  Men ſhall not ſay, lo here, lo there,
                  Behold the ſame among you is:
                  
                     His kingdome is ſpread eu'ry where,
                  In faithfull hearts abideth this.
                  In truth and 
                        Rom. 14.17. righteouſneſſe I ſay,
                  Find out Gods kingdome well ye may.
               
               
                  To his Diſciples then ſaid he,
                  The dayes will come you ſhall deſire
                  (As now ye are) with me to be,
                  And ſhall not haue what ye require.
                  The ſonne of man muſt ſuffer wo:
                  And for a time depart you fro.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Luc. 17.23. Math. 24.23. Mar. 13.21.If any then to you do ſay,
                  Lo here is Chriſt, or Chriſt is there,
                  Beleeue it not, for at that day,
                  Falſe Chriſts and Prophets ſhall appeare,
                  And ſhall ſhew ſignes and wonders ſuch,
                  As will deceiue men very much.
               
               
                  For as the lightning from the Eaſt
                  Doth come, and that moſt ſuddainly,
                  And ſhineth forth into the Weſt,
                  So ſhall it be moſt certainly:
                  The ſonne of man ſhall come, I ſay,
                  In like ſort at the iudgement day.
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           uc. 17.26. Math. 24 38. 
                           
                              ••
                           ne 7.5. 
                           •
                        . Pet. 3.20.And as it was before the flood,
                  They did both eate and drinke alſo,
                  And maried wiues, as they thought good,
                  Till Noah the arke had entred tho:
                  Where he and his from flood were free,
                  Though all men elſe were drownd, ſaid he.
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           uc 17.28. 
                           
                              •
                           en. 19.24.In Lots dayes likewiſe it befell,
                  They ate, they dranke, they bought, they ſold,
                  They built, and thought that all was well,
                  Nor would heare Lot, for all he told,
                  
                     Till fire and brimſtone from aboue,
                  Deſtroyed all that In Sodome. there did moue.
               
               
                  So ſhall it in the latter day,
                  When I ſhall then reuealed be:
                  Let him that on the houſe doth ſtay,
                  Not fetch his ſtuffe below, ſaid he:
                  Nor from the field, but haue in mind,
                  Lots wife that looked ſo behind.
               
               
                  Who ſo his ſoule doth ſeeke to ſaue,
                        Luc. 17.33. Cap. 9.24. Cap. 16.25. Math. 10.39. Mar. 8.35. Ioh. 12.25.
                  
                  If not through me, ſhall looſe the ſame:
                  And life he likewiſe then ſhall haue,
                  When life he looſeth for my name:
                  For he ſhall liue eternally,
                  That dyeth ſo here willingly.
               
               
                  Two in one bed, or field ſhall then,
                        Luc. 17.34. Math. 24.40. 1. Theſſ. 4.17.
                  
                  Whereof but one receiu'd ſhall be,
                  The other of thoſe very men,
                  To be refuſed ſure is he.
                  Two women grinding then at mill,
                  The good receiu'd, but not the ill.
               
               
                  Where Lord? where the carcaſſe doth reſt,
                        Luc. 17.37. Math. 24.28.
                  
                  The eagles will reſort thereto:
                  If that it be by Eaſt or Weſt,
                  Such fowle, vnto their pray will go.
                  Gods choſen ſhall reſort that day
                  To Chriſt, as theſe vnto their pray.
               
            
            
               The parable of the vnrighteous Iudge and the widow, teaching men to pray continually.
               
                  By parable Chriſt ſpake that day
                        Luc. 18.1. Eccl. 18.22. Rom. 12.12. 1. Theſſ. 5.17.
                  
                  To his Diſciples, to this end,
                  That they ought alwayes for to pray,
                  And not to faint while they attend:
                  
                     For they ſhall ſurely mercie haue,
                  That inſtantly for mercie craue.
               
               
                  There was a Iudge which had no feare,
                  Nor reuerence of God or men:
                  A widow woman dwelling there,
                  Did moue this Iudge (not now and then)
                  But dayly crying mightely,
                  Auenge me of mine enemie.
               
               
                  Though for a time he would not heare
                  Her ſute; thus the poore widow ſped,
                  At laſt ſaid he, though without feare
                  Of God or man my life I lead,
                  Her inſtancie doth vexe me ſo,
                  Ile do her right, and let her go.
               
               
                  If this vnrighteous Iudge thus do,
                  For his elect will not God care,
                  That day and night cry him vnto?
                  Though for a time their foes he ſpare,
                  He will reuenge ech iniurie
                  That they receiue aſſuredly.
               
            
            
               The Parable of the Phariſie and the Publicane, that went into the Temple to pray.
               
                  
                     
                        Luc. 18.9.A parable he ſpake againe,
                  To ſome infected with ſelfe truſt:
                  For they did other men diſdaine,
                  And did account them ſelues for iuſt.
                  Into the Temple for to pray,
                  Two men went vp, both in one day.
               
               
                  The one of them a Phariſie,
                  The other was a Publican:
                  The firſt full of hypocriſie,
                  The other was a ſimple man.
                  
                     Their prayers ſheweth what they were,
                  Of whom Chriſt maketh mention here.
               
               
                  The firſt ſtood vp and prayed ſo,
                  Oh God this day I do thanke thee:
                  This I as other neuer do,
                  Extort or robbe as ſome, ſaid he:
                  I am not an adulterer,
                  Nor as this man is, a ſinner.
               
               
                  Twiſe in the weeke alſo I faſt,
                  I giue tith of all I poſſeſſe.
                  The Publican poore man at laſt,
                  Began his ſinnes for to confeſſe:
                  This man in great humilitie,
                  Acknowledged his miſerie.
               
               
                  He ſtood farre of, and did not there,
                  Lift vp his eyes to looke on hye:
                  The poore man was in ſuch a feare,
                  For to offend Gods maieſty;
                  Be mercifull (oh God) ſaid he,
                  Moſt wretched ſinner vnto me.
               
               
                  This man, ſaid Chriſt, went thence away,
                  More iuſt then did the Phariſie:
                  For eu'ry one that doth delay
                  To knowledge his infirmitie,
                  Shall be brought low: the humble he,
                  Likewiſe exalted ſure ſhall be.
               
            
            
               The parable of the Talents.
               
                  The kingdome of heau'n much like is
                        Luc. 19.12. Math. 25.14. Mar. 13.35.
                  
                  Vnto a king that went from home,
                  To a ſtrange countrey farre from his,
                  But made his ſeruants firſt to come,
                  To whom he did deliuer tho,
                  
                     His goods ere he from home would go.
               
               
                  To one man gaue he Talents fiue,
                  And to another onely two:
                  The third had one, therewith to thriue,
                  Each one had ſome-thing for to do,
                  As they were able: then ſtraight-way,
                  He went from home that very day.
               
               
                  Then he that the fiue Talents had,
                  Went and did occupie the ſame:
                  And gainde, to make his maſter glad,
                  Fiue Talents more before he came.
                  He that likewiſe receiued two,
                  Did therewith gaine as many mo.
               
               
                  But he that had receiued one,
                  Within the earth did digge the ſame,
                  And hid the money with a ſtone,
                  To keepe vntill his maſter came.
                  Thus eu'ry one did occupie
                  Their maſters Talents diuerſly.
               
               
                  And after a long ſeaſon came
                  The maſter of thoſe ſeruants home,
                  And reckned with them for the ſame,
                  One after other as they come.
                  To giue accounts from firſt to laſt,
                  They all were call'd, till all was paſt.
               
               
                  Then came he that fiue Talents had,
                  And brought with him fiue Talents mo,
                  And ſayd, oh maſter heare (be glad)
                  Thy money is, and gaynes alſo:
                  For I haue gayned as much more.
                  As I receiu'd of thee before.
               
               
                  
                  To him his maſter ſayd againe,
                  Thou good and faithfull ſeruant haſt
                  Well done, therewith to take ſuch paine,
                  Thou ſhalt receiue reward at laſt.
                  Thy maſters ioy enter and take,
                  Of much I will thee ruler make.
               
               
                  He came alſo that did receiue
                  Two Talents, and thus could he ſay:
                  Oh maſter, here thou mayſt perceiue
                  My gaynes, ſince thou went'ſt hence away;
                  Here is thy money that I had,
                  And as much more, that I haue made.
               
               
                  His maſter vnto him then ſayd,
                  Good ſeruant ſure it is well donne,
                  The time, I ſee was not delayd,
                  Thou couldſt not elſe ſo much haue wonne:
                  Thy faithfulneſſe in this was ſuch,
                  I will thee ruler make of much.
               
               
                  Then he which had receiued one,
                  Came to his maſter, and did ſay;
                  When thou away from hence waſt gone,
                  I hid thy money without nay,
                  Becauſe I fear'd thy crueltie,
                  Receiue thine owne contentedly.
               
               
                  His maſter anſwered and ſayd,
                  Thou ill and ſlouthfull ſeruant, why
                  (If thou of me were ſo affrayd,
                  And knew'ſt ſo well my crueltie)
                  Didſt not thou finde ſome meane or way,
                  To get me gaynes againſt this day?
               
               
                  The Talent take from him therefore,
                  And giue it him that now hath ten:
                  
                     
                     
                        Math. 25.29. Cap. 13.12. Mar. 4.25. Luc. 8.18. Cap. 19.26.For who ſo hath, he ſhall haue more,
                  And he ſhall haue abundance then.
                  From him that hath not, ſhall a way
                  Be taken what he hath, I ſay.
               
               
                  That ſeruant voyde of profit, ye
                  To vtter darkneſſe therefore caſt,
                  There weepe and gnaſh his teeth ſhall he:
                  Thus ſhall his ſlouth be payd at laſt.
                  See then your talent fructifie,
                  Leaſt you looſe it eternally.
               
            
            
               Of the labourers hired into the vineyard.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 20.1.The kingdome ſure of heau'n is ſo,
                  Like vnto a houſholder here,
                  That to hire labourers would go,
                  Aſſoone as day-light did appeare.
                  With them for pence he did agree,
                  All day to worke, this was their fee.
               
               
                  About the third houre of the day,
                  When he came to the market place,
                  The idle thence he ſent away,
                  Into his farme to worke apace.
                  Likewiſe the ſixt and ninth houre he,
                  With other mo did then agree.
               
               
                  Againe th'eleu'nth houre there he found
                  Some other idle ſtanding by:
                  Go ye (ſaid he) to my farme ground,
                  Why ſtand ye thus ſo idlely?
                  No man hath hired vs you ſee.
                  Go to my vineyard, then ſaid he.
               
               
                  When euen came the maſter ſayd,
                  Vnto his Steward, call them ſoone,
                  That I may ſee the worke-men payd,
                  
                     Which all this day my worke haue donne.
                  Begin and pay the laſt of all:
                  As he is ſeru'd the other ſhall.
               
               
                  A penie each of them then had,
                  From laſt to firſt as he did go:
                  Which made the firſt men very ſad,
                  They thought their pay ſhould not be ſo.
                  Go to, ſaid he, this is your hire,
                  You may no more of me require.
               
            
            
               Chriſt as he went to Ieruſalem did admoniſh his Diſciples of his paſſion.
               As to Ieruſalem he went,
                     Math. 20.17. Cap. 22.14. Mar. 10.32. Luc. 18.31.
               
               Chriſt Ieſus told them certainly,
               The Prieſts and Scribes with full intent,
               Do purpoſe me to crucifie:
               Yet when the Gentiles haue me ſlaine,
               The third day I will riſe againe.
            
            
               Iohn and Iames the ſonnes of Zebede contended for primacie, and were taught humilitie and patience, and to auoyde ambition.
               
                  The wife of Zebedeus came
                        Math. 20.20. Mar. 10.35.
                  
                  To Chriſt, and both her ſonnes alſo,
                  And her requeſt ſhe thus did frame,
                  Graunt ere thou to thy kingdome go,
                  That theſe my ſonnes there ſitting be,
                  Each one, vpon each hand of thee.
               
               
                  Ye wot not what ye aske, ſaid he,
                  Can ye drinke of my cup in deed?
                  Or be Baptiz'd as I ſhall be?
                  Yea that we can, if we may ſpeed.
                  Yet I can not graunt your requeſt,
                  That in my father ſure doth reſt.
               
               
                  
                  But when the other ten heard this,
                  They at the brethren did diſdaine.
                  Then Ieſus ſayd ye thinke amiſſe,
                  Among the Gentiles Lords do raigne:
                  They that are great of them, are preſt,
                  Authorized, to rule the reſt.
               
               
                  It ſhall not ſo among you be,
                  He that would greateſt ſeeme of all,
                  Or chiefeſt in authoritie,
                  Shall ſerue the reſt, as at a call.
                  As to be ſerued came not I,
                  But ſerue, and ſaue men certainly.
               
            
            
               Chriſt gaue blind Bartimeus and two other blind men their ſight as he paſſed from Iordan through Iericho toward Ieruſalem. The 14. of March.
               
                  
                     Mar. 10.46. Math. 20.29. Luc. 18.35. Iericho was two myles from Iordā, & foure myles and a halfe from Ieruſalem.The fourteenth day as Ieſus went
                  From Iordan towards Bethanie,
                  In Iericho, there did preſent,
                  A worke none elſe could remedie:
                  Blind Bartimeus and two men
                  As blind as he, were crying then;
               
               
                  O ſonne of Dauid make vs ſee,
                  We are poore men both bare and blind,
                  Let our eſtate (oh Lord) moue thee,
                  That we may of thy mercy find.
                  Their blindneſſe he did helpe ſtraight-wayes,
                  And they him follow'd giuing prayſe.
               
            
            
               The calling of Zacheus a rich man, and by office the chiefe receiuer of tribute.
               
                  
                     
                        Luc. 19.1.As Ieſus went through Iericho,
                  Zacheus ſought him for to ſee:
                  His ſtature did not ſerue him ſo,
                  Among the throng it would not be,
                  
                     He ran and clymed vp therefore,
                  A figge tree in the way before.
               
               
                  This was the ſhift that rich man had,
                  To ſee Chriſt as he came that way:
                  When Chriſt came by, to make him glad,
                  He looking vp, to him did ſay;
                  Zache come downe without delay,
                  At thy houſe Ile abide this day.
               
               
                  Then he came downe full haſtily,
                  Aſſoone as Ieſus did command:
                  And him receiued ioyfully;
                  But ſome of them that there did ſtand,
                  Did murmure that he then would go,
                  To lodge there with a ſinner ſo.
               
               
                  To Chriſt Zacheus as he ſtood,
                  Said (Lord) I giue halfe that I haue
                  Vnto the poore, to do them good,
                  And no man ſhall haue need to craue;
                  What I by fraude or force did take,
                  Fourefold Ile giue him for thy ſake.
               
               
                  Then Ieſus ſayd, ſaluation
                  Is come into this houſe, ye ſee:
                  Sith of the generation
                  Of Abraham, by faith is he.
                  The ſonne of man doth ſeeke and ſaue,
                  That which was loſt, as here I haue.
               
            
            
               Ieſus though he ſtayd a while (after he had heard that Lazarus was ſicke) working in the regions round about ſundry miracles, and preaching the Goſpell: at laſt he returned to Bethanie, where he raiſed Lazarus from death to life againe.
               
                  Now to returne to Lazarus,
                        Ioh. 11.7.
                  
                  
                     Which was already dead in deed:
                  To his Diſciples Chriſt ſaid thus,
                  Come let vs go from hence with ſpeed:
                  To Iurie we without all ſtay,
                  Muſt paſſe apace the ready way.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 11.8. Cap. 7 30. Cap. 8.59. Cap. 10.31.O maſter, then ſaid they againe,
                  The Iewes ſought lately thee to ſtone,
                  And wilt thou not then here remaine,
                  And ſo prouide to ſaue for one?
                  He ſtumbleth not that walkes by day,
                  But in the night (ſaid Chriſt) he may.
               
               
                  Theſe things Chriſt Ieſus to them ſpake,
                  And then ſaid, Lazarus doth ſleepe,
                  But I go him for to awake.
                  What Chriſt then ment, they tooke no keepe,
                  But ſaid, Lord, if he ſleepe, then he
                  Both ſafe and ſound will ſhortly be.
               
               
                  Then Ieſus ſaid to them againe,
                  Our friend is dead, and I reioyce
                  I was not there: Chriſt then was plaine,
                  To ſtrengthen ſuch as he made choice.
                  Then Thomas ſaid, come, let vs go,
                  That we with him may dye alſo.
               
               
                  The fifteenth day Chriſt Ieſus ſpent,
                  In iourneying along the way:
                  He then bewrayed what he meant,
                  In Bethanie the ſixteenth day.
                  For Ieſus then in hand did take,
                  His ſleeping friend, againe to wake.
               
               
                  Chriſt found he had lyen in the graue,
                  Foure dayes already ere he came:
                  The women they this comfort 
                        
                           •
                        ad. haue,
                  
                     The Iewes that heard his death by fame,
                  (Becauſe Ieruſalem was nye)
                  Came vnto them to Bethanie.
               
               
                  When Martha heard that Chriſt was there,
                  She went to meete him by the way,
                  And ſaid, Lord, if thou hadſt bene here,
                  Thy friend had not bene dead this day:
                  Yet what thou doeſt deſire or craue
                  Of God, I know thou mayſt it haue.
               
               
                  Thy brother then ſaid Chriſt ſhall riſe.
                        Ioh. 11.24. Math. 22.23. Mar. 12.18. Luc. 20.27. Act. 23.8.
                  
                  I know ſaid Martha the laſt day.
                  Life without me is in no wiſe,
                  Nor reſurrection ſayd Chriſt. I ſay.
                  The man in me that doth beleeue,
                  Though he were dead, yet ſhall he liue.
               
               
                  Who liues and doth beleeue in me,
                  Shall neuer dye: beleeu'ſt thou this?
                  I do beleeue, thou Lord, art he,
                  That Chriſt, the ſonne of God iwis,
                  Which ſhould come to the world, and ſo
                  When ſhe had ſaid, home ſhe did go.
               
               
                  Then called ſhe forth ſecretly,
                  Her Mary Magdalene. ſiſter, and to her ſhe ſaid:
                  The maſter is come hard here by,
                  Where he and his for thee haue ſtayd.
                  When ſhe heard this, ſhe quickly roſe,
                  And to the Lord forthwith ſhe goes,
               
               
                  Ieſus came not yet to the towne,
                  Where Martha met him there he was:
                  When Mary went ſo haſtie downe,
                  The Iewes that were then there in place,
                  Roſe vp, and ſaid, come follow now,
                  
                     She will go weepe for him we know.
               
               
                  When Mary came our Sauiour to,
                  She flat downe at his feete then fell:
                  My brother (Lord) ſhe ſayd alſo,
                  Had not bene dead, I know it well,
                  If thou hadſt here bene him to ſee,
                  For God had him reſtor'd to thee.
               
               
                  When Ieſus therefore ſaw her weepe,
                  And all the Iewes that came with her:
                  He groned in the ſpirite deepe,
                  So moued his affections were.
                  Where haue ye layd him then ſayd he?
                  They ſayd vnto him (Lord) come ſee.
               
               
                  And Ieſus wept: the Iewes then ſayd,
                  Behold, how he did loue the man:
                  His death could Chriſt not haue delayd,
                  That blind mens eyes ſo open can?
                  Then he againe did deepely grone,
                  And from the graue, ſaid take the ſtone.
               
               
                  Then Martha ſayd, he ſtinketh now,
                  For he is dead foure dayes ago.
                  Then Ieſus ſayd, I did thee ſhow,
                  If thou beleeue what I would do;
                  Gods glorie, this I ſayd to thee,
                  If thou beleeue, thou ſhouldeſt ſee.
               
               
                  When they, the ſtone remoued had,
                  Then Ieſus did lift vp his eyes,
                  And ſayd (oh father) I am glad,
                  My prayers thou doeſt not deſpiſe;
                  That theſe (as thou ſtill heareſt me)
                  May know that I am ſent of thee.
               
               
                  
                  Then Ieſus cryed with a loude voyce,
                  Come Lazarus, out of the graue.
                  Then he came forth, and they reioyce,
                  Their dead againe ſo whole to haue.
                  Chriſt bad them looſe away each band,
                  For he was bound face, foote, and hand.
               
               
                  Then many of them did beleeue,
                  When they had ſeene what he had donne:
                  This act did others of them grieue,
                  And to the Phariſies they runne;
                  To whom they told what they had ſeene
                  In Bethanie, where they had bene.
               
               
                  The high Prieſts and the Phariſies,A Coūſell held againſt Chriſt.
                  
                  A counſell called out of hand:
                  What ſhall we now (ſayd they) deuiſe?
                  Chriſts fame is ſpread throughout the land.
                  Such wondrous works now worketh he,
                  His miracles, who doth not ſee?
               
               
                  All men in him will ſure beleeue,
                  If we do let him thus alone:
                  The Romans will come vs to grieue,
                  (Supplanting all our nation)
                  They will our rulers take away,
                  Therefore deuiſe we may him ſlay.
               
               
                  Then he that Cayphas had to name,
                  And was the high Prieſt that ſame yeare,Cayphas Propheſie of Chriſts death.
                  
                  Perceiue ye not (ſayd he) the ſame?
                  And doth it not to you appeare,
                  That for the people one muſt dye,
                  Leaſt they ſhould periſh vtterly?
               
               
                  This God did make him Propheſie:
                  Againſt himſelfe he witneſſe beares,
                  
                     Though for all people Chriſt ſhould dye,
                  (Who, guiltleſſe bloud to ſpill but feares?)
                  Gods children and his ſcattred ſheepe,
                  Chriſt Ieſus had a care to keepe.
               
               
                  From that day, they conſulted how
                  They might him take, and cauſe to dye:
                  Whereas the Iewes of him might know,
                  Chriſt walked no more openly.
                  To Ephraim he went away,
                  Where he and his Diſciples lay.
               
               
                  The paſſeouer was then at hand,
                  And to Ieruſalem there went
                  Full many out of all that land,
                  Before the feaſt: ſome with intent
                  Themſelues as then to purifie,
                  Which feaſt the Iewes kept orderly.
               
               
                  The Iewes for Ieſus ſought about:
                  All in the temple where they where,
                  That he came not did make them doubt,
                  For they had ſought him eu'ry where.
                  They chargd'd who knew where he would lye,
                  To tell, or take him craftily.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 12.1. Math. 26.7. Mar. 14.3.Six dayes before the feaſt, no more,
                  Our Sauiour came to Bethanie:
                  Where he would not be ſeene before,
                  His enemies it was too nye.
                  Now the appointed time was come,
                  And Chriſt obayd his fathers dome.
               
               
                  Though he but lately fled away,
                  He then returned with good will.
                  His fathers minde he would obay,
                  And ſo all Propheſies fulfill.
                  
                     He came therefore to Bethanie,
                  Prepared for mankind to dye.
               
            
            
               Chriſt being come backe to Bethanie from Ephraim, ſupped with Lazarus, and was annoynted by Mary, whereat Iudas was offended eſpeciallie.
               
                  Chriſt fearing neither watch nor ward,
                        Ioh. 12.2.
                  
                  Did offer all occaſion
                  Vnto the Iewes, without regard,
                  To haſten on his paſſion:
                  Wherefore he ſupt in Bethanie,
                  His aduerſaries euen by.
               
               
                  With Lazarus Chriſt ſupped there,
                  And Martha ſerued then at boord,
                  Where many did with ioy and feare,
                  Attend vnto Chriſt Ieſus word:
                  As Iohn doth witneſſe Mary then,
                  Annoynted Chriſt before thoſe men.
               
               
                  Of oyntment Mary tooke a pound,
                  Of Spiknard very coſtly ſure,
                  As any oyntment might be found,
                  For it was perfect, ſweet and pure,
                  This all ſhe ſpent on Ieſus there,
                  His head and feete as may appeare.
               
               
                  His feete ſhe wiped with her hayre,
                  The houſe with odour it was ſweete:
                  The ſauour ſo perfum'd the ayre,
                  That came from Ieſus head and feete.
                  Yet Iudas did repine at this,
                  For of his purpoſe he did miſſe.
               
               
                  For he it was that did receiue,
                  What men at any time did giue:
                  
                     This Chriſt did very well perceiue,
                  How that her Or act. fact his mind did grieue:
                  For ſtraight with her a fault he found,
                  And did her checke thus very round.
               
               
                  This waſt it needed not, ſayd he,
                  This oyntment for three hundred pence
                  Might haue bene ſold and giuen me,
                  As part of the beneficence
                  That vſed is vnto the poore,
                  And ſuch as go from doore to doore.
               
               
                  He ſpake not as his mind then gaue,
                  But moued with a vayne deſire:
                  For he did couet all to haue,
                  This kindled in him flaming fire
                  Of greedineſſe, as did appeare,
                  By ſuch words as he vttred there.
               
               
                  Then Ieſus ſayd, let her alone,
                  She kept this for my burying day;
                  The poore ye may well thinke vpon,
                  They ſhall remaine with you alway:
                  Ye ſhall not alwayes ſo haue me,
                  But they alwayes with you ſhall be.
               
               
                  The womans worke thus wrought on me
                  Is good, and ſhall not be forgot,
                  This Goſpell where as it ſhall be
                  Preached throughout the world, I wot:
                  This act of hers ſhall be ſpoke ſure,
                  And her memoriall ſhall endure.
               
               
                  Much people of the Iewes were there,
                  Not all for Ieſus ſake onely,
                  But for to try what they did heare,
                  Of Lazarus aſſuredly.
                  
                     Of him they heard, as you haue read,
                  How Ieſus raiſd him from the dead.
               
               
                  The high Prieſts therefore tooke aduiſe,
                  How they might Lazarus alſo
                  Condemne with Chriſt in any wiſe,
                  Becauſe they ſaw that many mo
                  Did for his ſake, in Chriſt beleeue,
                  Which thing did very much them grieue.
               
            
            
               The next day following Chriſt went towards Ieruſalem, riding moſt gloriouſly, the people crying Hoſanna to the ſonne of Dauid.
               
                  When they were thence to Bethphage come,
                        Math. 21.1. Mar. 11.1. Luc. 19.29.
                  
                  Which to Ieruſalem is nye:
                  From the mount Oliues he ſent ſome,
                  To the next village by and by;
                  There hence to fetch an aſſe away,
                  For him to ride vpon that day.
               
               
                  If any one ſay ought, ſay ye,
                  Thereof the Lord as now hath neede:
                  And he will ſend the ſame to me,
                  Therefore go hence, and come with ſpeed.
                  That Prophecies ſo long ago,
                  Might be fulfilled, he did ſo.
               
               
                  To tell it Sion, ſee ye go,
                        Eſay. 62.11. Zach. 9.9. Math. 21.5. Ioh. 12.13.
                  
                  Behold, thy king doth come to thee,
                  Meeke ſitting on an aſſe, and lo
                  This happened then ſo to be:
                  But his Diſciples (as forgot)
                  Theſe things at firſt perceiued not.
               
               
                  Yet the Diſciples went away,
                  Accompliſhing their maſters mind:
                  They brought the aſſe without delay,
                  
                     Which Chriſt had told them how to find:
                  And put their clothes the aſſe vpon,
                  That Ieſus then might ride thereon.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 12.12. Math. 21.8. Mar. 11.8. Luc. 19.35.A multitude that verie day,
                  Of ſuch as were come to the feaſt:
                  When they heard Chriſt would ride that way,
                  Met him, and they for ioy were preſt
                  To ſpread the branches they did beare,
                  And ſome the clothes that they did weare.
               
               
                  Moreouer they that deckt the way,
                  And went Chriſt Ieſus there before,
                  And they that followed, each did ſay,
                  And prayſe his name for euermore;
                  The king of Iſraell is come,
                  Bleſſed be he for ay, ſayd ſome.
               
               
                  Hoſanna Dauids ſonne, to thee,
                  Bleſſed art thou, ſome other ſay:
                  All prayſe and honour giuen be,
                  To him that In the name of the Lord. commeth now this way.
                  Hoſanna thou which art ſo hye
                  In heau'n, full of all maieſty.
               
               
                  When to Ieruſalem they came,
                  The Citie all was moued then:
                  And fully preſt this pompe to blame:
                  Who is this, ſay they, to thoſe men?
                  Ieſus, they ſay, that Prophet he,
                  Of Nazareth in Galilie.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     Math. 21.13. Mar. 11.17. Luc. 19.46. Eſay. 56.7. Ierem. 7.11.Chriſt then againe purged the Temple, and caſt out the buyers and ſellers thence, and cured certaine blind and lame perſons.
               
                  So Chriſt went ſtraight the Temple to,
                  And purged then againe the ſame:
                  
                     He did (as he was wont to do)
                  All their abuſes greatly blame,
                  Reprouing all thoſe euill men,
                  That made Gods houſe for theeues a den.
               
               
                  Then to the Temple came the blind,
                  The halt, and ſuch as grieued were:
                  Whom Chriſt did heale (ſuch grace they find
                  As ſeeke to him, let no man feare)
                  Thoſe men gaue God continuall prayſe,
                  That ſuch a Prophet he would rayſe.
               
               
                  But when the chiefe Prieſts, Scribes, and ſuch,
                  Saw all the maruels that he wrought,
                  It grieu'd them, and diſdayning much,
                  They vtter'd what in mind they thought:
                  For they the children heard on hye
                  (Hoſanna Dauids ſonne) to cry.
               
               
                  Doeſt thou heare what theſe children ſay,
                  Said they to Chriſt? he ſayd I do:
                  Haue you not read of this I pray,
                  That written was ſo long ago?
                  By babes and ſucklings ſure thou haſt,
                        Math. 21.1
                           •
                         
                        Pſal. 8.2.
                  
                  Made the prayſe perfect now at laſt.
               
            
            
               Chriſt conferred with certaine Grecians, or rather they deſired to ſee Christ, and ſpeake to him.
               
                  Now there were certaine Greekes as then,
                        Ioh. 12.20.
                  
                  That came to worſhip at the feaſt:
                  Which were among thoſe other men,
                  As earneſt as they ſaw the reſt;
                  Theſe ſay to Philip we pray thee,
                  To helpe that we may Ieſus ſee.
               
               
                  Philip told Andrew of the ſame,
                  Againe they both to Ieſus went,
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                     As meſſengers, in thoſe mens name,
                  And told him all, and who them ſent.
                  The houre is come, the ſonne (ſayd he)
                  Of man muſt glorified be.
               
               
                  I ſay vnto you verily,
                  Except that the wheate corne do fall
                  Into the ground, and therein dye,
                  It bringeth forth no fruit at all:
                  But if it dye, aſſuredly,
                  It bringeth fruit abundantly.
               
            
            
               Another Sermon of the Croſſe, wherein Chriſt couertly foretold of his death.
               
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 12.25. Math. 10.39. Cap. 16.25. Mar. 8.35. Luc. 9.24.He that doth loue his life, he ſhall
                  Looſe it, but who ſo hates it here,
                  Shall keepe it to life eternall,
                  Though this ſcarce truth, to ſome appeare:
                  Learne ye your ſelues to hate therefore,
                  That ye may liue for euermore.
               
               
                  If any man wiſh to ſerue me,
                  Let him come follow me, I ſay:
                  For where I am, there ſhall he be,
                  I will protect him night and day.
                  They (in my ſeruice) that endure,
                  My father will them honour ſure.
               
               
                  And Ieſus herein declared
                  Himſelfe a perfect man to be:
                  My ſoule (ſaith he) is now troubled,
                  From this houre, father, ſaue thou me.
                  But therefore to this houre I came,
                  Yet father, glorifie thy name.
               
               
                  Then came from heau'n a mightie voyce,
                  Saying I haue, and will againe:
                  
                     (This may each mortall man reioyce,
                  That God did not for him diſdaine,
                  To ſend his ſonne to beare his blame)
                  In whom he glorified his name.
               
               
                  Then ſayd the people that ſtood by,
                  It was ſome thunder that they heard:
                  But others ſayd, nay verily,
                  An Angell if ye do regard,
                  Spake vnto him; thus diuerſe men,
                  Did diuerſly iudge of it then.
               
               
                  And Ieſus anſwered, and ſayd,
                  This voyce came not becauſe of me,
                  But for your ſakes, be not affrayd,
                  Great things you ſhall both heare and ſee:
                  For your ſakes God will glorifie
                  The ſonne of man, aſſuredly.
               
               
                  Of this world now the iudgement is,
                  The Prince thereof caſt out ſhall be:
                  And if I were lift vp iwis,
                  Ile from the earth, draw men to me.
                  Now this ſayd he to ſignifie,
                  What death then ſhortly he ſhould dye.
               
               
                  We heard out of the law, ſayd one,
                        Ioh. 12.34. Pſal. 89.36. Pſal. 110.4. Pſal. 117.2. Ezek. 37.25.
                  
                  That Chriſt for euer ſhould remaine:
                  And how ſayſt thou, he muſt be gone,
                  The ſonne of man muſt needs be ſlayne,
                  And lift vp high vpon a tree?
                  Tell, who that ſonne of man ſhould be.
               
               
                  Then Ieſus ſayd,
                        Ioh. 12.35. Cap. 1.9. a litle while
                  Light is with you, walke in the ſame,
                  Leaſt that the darkneſſe you beguile,
                  Who walkes therein may merite blame.
                  
                     While ye haue light beleeue therein,
                  As louing it, and hating ſinne.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 21.17.So left he them, and went againe,
                  As he was wont, to Bethany:
                  For there all night he did remaine,
                  Among his choſen company.
                  This night by night he vſed ſtill,
                  That ſo he might all things fulfill.
               
            
            
               Chriſt going the next day from Bethany to Hieruſalem, curſed the figge tree.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 21.18. Mar. 11.12.As Chriſt returned the next day,
                  From thence Hieruſalem vnto,
                  He was an hungred by the way,
                  And to a figge tree he did go,
                  That grew hard by, thereon to find
                  Some figges, as then to eaſe his mind.
               
               
                  But when thereon he onely found
                  Greene leaues, and not a figge at all,
                  From top he cu
                        ••
                     d it to the ground:
                  Fruit hence-forth on thee neuer ſhall▪
                  
                  Be ſeene againe, ſayd Chriſt, and ſo,
                  Away from thence they all did go.
               
               
                  Like to an hypocrite, this tree
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      leaues, but had no fruit ſo eate:
                  L
                        •
                     t hypocrites then warned be,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      the ſome curſſe, that Chriſt did threat:
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      with one word the Lord he may,
                  Head, branch, and root, cauſe to decay.
               
               
                  All his Diſciples then did ſee
                  What he had done, and heard likewiſe
                  The curſe Chriſt gaue vnto that tree,
                  Yet litle thought in any wiſe,
                  
                     What would be fall, but thence they went,
                  The Citie to as they were bent.
               
               
                  Chriſt to the Temple went againe,
                  And purg'd it, as he did before,
                  Reprouing them that were ſo vayne,
                  Abuſing ſtill then more and more
                  That place, appointed men to pray,
                  And not for marchandiſe to ſtay.
               
               
                  The Scribes and high Prieſts hearing this,
                  Sought how they might him then deſtroy,
                  Though he had done nothing amiſſe,
                  But gaue them cauſe of greateſt ioy▪
                  
                  They ſought his life, that life doth giue
                  To all men that in him beleeue.
               
               
                  They feared him, for they did ſee,
                  They could no way reſiſt his will:
                  And did perceiue moſt men to be
                  Aſtonied at his doctrine ſtill.
                  When euen came Ieſus did hye,
                  And got him backe to Bethany.
               
            
            
               Chriſt returning the next day, the Diſciples ſeeing the figge tree withered, tell him of it.
                     Math 21.19. Mar. 11.20.
               
               
                  The next day, as they paſſed by,
                  Then the Diſciples all did ſee
                  The figge tree dryed, verily,
                  And that vp from the roote to be▪
                  
                  Then Peter ſayd, maſter ſee this,
                  The figge tree throughly with'red is.
               
               
                  Then Ieſus anſwering, did ſay,
                  If ye haue faith vnfainedly,
                  Ye may this mountaine moue away
                  And lay it in the ſea to lye.
                  
                     See that your hearts be cleane and pure,
                  And that your faith be firme and ſure.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Mar. 11.24. Math. 6.14. 
                           
                              •
                           ap. 7.7.Then what ye do deſire, I ſay.
                  By prayer ſhall be done in deed:
                  Faithfull requeſts haue wings alway,
                  To flye vnto the Lord with ſpeed.
                  Forgiue when ye do pray alſo,
                  That on your faults God thinke no mo.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Mar. 11.27.Then to Hieruſalem they came,
                  And to the temple went againe:
                  Where walking then within the ſame,
                  The high Prieſts fraught with foule diſdaine,
                  And all the Scribes and Elders were,
                  To ſee Chriſt Ieſus comming there.
               
               
                  They askt by what authoritie,
                  Chriſt did thoſe things ſo lately there;
                  Who is of ſo great dignitie,
                  As may appoint thee ruler here?
                  Our elders left vs long ago
                  All power here, and to no mo.
               
               
                  Then Ieſus anſwered, and ſayd,
                  I will aske you one queſtion,
                  And anſwer me now vndelayd,
                  Therein your iuſt opinion:
                  And I, by what authoritie,
                  Haue done theſe things, will teſtifie.
               
               
                  Iohns Baptiſme tell me certainly,
                  Was it from heau'n or elſe of men?
                  Now anſwer me vnfainedly,
                  And you ſhall haue your anſwer then.
                  Like doubtfulneſſe there is in this,
                  As in their former queſtion is.
               
               
                  
                  They thought, if we confeſſe it came
                  From heau'n, then will he ſurely ſay,
                  Why did ye not beleeue for ſhame
                  His doctrine, and his words obay?
                  But if we ſay, of men, we feare
                  The people, that are ſtanding here.
               
               
                  For Iohn accounted was in deed,
                        Math. 21.26. Cap. 14.5. Mar. 6.20.
                  
                  A mightie Prophet of them there:
                  When they perceiu'd how they ſhould ſpeed,
                  To anſwer him they ſtood in feare;
                  They anſwer'd then they knew not well,
                  He anſwer'd them he would not tell.
               
            
            
               The Parable of the two ſonnes.
               
                  What thinke ye then ſayd Chriſt againe?
                        Math. 21.28.
                  
                  Two ſonnes a certaine rich man had:
                  Vnto the elder of the twaine
                  The father came, and thus he bad:
                  Go ſonne, ſaid he, and worke I ſay,
                  Within my vineyard all this day.
               
               
                  The ſonne then anſwered, and ſayd,
                  I will not worke therein at all:
                  But afterward as all affrayd
                  To diſobay his fathers call,
                  His frowardneſſe he did repent,
                  And then into the vineyard went.
               
               
                  Then came he to the ſecond ſonne,
                  And ſayd to him ſuch words likewiſe:
                  Thy will (ſayd he) ſhall ſure be done,
                  Yet did his fathers heſts deſpiſe.
                  For this ſonne neuer laboured
                  In his worke as he promiſed.
               
               
                  Now whether of the twaine ſay ye,
                  
                     Performed beſt the fathers will?
                  The firſt or laſt tell this to me?
                  The firſt ſayd they, did it fulfill.
                  The Publicans and harlots then,
                  Shall go to heau'n before theſe men.
               
               
                  For in the way of righteouſneſſe,
                  Iohn came to you I ſay, ſaid he:
                  As did his doctrine well expreſſe,
                  Yet ye beleu'd not him, I ſee;
                  The Publicans and harlots they,
                  Beleeuing did his words obey.
               
               
                  Though ye his words and works did find,
                  So well agreeing certainly:
                  None to repentance gaue his mind,
                  Among you all aſſuredly.
                  His doctrine, that beleeuing ye,
                  Might for your ſinnes much grieued be.
               
            
            
               Another Parable of the vineyard, let out 
                     〈◊〉
                   the vnfaithfull husband-men.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           th. 21.33. 
                           
                              •
                           r. 12.1. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . 20.9. 
                           
                              •
                           y. 5.1. 
                           
                              •
                           em. 2.21.Another Parable heare ye,
                  A certaine houſholder did plant
                  A vineyard, and round hedged he
                  The ſame, that nothing it did want:
                  And therein this man builded tho,
                  A wine-preſſe, and a towre alſo.
               
               
                  All this he let to husband-men,
                  And traueld to a ſtrange countrey:
                  For thence he went to ſoiourne then,
                  In hope his farmours would obey
                  His will, and well performe alſo
                  Their promiſe made, ere he did go.
               
               
                  But when the time of fruit drue nye,
                  
                     And he had ſent for to receiue
                  The fruits of them his ſeruants by,
                  As promiſe was when he tooke leaue.
                  His ſeruants they did beate and kill,
                  Litle regarding their Lords will.
               
               
                  Againe he ſent vnto them mo,
                  Which ſeruants they did kill likewiſe:
                  At laſt his ſonne he cauſd to go,
                  His ſonne alſo they did deſpiſe.
                  His onely ſonne which he ſent there,
                  Of whom he hop'd they ſtood in feare.
               
               
                  But when the husband-men did ſee
                  The ſonne: 
                        Math 21.38 Cap. 26.3.4. Cap. 27.1. Ioh. 11.53. this is the heire, they ſayd:
                  Come let him likewiſe killed be,
                  All ſhall be ours, be not affrayd;
                  They ſlue the ſonne himſelfe at laſt,
                  And him out of the vineyard caſt.
               
               
                  Now Ieſus ſayd, what thinke ye then?
                  For theſe offences that your heare,
                  What ſhall their Lord do to thoſe men,
                  Whoſe faults ſo manifeſt appeare?
                  They ſlue his ſeruants one by one,
                  And laſtly ſlue his onely ſonne.
               
               
                  They ſayd the Lord will ſure deſtroy
                  Moſt cruelly thoſe wicked men,
                  And others ſhall his farme enioy,
                  To whom the Lord will let it then,
                  That fruit in ſeaſon will him yeeld,
                        Math. 21.42. Pſal. 118.22. Act. 4.11. Rom. 9.33. 1. Pet. 2.7.
                  
                  Of eu'ry ſort within his field.
               
               
                  Then Ieſus ſayd haue ye not read?
                  The 
                        •
                     one the builders did refuſe,
                  Is of the corner made the head?
                  
                     And ſo put there to chiefeſt vſe.
                  The Lord his doing it is this,
                  And in our eyes a maruell is.
               
               
                  
                     The fruits of 
                           •
                        he kingdome 
                           •
                        f God, is to 
                           •
                        mbrace Chriſt 
                           •
                        eſus, and ad
                        
                           •
                        oniſhed by 
                           •
                        im to amend 
                           •
                        ur liues. The fruits of 
                           •
                        he ſpirit. Gal. 
                           •
                        . 22. are alſo 
                           •
                        he fruits of 
                           •
                        he kingdome 
                           •
                        f God▪ &c. Aretius.Therefore I ſay to you againe,
                  The kingdome of God ſure ſhall be
                  Taken from you, this thing is plaine,
                  And giuen others francke and free,
                  Which will the fruits thereof forth bring,
                  And yeeld increaſe in eu'ry thing.
               
               
                  And who ſo on this ſtone ſhall fall,
                  Shall broken be, this you ſhall find:
                  But on whom it ſhall fall withall,
                  To powder him the ſtone will grind.
                  The firſt he may be heald againe:
                  This laſt ſhall labour but in vaine.
               
               
                  When the chiefe Prieſts and Phariſie,
                  Theſe Parables of Chriſt did heare,
                  They did perceiue then by and by,
                  Of whom he ſpake as did appeare:
                  For they on him ſought hands to lay,
                  Yet did for feare their purpoſe ſtay.
               
               
                  
                     That Chr. was 
                           •
                         prophet, the 
                           •
                        eadines of the 
                           •
                        eopleto ſet him free, & that his 
                           •
                        oure was not 
                           •
                        ome, were 3. 
                        
                           •
                        hiefe cauſes 
                           •
                        hat the Scribes and Phariſies 
                           •
                        ooke not Chriſt 
                           •
                        hen.The people that were ſtanding by,
                  A Prophet they tooke Chriſt to be▪
                  
                  This feared them that did eſpy,
                  Their readineſſe to ſet him free.
                  And eke his houre was not come then,
                  Which was a let vnto thoſe men.
               
            
            
               Another Parable of the King that made a mariage for his ſonne, whoſe bidden guests refuſed to come (although they were called) to the wedding.
               
                  Another Parable he ſpake
                  As then, before the multitude,
                  
                     That vnexcuſed he might make
                  The Iewes for their ingratitude,
                  To whom the Lord ſo bounteouſly,
                  Had offred ſo much clemency.
               
               
                  Gods kingdome is like to a King,
                  That made a mariage for his ſonne:
                  And when he had for his wedding
                  Prepared what was to be donne,
                  He ſent his ſeruants then forth all,
                  That they his bidden gueſts might call.
               
               
                  The gueſts would not, though bid they were,
                  Repaire with them vnto the feaſt:
                  They ſayd, they could not then be there,
                  To their affaires they were addreſt:
                  And thus they did the King abuſe,
                  For eu'ry one made his excuſe.
               
               
                  The firſt had bought a farme he ſayd,
                  And he muſt needs the ſame go ſee:
                  The ſecond was no whit affrayd,
                  Excuſed well he hop'd to be,
                  Fiue yoke of oxen he did buy,
                  And went to proue them haſtily.
               
               
                  The third had wed a wife as then,
                  He could not come in any wiſe:
                  Thus anſwered thoſe wicked men,
                  That did the heau'nly feaſt deſpiſe:
                  Yet were they not ſo very bad,
                  But there were ſome ten time as mad.
               
               
                  For they intreated ſhamefully,
                  The ſeruants that the King had ſent:
                  They killed them moſt cruelly,
                  That ſo much good to them had ment;
                  
                     Though wicked were the firſt in deed,
                  Theſe did the other farre exceed.
               
               
                  But when the king had heard the ſame,
                  He ſent his warriours forth with ſpeed:
                  For he was wroth to heare the fame,
                  And worſe diſpleaſed with the deed.
                  Thoſe murtherers deſtroyed he,
                  And cauſd their Citie burnt to be.
               
               
                  Vnto his ſeruants he ſayd then,
                  The wedding truly is prepard:
                  Vnworthie were thoſe wicked men,
                  That would ſo lightly it regard;
                  Go ye therefore to the high way,
                  And bring me gueſts without delay.
               
               
                  The ſeruants went and ſo they did,
                  They brought him gueſts both good and bad▪
                  
                  For eu'ry one they met, they bid,
                  To ſeeke to make their maſter glad;
                  And ſo with gueſts they furniſhed
                  The feaſt that he ſolemnized.
               
               
                  The king came in his gueſts to ſee,
                  And there he did perceiue anon,
                  A man among the reſt to be,
                  That had no wedding garment on;
                  This came not to adorne the feaſt,
                  But to haue meate among the reſt.
               
               
                  The king vnto him quickly ſayd,
                  How camſt thou hither in, my friend?
                  And he then ſpeachleſſe all affrayd,
                  Could by no meanes his cauſe defend.
                  The king could ſoone his faults eſpie,
                  For all his cloakt hypocriſie.
               
               
                  
                  Then to his ſeruants ſayd the king,
                  Bind him, and take him hence away:
                        Math. 22.13. Cap. 8.12. Cap. 13.42. Ca. 20.16. Ca. 25.30.
                  
                  To vtter darkneſſe ſee you bring
                  Him, bound both hand and foote, I ſay;
                  There weepe and gnaſh his teeth ſhall he:
                  Many are cal'd, few choſen be:
               
            
            
               Of paying tribute vnto Caeſar.
               
                  The Phariſies tooke counſell then,
                        Math. 22.15. Mar. 12.13. Luc. 20.20.
                  
                  How Chriſt in talke might tangled be:
                  They ſent vnto him Herods men,
                  With their Diſciples this to ſee.
                  Thus all their wits they buſied ſtill,
                  To ſeeke to worke Chriſt Ieſus ill.
               
               
                  Maſter, ſayd they, we know and ſee,
                  That thou art true, and teacheſt right
                  The way of God, and that with thee,
                  Reſpect of man is verie light:
                  Mans perſon thou doeſt not reſpect,
                  But him that doth Gods will effect.
               
               
                  Tell vs therefore how thinkeſt thou?
                  May we to Caeſar tribute giue?
                  Thy iudgement herein ſhew vs now,The tribute payd to the vſe of the Temple, was thē leuied to the vſe of the Emperour.
                  
                  For this thing doth vs greatly grieue,
                  To pay him that miſlikes men more,
                  The temple had alwayes before.
               
               
                  Ieſus knowing their wickedneſſe,
                  Sayd, Hypocrites, why tempt ye me?
                  Your deeds ſhew you to be no leſſe,
                  I cannot ſo deceiued be:
                  The tribute money ſhew me ſoone,
                  And you ſhall know what muſt be done.
               
               
                  They brought a peny to him then,
                  
                     Whoſe Image (then ſayd Chriſt) is this,
                  And ſuperſcription (to thoſe men?)
                  
                     
                        Math. 22.21. Rom. 13.7. Mar. 12.17. Luc. 20.25.Caeſars, ſayd they, it ſurely is.
                  Giue Caeſar, Caeſars things therefore,
                  And God his due, for euermore.
               
               
                  When they heard this, they maruelled,
                  And left him then and went away:
                  H
                        •
                     s anſwer them aſtoniſhed,
                  So that they could not him gainſay.
                  
                     Eraſm. in Math. Cap. 22. verſ. 22.
                      Yet left they not (ſuch was their grace)
                  To hate him, though they left the place.
               
            
            
               Chriſt confuted the Saduces, which denied the reſurrection.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 22.23. Mar. 12.18. Luc. 20.27. Act. 23.8.The Saduces the ſame day came:
                  The reſurrection they deny,
                  And all ſuch men did fowly blame,
                  That would beleeue it verily.
                  Theſe came, I ſay, to Chriſt that day,
                  Their ignorance for to bewray.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math 22 24. Deut. 25.5.Maſter (ſayd they) Moſes hath ſayd,
                  Childleſſe if that a man ſhould dye,
                  His brethren need not be affrayd,
                  To take his wife ſucceſſiuely,
                  And mary her, to raiſe him ſeed,
                  This law allowed was in deed.
               
               
                  There were ſeu'n brethren here with vs,
                  The firſt of them did wed a wife:
                  And dying then it hap'ned thus,
                  He left no child, that left this life,
                  His wife vnto his brother he
                  Did leaue alſo, his wife to be.
               
               
                  The ſecond, third, and all the reſt,
                  
                     Did mary her, but had no ſeed:
                  For ech of them as is expreſt,
                  One after other dy'd in deed;
                  And laſt of all then dyed ſhe,
                  Whoſe wife in heau'n there ſhall ſhe be?
               
               
                  Then Ieſus anſwered againe,
                  And ſayd vnto them verily,
                  Ye are deceiued, this is plaine,
                  In your conceit, and wot ye why?
                  The Scripture ye at any hand,
                  Nor yet Gods power vnderſtand:
               
               
                  For in the reſurrection,
                  Men do not mary wiues as then,
                  But are in each condition
                  As Angels are, not mortall men.
                  But that the dead do riſe againe,
                  Haue ye not read, yea oft in vayne?
               
               
                  I am ſayd God, of Abraham,
                        Math. 22.32. Exod. 3.6.
                  
                  Of Iſaac and Iacob in deed,
                  Their God, and of all them that came
                  Of them, by faith, or of their ſeed.
                  Sure of the liuing God is he,
                  Not of the dead, I ſay to thee.
               
               
                  And when the people heard it, they
                  Were all aſtonied at the ſame:
                  But ſome his doctrine did obey,
                  Some other ſhrunke away for ſhame:
                  Which did his works and words deſpiſe,
                  Nor would beleeue in any wiſe.
               
            
            
               The Phariſies demanded of Chriſt, which was the great commandement, and his anſwer.
                     Math. 22.34 Mar. 12.28.
               
               
                  But when the Phariſies had heard,
                  
                     That Chriſt to ſilence then had brought:
                  The Saduces, without regard,
                  They then a ſhift againſt him ſought,
                  To worke his ſhame if it might be,
                  And ſo aſſembling this agree.
               
               
                  A Doctour of the Law therefore,
                  Should aske him there a queſtion,
                  Tempting him then as before,
                  And asking his opinion:
                  Oh maſter, in the law which is
                  The great commandment? tell me this.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 22.37. Luc. 10.27. Deut. 6.5.Then Ieſus ſayd to him againe,
                  The Lord thy God him ſhalt thou loue
                  With all thy heart, and eu'ry vayne,
                  Thy ſoule, and what thy mind may moue:
                  This is the great commaundement,
                  To keepe it is expedient.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 22.38. Mar. 12.31. Leuit. 19.18. Rom. 13.9. Galat. 5.14. Iam. 2.8.The ſecond is like vnto this;
                  As thine owne ſelfe thy neighbour loue
                  On theſe commandements it is,
                  The law and Prophets hang and moue.
                  In firſt and laſt, the wiſeman can
                  Learne duties, due to God and man.
               
               
                  To Ieſus ſayd the Phariſie,
                  Maſter, thou haſt ſayd very true:
                  There is but one God verily,
                  To loue, feare, and ſerue him is due.
                  Then Ieſus ſayd, Gods kingdome thou,
                  Art not farre from, I tell thee now.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     Math. 22.41. Mar. 12.35. Luc. 20.41.Christ demanded of them how Chriſt the Meſſiah is the ſonne of Dauid.
               
                  While that the Phariſies were there,
                  
                     Gathred together as we find:
                  Ieſus did aske them without feare,
                  Of Chriſt, what thinke ye in your mind?
                  Whoſe ſonne is he? they ſayd againe,
                  Chriſt Dauids ſonne is very plaine.
               
               
                  Chriſt ſayd to them,
                        Math. 22.44. Mar. 12.36. Pſal. 110.1. how then doth he
                  In ſpirit call him Lord, I pray▪
                  
                  As in the Pſalmes is for to ſee,
                  The Lord vnto my Lord did ſay,
                  Sit at my right hand till I make
                  Thy foes thy foote-ſtoole, for thy ſake.
               
               
                  If Dauid cal'd him Lord, how then
                  Is he his ſonne, do you declare?
                  And none of all thoſe buſie men
                  Could anſwer him, as witneſſe are
                  Their works, they durſt not, this is plaine,
                  From that day aske him ought againe.
               
            
            
               The doctrine of the Scribes and Phariſies, ſitting in Moſes chaire was to be heard, but their liues and manners not to be followed.
               
                  Ieſus ſpake to the multitude,
                  And his Diſciples likewiſe then,
                  (Not waighing the ingratitude,
                  Of ſuch malitious wicked men.)
                  Commending of the Scribes their place,
                  Though they themſelues were voyde of grace.
               
               
                  
                     There are 3. ſortes of Miniſters. The firſt do teach well & liue well, as the Apoſtles, & they build with both hāds. The ſecond, teach well & liue ill, as the Scribes and Phariſies: theſe build with one hand and pull downe with another. The third teach ill and liue worſe: theſe ſcatter with both hāds.The Scribes and Phariſies do ſit,
                  In Moſes ſeat, Chriſt Ieſus ſayd:
                  All therefore what they bid is fit,
                  That you obſerue it vndelayd:
                  But what they do, do not the ſame,
                  They ſay and do not, to their ſhame.
               
               
                  
                  For heauie burdens they do bind,
                  And on mens ſhoulders them they lay,
                  
                     
                        Math. 23.4. Luc. 11.46. Act. 15.10.Moſt grieuous to be borne in mind,
                  Intollerable eu'ry way;
                  But they themſelues will not once proue,
                  With any finger them to moue.
               
               
                  All that they do is to be ſeene,
                  To haue of men a prayſe therefore:
                  
                     
                        Math. 23.5. Nomb. 15.57. Deut. 22.12.It is not now as it hath beene,
                  They do diſſemble more and more.
                  For God would haue his word well knowne,
                  And not vpon their clothes ſo ſhowne.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 23 6. Mar. 12.38. Luc. 11.43. Cap. 20.46.But they haue broad Philacteries,
                  And Gods commandements in thoſe
                  Not in their hearts, theſe miſteries
                  Their fowle diſſembling do diſcloſe.
                  What they about them written beare,
                  The heart to haue it, fitteſt were.
               
               
                  And other vanities among,
                  That th
                        •
                     ſe men vſe continually:
                  They fringe their garments all along,
                  For outward ſhow aſſuredly.
                  They loue the chiefeſt place and ſeate,
                  In all aſſemblies, and at meate.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 23.7. Iam. 3.1.And greetings in the market place,
                  And maſters to be call'd of men:
                  Be not ſo call'd, leaſt you diſgrace
                  Your call, and doctrine euen then.
                  Chriſt onely maſter you may call,
                  And ye your ſelues are brethren all.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 23.9. Malach. 1.6.On earth your father, no man call,
                  For one your father is in deed:
                  
                     He is in heau'n farre aboue all,
                  And giueth you what you haue need.
                  Be not call'd Doctours, for one is
                  Your Doctour, euen Chriſt iwis.
               
               
                  Let him that is the greateſt, be
                  As ſeruant vnto all the reſt:
                  
                     
                        Math. 23.12 Luc. 14.11. Cap. 18.14.Himſelfe who ſo exalteth he,
                  Shall be brought low: but this is beſt,
                  That ye your ſelues do humble; ſo
                  To be exalted where ye go.
               
            
            
               Chriſt cryed wo againſt the Scribes, Phariſies and Lawyers.
               
                  Wo be to you, ye Scribes therefore,
                        Math. 23.13.
                  
                  And Phariſies withall, I ſay,
                  You hypocrites do euermore
                  Shut men from heauen all that ye may:
                  For in your ſelues ye do not go,
                  Nor ſuffer them that would do ſo.
               
               
                  Wo be to you,Vnder colour of their holyneſſe and long prayers for them, they oft conſumed their wealth & their honeſtie. for ye deuoure
                  The widowes houſes craftily:
                  Your prayers longer by an houre
                  Ye make, to worke your trechery;
                  Wherefore without compaſſion,
                  You ſhall receiue damnation.
               
               
                  Wo be to you (I ſay) againe,
                  For ye do compaſſe ſea and land
                  To ſeeke one Proſelite to gaine,
                  That he your law may vnderſtand.
                  Which when he learnes then ſure is he,
                  Much more the child of hell then ye.
               
               
                  Wo 
                        〈◊〉
                      to you, ye guides ſo blind,
                  Which ſay that who ſo vſe to ſweare
                  
                     By the temple, this oth doth bind
                  No man, thereof 
                        •
                     e need not feare:
                  But by the gold thereof, ſay ye,
                  Who ſo do ſweare, offenders be.
               
               
                  Of both theſe things which do you deeme,
                  To be in deed the holyeſt?
                  The gold which you ſo much eſteeme,
                  Or temple of the mightieſt?
                  The gold it doth The temple. it beautifie,
                  The temple That is the gold. it doth ſanctifie.
               
               
                  And who doth by the altar ſweare,
                  It is nothing as you do ſay:
                  But ſo to do ye make men feare,
                  By the offring, in any way.
                  The gift or altar which thinke ye,
                  The holieſt of them both to be?
               
               
                  Ye fooles and blind, the offering
                  Is by the altar ſanctifi'd▪
                  
                  Who ſweares by it, for any thing,
                  Of this you may be certifi'd,
                  He ſweares by it and all things there,
                  Therefore take heed how ye do ſweare.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 23.21. Cap. 5.34. 1. King. 8.13. 2. Chron. 6.2.Who by the temple ſweareth, he
                  By it, and by him ſure doth ſweare
                  That dwels therein: and likewiſe ye
                  That ſweare by heau'n without all feare,
                  Of God ye do ſweare by the throne,
                  And him that ſitteth thereupon.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 23.23. Luc. 11.42.Wo be to you ye Scribes (I ſay)
                  And Phariſies ſo full of guile:
                  Ye hypocrites is this the way,
                  To cloake your curſed craft ſo vile?
                  
                     The leaſt things that the law doth will,
                  You keepe, and leaue the greateſt ſtill.
               
               
                  Mint, anniſe, and cummin tith ye,
                  And waightier matters leaue alone:
                  The law commandeth theſe to thee
                  But laſt of all to thinke vpon.
                  For iudgement, mercy, and faith, are
                  The chiefeſt things ſhould be your care.
               
               
                  Ye blind and wicked guides, which ſtraine
                  A gnat, as if ye could not well
                  Deuour the ſame except with paine,
                  And ſwallow vp a great cammell:
                  Ye hypocrites, for cloaking ſo
                  Your craftineſſe, you heape on wo.To drinke wine in a vnwaſhen cup defileth not a man, but to drinke wine gotten by fraude, or for exceſſe, not for neceſſitie, this defileth a man.
                  
               
               
                  Wo be to you (I ſay againe,)
                  For ye make cleane the vtter ſide
                  Of cup and platter, all in vaine,
                  It doth bewray your fooliſh pride:
                  But they within, are not the leſſe
                  Of briberie full, and all exceſſe.
               
               
                  Thou blind and fooliſh Phariſie,
                  Cleanſe firſt the inſide of the ſame,
                  And then the out-ſide verily,
                  Thou mayſt make cleane without all blame:
                  If that the inner man be pure,
                  The outward man is cleane be ſure.
               
               
                  Wo be to you, for ſure ye be
                  Like painted tombes in outward ſight:
                  Appearing fayre to them 
                        •
                     hat ſee
                  No part within, how they are dight:
                  For dead mens bones are there doubtleſſe
                  Remaining with much filthineſſe.
               
               
                  
                  So ye alſo, for outwardly
                  Ye do as righteous men appeare,
                  But are full of hypocriſie,
                  And vices, it is very cleare:
                  The outward man is fayre in ſhow,
                  And fowle within, as God doth know.
               
               
                  Wo be to you that build ſo braue
                  The Prophets tombes that were before,
                  And garniſh outwardly each graue
                  Of righteous men, now more and more;
                  And more then that you verily,
                  Thus vtter your iniquitie.
               
               
                  If we as then had bene (ye ſay)
                  In our forefathers time, had we
                  Conſented ſo to ſee the day,
                  That guiltleſſe bloud then ſpilt ſhould be?
                  The Prophets had not dyed ſo,
                  Nor any godly man with wo.
               
               
                  So then ye are as witneſſes
                  Vnto your ſelues, how that ye be
                  Their children, as ye do confeſſe,
                  That murthred them, therefore do ye
                  What lacked of their crueltie,
                  Fulfill with all dexteritie.
               
               
                  O Serpents the ofſpring in deed,
                  And bloudy generation
                  Of vypers, and their very ſeed
                  By nature and opinion:
                  How ye ſhould ſcape no man can tell,
                  The great damnation of hell.
               
               
                  Wherefore behold, to you Ile ſend,
                  Prophets, wiſemen, and Scribes ſurely,
                  
                     To ſee if that ye will amend,
                  Whom ye will kill and crucifie,
                  And ſcourge in Synagogues apace,
                  And perſecute from place to place.
               
               
                  That on you all the bloud may come,
                        Math. 23.35. Gene. 4.8. Heb. 11.4.
                  
                  Which was ſhed vpon earth alway,
                  From righteous Abell, Adams ſonne,
                  To Zacharias, bloud which lay
                  Betweene the temple verily,
                  And altar, ſlaine moſt cruelly.
               
               
                  All theſe things ſhall aſſuredly
                  Come on this generation,
                  This ag
                        •
                      ſhall beare this penaltie,
                  And righteous condemnation,
                  That all their vayne hypocriſie,
                  May be detected openly.
               
               
                  Hieruſalem which killeſt ſo,
                        Math. 23.37. Luc. 13 34.
                  
                  The Prophets that are ſent to thee,
                  And ſtoneſt ſome t'augment their wo,
                  How often would I, tell it me,
                  Thy children gather for their good,
                  Which they moſt frowarly withſtood?
                        Math. 23.37. Eſd. 
                        
                           •
                        .30.
                  
               
               
                  Yea euen as a carefull hen
                  Doth clocke her chickens, ſo haue I:
                  And yet will not theſe wicked men
                  Be ſaued from their miſerie:
                  All waſt and deſolate ſhall be,
                  Their dwellings left that lothed me.
               
               
                  For vnto you, marke it, I ſay,
                  Ye ſhall not hence-forth ſee me more,
                  Vntill ye bleſſe the very day,
                  And wiſh good hap for euermore
                  
                     To him that commeth ſo with fame
                  To you, in great Iehouahs name.
               
               
                  As Ieſus by the treaſurie
                  Beheld, what men did offer there,
                  The rich and poore moſt bounteouſly
                  Did caſt therein, as may appeare:
                  Of all the reſt a widow then,
                  Caſt in two mites among thoſe men.
               
               
                  To his Diſciples Ieſus ſaid,
                  I ſay to you aſſuredly,
                  She in this treaſurie hath layd
                  More then their ſuperfluitie,
                  She caſt in all ſhe had in ſtore,
                  They want no whit they had before.
               
            
            
               Of the deſtruction of the temple and Citie, and of the end of the world.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 24.1. Mar. 13.1. Luc. 21.5.When Ieſus then had finiſhed,
                  To purge the temple as ye heard,
                  And had alſo accompliſhed
                  His iudgements heare before declard,
                  He left the temple, then to go
                  To Bethanie, whence he came fro.
               
               
                  And this the third day after was
                  The feaſt of Palmes, or Palme ſunday:
                  But ere he thence away could paſſe,
                  Thus his Diſciples to him ſay;
                  Come Lord, and ſee this building here,
                  How beautifull it doth appeare.
               
               
                  And Ieſus ſaid to them againe,
                  See ye theſe things and marke them all?
                  There ſhall not verily remaine,
                  One ſtone hereof that ſhall not fall.
                  
                     A ſtone ſhall not be left on ſtone,
                        Math. 24.2. Luc. 19.44.
                  
                  But ſhall be caſt downe eu'ry one.
               
               
                  And his Diſciples came againe,
                  As he vpon mount Oliues 
                        •
                     ate,
                  And ſayd, do thou now tell vs plaine,
                  When this ſhall be, and of the ſtate
                  Of thy comming, and the worlds end,
                  And what ſigne then thou wilt vs ſend.
                        Math. 24.4. Epheſ. 5.6. 1. Coloſſ. 2.18.
                  
               
               
                  And Ieſus anſwered and ſayd,
                  That you be not deceiu'd take heed:
                  Great cauſe ye haue to be affrayd,
                  Leaſt you as others then ſhould ſpeed:
                  For many ſhall come in my name,
                  And deceiue many with the ſame.
               
               
                  And ye ſhall heare of warres, I ſay,
                  And rumours of warres there ſhall be:
                  Let not all this your minds diſmay
                  Or trouble, though the ſame ye ſee:
                  Theſe things to come no man may let,
                  But ſure the end is not as yet.
               
               
                  One nation ſhall firſt ariſe
                  Againſt another nation:
                  And realme with realme ſhall in this wiſe,
                  Fall into great contention.
                  Peſtilence, and famine then,
                  And earthquakes, ſhall vexe diuerſe men.
               
               
                  For theſe aſſuredly ſhall be,
                  And that in diuerſe places ſo,
                  That who ſo ſhall thoſe troubles ſee,
                  And plagues, ſhall ſore lament for wo.
                  Of ſorowes and alſo of care,
                  All theſe things but beginnings are.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        Math. 24.9. Cap. 10.17. Luc. 21.12. Ioh. 15.20. Cap. 16.2.Then you deliuer'd vp ſhall be,
                  By men to be afflicted ſore:
                  They ſhall kill you, take this of me,
                  Ye ſhall be hated more and more
                  Of nations, for my names ſake,
                  Which you contentedly muſt take▪
                  
               
               
                  Offended then ſhall many be,
                  And one another ſhall betray:
                  And hatred in the highſt degree,
                  Shall among men beare too great ſway.
                  Falſe Prophets alſo ſhall ariſe,
                  Which ſhall deceiue the worldly wiſe▪
                  
               
               
                  And then becauſe iniquitie,
                  Shall be increaſed day by day,
                  The loue of many verily,
                  Shall be as cold as clod of clay:
                  
                     
                        Math. 24.13. 
                           •
                        . Theſſ. 3.13. 
                           •
                        . Tim. 2.5.But to the end who doth endure,
                  Shall ſaued be, of this be ſure.
               
               
                  When this Goſpell of the kingdome,
                  Shall preached be in eu'ry place
                  Throughout the world, ſure then ſhall come
                  The end within a litle ſpace.
                  This witneſſe to both good and bad,
                  Encreaſeth ioy or maketh ſad.
               
               
                  Theſe are the ſignes that Chriſt foretold,
                  Should come ere thy deſtruction,
                  Thou Citie that to ſinne art ſold,
                  Still working thy confuſion:
                  Hieruſalem thou wilt not ſee,
                  Nor yet receiue health ſent to thee.
               
               
                  
                      Therefore ſeducers ſhall ariſe,
                  
                      Warres and rumours of warres ſhall be:
                  
                     
                      The peſtilence in raging wiſe,
                  
                      And famine in the highſt degree:
                  
                      Earthquakes which may not be withſtood,
                  
                      And perſecution of the good.
               
               
                  
                      Offences publike in each place,
                  
                      And verie wicked trecherie,
                  
                      Falſe Prophets many wanting grace,
                  Deceiuing many ſubtilly:
                  
                      Of maners much corruption,
                  Stained with all pollution.
               
               
                  
                      Loue cold among the greateſt ſort
                  Of brethren then ſhall likewiſe be:
                  Yet for the faithfull this comfort,
                  Ere then they ſhall be ſure to ſee
                  
                      The Goſpell preached euerie where:
                  And then the end ſhall ſoone appeare.
               
               
                  And therefore this ſhall be the end,
                  Which you muſt marke aduiſedly,
                  For few ſhall then find out a frend,
                  There will be ſuch calamitie:
                  When former ſignes are come to paſſe,
                  The end is worſe then all that was.
               
               
                  For then Ieruſalem ſhall be
                        Math. 24.15. Mar. 13.14. Luc. 21.20. Dan. 9.27.
                  
                  With men beſieged round about:
                  Let them conſider then that ſee
                  What Daniell ſpoke: it is no doubt
                  The great abhomination,
                  Of thy iuſt deſolation.
               
               
                  This ſtanding in the holy place
                  When ye do ſee, marke what I tell,
                  Let him that reades while he hath ſpace,
                  This prophecie conſider well.
                  
                     Then let them which in Iewrie be,
                  From thence into the mountaines flee.
               
               
                  Let him that is on the houſe top,
                  Not come downe thence to fetch away
                  Ought that he hath in houſe o
                        •
                      ſhop,
                  Leaſt lingring there by ſuch delay
                  He looſe the oportunitie,
                  Offred for his commoditie.
               
               
                  And he that in the field is then,
                  Let him not go backe home againe,
                  To fetch his clothes, though this to men
                  May ſeeme to be exceeding paine,
                  The time ſhall then require no leſſe,
                  Then I to you do now expreſſe.
               
               
                  Then wo to them with child ſhall be,
                  And them that do giue ſuch alſo:
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        lee you muſt: 
                           •
                        herefore pray 
                           •
                        hat it happen 
                           〈◊〉
                         on the Sab
                        
                           •
                        oth leaſt Reli
                        
                           •
                        ion, or in win
                        
                           •
                        er the ſeaſon, be lets to 
                           •
                        ou.For theſe are moſt vnapt to flee,
                  And therefore ſubiect to all wo.
                  That your flight be not, ſee you pray,
                  In winter or the Sabboth day.
               
               
                  For then great troubles ſhall be ſure,
                  Such were not ſince the world began:
                  Nor ſhall be while the world endure,
                  That ſaued ſcarce ſhould be a man,
                  If for th'elect it happened,
                  Thoſe dayes ſhould not be ſhortened.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 24.23. Mar. 13.21. Luc. 17.23.If any then to you do ſay,
                  Lo here is Chriſt, or Chriſt is there,
                  Beleeue it not: for at that day,
                  Falſe Chriſts and Prophets ſhall appeare,
                  And ſhall ſhew ſignes and wonders ſuch,
                  As will deceiue men very much.
               
               
                  
                  Thoſe falſe Chriſts and falſe Prophets ſhall
                  Gods choſen very neare deceiue,
                  If poſſible it were at all,
                  As then you ſhall full well perceiue.
                  Behold I haue told you before,
                  Haue alwayes care hereof therefore.
               
               
                  Wherefore if they vnto you ſay,
                  Behold he in the deſert is:
                  Go not forth after him that way,
                  For you ſhall find vntruth in this.
                  In ſectet if they ſay he be,
                  Beleeue it not, it is not he.
               
               
                  For as the lightning from the Eaſt,
                  Doth come and that moſt ſodainly,
                  And ſhineth forth into the Weſt,
                  So ſhall it be aſſuredly:
                  The ſonne of man ſhall come I ſay,
                  In like ſort at the iudgement day.
               
               
                  For where the dead carcaſſe doth reſt,
                        Math. 24.28. Luc. 17.37.
                  
                  The eagles will reſort thereto,
                  If that it be by Eaſt or Weſt,
                  Such fowle vnto their pray will go.
                  Gods choſen ſhall to Chriſt that day
                  Reſort, as theſe vnto their pray.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 24.29 Mar. 13.24. Luc. 21.25. Eſ
                              •
                           y. 13.1
                           •
                        . Ezek 32.7. Ioel. 2 31. Cap. 3.15. Math. 24 30. Dan. 7.13. Reuel. 1.7.After thoſe dayes immediatly,
                  And all thoſe troubles, then forth-right,
                  The ſunne ſhall darken by and by,
                  And eke the moone ſhal
                        •
                      not giue light:
                  The ſtarres of heauen they ſhall fall,
                  And powres thereof ſhall ſhake withall.
               
               
                  And lo, in heau'n ſhall ſure appeare,
                  The ſigne of Chriſt his comming then,
                  
                     And much ſhall mourne then eu'ry where.
                  All kindreds and all tribes of men.
                  Then in the clouds Chriſt comming he,
                  Moſt glorious all men ſhall ſee.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 24.31. 1. Cor. 15.52. 1. Theſſ. 4.16.And he his Angels foorth ſhall ſend,
                  With ſound of trumpe that is ſo ſhrill:
                  On the elect they ſhall attend,
                  And gather them as he doth will,
                  From the foure winds and eu'rie where,
                  In one together to appeare.
               
            
            
               The Parable of the Figge tree.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 24.32.Now learne the parable, I ſay,
                  Of the figge tree, whoſe boughs ſhut out
                  And bearing leaues, do well bewray
                  Sommer at hand without all doubt:
                  So all theſe things when ye do ſee,
                  Gods kingdome neare know then to be.
               
               
                  This generation verily
                  Paſſeth not, vntill all be done,
                  As you haue heard effectually:
                  The Lord will it accompliſh ſoone.
                  
                     
                        Matth. 24.35. Mar. 13.31.Both heau'n and earth ſhall paſſe away,
                  But my words ſure ſhall not decay.
               
            
            
               Chriſts comming ſhall be as the dayes of Noa
                     •
                   were, ſudden and vnlooked for.
               
                  
                     
                        Matth. 24.36.No man doth know that houre or day,
                  No, not the Angels, be ye ſure:
                  My father onely, this I ſay,
                  Doth onely know that day and houre:
                  For as the dayes of Noë haue bene,
                  So ſhall Chriſts comming then be ſeene.
               
               
                  
                  As in the dayes before the flood,
                        Matth. 24.38. Luc. 17.26. Gen. 7.5. 1. Pet. 3.20.
                  
                  They did both eare and drinke alſo,
                  Marrie, and elſe what they thought good,
                  Till he the Arke had gone into.
                  All this we may in Moſes ſee,
                  How he and his from flood were free.
               
               
                  And all the reſt did nothing know,
                  Till that the flood tooke them away:
                  It ſhewes how they were verie ſlow
                  For to repent their ſinnes that day.
                  Chriſts comming ſhall as ſuddenly
                  Be ſeene, as that was verily.
               
               
                  Two men ſhall in the field be then,
                        Matth. 24.40. Luc. 17.34. 1. Theſſ. 4.17.
                  
                  The one of them receiu'd ſhall be,
                  The other of thoſe verie men,
                  To be refuſed ſure is he.
                  Two women grinding then at mill,
                  The good receiu'd, but not the ill.
               
            
            
               A warning to all men to be watchfull.
               
                  Wake therefore and be warie men,
                        Matth. 24.42. Mar. 13.35.
                  
                  For ye know not what houre or day
                  Your maiſter comes, leſt ſleeping then
                  You with the reprobate decay.
                  Watch that with the elected ſort
                  Receiu'd ye be, to your comfort.
               
               
                  Of this be ſure, if the good man,
                  The houre the theefe will come may know,
                        Matth. 24.43. Iuc. 12.39. 1. Theſſ. 5.2. Reu. 16.15.
                  
                  He will keepe watch all that he can,
                  To ſaue his houſe from hurt I trow.
                  Be likewiſe readie alwayes then,
                  For Chriſt will come ye know not when.
                        Matth. 24.45. Luc. 12.42.
                  
               
               
                  A faithfull ſeruant and a wiſe,
                  
                     Made ruler of his maſters men:
                  His maſters truſt will not deſpiſe,
                  But feedeth them in ſeaſon then
                  When he is abſent, as he were
                  Still preſent with his ſeruants there.
               
               
                  That ſeruant bleſſed is in deed,
                  Whom his maſter when he doth come,
                  Shall find ſo doing, he ſhall ſpeed,
                  Be ſure, of ſome eſpeciall roome:
                  His maſter will make him therefore,
                  Ruler of all he hath in ſtore.
               
               
                  But if the euill ſeruant ſay,
                  My maſter will not come as yet:
                  And ſmite his fellowe day by day.
                  And ſtill with drunkards drinke and eate
                  His maſter will come when that he
                  Expecteth not him for to ſee.
               
               
                  Him he will cut off from the reſt,
                  And giue to him his portion
                  With hypocrites this is the leaſt,
                  
                     
                        Math. 24.51. 
                           
                              •
                           ap 13 42. 
                           
                              •
                           ap. 25 30.That after condemnation,
                  He ſhall both weepe and gnaſh for wo,
                  His teeth that he applied ſo.
               
            
            
               The Parable of the ten Virgines.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 25.1.The kingdome ſure of heau'n ſhall be
                  Vnto ten virgines likened,
                  Which tooke their lampes and went to ſee▪
                  
                  If they could meete (as happened)
                  The bridgrome, comming by that way,
                  For whom all they together ſtay.
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        retius in Ca. 
                           
                              •
                           5. Math.Yea virgines they were all in deed,
                  Such find this ſpouſe aſſuredly,
                  
                     As chaſtly haue in heart decreed,
                  On Chriſt to call vnfainedly,
                  And not on idols, for they muſt
                  Repoſe in Chriſt their onely truſt.
               
               
                  Yet onely fiue were wiſe of theſe,
                  And fiue were fooliſh certainly,
                  Which had their lampes the bride to pleaſe,
                  And went to meete him ſolemnely.
                  The former fiue had oyle all night.
                  The laſt had none to ſaue their light.
               
               
                  Now while the bridegrome taried long,
                  All ſlumbred and ſlept heauily:
                  There was at midnight heard among
                  The Vingins, ſodainly this cry;
                  Behold, the bridgrome comes this way,
                  Go meete him forth without delay.
               
               
                  Then all thoſe Virgins quickly roſe,
                  And trym'd their lampes away to go:
                  The fooliſh Virgins ſayd to thoſe
                  That wiſer were, giue vs alſo
                  Some of your oyle, our lampes to ſaue,
                  Our lampes are out, no oyle we haue.
               
               
                  The wiſe thus anſwer'd them againe,
                  Leſt there be not inough we feare
                  For vs and you, therefore take paine,
                  To go and buy ſome oyle elſewhere.
                  Their fooliſhneſſe deſerued blame,
                  For while they went the bridegrome came.
               
               
                  And they that then were ready, went
                  Into the wedding with the bride,
                  And they that there were not preſent,
                  Were ſhut out at that very tyde.
                  
                     And when they came and knocked faſt▪
                  
                  This anſwer they receiu'd at laſt.
               
               
                  I know you not that cry and call,
                  Lord, Lord do open vs this gate:
                  Nor you may not come in at all,
                  Your knocking now is to to late:
                  
                     
                        Math. 25.13 Cap. 24 
                           •
                        2. Mar. 13.33. Luc. 19.12. Sith, ye know not the houre or day,
                  That Chriſt doth come, watch ſtill and pray.
               
            
            
               The Parable of the Talents.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 25.14. Mar. 13.35. Luc. 19.12.For the kingdome of heau'n, it is
                  Like to a man that went from home,
                  To a ſtrange countrey farre from his,
                  But cauſd his ſeruants firſt to come:
                  To whom he did deliuer tho,
                  His goods, ere he from home would go.
               
               
                  To one he gaue then Talents fiue,
                  And to another onely two:
                  He one vnto the third did giue,
                  Each one had ſomething then to do,
                  As they were able; and ſtraight way,
                  He did depart, that very day.
               
               
                  Then he that the fiue Talents had,
                  Went and did occupie the ſame,
                  And gayn'd to make his maſter glad,
                  Fiue Talents more before he came.
                  He that likewiſe receiued two,
                  Did gayne therewith as many mo.
               
               
                  But he that had receiued one,
                  Within the earth did digge the fame,
                  And hid the money with a ſtone,
                  To keepe vntill his maſter came.
                  Thus eu'ry one did occupy,
                  
                     Their maſters Talents diuerſly.
               
               
                  And after a long ſeaſon came,
                  Their maſter home to them againe:
                  They reckned with him for the ſame,
                  And gaue accounts of all their gaine:
                  One after other as they could.
                  What they had done, to him they told.
               
               
                  He came firſt that fiue Talents had,
                  And brought with him fiue Talents mo:
                  And ſayd, ô maſter here (be glad)
                  Thy money is, and gaines alſo:
                  For I haue gained as much more,
                  As I haue receiu'd of thee before.
               
               
                  To him his maſter ſaid againe,
                  Well done good ſeruant ſure thou haſt:
                  That thou therewith did'ſt take ſuch paine,
                  Thou ſhalt receiue reward at laſt:
                  Enter thy maſters ioy to take,
                  Of much I will thee ruler make.
               
               
                  He came that did receiue likewiſe,
                  Two Talents, and he thus did ſay:
                  O maſter, thou mayſt not deſpiſe,
                  Theſe games ſince thou went'ſt hence away:
                  Here is thy money that I had,
                  And as much more that I haue made.
               
               
                  His maſter vnto him did ſay,
                  Good ſeruant, ſure it is well donne:
                  The time thou ſpendeſt well alway,
                  Elſe couldſt not thou ſo much haue wonne:
                  Thy faithfulneſſe in this was ſuch,
                  I will thee ruler make of much.
               
               
                  
                  Then he which had receiued one,
                  Came to his maſter, and did ſay,
                  When thou a way from hence waſt gone,
                  I hid thy money without nay,
                  Becauſe I fear'd thy cruelty▪
                  
                  Here, take thine owne contentedly.
               
               
                  His maſter anſwered and ſayd,
                  Thou ill and ſlouthfull ſeruant, why
                  (If thou of me art ſo affrayd,
                  And knowſt ſo well my crueltie)
                  Didſt not thou find ſome meane or way,
                  To get me gaines againſt this day?
               
               
                  The Talent from him take therefore,
                  And giue it him that now hath ten:
                  
                     
                        Math. 25.29 Cap. 13.12. Luc. 8.18. Cap. 19.26. Mar. 4.25. For who ſo hath, he ſhall haue more,
                  And he ſhall haue abundance then.
                  From him that hath not, ſhall away
                  Be taken all he hath, I ſay,
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 25.30. Cap. 22.13. Cap. 8.12.That ſeruant voyde of profit, ye
                  To vtter darkneſſe therefore caſt:
                  There weepe and gnaſh his teeth ſhall he,
                  Thus ſhall his ſlouth be payd at laſt.
                  See then your Talent fructifie,
                  Leaſt you looſe it eternally.
               
            
            
               The manner of the laſt Iudgement.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 25.31.When that the ſonne of man comes to
                  The Iudgement, with great maieſty,
                  His holy Angels all alſo,
                  Shall be with him moſt gloriouſly:
                  And he ſhall ſit vpon the throne
                  Of glorie, iudging eu'ry one.
               
               
                  All nations ſhall be gathered,
                  
                     Before the ſonne of man as then,
                  And there they ſhall be ſeuered,
                  The godly from the wicked men,
                  As ſhepheards ſeperate their ſheepe,
                  From flockes of goats that they do keepe.
               
               
                  The ſheepe, whereby are ment the beſt,
                  He ſhall ſet then on his right hand.
                  The goates, by which are ment the reſt,
                  On the left ſide of him ſhall ſtand:
                  So ſhall the King to the good men,
                  Pronounce this louing ſentence then;
               
               
                  Ye bleſſed of my father come,
                  Inherite you the kingdome here,
                  Prepared ere the world begon,
                  For you (of him) as doth appeare:
                        Math. 25.35. Eſay. 58.7. Ezek. 18.7.
                  
                  For when I wanted food to eate,
                  Ye gaue me lodging, drinke and meate.
               
               
                  Ye clothed me, that naked was,
                  Me, being ſicke, ye came to ſee:
                  Impriſoned ye did not paſſe,
                  Vntill ye had relieued me,
                  My wants ſupplying willingly,
                        Math. 25.36. Eccl. 7.35.
                  
                  And comforting my miſerie.
               
               
                  Then ſhall the righteous, ſay againe,
                  Lord, when ſaw we thee in ſuch caſe?
                  And then the King without diſdaine,
                  Shall anſwer them; in eu'ry place,
                  In as much as ye haue done this,
                  To theſe my brethen, mine it is.
               
               
                  Then ſhall he to the other ſay,
                  (The wicked goates on the left hand)
                  Depart ye curſed hence away,
                  
                     All, as ye do together ſtand:
                  
                     
                        Math. 25.41. 
                           
                              •
                           ap. 7 23. 
                           
                              •
                           ſal. 6.8. 
                           
                              •
                           uc. 13.27.Go into fire vnquencheable,
                  Prepared for the damnable.
               
               
                  For when I hungred verie ſore,
                  Ye gaue me then nothing to eate▪
                  
                  And oft I thirſted more and more,
                  Yet wanted drinke, aſwell as meate:
                  Ye lodged not, nor clothed 
                        •
                     e,
                  Nor ſicke in priſon would me ſee.
               
               
                  They aske when they had ſeene him ſo:
                  He anſwereth now as before:
                  
                     
                        Math. 25.46. Dan. 12.2. Ioh. 5.29.Therefore he ſaith, that theſe ſhall go,
                  To ſuffer paine for euermore▪
                  
                  But ſure the righteous ſhall then all,
                  Go and poſſeſſe life eternall.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Luc. 21.37.Chriſt in the Temple taught by day,
                  And there hence out at night he went
                  To Oliuet the readie way,
                  Where that time he then alwayes ſpent.
                  To heare him dayly many came,
                  So much was ſpread abroad his fame.
               
            
            
               Another Sermon of the Croſſe, which Chriſt made to his Diſciples in Bethanie, at Simon the leapers houſe.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 26. Mar. 14.1. Luc. 22.1.When Ieſus had thus finiſhed
                  Theſe ſayings, he began to ſay
                  To ſuch as him then followed,
                  From place to place ſo eu'ry day;
                  Ye know within two dayes will be
                  The feaſt of paſſeouer, ſayd he.
               
               
                  And then ſhall be deliuered,
                  The ſonne of man (as heretofore
                  
                     I told you) to be crucified,
                  Although it grieue you verie ſore:
                  The time, is come that death the iuſt,
                  For ſinfull men needs ſuffer muſt.
               
               
                  The chiefe Prieſts were then aſſembled,
                        Math. 26.3. Ioh. 11.47.
                  
                  The Scribes and eke the Elders all,
                  Where they this thing delibered,
                  (Within the high Prieſt Cayphas hall)
                  How Ieſus might by ſubtiltie
                  Be had, and killed cruellie.
               
               
                  But they ſayd, not on the feaſt day,
                  Leaſt any vproare there ſhould be
                  Among the people any way,
                  If they the ſame ſhould hap to ſee:
                  The people him do magnifie,
                  Whom we deſire to crucifie.
               
               
                  Then Iudas tooke occaſion,
                  (Set forward by the deuill in deed,
                        Math. 26.6. Mar. 14.3. Ioh. 11.2. Cap. 12.3.
                  
                  To be of ſuch opinion,
                  Which cauſed him ſo ill to ſpeed)
                  When Chriſt did ſup in Bethany,
                  At Simons houſe aſſuredly.
               
               
                  Where Mary did annoynt the Lord,
                  With pretious oyntment that ſhe had,
                  As Chriſt was there ſet at the boord,
                  Which made the traytour Iudas mad▪
                  
                  He thought it waſt that ſo was ſpent,
                  Reuenge it therefore thus he ment.
               
               
                  He went to the chiefe Prieſts, and ſayd,
                        Math. 26.14. Mar. 14.10 Luc. 22.4.
                  
                  What will ye now giue vnto me,
                  If I deliuer vndelayd,
                  Chriſt to your hands? what then ſay ye?
                  
                     All thirtie pence they ſaid againe,
                  We will giue thee if thou take paine.
               
               
                  And from that time, as moſt ſuppoſe,
                  He ſought all oportunitie
                  For to betray him vnto thoſe,
                  That hired him ſo liberallie:
                  For all his mind was fully ſet,
                  By hooke or crooke ſome gaines to get.
               
            
            
               The Diſciples demand of Chriſt, where he would they ſhould prepare the paſſeouer.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 26.17. Mar. 14.12. Luc. 22.7.The firſt day of vnleauened bread,
                  Peter came vnto Chriſt and Iohn,
                  (Whom they acknowledged their head)
                  And askd of him this queſtion;
                  Where wilt thou that we do prepare,
                  To eate the paſſeouer declare?
               
               
                  Then he thus vnto them did ſay,
                  Go ye into the Citie both,
                  And you ſhall meete one in your way,
                  Marke whither that the ſame man goeth▪
                  
                  You ſhall ſee him a pitcher beare,
                  Of water full, when you come there.
               
               
                  Go ye and follow him into
                  The houſe he goeth in, and ſay
                  To the good man, we pray you do
                  Shew the chamber our maſter may
                  Eate paſſeouer, and he forth right
                  Will ſhew a chamber ready dight.
               
               
                  So the Diſciples found in deed,
                  As Chriſt before to them did ſay:
                  And they prepar'd for him with ſpeed,
                  
                     
                        Math. 26.19 Mar. 14.18. Luc. 22.14. Ioh. 13.21. To eate the paſſeouer that day.
                  
                     So when the euen was now late,
                  Chriſt came and with the twelue he ſate.
               
               
                  As they did eate, Chriſt ſayd againe,
                  Aſſuredly to you, I ſay,
                  You ſhall ſee this (though to his paine)
                  That one of you ſhall me betray.
                  Then the Diſciples ſorie were,
                  And of this ſaying ſtood in feare.
               
               
                  Now there was one whom Chriſt did loue,
                        Ioh. 13.22. Math. 26.21. Mar. 14.18. Luc. 22.21.
                  
                  That leaned then vpon his breaſt:
                  Him Peter did with ſignes ſo moue,
                  That he demanded for the reſt;
                  Tell vs (ô Lord) we do thee pray,
                  Who is it that ſhall thee betray?
               
               
                  And Ieſus ſayd, the hand is here
                  At this boord, that betrayeth me,
                  (As to you all it will appeare)
                  And in the diſh now dippeth he.
                  He lift his heele againſt his head,
                  That eateth with me of this bread.
               
               
                  The ſonne of man ſhall ſurely go,
                  As of him it hath written beene:
                  But to that man be euer woe,
                  By whoſe deuiſe the ſame is ſeene.
                  It had bene good for him, I ſay,
                  He had not yet bene borne this day.
               
               
                  Then Iudas which did Chriſt betray,
                  Anſwer'd and ſaid, ſir is it I?
                  The traitour thought to find a way,
                  To cloake his treaſon craftily.
                  Then Chriſt ſaid, thou haſt ſayd in deed,
                  As I haue ſayd, ſo ſhall I ſpeed.
               
            
            
               
               Chriſt waſhed his Diſciples feete.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           oh. 13.1. Math. 26.2. Mar. 14.1. 
                           
                              •
                           uc. 22.1.Chriſt knowing that the father had
                  Giuen all things into his hand,
                  (Whereof all men may be right glad,
                  That truly this will vnderſtand)
                  And that from God come forth was he,
                  And went to God, with him to be.
               
               
                  He riſing from his ſupper, layd
                  His vpper garments all aſide,
                  And tooke a towell, it is ſayd,
                  And withall girt himſelfe that tyde▪
                  
                  Chriſt Ieſus did this verily,
                  To teach vs true humilitie.
               
               
                  Chriſt powred in a baſin then,
                  Water to waſh their feete withall,
                  He humbling him among his men,
                  Did with a towell wipe them all:
                  Thus vſd he all ſimplicitie,
                  To teach vs ſtill humilitie.
               
               
                  To Simon Peter then he came,
                  Who ſayd, what doeſt thou Lord to me▪
                  
                  To waſh my feete it were my ſhame,
                  Therefore good Lord, this may not be.
                  What I do now, ſayd Chriſt, at all
                  Thou knowſt not, but hereafter ſhall.
               
               
                  But Peter ſayd, thou ſhalt not now,
                  O maſter, waſh my feete, I ſay.
                  Then Ieſus ſayd, cleane art not thou,
                  Nor mayſt be if thou diſobay:
                  For Peter if I waſh not thee,
                  Thou ſhalt haue ſure no part with me.
               
               
                  And Simon Peter ſayd againe,
                  
                     Lord, not my feete all onely then,
                  But head and hands if thou take paine,
                  And wilt ſuch fauour ſhew to men.
                  Chriſt ſayd, whoſe feete is waſhed ſo,
                  Is cleane, and needs not any mo.
               
               
                  And ye are cleane although not all,
                  For he knew who ſhould him betray:
                  He knew him well before his fall,
                  How fowly he would ſlide away:
                  But to repent he had no grace,
                  Though he were checkt in eu'ry place.
               
               
                  So after that he waſhed had
                  Their feete, and tooke his clothes againe,
                  And was ſet downe, as alwayes glad
                  He was, for his to take all paine;
                  Know ye, ſayd he, what I haue donne?
                  Do ye therefore as I begonne.
               
               
                  Ye call me Lord, and maſter well,
                  For ſo in very deed I am:
                  If I your Lord, that ſo excell,
                  Moſt humble for your ſakes became,
                  Ye ought each others feete therefore
                  To waſh, as I haue done before.
               
               
                  Example vnto you gaue I,
                  That you as I haue done, ſhould do:
                  The ſeruant was not certainly
                  Aboue his maſter, hitherto,
                  Nor the ambaſſadour I ſay,
                  Greater then who ſent him away.
               
               
                  If ye know theſe things I declare,
                  And do 
                        •
                     hem, then bleſſed are ye:
                  It is a vertue verie rare,
                  
                     Among moſt men the ſame to ſee.
                  All this he ſpake to them aſſoone
                  As he of waſhing them had done.
               
            
            
               Chriſt instituted the Sacrament of his holie Supper.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 26.26. 
                           •
                        . Cor. 11.24.And as they ſate all then at meate,
                  Ieſus tooke bread, and brake the ſame,
                  And giuing thankes, gaue it to eate,
                  To them that thither with him came:
                  And ſayd, take, eate ye all of this,
                  My body for you giuen is.
               
               
                  Alſo he tooke the cup, when he
                  Had giuen thankes, and gaue it thoſe:
                  Saying, of it now drinke all ye,
                  (This cup ſee ye do ſo diſpoſe
                  As I haue taught you) ſtill, ſayd he,
                  Receiuing this, remember me.
               
               
                  For this it is my bloud truly,
                  Of the new Teſtament I make,
                  For many ſhed aſſuredly,
                  Thereby their ſinnes away to take:
                  Who ſo hath not remiſſion
                  By it, hath iuſt damnation.
               
               
                  Hence-forth of this fruit of the vine,
                  I will not drinke, vntill that day
                  When I ſhall drinke it new with mine,
                  And that Gods kingdome come I ſay.
                  When Supper thus all finiſht was,
                  Chriſt Ieſus ſong a Pſalme for grace.
               
               
                  And Iudas that did Chriſt betray,
                  (Aſſoone as Sathan prickt him on)
                  Departed thence and went away:
                  
                     But Ieſus ſayd ere he was gone,
                  What is deuiſed ſecretly,
                  Go Iudas do it ſpeedily.
               
               
                  But none of them that then were there,
                  Knew why the Lord ſayd to him ſo:
                  The bagge, thought they, Iudas doth beare,
                  And therefore he doth bid him go
                  To giue the poore what he thinkes beſt,
                  Or to prouide againſt the feaſt.
               
               
                  When he was gone out, Ieſus ſayd,
                  The ſonne of man is glorified,
                  And God in him, be not affrayd,
                  For you in both are ſanctified:
                  As God, in the ſonne verily,
                  So he the ſonne will glorifie.
               
            
            
               Chriſt departed thence into the mount of Oliues, where as alſo by the way he comforted and ſtrengthened his Diſciples.
               
                  When Ieſus thus fore-warned had
                  All them, of that which happened,
                  To comfort them and make them glad,
                  Againſt his death which haſtened,
                  They paſſed thence though it was night,
                  And to mount Oliues they went right.
               
               
                  Where he, as alſo by the way,
                  Admoniſht them, and comforted,
                  To loue together, and I ſay,
                  Againſt the deu'll them ſtrengthened:
                  For Chriſt did know it well before,
                  They ſhould be tempted ye 
                        ••
                     fore.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 26.31 Mar. 14.27. Ioh. 16.32. Zachar. 13.7.This night, ſayd he, you ſhall be all
                  Offended much becauſe of me:
                  
                     For when the ſhepheard hath a fall,
                  The ſheepe ſoone ſhall then ſcattred be:
                  Yet after I am riſen, I
                  Will go with you to Galilie.
               
               
                  O litle children, yet a while
                  I am with you, ye ſhall ſeeke me:
                  Let not the deu'll you then beguile,
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 13.33. Cap. 7.34.Where I go, yet, come cannot ye:
                  Let this therefore I ſay, you moue,
                  Each one another for to loue.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 13.34. Cap. 15.12. Math. 22.39. Leuit. 
                        
                           •
                        9.1
                           •
                        . 1. Ioh. 4.21.By this ſhall all men know indeed,
                  That my Diſciples ſure ye are,
                  If each one helpe ano
                        •
                     hers need,
                  And to the world your loue declare
                  Loue is the badge and onely ſigne,
                  That men may beſt know you for mine.
               
               
                  Then Simon Peter ſayd, I pray,
                  Lord, tell me whither goeſt thou?
                  O Simon where I go, I ſay,
                  Thou canſt not come and follow now,
                  But afterwards I tell it thee,
                  Thou ſhalt be ſure to follow me.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 13.37. Math. 26.33. Mar. 14.29.And Peter ſayd Lord, why not now?
                  My I fe
                        ••
                      will looſe for thy ſake.
                  Thy life for my ſake looſe wilt thou?
                  No haſt, ſaid Chriſt, ô Simon make:
                  The cocke ſhall not crow verily,
                  Vntill thou do me thriſe deny.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Luc. 22.31. 1. Pet. 5.8.And Ieſus ſayd ô Simon ſee,
                  Sathans deſires aſſuredly,
                  That you as wheate ſhould winow'd be,
                  This he attempted earneſtly:
                  
                     But I for thee haue pray'd, I ſay,
                  Thy faith ſo fayle not cleane away.
               
               
                  And ſee when thou conuerted art,
                  Thy brethen that thou ſtrengthen then:
                  But he ſaid, though I ſuffer ſmart,
                  And dye the death before all men,
                  My maſter I will not deny,
                  So ſaid the reſt, aſſuredly.
               
               
                  And he ſayd vnto them againe,
                        Luc. 22.35. Math. 10.9.
                  
                  When you without a bagge I ſent,
                  And ſcrip, and ſhoes, declare it plaine,
                  What then ye lacked where ye went?
                  Nothing ſayd they, but now ſayd he,
                  To you theſe things may wanting be.
               
               
                  See then of theſe things ye make ſtore,
                  And ſell thy coat a ſword to buy:
                  The Scripture ſhall be euermore,
                        Luc. 22.37. Eſay. 53.12.
                  
                  In me performed certainly.
                  They ſayd, ô Lord, two ſwords haue we.
                  It is inough, againe ſayd he.
               
            
            
               Chriſt armed his Diſciples with conſolation againſt trouble, declaring that he is the way, the truth, and the life.
               
                  Though otherwiſe he knew it well,
                        Ioh. 14.1.
                  
                  It would fall out immediatly,
                  Then they ſayd: yet for to expell
                  Their feare, he arm'd them gratiouſly;
                  Let not your hearts now troubled be,
                  Ye truſt in God, do ſo in me.
               
               
                  And dwelling places many are,
                  Within my fathers houſe, I ſay:
                  For you I go, place to prepare,
                  
                     That be there, where I am, ye may:
                  Yet I will come to you againe,
                  And you receiue without diſdaine.
               
               
                  Now ye know whither that I go,
                  And likewiſe ye do know the way.
                  
                     Thomas ignorant of the way, is taught 
                           •
                        t by Chriſt.Then Thomas ſayd, Lord, no not ſo,
                  We know it not, nor know it may,
                  Except thou ſhew it, how ſhould we
                  Know well the way to go with thee?
               
               
                  Then Ieſus ſayd, I am the way,
                  I am the truth, and life alſo:
                  Come to the father no man may,
                  Except that he by me do go.
                  Full well my father knoweth he,
                  That perfectly hath knowen me.
               
               
                  
                     Philip deſired to ſee the father.Philip ſayd, Lord, it will ſuffiſe,
                  If thou let vs thy father ſee:
                  Then Ieſus anſwer'd in this wiſe,
                  O Philip he that hath ſeene me,
                  Hath ſeene my father verily:
                  Beleeue the ſame vnfainedly.
               
               
                  Beleeu'ſt thou not that ſure I am
                  In the father, and he in me▪
                  
                  The wordes I ſpeake, from him they came,
                  The works I do, all them doth he:
                  I am in him, ſo do it take,
                  At leaſt beleeue for the worke ſake.
               
               
                  In deed, in deed, to you I ſay,
                  Who firmely doth beleeue in me,
                  The works I do, do them he may,
                  And greater works then theſe ſhall he.
                  That man ſhall ſure be bleſſed ſo,
                  
                     For I vnto my father go.
               
               
                  What ye aske in my name, Ile do,
                        Ioh. 14.13. Cap. 16.23. Math. 7.7. Mar. 11.24. Iam. 1.5.
                  
                  That in the ſame my father may
                  Be glorifi'd, I hither to
                  Haue euer taught you ſo to pray.
                  Withall I ſay, if ye loue me,
                  See my preceptes obſerued be.
               
               
                  Chriſt ſayd, the father I will pray,
                  And he another comforter
                  Shall giue to you, that the ſame may
                  Abide and be with you euer.
                  Gods ſpirit ſure on you ſhall be,
                  A teacher of all truth is he.
               
               
                  I will not leaue you comfortleſſe,
                  But I will come to you againe,
                  And then to you I will expreſſe,
                  How in the father I remaine:
                  The world ſhall not theſe things perceiue,
                  Becauſe it will not me receiue.
               
               
                  Then Iudas ſayd vnto him, Lord,Iudas demanded of Chriſt, why he would not ſhew himſelfe vnto the world.
                  
                  (Not Iudas that the traitour was)
                  Why doeſt thou not as well accord,
                  To graunt vnto the world this grace?
                  To ſhew thy ſelfe to them alſo,
                  As vnto vs thou mean'ſt to do?
               
               
                  He that my precepts will obay,
                  And keepeth them, he loueth me:
                  He that doth keepe my word, I 
                        •
                     ay,
                  Lou'd of my father he ſhall be;
                  What I ſay therefore marke it well,
                  For we will come with him and dwell.
               
               
                  
                  The comforter the holy Ghoſt,
                  The father will ſend in my name:
                  He will ſee that no word be loſt,
                  That out of my mouth euer came.
                  Let not your heart be mou'd to feare,
                  Peace with you I leaue eu'ry where.
               
               
                  That I do go, and come againe,
                  Might giue you cauſe with heart and voyce,
                  To laud the father, God certaine,
                  And ſo much more in heart reioyce,
                  In that I tell you this before,
                  You may beleeue me euermore.
               
               
                  I will not many things to you
                  Speake after this, as I haue donne:
                  The Prince of this world commeth now,
                  Yet he in me hath nothing wonne:
                  But this I do that men may ſee,
                  I loue the father, he loues me.
               
            
            
               The Parable of the Vine.
               
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 15.1. Math. 15.13.I am the true and perfect vine,
                  My father is an husband man:
                  Fach braunch that is not truly mine,
                  He cuts away that cut it can:
                  And each one that beares fruit in me,
                  He makes more fruitfull for to be.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 15.3. Cap. 13.10.Through the word I haue ſpoken now,
                  Ye are aſſuredly made cleane:
                  Abide in me and I in you,
                  If to beare fruit ye euer meane.
                  As branches cut of fruitleſſe be,
                  So you, except you bide in me.
               
               
                  I am the vine, ye branches are,
                  
                     He that abideth ſtill in me,
                  And I in him, he need not care,
                  Much fruit in him ſhall euer be.
                  Giue eare and liſten hereunto,
                  Ye can without me nothing do.
               
               
                  He that abideth not in me,
                  Is cut off as a with'red bough,
                  And to the fire caſt then is he,
                  Where he is puniſht ſore inough.
                  In me abide, aske what ye will,
                  And your requeſt I will fulfill.
               
               
                  My father he is glorified,
                  In that ye beare much fruit in me:
                  And we are both much honored,
                  If ye together louing be.
                  This ought you greatly thereto moue,
                  That I (as he lou'd me) you loue.
               
               
                  Sure greater loue can no man beare
                  Then this, when one doth for his friend.
                  Beſtow his life, to him ſo deare,
                  Which I do onely to this end,
                  To keepe ſafe mine from all annoy,
                  That they in me might ſtill haue ioy.
               
               
                  Ye are my friends, if ye 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſerue
                  What I do both command and ſhow:
                  The hireling doth his maſter ſerue,
                  His ſecrets yet he doth not know.
                  All that I of my father heard,
                  The ſame to you I haue declar'd.
               
               
                  Ye haue not choſen me before,
                  I firſt choſe you, I tell you plaine,
                        Ioh. 1
                           •
                        .16. Math. 18.19.
                  
                  To bring forth fruit ſtill more and more,
                  
                     And that your fruit it might remaine:
                  That what ſo ye aske in my name,
                  My father may giue you the ſame.
               
               
                  Loue one another I command,
                  The world doth hate you, well ye know,
                  The cauſe ye likewiſe vnderſtand,
                  Is that I haue ſo choſen you.
                  If they haue perſecuted me,
                  So perſecuted ſhall you be.
               
               
                  If they haue kept my word before,
                  They will keepe yours hereafter ſo:
                  All thoſe things they and rather more,
                  For my name ſake to you will do.
                  Againſt me and mine they are bent,
                  Not knowing from whom I am ſent.
               
               
                  If I had not come, then in deed
                  They ſhould haue had no ſinne at all:
                  But now haue they no cloake at need,
                  To hide their ſinne that is not ſmall.
                  My father hates who hateth me,
                  And they hate both, for all they ſee.
               
               
                  But it is that the word might be
                  Fulfilled, written in their law;
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 15.25. Pſal. 35.19. Without a cauſe they hated me,
                  Of my word they ſtand not in awe.
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 15.26. Cap 14.16. Luc. 24.49. The comforter ſhall teſtifie
                  Of me, with you aſſuredly.
               
            
            
               Another Sermon of the Croſſe: the Diſciples comforted with promiſe of the holy Ghoſt: the comming of Christ againe: his Aſcention: to aske in his name: peace in Christ, and affliction in the world to ſuch as follow him.
               
                  
                  Theſe things I haue vnto you ſayd,
                        Ioh. 16.1.
                  
                  That ye might not offended be:
                  Nor that ye ſhould be much affrayd,
                  When from their Sinagogues that ye
                  Be thruſt out, for they ſhall you kill,
                  And yet thinke that they do Gods will.
               
               
                  Theſe things they will vnto you do,
                  Becauſe that they haue not known me,
                  Nor yet the father hitherto
                  Theſe things I ſay to you, that ye
                  May thinke on it for euermore,
                  That I haue told you this before.
               
               
                  I tell it now, becauſe I go
                  Hence vnto him that did ſend me,
                  And none of you though grieued ſo,
                  Doth aske of me, what ayleth thee?
                  Or whither goeſt thou a way?
                  And yet ye ſorow all ye may.
               
               
                  Yet ſurely this to you ſay I,
                  It is expedient I go:
                  For if I go not hence truly,
                  The comforter he comes not ſo
                  As I haue ſayd, thinke this in heart,
                  I will ſend him when I depart.
               
               
                  When he is come, he will reproue,
                  
                      The world of ſinne, becauſe men do
                  Diſtruſt in me, whom thy ſhould loue:
                  
                      Of righteouſneſſe, becauſe I go
                  To my father, from hence away,
                  You ſhall ſee me no more, I ſay.
               
               
                  
                      Of iudgement, ſhall the world likewiſe
                  Reproued be by him as then:
                  
                     Becauſe their Prince then iudged is,
                  And righteouſneſſe reſtor'd to men:
                  For Sathans empire hath a fall,
                  And Gods annointed ruleth all.
               
               
                  I haue yet many things to ſay,
                  But ye cannot them now well beare:
                  The comforter will not delay,
                  To tell you all things, do not feare.
                  He ſhall ſhew you mine verily,
                  And ſo he ſhall me glorifie.
               
               
                  A litle while and ſurely ye
                  Sall not ſee me, and yet againe
                  After a while ye ſhall ſee me,
                  For I go where I muſt remaine.
                  But they had not as then the reach,
                  For to perceiue what Chriſt did teach.
               
               
                  Therefore he ſayd to them againe,
                  Aſſuredly to you I ſay,
                  You ſhall weepe and be full of paine,
                  Yet ſhall the world reioyce that day.
                  Though ſorow do you much annoy,
                  Your ſorow ſhall be turn'd to ioy.
               
               
                  A woman when ſhe trauaileth,
                  Hath ſorow that her houre is nye▪
                  
                  As ſoone as ſhe deliuereth
                  Her child, then ſhe immediatly,
                  Her anguiſh doth not thinke vpon,
                  For ioy of him, her paine is gone.
               
               
                  So now ye ſorow at the heart,
                  But I will ſee you ſure againe,
                  Though for a time I do depart,
                  Ile come to eaſe you of your paine:
                  
                     And then your ioy ſhall be ſo great,
                  As you may neuer it forget.
               
               
                  Ye ſhall aske nothing then of me,
                        Ioh. 16.23. Cap. 14.13, Math. 7.4. Cap. 21.22. Mar. 11.24. Luc. 11.9. Iam. 1.5.
                  
                  But of my father in my name:
                  And what ye aske ſhall giuen be,
                  Be moſt aſſured of the ſame.
                  In my name ye askt nothing yet,
                  Aske, ye ſhall haue, nothing ſhall let.
               
               
                  In Parables theſe things I ſpake,
                  But ſure the time will come, when I
                  A plainer ſpeach to you ſhall make,
                  And preach the father openly.
                  What in my name ye aske, that he
                  Will giue, becauſe ye loued me.
               
               
                  For from the father out I came
                  Into the world, and out againe,
                  I do depart, and leaue the ſame,
                  And go to him thereto remaine.
                  Thou Sayd his Diſciples. ſpeakeſt now ſo plaine, we ſee.
                  That no man more needs aske of thee.
               
               
                  Now we beleeue thou cam'ſt from God.
                  The houre is come then Ieſus ſayd,
                  Ye ſhall taſt of a bitter rod,
                  And ſcattred be, be not affrayd,
                  From me though you be fled and gone,
                  The father leaues me not alone.
               
               
                  Theſe things I ſpeake to comfort you,
                  And that in me, you might haue peace:
                  For in the world aſſured now,
                  Afflictions for you do increaſe.
                  B
                        •
                      of good comfort: verily
                  The world now ouercome haue I.
               
            
            
               
               The prayer of Chriſt vnto the father for his elect.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           h. 17.1.After that Chriſt had preached long
                  To his Diſciples, of the croſſe,
                  He mingled comforts all among,
                  Leſt they diſpayr'd for ſuch a loſſe.
                  He prayed God them to protect,
                  And this his doctrine to effect.
               
               
                  And Ieſus lift his eyes on hye,
                  And ſayd, the houre, ô father deare,
                  Is come, thy ſonne then glorifie,
                  That ſo thy glorie may appeare.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           oh. 17.2. Math. 28.18.As thou him power gau'ſt of all,
                  So he gaue his life eternall.
               
               
                  And this is ſure eternall life,
                  That they the onely God know thee,
                  And whom thou haſ
                        •
                      ſent (without ſtrife
                  Acknowledge) Ieſus Chriſt to be.
                  The worke thou gaueſt me to do,
                  I to thy glorie finiſh'd to.
               
               
                  Now glorifie thou me againe,
                  With thine owne ſelfe (ô father deare)
                  As when I did with thee remaine,
                  Ere heau'n and earth did firſt appeare:
                  Thy name to thoſe declared I,
                  Thou gaueſt me, accordingly.
               
               
                  They kept thy word, and know withall,
                  That all I haue are come of thee:
                  They did obay when I did call,
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 17.8. Cap. 16.27.Beleeuing that thou haſt ſent me.
                  For thoſe thou gaueſt me▪ alway
                  For them, not for the world, I pray.
               
               
                  
                  As they and elſe all mine are thine,
                  And I in them am glorified:
                  So thine vndoubtedly are mine,
                  Thou haſt thy ſonne ſo fauored,
                  I in the world am now no more,
                  But they are as they were before.
               
               
                  O father, keepe them in thy name,
                  Thoſe that thou haſt ſo giuen me:
                  As one in deed we both became,
                  That ſo they may for euer be.
                  I kept them ſafe, I loſt not one,
                        Ioh. 17.12. Pſal. 109.7.
                  
                  Saue that child of perdition.
               
               
                  I ſpeake theſe things, and come to thee,
                  That they in them might haue my ioy:
                  Thy word is giuen them of me,
                  Yet will the world much them annoy;
                  It hates them, for both they and I
                  Are not of this world, verily.
               
               
                  Out of the world I do not pray,
                  That thou ſhouldſt take them by and by,
                  But that from euill night and day
                  Thou keepe, and giue them victory,
                  In all their combats, when they craue,
                  Thy helpe (ô father) let them haue.
               
               
                  They are not of this world, nor I,
                  Thy word it is the truth in deed;
                  Therewith do thou them ſanctifie,
                  And helpe them father at all need.
                  As to the world thou didſt ſend me,
                  So theſe of me ſent likewiſe be.
               
               
                  And for their ſakes I ſanctifie
                  My ſelfe, that through the truth they may
                  
                     Be ſanctified aſſuredly.
                  For them I do not onely pray,
                  But for them alſo which affoord
                  Firme faith in me, Lord, through thy word.
               
               
                  That they all may be one, as thou
                  (O father) art in me, and I
                  In thee was, and am preſent now,
                  So they may all be verily
                  Made one in vs, that the world may
                  Beleeue thou haſt ſent me this day.
               
               
                  The glory that thou gaueſt me,
                  I gaue them, that they may be one
                  As we are one, that they might be
                  Knowne the Diſciples of thy ſonne:
                  And that as me thou loueſt thoſe,
                  Whom ſo out of this world I choſe.
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           oh. 17.24. Cap. 11.26.I will (ô father) that they be
                  With me, where euer that I am,
                  That there the glory they may ſee,
                  Which thou haſt giuen to my name.
                  Thou louedſt me, ere thou began
                  To make this world, and create man.
               
               
                  The world (ô father) knowes not thee,
                  But I haue knowne thee: and ſo theſe
                  Haue knowne in deed that thou ſentſt me.
                  Thy name to them whom thou doeſt pleaſe
                  I will declare: thereby to moue,
                  There may in them be perfect loue.
               
            
            
               The Paſſion of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, and firſt of his prayers in mount Oliuet, where he ſweat drops of bloud, and an Angell came and comforted him.
               
                  
                  When Ieſus theſe things ſpoken had,
                        Ioh. 18.1. Math. 26.36. Mar. 14.32. Luc. 22.39.
                  
                  Ouer brooke Cedron then he went
                  With his Diſciples, who were ſad,
                  When they perceiued what he ment.
                  Some Gethſemane do name the place,
                  This garden in mount Oliues was.
                        Ioh. 18.3. Math. 26.47. Mar. 14.43. Luc. 22.47.
                  
               
               
                  And Iudas which did him betray,
                  Did likewiſe know the place full well:
                  And knew that Chriſt would walke that way,
                  As then moſt truly it befell.
                  For thither oft to their comfort,
                  With his, Chriſt vſed to reſort.
               
               
                  When he was come into the place,
                  He choſe of his Diſciples three,
                  To watch and pray with him a ſpace,
                  To whom he ſayd, go ye with me:
                  And ſo he went aſide to pray,
                  And left the reſt behind to ſtay.
               
               
                  And theſe were Peter, Iames, and Iohn,
                  That he tooke then with him apart;
                  They ſo with ſleepe were ouer gone,
                  That they perciu'd not all his ſmart.
                  Theſe on mount Thabor verily,
                  Had ſeene before his maieſtie.
               
               
                  Where they as witneſſe choſen were
                  By him, of his diuinitie:
                  And now that likewiſe may appeare
                  To them his great humilitie.
                  He choſe no more, becauſe by three,
                  All things well witneſſed may be.
               
               
                  Then to waxe heauie he began,
                  And ſorowfull as all affrayd:
                  
                     Sore troubled was the outward man,
                  He thus to his Diſciples ſayd;
                  My ſoule is heauie verily,
                  Yet I muſt needs now yeeld to dye.
               
               
                  Now tary here and watch with me,
                  While I go yonder for to pray:
                  A litle further then went he,
                  And falling on his face, did ſay,
                  Let this cup paſſe (ô father mine)
                  Yet not my will be done, but thine.
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           uc. 22.43.And there from heauen did appeare,
                  Him comforting an Angell then:
                  The waight of ſinne that he did beare,
                  So preſſed him (for mortall men)
                  That he ſweat drops of bloud a pace,
                  Which trickled downe along his face.
               
               
                  Then vp from prayer he aroſe,
                  And his Diſciples came vnto:
                  But he all ſleeping there found thoſe,
                  For heauineſſe oppreſt them ſo.
                  Why ſleepe ye, then ſayd Chriſt? I ſay
                  Ariſe, watch earneſtly, and pray.
               
               
                  The fleſh is weake and fraile alſo,
                  But yet the ſpirit ready is:
                  Pray leaſt ye enter now into
                  Temptation in any wiſe;
                  And ſo againe he went away,
                  Where he then (as before) did pray,
               
               
                  At his returne to them againe
                  The ſecond time, they were a ſleepe,
                  Their eyes were heauie, they in vaine
                  Did labour, waking them to keepe:
                  
                     They knew they had deſerued blame,
                        Mar. 14.40.
                  
                  And could not anſwer him for ſhame.
               
               
                  So he left them, and went away,
                  (He ſaw they could not well awake)
                  And as before againe did pray,
                  Thus thriſe he did his prayers make.
                  To his Diſciples then ſayd he,
                  Take reſt and ſleepe henceforth may ye.
               
               
                  Behold, the houre is now at hand,
                  And ready come aſſuredly:
                  This you ſhall ſhortly vnderſtand,
                  That ſure the ſonne of man ſhall dye;
                  Into the hands of ſinners he
                  Shall preſently deliu'red be.
               
            
            
               Iudas the traitour with a band of men, and officers, which he receiued of the high Prieſts and Phariſies, came thither with lanternes, torches and weapons to take Ieſus.
               
                  Now let vs go, I ſay ariſe,
                        Math. 26.46.
                  
                  He commeth that doth me betray:
                  The traitour Iudas on this wiſe,
                  Was then ſet forward in his way,
                  And neare approching to the place,
                  Where Chriſt with his Diſciples was.
               
               
                  He had receiu'd a band of men,
                  And officers alſo withall,
                  That the high Prieſts allow'd him then,
                  The number of them was not ſmall:
                  They with their weapons came all night,
                  With lanterns and with torches light.
               
               
                  The high Prieſts in all things were preſt,
                  
                     Chriſt Ieſus for to crucifie:
                  The Phariſies they would not reſt,
                  Till Chriſt were ſlaine moſt cruelly.
                  Therefore with Iudas they did ſend
                  By night, men armed to that end;
               
               
                  All which with Iudas then were come.
                  As Chriſt to his Diſciples ſpake,
                  A token Iudas gaue to ſome,
                  That they might know whom they ſhould take,
                  He whom I kiſſe it is the ſame,
                  Lay hold on him, leaſt you haue blame.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 18.6.But Chriſt whoſe might they could not match,
                  If he had ment them to withſtand,
                  (Whom they by fraud or force would catth,)
                  Went forth to meete them our of hand:
                  Who with his word their weapons all,
                  And they themſelues did cauſe to fall.
               
               
                  When Chriſt ſayd to them, whom ſeeke ye?
                  Ieſus of Nazareth, they ſay.
                  He anſwer'd and ſayd, I am he,
                  And ſo they all went backe away,
                  And to the ground they did thereat,
                  As men amazed fall downe flat.
               
               
                  Then he ſayd vnto them againe,
                  Whom ſeeke ye after tell it me?
                  Ieſus of Nazareth certaine,
                  They anſwered is euen he.
                  Then Ieſus ſayd, ſure here I am,
                  For whom ye ſay, you hither came.
               
               
                  If you ſeeke me let theſe men go,
                  And quietly depart away:
                  This was that his word might proue ſo,
                  
                     Which he of them before did ſay;
                        Ioh. 18.9. Cap. 17.12. Pſal. 109.7.
                  
                  Of them which thou haſt giuen me,
                  I haue not ſure loſt one, ſayd he.
               
               
                  Then Simon Peter drew a ſword,
                  And ſmote the high Prieſts ſeruant there:
                  He minded to reuenge his Lord,
                  And therefore cut of Malchus eare:
                  For ſo they called him by name,
                  He was one that with Iudas came.
               
               
                  Put vp thy ſword in ſheath, ſayd he,
                  What ſayeſt thou (ô Peter) now?
                  The cup my father giueth me,
                  Shall I not drinke of thinkeſt thou?
                  The Scripture thus I muſt fulfill,
                  That ſaith, it is my fathers will.
               
               
                  Doeſt thou ſuppoſe I cannot pray
                  My father, that he would giue me
                  Twelue legions (as well he may,)
                  Of Angels with me ſtill to be?
                  Then preſſed Iudas Chriſt to kiſſe.
                  Betray'ſt thou me, ſayd Chriſt with this?
               
               
                  Then to the multitude he ſayd,
                  The high Prieſts, and the Captains there:
                  Ye be come out as men affrayd,
                  Or as againſt a theefe it were,
                  With ſwords, and ſtaues: when I, ſayd he,
                  Did dayly teach, you tooke not me.
               
            
            
               Ieſus was taken, bound, and brought to Anna
                     •
                   firſt, and then to Cayphas.
               
                  The Captaine, officers and band,
                        Ioh. 18.12.
                  
                  Tooke Ieſus, and they bound him then,
                  And thence they led him out of hand,
                  
                     Among a ſort of armed men.
                  To Annas firſt, he father was
                  To her that was wife of Cayphas.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 18.14. Cap. 11.50.This Cayphas was high Prieſt that yeare,
                  He to the Iewes this counſell gaue,
                  How it expedient did appeare,
                  That they the man as then ſhould haue,
                  Which there muſt for the people dye,
                  Leſt they ſhould periſh vtterly.
               
               
                  This of himſelfe then ſpake not he,
                  But being high Prieſt propheci'd
                  
                     
                        Numb. 24.5.As Balam did, the Lords decree,
                  Which he would faine haue contrari'd:
                  But both or them were bridled ſo,
                  They muſt obay would they or no.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 18.15. Math. 26.58. Mar. 1
                           •
                        .54. Luc. 22.5
                           •
                        
                     Now Simon Peter followed
                  His maſter, and another then
                  Of the Diſciples, acquainted
                  With the high Prieſts and with their men:
                  This therefore by acquaintance went
                  Into the hall, where Chriſt was ſent.
               
               
                  But Peter ſtood out at the doore,
                  He was not friended there ſo well:
                  The other that went in before,
                  Came out to him as it befell,
                  And ſpake to her that kept the gate,
                  And ſo brought Peter in thereat.
               
            
            
               The high Prieſts, the Elders, and the whole Counſell ſought falſe witneſſe againſt Ieſus: Peter denieth him thriſe.
               
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 18.17.Then ſayd the mayd that kept the gate,
                  Thou one of his Diſciples art:
                  
                     But he deny'd it verie flat,
                  And ſo from her he did depart.
                  Then came he where the ſeruants were,
                  And ſate him downe among there.
               
               
                  The high Prieſts and the Elders all,
                        Math. 26.59. Mar. 14.55.
                  
                  That then were met in Counſell there,
                  Within the high Prieſt Cayphas hall,
                  Sought ſuch as would falſe witneſſe beare,
                  Whereby they might make Ieſus dye,
                  But they found none aſſuredly.
               
               
                  Though many came that witneſſe bare,
                  Their witneſſe yet did not agree;
                  At laſt are found two men that dare
                  Falſe witneſſes againſt him be.
                  They vndertooke to iuſtifie,
                  More then was true aſſuredly.
               
               
                  They ſayd, that they had heard him ſay,
                  That he Gods temple could deſtroy,
                  And build a fayrer eu'ry way,
                  Within three dayes without annoy.
                        Mar. 14.59.
                  
                  Yet theſe as Marke doth teſtifie,
                  Did not agree ſo perfectly.
               
               
                  Then the chiefe Prieſt from ſeate aroſe,
                  And asked Ieſus on this wiſe,
                  Why anſwereſt thou not to thoſe?
                  Thou ſeeſt what witneſſes ariſe,
                  And teſtifie, as may appeare,
                  A truth, againſt thee to vs here.
               
               
                  But Ieſus yet did hold his peace.
                  The high Prieſt ſayd to him againe,
                  I charge thee that thou do no leſſe,
                  By God the Lord, but tell it plaine,
                  
                     
                     
                        Mar. 14.62. Math. 24.30.If Chriſt the ſonne of God thou be?
                  Then Ieſus ſayd, I ſure am he.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 26.64. Cap. 16.27. Rom. 14.10. 1. Theſ. 4.14.And ye ſhall ſee the ſonne of man,
                  Sitting at the right hand of God,
                  (Whoſe power to reſiſt none can,
                  Nor of himſelfe eſcape his rod)
                  And in the clouds of heau'n ſhall ye,
                  The ſonne of man then comming ſee.
               
               
                  The high Prieſt then his clothes did rent,
                  And ſayd, what need we any more
                  Of witneſſes for this intent?
                  He openly blaſphemeth ſore.
                  What thinke ye? then they cried all,
                  Death he deſerues, and dye he ſhall.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 26.67. Eſay. 50.6.They mocked Chriſt, that him did hold,
                  And ſpat withall into his face:
                  To ſtrike him alſo they were bold,
                  So much they were deuoyd of grace;
                  With rods and fiſts moſt cruelly,
                  They beat, and vſd him ſhamefully,
               
               
                  Then ſayd they to him, Propheſie,
                  Which of vs all now hath done this:
                  And other things as wickedly
                  They did againſt him then deuiſe.
                  But he moſt meekely ſuffred all,
                  To bring vs ſinners our of thrall.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 26.69. Mar. 14.66. Luc. 22.55. Ioh. 18.25.Now all this while there at the fire
                  Did Simon ſit, among them then:
                  Another mayd did thus inquire,
                  Art not thou one of this mans men?
                  Though ſhe affirm'd it to be ſo,
                  Yet he deni'd it, ſaying no.
               
               
                  
                  Then they that ſtood by, ſayd againe,
                  One of them thou moſt ſurely art:
                  Thy ſpeach bewrayeth thee ſo plaine,
                  Thou canſt not hide it for thy heart.
                  Then he to curſe and ſweare began,
                  That he did neuer know the man.
               
               
                  The cocke did crow then once againe,
                        Mar. 14.72.
                  
                  For Marke doth ſay he crowed twiſe:
                  Man of himſelfe is verie vaine,
                  Peter deny'd his maſter thriſe.
                  The cocks crow could not let his fall,
                  Till Chriſt did looke on him withall.
               
               
                  Then he remembred what was ſayd
                  Of Ieſus vnto him before;
                  And then he went out all affrayd,
                  And wept and wayled verie ſore.
                  Whom late no death could terrifie,
                  Perceiu'd then his infirmitie.
               
            
            
               Chriſt was brought vnto Pylate then Preſident of the Romanes: Iudas repentance and death.
               
                  Then in the dawning of the day,
                        Math. 27.1. Mar. 15.1. Luc. 22.66. Ioh. 18.28.
                  
                  The high Prieſts and the Elders did
                  A counſell hold to find ſome way,
                  By death Chriſt Ieſus life to rid:
                  Whom thence they led then haſtily,
                  Bound hand and foot moſt ſhamefully.
               
               
                  From Cayphas vnto Pylats hall,
                  Ieſus condemned ſo of late,
                  They brought bound by their counſell all;
                  (Re
                        •
                     oycing at his wofull ſtate.)
                  
                     For they had no authoritie,
                  Our Sauiour Chriſt to crucifie.
               
               
                  Yet they into the common hall,
                  Where Pylate did his iudgement giue
                  Went not themſelues, leaſt thereby all
                  (For ſo the Iewes did then beleeue)
                  Should be defiled, and be let
                  Thereby the paſſeouer to eate.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 27.3.While this was doing, marke the end
                  That to the traitour Iudas fell:
                  He was paſt grace for to amend,
                  He loued Mammon to to well:
                  Yet his offence diſpleaſd him ſo,
                  That he was wrapped all in wo.
               
               
                  When by his meanes he did perceiue,
                  His maſter was condemn'd to dye,
                  An inward griefe he did conceiue,
                  And did repent him mightely:
                  But his repentance tooke no place,
                  For it was voyde of faith and grace.
               
               
                  The thi
                        •
                     tie ſiluer peeces he
                  Vnto the high Prieſt brought againe:
                  I ſinn'd, ſayd he, and wo is me,
                  Which haue procur'd my maſters paine;
                  It was becauſe you thought it good,
                  That I betrayd his guiltleſſe bloud.
               
               
                  What is that vnto vs, ſayd they?
                  Looke thou to that which thou haſt done:
                  Therein thou didſt our heſts obey,
                  And we will end what is begon.
                  
                     
                        Math. 27.5. Act. 1.18.In temple he the ſiluer caſt,
                  And went and hangd himſelfe at laſt.
               
               
                  
                  The chiefe Prieſts tooke the ſiluer plate,
                  And ſayd, it is not lawfull we
                  Do them put vp (ſuch is our ſtate)
                  Among our treaſure for to be.
                  And why? the law doth ſo deuiſe,
                  Becauſe it is of bloud the price.
               
               
                  Then they tooke counſell, and did buy
                  A potters field, as did befall,
                        Zachar. 11.13.
                  
                  For to fulfill the Propheſie,
                  To be the ſtrangers buriall:
                  Wherefore that field is calld, I ſay,
                        Math. 27.8. Act. 1.19.
                  
                  The field of bloud vntill this day.
               
               
                  And to leaue of his tragedie,
                        Math. 27.11
                           •
                         
                        Mar. 15.1. Luc. 23.3. Ioh. 18.33.
                  
                  Let vs returne to Chriſt againe,
                  Whom then the Iewes maliciouſly,
                  For to accuſe did take ſuch paine;
                  On Pylate they did cry and call,
                  Though then they went not to the hall.
               
               
                  Pylate went out to them, and ſayd,
                  What cauſe bring you againſt this man?
                  The wicked Iewes nothing affrayd,
                  For to accuſe him thus began;
                  An euill doer were not he,
                  We would not haue brought him to thee.
               
               
                  Then Pylate ſayd to them againe,
                  Take him, and iudge him by your law,
                  We may not iudge him, it is plaine,
                        Ioh. 18.32. Math. 20.19.
                  
                  Of Caeſar we do ſtand in awe.
                  Chriſts word this was to verifie,
                  When he foretold how he ſhould dye.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Luc. 23.1. Math. 22.21. Mar. 12.17.They charged Chriſt that found he was,
                  Peruerting of the people there,
                  
                     Forbidding men from place to place,
                  To pay their tribute any where
                  Vnto Auguſtus, perſwading
                  That he was Chriſt their onely king.
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           uc. 23.3. Math. 27.11. Mar. 15.2. Ioh. 18.33.As Ieſus in the iudgement hall,
                  Before the gouernour did ſtand,
                  He ſayd to Chriſt before them all,
                  Anſwer thou this now out of hand;
                  Art thou king of the Iewes or no?
                  And Ieſus ſayd, thou ſayeſt ſo.
               
               
                  The high Prieſts, and thy nation,
                  Deliuered thee vnto me:
                  Now tell me then what haſt thou done,
                  That they ſhould ſo cry out on thee?
                  They ſay thou art a naughtie man,
                  Defend thy cauſe now if thou can.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 18.36.Then Ieſus ſayd, my kingdome is
                  Not of this world, for if it were.
                  My ſeruants ſure would neuer miſſe,
                  To fight for me without all feare,
                  Ere I ſhould thus deliuered be,
                  Vnto the Iewes, as thou doeſt ſee.
               
               
                  Then Pylate ſayd, art thou a king?
                  And Ieſus ſayd, thou ſayſt I am.
                  I was borne for this verie thing.
                  For this cauſe to the world I came,
                  And witneſſe of the truth to beare:
                  My voyce he that loues, truth will heare.
               
            
            
               Pylate ſent Christ to Herod, and they were made friends that day: Herod ſent Chriſt backe to Pylate: Pylate warned by his wife ſought by all meanes to deliuer Chriſt.
               
                  
                  Then to the high Prieſts Pylate ſayd,
                        Luc. 23.4.
                  
                  I find no fault ſure in this man:
                  Their furie then could not be ſtayd,
                  But fiercely thus they all began;
                  He teacheth mouing mightily
                  
                     All Iudea to this place. All, and begon at Galilie.
               
               
                  When Pylate heard of Galilie,
                  Is he a Galilean then?
                  Sayd he; and forthwith haſtily
                  Sent Chriſt to Herod with his men:
                  He at Hieruſalem then was,
                  When all theſe things came ſo to paſſe.
               
               
                  When Herod ſaw him, he was glad,
                  For he deſired him to ſee:
                  And ſo his wiſh at laſt he had,
                  Which neuer till that time would be.
                  Such ſignes and wonders Herod thought
                  He ſhould haue ſeene, as Chriſt had wrought.
               
               
                  He then with Chriſt there queſtioned,
                  And did him many things demand:
                  But Ieſus nothing anſwered,
                  For all king Herod could command.
                  Though high Prieſts, Scribes and people all,
                  Accuſed Chriſt in Herods hall.
               
               
                  Then Herod with his men of warre,
                  Mocking Chriſt, him in white array:
                  (Pylate and Herod were at iarre,
                  And were made friends that verie day.)
                  And Chriſt ſo clad, Herod againe,
                  Sent backe to Pylate it is plaine.
               
               
                  Then he thus warned by his wife,
                  Wrong not thou that iuſt man, ſayd ſhe:
                  
                     He ſought all meanes to ſaue his life,
                  But by thoſe meanes it would not be.
                  This made the Iewes yet almoſt mad,
                  To heare what he deuiſed had.
               
               
                  Ye haue brought this man vnto me,
                  As who the people doth peruert:
                  I haue examin'd him, ye ſee,
                  And find in him no ſuch deſert,
                  To puniſh him for any thing,
                  That you againſt the man do bring.
               
               
                  Nor Herod vnto whom ye went,
                  Finds that he doth deſerue to dye:
                  For vnto Herod him I ſent,
                  Whom vncondemned verily
                  He did ſend backe; ſith it is ſo,
                  Ile chaſten him, and let him go.
               
            
            
               The gouernour was accuſtomed at that feaſt to let looſe vnto the people a priſoner, whom they would: he offered to let looſe Ieſus vnto them, but they required Barrabas and obtained; their importunitie alſo preuailed with Pylate against Chriſt.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 27.15. Mar. 15.6. Luc. 23.17. Ioh. 18.39. Act. 3.14.The gouernour ſtill at that feaſt,
                  Was wont to giue a priſner free:
                  He whom the people would requeſt,
                  Who ſo it were, the ſame was he.
                  One Barrabas was priſoner,
                  A verie theefe and murtherer.
               
               
                  Then Pylate to the people ſayd,
                  Whom will ye that I do let looſe?
                  His libertie ſhall vndelayd
                  
                     Be granted him, whom ye do chooſe:
                  If Chriſt, or Barrabas be he,
                  Now name the man, he ſhall go free.
               
               
                  For Pylate knew it verily,
                  That enuie cauſed them indeed
                  To deale with Chriſt ſo cruelly,
                  And therefore ſought to haue him freed.
                  His wife alſo to that intent,
                  A meſſage had to Pylate ſent.
               
               
                  But the chiefe Prieſts and Elders bad
                        Math. 27.20. Mar. 15.11. Luc. 23.18. Ioh. 18.42.
                  
                  The people that they ſhould require,
                  That Barrabas might free be had,
                  And that none ſhould for Chriſt deſire.
                  To this aduiſe with full intent,
                  The people ſoone did yeeld conſent.
               
               
                  For when that Pylate did demand,
                  Which of them both they would haue looſe:
                  They (as the high Prieſt did command)
                  Barrabas the theefe did chooſe.
                  Sith we (ſay they) this cuſtome haue,
                  Then Barrabas we all do craue.
               
               
                  But Pylate willing to let go
                  Chriſt Ieſus, asked them againe;
                  What will ye then that I ſhould do
                  With Ieſus? and they anſwer'd plaine,
                  And did requeſt moſt inſtantly,
                  That Pylate would him crucifie.
               
               
                  He did the third time aske likewiſe,
                  What was the euill Chriſt had done:
                  I cannot ſee (though you ſurmiſe)
                  A cauſe of death ſince you begon.
                  Chriſt I will chaſtiſe and let go,
                  
                     If you conſent to haue it ſo.
               
               
                  But they more earneſtly require,
                  That he would Ieſus crucifie.
                  At laſt he granted their deſire,
                  Although it were vnwillingly:
                  For when the people ſeemd to faile,
                  The high Prieſts voyces did preuaile.
               
               
                  When Pilate ſaw all he could do,
                  Would not effect then his deſire,
                  But that it made the tumult mo,
                  And that they did Chriſts death conſpire:
                  Their furie grew to ſuch a rage,
                  That nought but death could it aſſwage.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 27.24.Then Pilate waſht his hands, and ſayd,
                  Moſt innocent I am indeed:
                  Though you ſeeme not to be affrayd,
                  To make this iuſt mans heart to bleed.
                  
                     As they wiſhed 
                           •
                        o they had, & 
                           •
                        his curſe conti
                        
                           •
                        ueth to this day. Math. 27.26.
                      His blood on vs and ours let be,
                  If it offend, and none on thee.
               
            
            
               Chriſt Ieſus was condemned and crucified.
               
                  So Pilate willing them to pleaſe,
                  Gaue ſentence as they did require:
                  He Barrabas did then releaſe,
                  And Ieſus as they did deſire
                  He ſcourged, and deliuered
                  Vnto them to be crucified.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Matth. 27.27. Mar. 15.16. Ioh. 19.1.The ſouldiers led Chriſt away,
                  And brought him to the common hall:
                  Whereas the band without delay,
                  Were gathered together all,
                  To worke and do aſſuredly,
                  To Chriſt all kind of villanie.
               
               
                  
                  They ſtripped him of all he had,
                  And put on him a ſcarlet weed:
                  A crowne of thornes which they had made,
                  Set on his head, in hand a reede,
                  And bowing knees, in mocking way,
                  God ſaue thee king of Iewes, they ſay.
               
               
                  And they did ſpit then in his face,
                  With rods they ſmote him on the head,
                  They were all cleane deuoyd of grace,
                  They in their ſinnes ſo wallowed:
                  They practiſed what they could tho,
                  That wrought, or might increaſe his wo.
               
               
                  They tooke his robe from him away,
                  And put his clothes on him againe:
                  Then led him foorth without delay,
                  No whit regarding all his paine.
                  Some thought the time loſt verely,
                  They letted Chriſt to crucifie.
               
               
                  As they out of the hall then came,
                        Matth. 27.32 Mar. 15.21. Luc. 23.26.
                  
                  They met a man that paſſed by.
                  Simon of Cyren calld by name,
                  Him they compelled certainly,
                  The croſſe of Chriſt with them to beare:
                  Which the man did for verie feare.
               
               
                  A multitude of people then,
                        Luc. 23.27.
                  
                  Did follow Chriſt the way he went,
                  Aſwell of women as of men,
                  For him they all did much lament.
                  Weepe not ye women ſo for me,
                  But for your ſonnes and ſelues, ſayd he.
               
               
                  The dayes will come when men ſhall ſay,
                  Bleſſed are they that barren are:
                  
                     The paps that giue no ſucke this day,
                  And wombes that likewiſe neuer bare:
                  
                     
                        Luc. 23.30. 
                           
                              •
                           ſay. 2.19. 
                           
                              •
                           oſea. 10.8. 
                           
                              •
                           euel. 6.16. For they ſhall wiſh the hils to fall,
                  And ſo the mountaines, on them all.
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           uc. 23.31. 
                           •
                         
                        Pet. 4.17. 
                           
                              •
                           erem. 25.29. 
                           
                              •
                           rou. 2.21.If they do this in the greene tree,
                  What ſhall be done then in the dry?
                  If thus they execute on me
                  The depth of all their crueltie?
                  What ſhall God to the wicked do?
                  Conſider it, and weepe no mo.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 27.33. Mar. 15.27. 
                           
                              •
                           uc. 23.32. 
                           
                              •
                           oh. 19.18.Two euill doers likewiſe were,
                  Then led with Chriſt for to be ſlaine,
                  A iuſt reward they both did beare,
                  Their euill deeds deſerued paine.
                  Yet Chriſt was vſd more ſpitefully
                  Then they, for all their villany.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 27.38. Mar. 15.22. 
                           
                              •
                           oh. 19.17. Luc. 23.33.From thence into the place they came,
                  Which Golgotha they called then:
                  Or dead mens ſculs it had the name,
                  For there they executed men:
                  They alſo call'd it Caluarie,
                  Where they did Ieſus crucifie.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 27.34. Mar. 15.33.Then vineger they mixt with gall,
                  Or wine and myrrhe as other thinke:
                  When Chriſt for drinke began to call,
                  They offerd this for him to drinke.
                  They had deuiſed it in vaine,
                  He would not ſo be rid of paine.
               
               
                  When Ieſus thus did ſuffer death,
                  Impatiencie in him was none,
                  He ſought no meanes to ſtop his breath,
                  As he with feare were ouergone:
                  
                     But for vs died verily,
                  As God appointed, patiently.
               
               
                  And crucifi'd when Ieſus was,
                        Luc. 22.33. Matth. 27.38 Mar. 15.27.
                  
                  Thoſe euill doers likewiſe were
                  So put to death, each in his place,
                  On his right hand and left hand there.
                  Chriſt Ieſus ſuffred like a lambe,
                  Not once repining at the ſame.
               
               
                  But calling to his father, ſayd,
                  O father do thou them forgiue,
                  Though they be not at all affrayd,
                  Thy ſonne with torments thus to grieue:
                  And though my life they take away,
                  That thou wilt blot their ſinnes, I pray.
               
               
                  His garments then they parted all,
                        Matth. 27.3
                           •
                         
                        Mar. 15.24. Ioh. 19.23. Pſal. 22.18.
                  
                  And did caſt lots there for his coate,
                  That he whoſe lot thereon would fall,
                  Might ſole enioy what he had got.
                  This was almightie God his will,
                  That they the Scriptures ſhould fulfill.
               
               
                  And all the people that ſtood by,
                  Beheld and ſaw what there was done:
                  The rulers alſo ſcornefully
                  Sayd, if he be Gods choſen ſonne,
                  As vnto others health he gaue,
                  So he himſelfe now let him ſaue.
               
               
                  A title Pilate alſo wrote,
                        Matth. 27.3
                           •
                         
                        Mar. 15.26▪ 
                        Luc. 23.38. Ioh. 19.19▪
                     
                  
                  And put it vp the croſſe vpon,
                  Whereby each man might plainly note,
                  What was then his opinion;
                  Ieſus of Nazareth to be
                  King of the Iewes, confeſſed he.
               
               
                  
                  And though the high Prieſts did repine,
                  That Pilate then ſhould write him ſo:
                  This ſentence, ſayd he, it is mine,
                  It ſhall remaine will ye or no.
                  In Hebrue, Greeke, and Latin he,
                  Did cauſe the ſame ſo writ to be.
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           oh. 19.25.All this while by his croſſe did ſtand
                  His mother, and her ſiſter to,
                  Marie Cleopas was at hand,
                  And Marie Magdalene alſo.
                  Though griefe did pierce them to the heart,
                  They would not yet from Chriſt depart.
               
               
                  Then Ieſus to his mother ſayd,
                  And the Diſciple ſtanding by,
                  Though they were both then all diſmayd,
                  To ſee Chriſt vſd ſo cruelly.
                  Thy mother ſee, ſaid he to th'one,
                  And to the other, ſee thy ſonne.
               
               
                  And this Diſciple was the ſame,
                  That Chriſt did ſo entirely loue,
                  Though Iohn doth here conceale his name:
                  Yet dutie did ſo deeply moue
                  His heart, that he obediently
                  Chriſts heſts performed faithfully.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 27.39. Mar. 15.29. Luc. 23.35.The wicked Iewes that paſſed by.
                  Reuil'd at Chriſt, and wagd the head:
                  The high Prieſt, Scribe and Phariſie,
                  Continued ſo till Chriſt was dead;
                  They mocking him from moſt to leaſt,
                  Till he was dead, did neuer reſt.
               
               
                  Thou that the Temple doeſt deſtroy,
                  And build it in three dayes againe,
                  
                     Now ſaue thy ſelfe from all annoy,
                  Why doſt thou ſo here ſuffer paine?
                  The ſonne of God if that thou be,
                  Come from the croſſe, that we may ſee.
               
               
                  Then of the euill doers one
                        Luc. 23.39.
                  
                  Began to raile on him alſo:
                  If thou be Chriſt Gods onely ſonne,
                  Command that we from hence may go.
                  Helpe now, ſayd he, thy ſelfe and vs,
                  That here do hang tormented thus.
               
               
                  The other anſwered and ſayd,
                  Doeſt thou not feare the liuing God?
                  Art not thou ſinfull man diſmayd,
                  That feeleſt iuſtly of his rod?
                  For we are puniſht worthely,
                  But this man vndeſeruedly.
               
               
                  Thus vnto Ieſus then ſaid he,
                  When thou doeſt to thy kingdome come,
                  I pray thee Lord remember me,
                  And graunt me there with thee a roome.
                  Then Ieſus ſayd, to thee I ſay,
                  Thou ſhalt be there with me this day.
               
               
                  From the ſixt houre the ninth vnto,
                  That day was darkned through the land:
                  The ſunne gaue then no ſhine alſo.
                  The Iewes would not yet vnderſtand,
                  No, not though that The vaile of the Tēple rent through the midſt as after appeareth. Math. 27.46. Mar. 15.34. Pſal. 22.2.
                      the temple there,
                  Renting, did put them all in feare.
               
               
                  About the ninth houre Ieſus ſayd,
                  Crying aloud as then likewiſe,
                  My God why haſt thou thus delayd,
                  Or ſeem'ſt thy ſonne ſo to deſpiſe?
                  
                     He ſeekes ſayd ſome, that then ſtood by,
                  Elias helpe aſſuredly.
               
               
                  And other ſaid, now let vs ſee,
                  If that Elias will him ſaue.
                  Then Ieſus ſayd, I thirſt, giue me
                  To coole my thirſt ſome drinke, I craues:
                  And ſaid, all things are finiſhed,
                  As God the Lord hath promiſed.
               
               
                  Mathew, Marke, as Iohn alſo
                  Say, that ſome there that then ſtood by,
                  With ſponge and vineger did go,
                  That they had filled haſtily:
                  And offred it vpon a reede,
                  But Chriſt drunke not of it indeede.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Luc. 23.46. Pſal. 31.3.Then with a loud voyce Chriſt did crie,
                  Into thy hands I do commend
                  My ſpirit, now moſt hartily:
                  O father deare, the ſame defend.
                  And ſo he bowing downe the head,
                  Gaue vp the ghoſt, and ſtraight was dead.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Matth. 27.51. 2. Cor. 3.14.Then (as is ſayd) the vaile did rent,
                  Of their great Temple into twaine:
                  From top to bottome it was ſplent,
                  Which neuer could encloſe againe;
                  The earth did quake, and ſtones did riue,
                  And graues did yeeld their dead aliue.
               
               
                  And many Saints did riſe and go,
                  After his reſurrection,
                  Into the citie, to and fro,
                  And made their apparition
                  To many of the godly there,
                  That of Gods wrath did ſtand in feare.
               
               
                  
                  When the Centurion that ſtood by,
                  And they that were abiding there,
                  Saw what did happen, certainly
                  They fell into exceeding feare:
                  Surely this man was iuſt, ſayd he;
                  And needs the ſonne of God muſt be.
               
               
                  The people that came to that ſight,
                  And did behold what things were done,
                  Smiting their breaſts, returned right,
                  Confeſſing him to be Gods ſonne.
                  Of his acquaintance ſome did ſtay,
                  But moſt were fled and gone away.
               
               
                  The women boldly there did ſtay,
                  And ſtood aloofe, and looked on:
                  Though his Diſciples fled away,
                  Theſe did behold his paſſion:
                  For God would haue thoſe weakelings there,
                  Witneſſe of ſuch things for to beare.
               
               
                  The Iewes becauſe they did prepare
                  That day, againſt the Sabboth day,
                  As men that had exceeding care,
                  Leſt they offended any way:
                  For that day was the Matth. 27.57. Mar. 15.42. Luc. 23.50. Ioh. 19.38. Their Sabbatū magnū fell out that yeare. chiefeſt feaſt
                  Among the Iewes of all the reſt.
               
               
                  Now that the bodies might not be,
                  Remaining on the croſſe that day,
                  They all together thus agree,
                  To begge of Pilate, that they may
                  Breake all their legges, and them downe take,
                  Leſt it ſhould them polluted make.
               
               
                  The Iewes they all did greatly feare,
                  In outward things for to offend:
                  
                     Their Sabboth they obſerued there,
                  Religiouſly they did pretend;
                  Yet ſpared not moſt wilfully,
                  To kill the guiltleſſe cruelly.
               
               
                  And now when leaue they gotten had,
                  The ſouldiours did performe the deed:
                  Both they and theſe were verie glad,
                  That ſo they of their ſuite did ſpeed:
                  Therefore they firſt the theeues did take,
                  And both their legs a ſunder brake.
               
               
                  And when they vnto Ieſus went,
                  And found him then already dead,
                  His legs they brake not, as they ment,
                  But then a ſouldiour opened
                  H
                        •
                     s ſide ſo ſweet with cruell ſpeare,
                  Which he in hand as then did beare.
               
               
                  And there-out ſtraightway iſſued,
                  As bloud then water freſhly both:
                  He that ſaw when it happened,
                  Doth witneſſe it as verie troth,
                  And knoweth that he here doth giue
                  The truth, that you might it beleeue.
               
               
                  All theſe things were ſo done in deed,
                  That they the Scripture might fulfill:
                  
                     
                        Act. 2.23.For God before had ſo decreed,
                  And man could not reſiſt his will.
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 19.37. Zach. 12.10. Whom they thruſt thorough they ſhall ſee:
                  
                     
                        Exod. 12.46. Numb. 9.12. His bones ſhall not one broken be.
               
            
            
               Chriſt was taken downe from the Croſſe, enbalmed and buried by Ioſeph of Arimathia and Nicodemus.
               
                  
                     
                        Matth. 27.57.When euen-tide was now at hand,
                  
                     That day of preparation,
                        Mar. 15.42. Luc. 23.50. Ioh. 19.38.
                  
                  A night then kept throughout the land,
                  With ſolemne obſeruation:
                  Their Sabboth then muſt haue no let,
                  For it began when ſunne was ſet.
               
               
                  Then Ioſeph came that was ſo iuſt,
                        Mar. 15.43.
                  
                  A noble counſeller in deed,
                  Which did in God repoſe his truſt,
                  And of his kingdome hop'd to ſpeed.
                  To thoſe he did not giue conſent,
                  That Chriſt our Sauiour did torment.
               
               
                  His worldly wealth was not a let,
                  And baniſhed he had all feare:
                  His maſter he could not forget,
                  That did for him ſuch torments beare;
                  Whoſe body Ioſeph then was glad,
                  To begge of Pylate: which he had.
               
               
                  But Pilate maruell'd if he were
                  Already dead, and ſent to call
                  The Captaine, witneſſe for to beare,
                  That h
                        •
                     d bene preſent there at all.
                  And when he heard the truth, then he
                  To Ioſephs will did ſoone agree.
               
               
                  Then Ioſeph went to take away
                  The body which he begged ſo:
                  He would therein make no delay,
                  But ſtraight to take it downe would go.
                  The feaſt drew on, Ioſeph would haue
                  Chriſt Ieſus body layd in graue.
               
               
                  And Nicodemus likewiſe came,
                        Ioh. 19.39. Cap. 3.2.
                  
                  Which a Diſciple was alſo,
                  Though ſecretly for feare of blame,
                  
                     This man with Ioſeph then did go.
                  Of mirrhe and 
                        •
                     loës pure and rare,
                  An hundred waight with him he bare.
               
               
                  They both his bodie downe did take,
                  And it in linnen cloths did lap:
                  Ointments and odours they did make,
                  Which with the bodie they did wrap.
                  They buried him as maner then
                  Was for to burie Noble-men.
               
               
                  Chriſt in a ſepulcher they lay,
                  That Ioſeph in a rocke did hew,
                  Wherein no man vntill that day
                  Was euer layd, this Ioſeph knew,
                  That had thereof the propertie,
                  As Luke and Iohn do teſtifie.
               
               
                  So when they had in ſolemne wiſe
                  Interred Chriſt, ere they were gone,
                  They did betweene them both deuiſe,
                  To roll vnto the doore a ſtone:
                  And then they did with heauie heart,
                  From thence vnto their home depart.
               
               
                  And Marie Magdalene did ſee,
                  And ſo did Marie loſes to,
                  Where Chriſt in graue was laid to be;
                  Then homeward both began to go,
                  Oyntments and odours to prepare:
                  They then of Chriſt (though dead) had care.
               
               
                  Yet reſted they the Sabboth day,
                  Becauſe of the commandement:
                  Though they kept them from thence away,
                  They caried ſtill a full intent,
                  When that the Sabboth had an end,
                  
                     To viſit Chriſt their Lord and frend.
               
               
                  Now that the Lord might manifeſt,
                        Math. 27.62.
                  
                  Chriſt Ieſus reſurrection
                  Vnto the Iewes, and all the reſt,
                  That were of the ſame faction:
                  He cauſed them, to their great ſhame,
                  To be the witneſſe of the ſame.
               
               
                  They ſpared not the ſabboth day,
                  To manifeſt their malice more:
                  Their zeale was ſuch they would not ſtay,
                  Or rather raging as before,
                  The high Prieſts, Scribes and all the reſt,
                  Aſſembled them vpon that feaſt.
               
               
                  And ſo they vnto Pilate went,
                  And humbly did deſire his aide,
                  Expreſſing wholly their intent,
                  They in this maner to him ſayd;
                  Chriſt that deceiuer oft would ſay,
                  I will from death riſe the third day.
               
               
                  Command the graue (we do pray thee)
                  To be made ſure, till that be paſt,
                  Leſt his diſciples, which may be,
                  Do ſteale him while thoſe dayes do laſt:
                  And to the people then do ſay,
                  That Chriſt from death roſe vp that day.
               
               
                  So the laſt errour worſe ſhall be,
                  A great deale then the firſt hath beene.
                  They raged yet as when that he
                  Among them late aliue was ſeene.
                  Ye haue a watch, ſaid Pilate, go,
                  And make it ſure, do euen ſo.
               
               
                  All thence they went then haſtely,
                  
                     The ſepulcher for to make faſt:
                  A watch prouided carefully,
                  They ſeald the ſtone, this was the laſt.
                  And this the Lord did ſo effect,
                  To confound whom he had reiect.
               
               
                  And to their ſauing health likewiſe,
                  Whom he had choſen long before.
                  To thee therefore God onely wiſe,
                  Be praiſe and thanks for euermore:
                  One mightie God in perſons three,
                  All honor we do giue to thee.
               
            
            Amen.
         
         
            
            THE SIXTH AND LAST PART OF THE HISTORIE OF OVR LORD AND SAVIOVR IEſus Chriſt, as it is written by the Euangeliſtes: containing his reſurrection from death, and his aſcenſion to heauen.
            To the tune of the 81. Pſalme.
            
                Chriſt roſe from death the day after the Sabboth, called the Lords day: Marie Magdalene and others came to the ſepulcher, and ſawe a viſion of Angels.
               
                  
                     BElight and glad, in God reioyce,
                        Pſal. 81.
                  
                  Which is our ſtrength and ſtay:
                  Be ioyfull and lift vp your voyce,
                  To Iacobs God alway:
                  
                     
                        Math. 1.16. Luc. 2.7.11. Ioh. 1.14. Cap. 8.42. For he hath ſent his ſonne indeed,
                  Our fleſh on him to take,
                  As he had long before 
                        Gen. 3.15. Cap. 12.3. decreed,
                  For his great mercies ſake.
               
               
                  Which fleſh in 
                        Luc. 2.11. Mat. 8.20. Mat. 9.12.13. 1. Tim. 1.15. 1. Cor. 6.11. baſe and poore array,
                  Chriſt clad him ſelfe withall,
                  And in this fleſh he tooke away
                  
                     
                        Luc. 2.11. Mat. 8.20. Mat. 9.12.13. 1. Tim. 1.15. 1. Cor. 6.11. The cauſe of all our fall.
                  Firſt, needs he muſt be perfect man,
                  Sith 
                        Gen. 3.6. man did firſt offend:
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           en. 3.6. 
                           
                              •
                           oh. 1.1.And God alſo, who onely can
                  So great a fault amend.
               
               
                  Thus Chriſt as he appointed was,
                  Both God and man in deed,
                  Brought by his death that thing to paſſe,
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Cor. 15.3.4.Which nothing elſe could ſpeed.
                  This Chriſt wrought our redemption,
                  From deuill, death and hell:
                  We haue by him ſaluation,
                  As holy Scriptures tell.
               
               
                  And when all men had loſt this light,
                  As farre as man could ſee:
                  For darkneſſe is our ſharpeſt ſight,
                  If faithleſſe that we be:
                  
                     1. Cor. 15.4. Eſay. 53.5. 1. Pet. 2.24. Ionas. 2.1.10.Yea then when all our hope was paſt,
                  To ſee Chriſt Ieſus ſlaine,
                  Out of the graue God brought at laſt,
                  Our ſauing health againe.
               
               
                  And to be witneſſe of the ſame,
                  And triumph ouer hell,
                  (That fleſh and bloud might to their ſhame,
                  Conſider of it well)
                  The weakelings of the world he choſe,
                  Whom worldly men deſpiſe,
                  For to confound the wits of thoſe,
                  That thought them worldly wiſe.
               
               
                  
                     1. Cor. 15.12.I meane the riſing vp againe,
                  Of Ieſus from the dead:
                  Leſt that our hope had bene in vaine,
                  And we with fancies fed.
                  For if the dead did not ariſe,
                  Our hope were vaine, I ſay,
                  
                     And we as beaſts ſhould in that wiſe,
                  Continue in the clay.
               
               
                  But Chriſt the firſt fruits of the dead,1. Cor. 15.20. Coloſſ. 1.18. Reuel. 1.5.
                  
                  Is riſen vp in deed:
                  As we the members of that head,
                  Shall ſure hereafter ſpeed.
                  And to ſtirre vp the ſlouthfull feare,
                  That his Diſciples had,
                  Weake women did firſt witneſſe beare,
                  Of that which made vs glad.
               
               
                  They when the Sabboth day was paſt,
                        Mar. 16.1. Luc. 24.1. Ioh. 20.1.
                  
                  Or while it did endure,
                  Deuiſed how they might at laſt,
                  With oyntments ſweet and pure,
                  Enbalme Chriſts body in the graue:
                  Therefore at Sabboths end,
                  Odours and oyntments ſweet they haue,
                  To worke what they intend.
               
               
                  With them the Sabboth day was done,
                  Aſſoone as ſunne was ſet:
                  And then the women all begon,
                  (For nothing then did let)
                  Their oyntments ſweet for to prepare:
                  And this they did by night,
                  That they might be (this was their care)
                  There by the day was light.
               
               
                  Then Mary Magdalen by name,
                  And Mary Solom to,
                  Were they which thus together came,
                  With other women mo:
                  And as they went all by the way,
                  This doubt did then ariſe,
                  
                     The ſtone to roll the women ſay,
                  We cannot all deuiſe.
               
               
                  Yet to the ſepulcher they go,
                  The firſt day of the weeke:
                  Where they at ſunne appearing ſo
                  Found that which they did ſeeke:
                  I meane when they came to the place,
                  Behold the ſtone was gone:
                  Gods Angell ſhewed them this grace,
                  To roll away the ſtone.
               
               
                  Whoſe face did ſhine like lightening,
                  His garments white as ſnow:
                  Which vnto them in the dawning,
                  Theſe ioyfull newes did ſhow:
                  How from the dead Chriſt riſen was;
                  But they amazed were,
                  To ſee ſuch things come ſo to paſſe,
                  Did put them in great feare.
               
               
                  The earthquake firſt, and then that ſight,
                  Vnuſd of them to ſee,
                  Did make the women all affright,
                  And wiſh at home to be.
                  And ſure no maruell, fith alſo
                  The watch was fraught with feare,
                  Notable once to moue or go,
                  They ſo aſtonied were.
               
               
                  When Marie ſaw the ſtone away,
                  She went thence home with ſpeed,
                  To Simon Peter where he lay,
                  To ſhew him of the deed.
                  And to the reſt, for this ſhe thought,
                  From graue the bodie they,
                  
                     (Which we with teares and ſorow ſought)
                  By night did ſure conuey.
               
               
                  Then Peter went with Iohn away,
                  To ſee what they had done:
                  They would no longer make delay,
                  But both together runne;
                  Yet this Diſciple him out went,
                  And Peter left behind,
                  Though both did runne with full intent
                  The truth thereof to find.
               
               
                  When Iohn vnto the graue did come,
                  He ſtouped downe to ſee,
                  Suppoſed as it is of ſome,
                  If Chriſt therein might be;
                  But he went not into the caue
                  Till Simon Peter came,
                  Who ſtepped firſt into the graue,
                  To ſee and ſearch the ſame.
               
               
                  Who there did find the linnen lye,
                  And kerchiefe of his head:
                  Not with the linnen, but ſet by,
                  Wrapt in another ſtead.
                  Then went the other in alſo,
                  That firſt came to the place:
                  And both ſaw and beleeued tho,
                  God giuing both ſuch grace.
               
               
                  For they did not well vnderſtand,
                  That Chriſt ſhould riſe indeed,
                  Till then: ſo they thence out of hand,
                  Returned home with ſpeed:
                  Nor did they ſee, or heare, as then,
                  More then the emptie graue:
                  
                     Chriſt ſurely had not choſen men,
                  Firſt ſight of him to haue.
               
               
                  But Mary would not ſo depart,
                  Nor leaue his graue as yet:
                  She felt ſuch ſorow in her heart,
                  She could him forget.
                  But wept, and wayled verie ſore,
                  Which ſhe did not in vaine;
                  She was firſt witneſſe made therefore,
                  That Chriſt did riſe againe.
               
               
                  The women they did not depart,
                  Their minds were wholy ſet
                  To find Chriſt, though they ſuffred ſmart,
                  Nothing the ſame could let:
                  Wherefore to comfort them againe,
                  God downe his Angels ſent,
                  Who heareth his when they complaine,
                  Effecting their intent.
               
               
                  Which Angels to the women ſayd,
                  Why do ye weepe and wayle?
                  Plucke vp your hearts, be not affrayd,
                  Ye haue no cauſe to quayle:
                  Ieſus that late was crucified,
                  In graue you looke to find:
                  Sith the Scripture is verified,
                  Then be not of that mind.
               
               
                  Chriſt is not here, but riſen is,
                  Aliue in deed is he:
                  And that ye may be ſure of this,
                  Come to his graue and ſee:
                  What God before appointed had,
                  Chriſt Ieſus did fulfill:
                  
                     Thereby to make his choſen glad,
                  And to obey Gods will.
               
               
                  Chriſt ſpake to you before of this,
                  If ye remember well,
                  While he in Galilie iwis,
                  Did there among you dwell:
                        Luc. 24.7. Cap. 9.22. Math. 17.23. Mar. 9.31.
                  
                  The ſonne of man deliuered,
                  To ſinfull men muſt be,
                  Sayd Chriſt, for to be crucified,
                  Yet riſe againe will he.
               
               
                  Then they theſe words remembered,
                  Though they were all affrayd:
                  And knew that he had ſuffered,
                  As he before had ſayd.
                  Thus were the women comforted,Thoſe 3. things which the Angels did to the women. Chriſt afterward appearing to thē by the way did the ſame. 1. Eaſed their feare comforted thē. 2. Satisfied thē of his reſurrection. 3. And ſent thē to declare the ſame to his Diſciples.
                  
                  And eaſed of their feare:
                  And of Chriſts riſing anſwered,
                  While they were weeping there.
               
               
                  And ſent home haſtily with care,
                  His reſurrection
                  To his Diſciples to declare
                  With expedition.
                  Which three things afterward againe,
                  Chriſt did to them, I ſay:
                  1 He eaſd their feare: 2 they ſaw him plaine:
                  3 He ſent them backe a way.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 20.11. Mar. 16.9. But Chriſt to Mary Magdalen
                  Did firſt of all appeare,
                  While ſhe was weeping, euen then
                  At his ſepulcher there:
                  And when ſhe bowed downe to ſee,
                  And looke the graue into,
                  
                     Of Angels there ſhe found to be
                  (As Iohn reporteth) two.
               
               
                  Which both, where Ieſus body lay
                  Were ſitting in the graue:
                  And thus they vnto Mary ſay,
                  What ſeekeſt thou to haue?
                  Why weepeſt thou? ſhe ſayd againe,
                  My Lord is ſtolne away:
                  Becauſe I know not (I complaine)
                  Where they my Lord did lay.
               
               
                  When Mary thus to them had ſayd,
                  She turning backe might ſee
                  
                     Chriſt firſt apparition was to Mary Magdalen after his reſurrection.Chriſt ſtanding by, yet all diſmayd
                  Chriſt knew him not to be.
                  Chriſt ſayd, why weep'ſt thou? ſhe did ſay
                  Sir, if thou bore him hence:
                  Now tell me where thou didſt him lay,
                  And I will fetch him thence.
               
               
                  All this while ſhe thought Chriſt to be
                  The gardiner in deed:
                  But when by name Chriſt called, ſhe
                  Did turne about with ſpeed:
                  And with her body turn'd her mind,
                  Thus did effect his call:
                  For ſhe which hitherto as blind
                  Perceiud him not at all,
               
               
                  Confeſſing now, doth anſwer ſo
                  That he her maſter is,
                  Whom ſhe as gardner ſpake vnto,
                  And doth reioyſe at this.
                  
                     
                        Mar. 16.9.This Mary (Marke ſaith) Chriſt made free,
                  When ſhe had then at leaſt
                  
                     Seu'n deuils in her; wherewith ſaith he,
                  This woman was poſſeſt.
               
               
                  But touch not me, did Ieſus ſay,
                        Ioh. 26.17.
                  
                  That I am not aſcended,
                  Thou doeſt beleeue: this errour may
                  And muſt by faith be moued.
                  Leaue thou to looke as dead for me,
                  I liue aſſuredly;
                  And now to touch me, learne to flie
                  By faith aboue the skie,
               
               
                  And to my brethren, ſay thou ſo,
                  To them I do thee ſend:
                  To my father and yours, I go,
                  To God I do aſcend.
                  Which was to lift their earthly mind,
                  To looke for whom we loue,
                  No more in earthy graue to find,
                  But now in heau'n aboue.
               
            
            
               Chriſt appeared to the women as they went backe from the graue, after they had ſeene the Angels, which told them of Chriſts reſurrection.
               
                  Then next,Chriſt ſecond apparition to the women as they wēt homward by the way. Math. 28.10.
                      while that the women went
                  All homeward in the way:
                  For backe the Angels had them ſent
                  To tell theſe newes: I ſay
                  Chriſt Ieſus did to them appeare,
                  Mathew doth teſtifie:
                  They worſhipp'd him with reu'rence there
                  Embracing ioyfully.
               
               
                  To whom, what both the Angels ſayd,
                  Chriſt did confirme againe:
                  
                      Plucke vp your hearts, be not affrayd,
                  
                     
                      You ſorow all in vaine.
                  Go bid my brethren, this ſayd he,
                  
                      They go to Galilie:
                  For me (as you haue) muſt they ſee,
                  And ſhall do ſpeedily.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Mar. 16.10.So thence, they went as charge they had,
                  (No feare did them annoy)
                  All his Diſciples to make glad,
                  Who thought it but a toy:
                  For all the women did report,
                  They would it not beleeue,
                  No comfort, could with them confort,
                  Chriſts death ſo did them grieue.
               
            
            
               The ſouldiours ſignified to the high Priests what was done, and they were corrupted with money by them.
               
                  
                     
                        Math. 28.11.When they were gone, the watchmen came
                  The Citie then vnto,
                  And told the high Prieſts all the ſame,
                  Which knew not what to do,
                  So mad they were, that their deuiſe,
                  Did not effect in deed:
                  Together they therefore their wiſe
                  To counſell call'd with ſpeed.
               
               
                  Wherein they did with one conſent,
                  Among themſelues agree,
                  The watch with money to content,
                  They ſpared for no fee:
                  Nor yet the watch did force to lye,
                  When they the money had;
                  The high Prieſts hir'd them eaſily,
                  And each of them was glad.
               
               
                  The Iewes that they had ſo obtaind
                  
                     The watch to worke their will:
                  The watch that they ſo much had gaind,
                  They cared not how ill.
                  So both were pleaſd, but marke the end,
                  What was it they ſhould do?
                  The watch muſt lye, and they defend,
                  It was concluded ſo.
               
               
                  The lye was this, that Chriſt from graue
                  Was ſtolne away by night,
                  And his Diſciples ſurely haue
                  Now hid him out of ſight.
                  When was it done? while we were all
                  By heauie ſleepe oppreſt:
                  And when we thought that great and ſmall,
                  Had likewiſe bene at reſt.
               
               
                  If they then ſlept, how did they ſee,
                  When he was ſtolne away?
                  And his Diſciples knew to be,
                  That did him thence conuay?
                  Or why did they (being armed men)
                  Not ſeeme for to reſiſt
                  Thoſe weakelings, without weapons then?
                  Too late comes had I wiſt.
               
               
                  If theeues had ſtolne the bodie thence,
                  They had not left behind
                  The linnen clothes, the recompence
                  That they were there to find.
                  If friends, the ſhame to ſee him bare,
                  Had cauſd them this to do:
                  As of the bodie to haue care,
                  To take the linnen to.
               
               
                  Yet they vpon preſumption,
                  
                     And promiſe to them made,
                  By the high Prieſts perſuaſion,
                  Set vp their lying trade:
                  For when they knew they ſhould go free,
                  And fall to no diſgrace,
                  Although the gouernour did ſee,
                  That they did lye apace,
               
               
                  They ſpread abrode this falſe report,
                  Which no way can be ſo:
                  That his diſciples did reſort
                  By night his graue vnto,
                  And had Chriſts bodie ſtolne away,
                  To make men thinke that he,
                  
                     
                        Ioh. 2.19. Cap. 10.17. Eſay 53.7.As he before (aliue) did ſay
                  In three dayes will I be.
               
               
                  And this among the Iewes is ſayd
                  Vnto this verie day,
                  (For they are not at all affrayd)
                  That he was ſtolne away.
                  By Pilates winking came to paſſe,
                  That this eſcaped tho:
                  He (as the high Prieſts) blinded was,
                  For God would haue it ſo.
               
               
                  The high Prieſts did the Gouernour
                  Perſwade; he was content;
                  The watch men had their hire therefore,
                  And ſo away were ſent.
                  And being gone, they ſpread this fame,
                  That Chriſt was ſtolne away:
                  Which ſure the Iewes do to their ſhame,
                  Beleeue vnto this day.
               
            
            
               
                  Chriſt. 3. apparition, to Simō Peter.Christ appeared to Peter.
               
                  Chriſt firſt to Marie did appeare,
                  
                     To comfort ſinners all,
                        Luc. 7.37. Cap. 8.2. Marc. 16.9.
                  
                  Then to the other women there,
                  To anſwer Euahs fall.
                  And thirdly vnto Peter he
                  Did ſhew him ſelfe alſo,1. Cor. 15.5. Luc. 24.34. Luc. 22.62.
                  
                  From former feare to ſet him free:
                  For Chriſt did ſee his wo.
               
            
            
               Of the two Diſciples that went to Emaus, and what happened to them by the way.Chriſts 4. apparition. Luc. 24.13. Aret. in Luc. Eraſm. in Luc.
               
               
                  Of the Diſciples, the ſame day,
                  As two to Emaus went,
                  (This from Ieruſalem then lay,
                  As writers do conſent,
                  Threeſcore furlongs; or foorthright
                  As we accompt do take,
                  Seu'n miles and one halfe mile we might,
                  Of the ſame furlongs make.
               
               
                  This Nicopolis ſince we name,Hieron. 8. cap. Daniel. Nicepho. li. 10. cap. 31. Plinius lib. 5. cap. 14.
                     
                  
                  The Romains cald it ſo:
                  It was a towne ſometimes of fame,
                  And very pleaſant tho.)
                  They talked both of what was done
                  As well to Chriſt before
                  He dy'd, as this, which now begonne
                  For to amaze them more.
               
               
                  For they had heard the women tell,
                  That Chriſt roſe vp againe,
                  And was aliue; yet knew not well,
                  Which they ſhould do of twaine:
                  Beleeue, or not: or what to do,
                  For all men ſaw him die:
                  But women onely, ſay theſe two,
                  
                     Theſe newes do teſtifie.
               
               
                  And as they thus then reaſoned,
                  Behold it came to paſſe,
                  That Chriſt him ſelfe as happened,
                  Or purpoſely it was,
                  Did ioyne him ſelfe in iourney wiſe,
                  With thoſe Diſciples then,
                  And ſayd, what do ye thus deuiſe,
                  And looke as wofull men?
               
               
                  Yet all this while their eyes were hold,
                  They could not both perceiue
                  What man he was, that was ſo bold,
                  Though they did him receiue
                  Moſt willingly to walke the way,
                  And trauell with them to,
                  As may appeare by what they ſay,
                  As they together go.
               
               
                  Art thou, ſaid Cleopas, (my friend)
                  A ſtranger onely here?
                  And if thou be, a while attend,
                  And giue vnto me eare:
                  For at Ieruſalem of late
                  The thing hath happened,
                  That we ſo much do wonder at,
                  Was thus determined.
               
               
                  Then Ieſus ſayd, what things were thoſe?
                  They ſayd to him againe,
                  The thing that we do now diſcloſe,
                  A number do diſdaine.
                  Ieſus of Nazaret was this,
                  A Prophet mightely
                  In word and deed, allowd iwis
                  
                     Of God and man lately.
               
               
                  Him the high Prieſts and rulers all,
                  Deliuered to be
                  Condemned in their iudgement hall:
                  And crucifi'd was he.
                  But we did hope, that he would ſure
                  Deliuer Iſraell:
                  Tis ſince he did his death endure,
                  Three dayes, we know it well.
               
               
                  And certaine women that we haue
                  Among vs, verely
                  Aſtonied vs: for at his graue
                  Where they were certainly,
                  Though they there found his bodie gone,
                  They did returne and ſay,
                  Of Angels that a viſion
                  They ſaw this very day.
               
               
                  Which ſayd, that Chriſt did liue indeed:
                  So that on this report,
                  Some of vs did with haſt and ſpeed,
                  Vnto the graue reſort.
                  And they did find apparantly,
                  All as the women ſayd,
                  But ſaw not him aſſuredly,
                  Which made vs all diſmayd.
               
               
                  O fooles, ſaid Chriſt, and verie ſlow
                  Of heart, for to conceiue:
                  What hath bene ſayd, do ye not know?
                  Or will ye not perceiue?
                  The Prophets all haue this foretold,
                  That Chriſt ſhould ſuffer ſo,
                  Then to his glorie enter ſhould,
                  And to his Father go.
               
               
                  
                  And he at Moſes then began,
                  And the Prophets by name,
                  Interpreting from man to man,
                  Their ſayings of the ſame:
                  And all their writings left behind
                  Of Chriſt, from firſt to laſt,
                  He then imprinted in their mind,
                  And would from them haue paſt.
               
               
                  For to the towne they did draw neare,
                  Whereto as then they went:
                  He ſeemed, not to tarie there,
                  So trying their intent.
                  But they conſtraining him, did ſay,
                  Abide with vs all night;
                  Farre ſpent alreadie is the day,
                  And now the towne in ſight.
               
               
                  So he went in to take his reſt,
                  Whereof they both were glad,
                  And then to ſupper them addreſt,
                  Content with what they had.
                  He ſitting downe, the bread did take,
                  And when they both did ſee,
                  He firſt gaue thankes, and then it brake,
                  They knew him Chriſt to be.
               
               
                  For both their eyes were opened,
                  And they did know him well:
                  But marke what after happened,
                  For thus it then befell,
                  While they with ioy ſurprized were,
                  He went out of their ſight,
                  And left them both abiding there,
                  To take their reſt all night.
               
               
                  
                  Herein we may aſſuredly,
                  Perceiue Chriſt Ieſus vſe,
                  And learne to eate meate thankfully,
                  Leſt we the ſame abuſe.
                  Chriſt vſing now his wont before,
                  In breaking bread to pray,
                  Did lighten them, that verie ſore
                  Were blinded by the way.
               
               
                  And yet againe twixt ioy and feare,
                  They were amazed ſo,
                  They could not ſee how from them there,
                  He then away did go.
                  Not that he did his ſhape at all
                  Exchange, as ſome men ſay:
                  But from this earth their minds to call,
                  On heau'nly things to lay.
               
               
                  For now no more on earth is he,
                  At he before hath bin
                  As mortall man, ſo found to be
                  In all, excepting ſinne:
                  But ſitteth ſure in heau'n aboue,
                  Now in great maieſtie,
                  His Father for vs ſtill to moue,
                  And worke our libertie.
               
               
                  Then they betweene them ſelues did ſay,
                  Did not our hearts reioyce,
                  While he talkt with vs by the way,
                  And while we heard his voyce?
                  Our hearts did burne, while we heard how
                  He op'ned more and more
                  The Scriptures vnto vs, ſo ſlow
                  To marke the ſame before.
               
               
                  
                  And in that houre they roſe againe,
                  And did returne with ſpeed:
                  They letted not for anie paine,
                  They went backe both indeed:
                  Vnto Ieruſalem they hie,
                  Where the Apoſtles were:
                  For they did there together lye,
                  Amazed much with feare.
               
               
                  Whom when they found, they ioyfully
                  Began for to report,
                  How by the way moſt happily,
                  Chriſt did to them reſort.
                  Yet ere they came the newes was ſpread
                  That Simon Peter he
                  Had likewiſe ſurely lately ſped,
                  Of Chriſt a ſight to ſee.
               
               
                  While theſe confeſt what he had done,
                  And told them by the way,
                  
                     
                        Luc. 24.36. Mar. 10.14. Iohn 20.19. Chriſts 5. apparition.
                     And how to know him they begonne,
                  By breaking bread that day:
                  Ieſus ſtood in the midſt, and ſayd,
                  Peace be vnto you all:
                  It is my ſelfe, be not affrayd,
                  Perceiue it well you ſhall.
               
               
                  This was that verie day at night,
                  That he did firſt ariſe,
                  That Chriſt appeared in their ſight,
                  While cloſely in this wiſe
                  They ſhut them in a ſecret place:
                  The Iewes they feared ſo,
                  That they durſt not be ſeene a ſpace,
                  Abrode the ſtreetes to go.
               
               
                  
                  He while the doores all cloſe were kept,
                  And they of him did talke,
                  Into the midſt of them then ſtept,
                  He made no longer walke.
                  Chriſt ſhewed his diuinitie
                  Herein, we muſt confeſſe;
                  Yet left not his humanitie,
                  For he meant nothing leſſe.
               
               
                  Nor did he pierce the doores indeed,
                  As fooliſh Papiſts hold:
                  For ſo to do he had no need,
                  That could do what he would.
                  If barres or bands and iron gate,
                        Act. 12.10.
                  
                  Gaue Peter leaue to go,
                  Why wonder ye ſo much thereat,
                  If theſe did euen ſo?
               
               
                  And that no fayned ſhape he had,
                  As ghoſts or ſpirits haue,
                  To eaſe their feare, and make them glad,
                  His hands and feete he gaue
                  That they ſhould handle them and ſee
                  That he had fleſh and bone:
                  And not as ſpirits wont to be,
                  For they haue neither none.
               
               
                  Therefore ſet care and feare aſide,
                  Theſe troubles that ariſe,
                  You may out of your hearts let ſlide,
                  And them as toyes deſpiſe.
                  The bodie that was layd in graue,
                  Now glorifi'd they ſee,
                  And to their handling ſubiect haue,
                  So good a God is he.
               
               
                  
                  Lo, thus did Chriſt to his appeare,
                  Such as ſought him indeed:
                  At eu'rie time and tide his eare,
                  Was open to their need.
                  
                      The morning Marie did him ſee,
                  
                      The women towards noone;
                  
                      To Peter next appeared he,
                  
                      And Cleopas & others going to Emaus. theſe ere day was done.
               
               
                  
                      To the Diſciples late at night
                  Appeared Chriſt alſo:
                  Great comfort had they of that ſight,
                  And ſo had many moe.
                  But while for ioy they did not yet
                  Beleeue that it was he,
                  Their blindneſſe did them ſo much let,
                  That then they could not ſee.
               
               
                  Chriſt did againe vnto them ſay,
                  Peace be vnto you all:
                  As me my Father, ſo I may,
                  And do you to me call,
                  To be ſent foorth, as I was ſent
                  To do my Fathers will:
                  The which you muſt with good intent,
                  As I haue, all fulfill.
               
               
                  He breathed then on them, and ſayd,
                  Receiue the holy Ghoſt:
                  And ſo gaue them ſuch heau'nly ayd,
                  As might releeue them moſt.
                  
                     
                        Iohn 20.23. Matth. 18.18. 1. Cor. 5.4. 2. Theſſ. 3.14.Whoſe ſinnes ye do remit, they are
                  Remitted, then ſaid he;
                  Whoſe ſinnes retained ye declare,
                  Retained ſhall they be.
               
               
                  
                  And while they wondred yet, he ſayd,
                  Haue ye here anie meate?
                  A peece of broyled fiſh they layd
                  Before him for to eate,
                  And of an honie combe a peece:
                  Which meate then ſurely he
                  Did take and eate, that he by theſe,
                  Might ſhew him man to be.
               
               
                  Then ſayd he vnto them againe,
                  Theſe are the words I ſpake,
                  When as I did with you remaine,
                  And here abiding make:
                  Fulfilled needes muſt all things be,
                  Which by the Prophets were,
                  As alſo Moſes writ of me,
                  As in the Law ye heare.
               
               
                  And he their vnderſtanding then
                  Did open, that they might
                  See what was ſayd by holy men,
                  And know the Scriptures right.
                  Thus it is writ, thus behoued
                  Chriſt Ieſus for to die,
                  And riſe againe ſo from the dead,
                  The third day verily.
               
               
                  And that of ſinnes remiſſion,
                  And eke repentance ſhould
                  Be preached to each nation,
                  As hath before bene told;
                  And that in Chriſts name alonely,
                  Which at Ieruſalem here ſhould firſt begin:
                  For his name is aſſuredly,
                  The onely ſalue for ſinne.
               
               
                  
                  Now ye of theſe things witneſſe are,
                  Which happened to me:
                  Therefore ſee you your ſelues prepare,
                  And alwayes readie be.
                  The promiſe that my Father made,
                  You ſhall receiue indeed:
                  The ſame Ile ſend to make you glad,
                  Aſſure your ſelues with ſpeed.
               
               
                  Therefore when I depart you fro,
                  See that you tarrie ſtill
                  Here in this Citie; for I go
                  To do my Fathers will.
                  In his good time he from on hi
                        •
                     
                  
                  Will to you power giue,
                  To preach abrode this myſterie,
                  That many may beleeue.
               
            
            
               Christ the eight day after appeared to them againe, Thomas himſelfe being then preſent.
               
                  
                     Iohn 20.24. Chriſts ſixt apparition.But Thomas was not with them there,
                  Which of the twelue was one,
                  When Ieſus did to them appeare,
                  For he from thence was gone.
                  And the Diſciples to him ſayd,
                  When he was come againe;
                  We ſaw the Lord while hence ye ſtayd,
                  And did abrode remaine.
               
               
                  Except in his hands I do ſee
                  The print of eu'ry naile,
                  And put my finger there, ſayd he,
                  Your words will not preuaile,
                  Except alſo into his ſide,
                  My hand that I may thruſt:
                  
                     Your newes from reaſon are ſo wide,
                  That them I will not truſt.
               
               
                  Now eight dayes after Chriſt had bene
                  With his Diſciples there,
                  He thus againe was likewiſe ſeene,
                  Vnto them to appeare:
                  And that while Thomas was within,
                  The doores then ſhut withall:
                  To ſtirre vp Thomas from his incredulitie ſinne,
                  And raiſe him from his fall.
               
               
                  Chriſt came, and in the midſt he ſtood,
                  Peace be to you, he ſaid:
                  Come hither Thomas, for thy good
                  I come, be not affrayd.
                  Put in thy fingers here, and ſee
                  My hands and ſide alſo:
                  They beare their marks, now faithfull be,
                  And let this weakneſſe go.
               
               
                  Then Thomas anſwered and ſayd,
                  My Lord my God art thou.
                  Thomas ſaid he, be not diſmayd:
                  Becauſe thou ſeeſt me now
                  Thou doſt beleeue: bleſſed I ſay
                  Are they that haue not ſeene,
                  And haue beleeued without nay,
                  As I with them had beene.
               
               
                  And many other things did he,
                  More then are written here:
                  And his Diſciples witneſſe be,
                  That dayly with him were.
                  But this is written that ye might
                  Beleeue that Ieſus is
                  
                     That Chriſt the ſonne of God, whoſe right
                  Is to giue life to his.
               
            
            
               Chriſt appeared to Iames.
               
                  1. Cor 1
                        •
                     .7. Chriſts 7. appa.
                  And Iames another time did ſee
               Chriſt, Paule doth it declare:
               Whereof we may aſſured be,
               For Chriſt of his had care;
               And as to Peter, ſo alone
               He vnto Iames then came.
               Thus did they ſee him euery one,
               And witneſſed the ſame.
            
            
               Chriſt appeared to ſeuen of the Diſciples as they were fiſhing at the ſea of Tiberias.
               
                  
                     
                        Iohn 21.1.After theſe things Ieſus alſo
                  Did ſhew him ſelfe againe,
                  To his Diſciples, ſeuen or mo,
                  Where then they did remaine,
                  At the ſea of Tiberias:
                  For they a fiſhing were.
                  And thus as then it came to paſſe,
                  That they were fiſhing there.
               
               
                  Theſe were together in one place,
                  And Simon Peter ſayd,
                  Ile go a fiſhing for a ſpace,
                  To whom they promiſe ayd:
                  For they ſayd, we will go with thee,
                  And ſo away they went;
                  Soone ſhipt they were as they would be,
                  Small time therein was ſpent.
               
               
                  But they that night their labour loſt,
                  Chriſt Ieſus was away:
                  They tooke no fiſh along the coaſt
                  
                     All night, till it was day.
                  That Chriſt came vnto them, and then
                  When he was come indeed,
                  Though paſt all hope (as wearie men)
                  Yet preſently they ſpeed.
               
               
                  For when it was now early day,
                  Chriſt on the ſhore did ſtand:Chriſts 8. apparition,
                  
                  They knew him not (as Iohn doth ſay)
                  Though they were neare at hand.
                  Haue ye ſayd Chriſt, ſirs anie meate?
                  They anſwered him, no.
                  Chriſt doth not his at all forget,
                  Where euer that they go.
               
               
                  Caſt out your net, and you ſhall find
                  On the right ſide, ſaid he:
                  So they obeyed Ieſus mind,
                  And caſt that ſide, to ſee;
                  Their trauels paſt was then no let,
                  They did what Chriſt them bad:
                  They ſcarſe could draw to land the net,
                  Such ſtore of fiſh they had.
               
               
                  Then that Diſciple whom Chriſt lou'd,
                  Said vnto Peter, lo,
                  It is the Lord: his heart was mou'd,
                  His mind did giue him ſo.
                  When Peter heard that it was he,
                  He girt his coate in haſt,
                  And caſt him ſelfe to ſwimme, to ſee
                  He would not be the laſt.
               
               
                  But all the reſt by ſhip did come,
                  They were not farre from land:
                  For as it is ſuppoſd of ſome,
                  
                     The ſhore was hard at hand.
                  Two hundreth cubits off they were,
                  Or thereabouts, they ſay:
                  The net they drawing with them there,
                  Made to the ſhore away.
               
               
                  Aſſoone as they were come to land,
                  A fire of coles they ſee:
                  And Ieſus by the ſame did ſtand,
                  There bread and fiſh had he.
                  The fiſh vpon the coales were layd,
                  That Ieſus had before:
                  Bring of your fiſh alſo, he ſayd;
                  Thereof they had great ſtore.
               
               
                  Then Peter ſtept, to draw ſtraightway
                  The net and fiſh to land:
                  His maiſters mind he did obay,
                  He readie was at hand.
                  And hundreth, fiftie, then and three
                  Of fiſhes great they had:
                  Their net vnbroken ſafe they ſee,
                  For all they were ſo lade.
               
               
                  Come now and dine, then Ieſus ſayd.
                  Of the Diſciples none
                  Durſt aske, who art thou? ſo affrayd
                  They were at what was done:
                  And eke withall they knew it well,
                  Him Chriſt the Lord to be:
                  No man had neede the ſame to tell,
                  They knew all it was he.
               
               
                  Ieſus tooke bread, and fiſh likewiſe,
                  And to them did it giue,
                  And they did eate what did ſuffiſe,
                  
                     Thus Chriſt did his releeue.
                  This was the eight time ſince he roſe,
                  Chriſt did to them appeare:
                  To ſome Diſciples, as to thoſe,
                  That met together there.
               
            
            
               Chriſt reſtored Peter to his former place, thriſe calling him, to anſwer his three fold deniall of him.
               
                  Chriſt ſayd when they had dined well,
                        Iohn 21.15.
                  
                  And each of them at eaſe;
                  Simon thou ſonne of Ionah tell,
                  Lou'ſt thou me more then theſe?
                  I loue thee Lord, thou knowſt I do.
                  My lambs (ſaid Chriſt) then feed.
                  Ieſus the ſecond time ſaid ſo:
                  He ſayd, I do indeed▪
                  
               
               
                  Then feed my ſheepe, Chriſt Ieſus ſayd.
                  Yet once againe did he
                  Aske Peter; which made him diſmayd,
                  So inſtant him to ſee.
                  Yea Peter grieu'd in heart to heare
                  Chriſt aske him thriſe the ſame;
                  It doth to thee (ô Lord) appeare,
                  That I do loue thy name.
               
               
                  Then feed my ſheepe, ſayd Chriſt againe;
                  So to his former place
                  Chriſt called him, by this tis plaine,
                  And he receiued grace.
                  He did his maiſter thriſe denie,
                  So grieuous was his fall:
                  And thriſe to eaſe his miſerie,
                  Chriſt Ieſus did him call.
               
               
                  Amen, amen, I ſay to thee,
                  When thou waſt young, thy way
                  
                     Was where thou wouldeſt then, as free
                  To walke at will each day.
                  When thou art old, another ſhall
                  Gird and leade thee alſo,
                  Where thou wouldſt not haue gone at all,
                  Yet mayſt not chuſe but go.
               
               
                  And this Chriſt vnto Peter ſpake,
                  To ſignifie thereby,
                  What death or end Simon ſhould make,
                  His God to glorifie.
                  And when to him he had ſaid this,
                  Chriſt ſaid then; follow me:
                  That now his calling certaine is,
                  Aſſured well is he.
               
               
                  He turning backe did ſoone eſpie
                  Him whom the Lord did loue,
                  Then following after; verely
                  He Chriſt for him did moue:
                  (For this had leaned on Chriſts breaſt,
                  As he at ſupper ſate,
                  And asked Chriſt then for the reſt,
                  Who ſhould betray his ſtate.)
               
               
                  When Peter therefore ſaw him ſo,
                  To Ieſus he did ſay;
                  Lord, what is it that he ſhall do?
                  Now tell me I thee pray.
                  Then Ieſus ſaid to him againe;
                  Man, what is it to thee,
                  If till I come he do remaine?
                  See thou, thou follow me.
               
               
                  Then went this word among them all,
                  That that man ſhould not die.
                  
                     Chriſt ſaid not vnto him, he ſhall
                  Not die aſſuredly,
                  But if vntill I come, I will
                  That tarie ſtill ſhall he,
                  Do thou what I command fulfill:
                  What is the ſame to thee?
               
            
            
               Chriſt appearing to his Diſciples, reproued their infidelitie.
               The ninth time that Chriſt did appeare,Chriſts 9. appa.
               
               Of incredulitie
               He did reproue all that were there.
               Through imbecillitie
               They did miſdoubt though they did ſee,
               And ſpeake to him withall.
               Thus blind (as they) our eyes now be,
               Till Chriſt them open ſhall.
            
            
               Chriſt appeared to his Diſciples and fiue hundred brethren at once in a mountaine in Galilie.
               
                  The next time was in Galilie,1. Cor. 15. Chriſts 10. app.
                     
                  
                  Vpon a mountaine there:
                  Where he as Paule doth teſtifie,
                  To many did appeare.
                  There vnto his a charge he gaue,
                  The which to vndertake,
                  He promiſd them a helpe to haue,
                  Which ſhould them able make.
               
               
                  For Ieſus ſpake, and thus did ſay,
                  All power now I haue,
                        Matth. 28.18. Cap. 11.27. Hebr. 2.8. Iohn 17.2.
                  
                  In heau'n and earth, and euerie way,
                  Which God the Father gaue.
                  
                     
                        Math. 28.19 Mar. 16.
                           •
                        
                      Go ye therefore now teaching all,
                  Baptizing them alſo:
                  
                     Throughout the world where I ſhall call,
                  And you oppoint to go.
               
               
                  Baptize all in the Fathers name,
                  The Sonne, and holy Ghoſt:
                  What I command, do ye the ſame,
                  Your labour is not loſt.
                  Teach them all things for to obſerue,
                  That I command indeed:
                  I am with you, you 
                        •
                     le preſerue,
                  And ſtill releeue your need.
               
               
                  I will ſaue them that ſhall beleeue,
                  And be bap
                        •
                     ized to:
                  My Father did me power giue,
                  That I the ſame may do.
                  The vnb
                        •
                     leeuers all ſhall be
                  Condemned for the ſame.
                  And theſe things alſo do ſhall he,
                  Which ſhall beleeue my in my name. name.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Marc. 16.17 Act. 16.18. The deuil, caſt out in my name ſhall,
                  
                     
                        Act. 2.4. With new toungs ſpeake ſhall they:
                  
                     
                        Marc. 16.18 Act. 28.5.8. No deadly drinks ſhall hurt at all,
                  And ſerpents take away.
                  On ſicke men if their hands they lay,
                  They ſhall recouer well.
                  All theſe things they ſhall day by day
                  Performe, as I do tell.
               
            
            
               Chriſt appeared againe to thē in Bethanie, and led them into mount Oliuet, where after he had bleſſed them, he aſcended moſt gloriouſly into heauen in their ſight.
               
                  
                     Chriſts 11. app.Then the Diſciples all they were
                  By Ieſus led away,
                  To Bethanie together there,
                  
                     On his aſcenſion day:
                  And to mount Oliuet they went,
                        Mar. 16.19. Luc. 24.50. Iohn 20.21. Act. 1.9.
                  
                  Where he did bleſſe them all,
                  Willing them then (as they were ſent)
                  All his elect to call.
               
               
                  When he had bleſſed them, foorthright,
                  While they beheld the ſame,
                  A cloud tooke him vp out of ſight,
                  Which ſodainly ſo came.
                  And while they looked ſtedfaſtly
                  To heau'nward as he went,
                  Behold two men did ſtand them by,
                  Perceiuing their intent.
               
               
                  Which ſayd to them, why gaze ye ſo,
                  Ye men of Galilie?
                  This Ieſus whom ye ſee thus go,
                  Shall ſo come verily,
                  Thoſe men in white apparell were,
                  Whom they knew not as then
                  Angels to be, that did appeare
                  As though they had bene men.
               
               
                  Which when they heard, they eu'rie where
                  Went preaching day by day,
                  The Lord increaſing here and there,
                        Mar. 16.20. Heb. 2.4.
                  
                  His Church, by them, I ſay:
                  And eke confirming what they taught,
                  With ſignes and wonders ſo,
                  That ſtill ſome fiſh their net then caught,
                  Where euer they did go.
               
               
                  Thus Ieſus was ſeene bodily,
                  In fortie dayes we reade,
                  Eleuen times aſſurely,
                  When he roſe from the dead.
                  
                     And after his aſcenſion,
                  Chriſt alſo was ſeene twice:
                  
                     Act. 7.56. Act. 9.5. 1. Cor. 15.8. Chriſts 12. apparition, which was ſpiritually.By Steuen when they did him ſtone,
                  And by Saint Paule likewiſe.
               
               
                  Firſt Steuen vpon Gods right hand
                  Did ſee him ſit on hie,
                  The which to them that there did ſtand,
                  He then did teſtifie.
                  
                     Chr. 13. appar. ſpiritually likewiſe was the laſt that is read 
                           •
                        f in the teſtament.Paule perſecuting ſore of ſuch
                  As did in Chriſt beleeue,
                  Saw him, reioycing verie much,
                  That God did grace him geue.
               
               
                  And many other things there are,
                  That Ieſus did alſo,
                  Which man with tong cannot declare,
                  Nor pen paint out: for lo
                  If written were his works and words,
                  The world could not containe
                  The bookes (ſo much the ſame affoords)
                  Vnwritten that remaine.
               
               
                  Yet herein is ſo much containd,
                  As we haue need to know:
                  Gods ſpirit ſure in them remaind,
                  That this to vs could ſhew;
                  Therefore be glad, in God reioyce,
                  That left vs ſuch a ſtay:
                  Be ioyfull, and lift vp your voyce,
                  To Iacobs God alway.
               
               
                  To Father, Sonne, and holy Ghoſt,
                  All glorie be therefore,
                  That was and is of might the moſt,
                  And ſhall be euermore. Amen.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               The Table of the firſt part.
               THe promiſed Meſſiah. 1
               
               The Angels ſalutation to Marie. 2
               
               Marie viſited Elizabeth. ibid.
               Ioſeph warned by the Angell. ibid.
               The taxe vnder Auguſtus Caeſar. 3
               
               The birth of Chriſt. ibid.
               The Angell to the ſhepheards. 4
               
               The circumciſion of Chriſt. 6
               
               The wiſemen. ibid.
               Simeon and Anna prophecie. 8
               
               Ioſephs going into Egipt. 9
               
               The infants ſlaine. 10
               
               Ioſephs returne out of Egipt. 11
               
               Ieſus diſputed with the Elders. ibid.
               A repetition of ſixe things. 12
               
            
            
               The Table of the ſecond part.
               The baptiſme of Chriſt. 15
               
               Chriſt faſted fortie dayes. 17
               
               Chriſt was tempted. 18
               
               Iohns teſtimonie of Chriſt. 20.30
               
               Iohn ſent Diſciples to Chriſt. 23
               
               Andrew and Iohn called. ibid.
               Simon Peter called. ibid.
               Philip called. ibid.
               Nathanaell called. 24
               
               Christs firſt miracle in Cana. 25
               
               Chriſt went from Cana to Capernaum. ibid.
               Chriſt droue the buyers and ſellers out of the Temple. 26
               
               Chriſts conference with Nicodemus. 28
               
               Chriſts returne to Iudaea. Of purifying. 30
               
               Ieſus auoyded danger in Iudaea. 31
               
               
                  Chriſts conference with the woman of Samaria. ibid.
               Chriſt preached at Nazareth. 35
               
               A Prophet not esteemed in his countrey. ibid.
               Chriſt healed the rulers ſonne. 36
               
               Iohns impriſonment: Apostles called. 37
               
            
            
               The Table of the third part.
               Chriſts ſermon in the mount. 39
               
               Chriſt pronounceth wo. 41
               
               Miniſters ſalt and light. 42
               
               Chriſt came to fulfill the Law. ibid.
               Thou ſhalt not kill. 43
               
               Reconciliation. 44
               
               Adulterie, Diuorcement, Othes. 45
               
               Reuenge. 46
               
               Loue thine enemie. ibid.
               Almes, Prayer. 47
               
               The Lords prayer. 48
               
               To forgiue one another. ibid.
               Faſting. ibid.
               Worldly care forbidden. 49
               
               Raſh iudgement forbidden. 51
               
               Holy things may not be giuen to dogges. ibid.
               Aske, ſeeke, knocke. ibid.
               The ſtraite and wide gate. 52
               
               Falſe prophets. ibid.
               The good and euill tree. ibid.
               The houſes on the rocke and ſand. ibid.
               A Leaper cleanſed. 53
               
               The Centurions ſeruant healed. 54
               
               Chriſt caſt out deuils. ibid.
               Peters wiues mother healed. 55
               
               Chriſt againe caſt out deuils. 56
               
               Chriſt went from Capernaū to preach to the other cities. ib.
               
                  Chriſts ſermon in the ſhip. 57
               
               Chriſts anſwer to the Scribe that would follow him. 58
               
               Chriſts anſwer to the Diſciple that would firſt go bury his father. ibid.
               Chriſt ſtilled the tempeſt of the ſea. 59
               
               Chriſt healed the poſſeſſed with deuils. ibid.
               Chriſt healed one of the palſey. 61
               
               Chriſt healed another leaper. ibid.
               Matthew called. 62
               
               Of faſting. 63
               
               Iayrus daughter. ibid.
               A blind man healed. ibid.
               The dumbe ſpeake. 64
               
               Chriſt healed one that had bin diſeaſed xxxviij years. ib.
               The Diſciples plucked 
                     •
                  ares of corne on the ſaboth day. 65
               
               The man with the withered band. 68
               
               Ieſus tooke compaſſion on the diſperſed multitude. 70
               
               The harueſt great. 71
               
               The twelue Apoſtles ſent to preach. ibid.
               Another ſermon of Christ. 74
               
               Tht Centurions ſeruant. 54.76
               
               Chriſt raiſed the widowes ſonne at Naijm from death. 77
               
               Iohn Baptiſts meſſage to Chriſt. ibid.
               Chriſts anſwer to Iohn. 78
               
               Chriſts teſtimonie of Iohn. ibid.
               Chriſt reproued his auditorie. 80
               
               Chriſt vpbraideth the vnthankefull cities. ibid.
               Chriſt reioyced for the ſucceſſe of the Goſpell. 81
               
               Chriſts exhortation to beare the croſſe. 82
               
               Chriſt dined with Simon the leaper. ibid.
               Certaine women followed Chriſt. 85
               
               A kingdome deuided. 86
               
               Blaſphemie. 87
               
               The ſigne of Ionas. 88
               
               Impenitencie. 89
               
               
                  To reuolt from the truth. 89
               
               Chriſts mother, ſiſters, and brethren. 90
               
               The parable of the ſeede. 91
               
               Chriſt interpreted the ſame. 93
               
               The parable of the good ſeed and tares. 94
               
               The parable of the muſtard ſeed. 95
               
               The parable of the leauen. 96
               
               The parable of the tares interpreted. 97
               
               The parable of the treaſure hidden. 98
               
               The parable of the pearle. ibid.
               The parable of the draw-net. 99
               
            
            
               The Table of the fourth part.
               Iohn Baptiſt beheaded. 101
               
               Chriſt preaching in his owne countrey, was deſpiſed againe. 104
               
               Chriſt ſent his Apoſtles to preach. 105
               
               The Apoſtles returne. 106
               
               Chriſt fed fiue thouſand with fiue loaues. ibid.
               Chriſt walked on the ſea. 109
               
               Chriſt healed the ſicke at Genezaret. 110
               
               Chriſts ſermon of the true Manna. 111
               
               Of eating meate vnwaſhen. 114
               
               The woman of Canaans daughter healed. 116
               
               Chriſt fed foure thouſand with ſeuen loaues. ibid.
               The Phariſies and Sadduces ſeeke a ſigne. 117
               
               The leauen of the Phariſies. 118
               
               Christ gaue a blind man ſight. 119
               
               The keyes of the kingdome of heauen. ibid.
               To beare the croſſe. Peter rebuked. 121
               
               The faithfull muſt beare it. 122
               
               Chriſt transfigured on Thabor. 123
               
               Christ healed the lunaticke. 124
               
               Chriſt foretold his paſſion and payed tribute. 125
               
               
                  Contention for primacie. 126
               
               Of forgiueneſſe. ibid.
               A king receiuing accounts. 127
               
               Chriſts ſermons at the feaſt of tabernacles. 128
               
               A woman taken in adulterie. 132
               
               Chriſt the light of the world. 133
               
               Of freedome. 136
               
               Chriſt gaue ſight to one borne blind. 138
               
               The true ſhepheard and hireling. 142
               
               The feaſt of Dedication. 144
               
            
            
               The Table of the fift part.
               Chriſt ſetled to go to Ieruſalem. 147
               
               Chriſts anſwer to the Scribe. 148
               
               Chriſts anſwer to the Diſciple. ibid.
               Chriſts anſwer to another that would bid his frends farewell. 149
               
               Chriſt ſent the ſeuentie Diſciples to preach. ibid.
               The ſeuentie returned. 151
               
               The Lawyers queſtion anſwered. 152
               
               Marie and Martha receiue Chriſt. 154
               
               Chriſt taught his Diſciples to pray. 155
               
               Chriſt caſt a deuill out of a dumbe man, and the dumbe ſpake. 157
               
               The Iewes required a ſigne. 158
               
               Chriſt rebuked the hypocriſie of the Phariſies. ibid.
               Lazarus ſicke. 161
               
               Diuorcement. 162
               
               The parable of the ſecure rich man. 163
               
               The parable of the watchfull ſeruant. 165
               
               Chriſt receiued infants. 166
               
               A rich young man that would be iuſtified by the Lawe. 167
               
               Euerlaſting life promiſed to them that follow Chriſt. 168
               
               
                  The labourers ſent to the vineyard. 169
               
               The crueltie of Pilate. 170
               
               The parable of the figge tree. ibid.
               Christ healed a woman that had bene ſicke 18. years. 171
               
               The parable of the muſtard ſeed. 172
               
               The ſtraite and brode way. ibid.
               Chriſt called Herod a Foxe. 173
               
               Chriſt healed the dropſie on the ſaboth. 174
               
               Chriſt taught lowlineſſe. 175
               
               Of the great ſupper. 176
               
               The parable of the loſt ſheepe and the groate. 177
               
               The parable of the p
                     •
                  odigall ſonne. 178
               
               The parable of the vniuſt ſteward. 181
               
               The hiſtorie of Diues and Lazarus. 183
               
               Offences are to be auoyded. 185
               
               Chriſt healed ten Leapers. 186
               
               The Phariſies would knowe when the kingdome of G
                     •
                  d ſhould come. 187
               
               The parable of the vnrighteous Iudge. 189
               
               The parable of the Phariſie and the Publican. 190
               
               Of the talents. 191
               
               Of the labourers. 194
               
               Chriſt foretelleth againe of his paſſion. 195
               
               The ſonnes of Zebede, and their requeſt. ibid.
               Blind Bartimeus. 196
               
               The calling of Zache. ibid.
               Chriſt raiſed Lazarus from death. 197
               
               A counſell held againſt Chriſt. 201
               
               Chriſt ſupped with Lazarus. 203
               
               Chriſt rideth into Ieruſalem. 205
               
               Chriſt caſt the buyers and ſellers out of the Temple. 206
               
               Of the Grecians. 207
               
               Another ſermon of the croſſe. 208
               
               Chriſt curſed the figge tree. 210
               
               The figge tree withered. 211
               
               
                  Th
                     •
                   parable of the two ſonnes. 213
               
               The parable of the vineyard let out. 214
               
               The parable of the king that made a mariage for his ſon. 216
               
               Of paying tribute to Caeſar. 219
               
               Of the reſurrection. 220
               
               Of the great commandement. 221
               
               How Chriſt is the ſonne of Dauid. 222
               
               The Scribes and Phariſies ſitting in Moſes ſeate are to be heard. 223
               
               Chriſt cried wo againſt the Scribes and Phariſies and the Lawyers. 225
               
               Of the deſtruction of the temple, the citie, and the ende of the world. 230
               
               The parable of the figge tree. 236
               
               Chriſts comming. ibid.
               A warning to be watchfull. 237
               
               The parable of the ten virgins. 238
               
               The parable of the talents. 240
               
               The maner of the laſt iudgement. 242
               
               Another ſermon of the croſſe. 244
               
               The Diſciples demād where they ſhould prepare the paſſeouer. 246
               
               Chriſt waſhed his Diſciples feete. 248
               
               The inſtitution of the Lords Supper. 250
               
               Chriſt went to mount Oliuet. 251
               
               Chriſt comforted his Diſciples. 253
               
               The parable of the vine. 256
               
               Another ſermon of the croſſe. 258
               
               Chriſts prayer for his Elect. 262
               
               The hiſtorie of the paſſion. 264
               
               Iudas with a band of men tooke Chriſt. 267
               
               Ieſus was brought to Annas and Caiphas. 269
               
               The high prieſts ſought falſe witneſſe againſt Chriſt. 270
               
               Chriſt brought before Pilate: Iudas death. 273
               
               
                  Chriſt brought before Pilate. Iudas death. 273
               
               Pilate ſent Chriſt to Herod. 276
               
               Barrabas let looſe. 278
               
               Chriſt condemned and crucified. 280
               
               Ioſeph and Nicodemus buried Chriſt. 288
               
            
            
               The Table of the ſixt part.
               Chriſt roſe from death the day after the Saboth. 293
               
               Chriſt appeared to Marie Magdalene. 300
               
               Chriſt appeared to the other women. 301
               
               The ſouldiers were corrupted. 302
               
               Chriſt appeared to Simon Peter. 314
               
               The two Diſciples going to Emaus. 315
               
               Chriſt appeared Thomas being preſent. 324
               
               Chriſt appeared to Iames. 326
               
               Chriſt appeared at the ſea of Tiberias. ibid.
               Peter reſtored. 329
               
               Chriſt appeared to his Diſciples, reprouing their vnbeleefe. 331
               
               Chriſts laſt apparition bodily. 332
               
            
            The end of the Table.
            
         
      
   