
      
         
            
            
               
            
         
         
            
            PANCHARIS: The first Booke. Containing The Preparation of the Loue betweene OVVEN TVDYR, and the QVEENE, Long ſince intended to her Maiden MAIESTIE: And now dedicated TO THE INVINCIBLE IAMES, Second and greater Monarch of great Britaine, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, with the Iſlands adiacent.
            
               Mar. Valerius Martialis. Victurus Genium debet habere liber.
            Printed at London by V. S. for Clement Knight, M D CIII.
         
         
            
            
            TO MY LORD THE KING. Sonet Acroſticke.
            
            IMage of God; firſt as a Man, and then
            As King, by moſt Deſert, and onely Right:
            Man is the King of Creatures, and thy might
            Exceedes this too, for thou art King of men.
            Sunne of our Sphaeie, may neuer Clowde vp pen
            So radiant Beames from thy poore Subiects ſight:
            That ſtill our Eyes may ſee their happy Light,
            Eu'n as their Heate did warme our Boſoms, when
            Vnſeene they ſhone beneath the fixed Star.
            Vp Noble Minde to thy fift Empirie,
            And ſome yet higher then thy fortunes ar:
            Reſemble Heau'n in all but Leuitie,
            Take after Earth in nothing more or leſſe
            Except an irremooued Stayedneſſe.
         
         
            
            TO THE BRIGHT QVEENE ANNE his deere Wife, and our dread Lady.
            
            
               1
               WHat is ſhe that like ſiluer Cynthia ſhoeth
               Amidſt the hoaſt of heauen,
               But fairer three times ſeauen?
               It is the Queene of Loue, ſee where ſhe goeth.
               The Queene of Loue and Beauty, (lo) together
               With her faire ſon the Prince of Loue comes hether
            
            
               2
               The Southpole that in our Horizon ſhined,
               And made the Earth to wonder,
               Gone is that Earth all vnder,
               And to the Northpole hath her roome reſigned:
               On whom to waite our Eyes and Harts perſeuer,
               And may they ceaſe, ô neuer, neuer, neuer
            
            
               3
               Thou in whoſe Zodiak of white armes enchained
               Our Sunne ſo oft hath ſhined,
               In whoſe wombe was confined
               What in this Iſle ſcornes to be long contained;
               Liue thou and he, and maiſt thou ſee him rather
               Copartner then Succeſſor to his Father.
            
         
         
            
            TO MY LORD THE PRINCE. Sonet Acroſticke.
            
            HEire of thy Sires foure Realmes, and (which I more
            Eſteeme) foure vertues, that vnto a fift,
            No doubt will thee (o ſlowly ſlowly) lift;
            
               
                  •
               e
                  ••
               iue this Ryme of thine old Aunceſtore
            
               
                  •
               ong Prince of Wales, and pardon me therefore.
            So may glad VICTORY be one day ſwift
            To crowne thy ſacred head (that art a grift
            Extracted hence) with holy Bayes, before
            (Vnuanquiſh'd or vnhurt by ſea or land)
            Vpon thy brow the Wreath of England ſit:
            And I with crowned head, but armed hand,
            Ride by thy Lordly ſide, and after it
            Turne from thy Grandſires loues to ſing thy wars,
            Exchanging Venus Mole for Marſes skars.
         
         
            
            Illuſtriſsimae Dominae. ARBELLAE STVARTAE. Sonulus Elegeiacus Acroſtichus.
            
            
               A Vricomum alterius Mundi iubar altera Virgo,
            Regia cui ſtirps eſt, Mens neque ſtirpe minor;
            Bu imperfectum facili cape fronte Poema:
            Eſt quia perfectus qui tibi mittit amor.
            Lactea nec Venus eſt illic, nec Vena, nec unquàm
            Latus Amor Muſa nouit adeſſe meae.
            Attamen Eugenij ſacros cantillat amores,
            Senfit amans ſocium queis Catherina iugum.
            Tandem orata Venus ſic ambos iuvit amantes,
            Vnde genus tantis Regibus, at
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                tibi.
            At
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                mihi ſcribenti utinam ſic aequa fuiſſet:
            Ritè ego ſi colui, dum ſub Amore fui.
            Tutamen (horriduiae faueas licet ipſa Dianae)
            Alma veni, Muſis & Venus eſto meis.
         
         
            
            
               Clariſſimo & Candidiſſimo jngenio Praeceptori olim, ſemper Amico GVLIELMO CAMDENO Armorum Regi nulli ſecundo Poemation hoc cenſendum & emendandum mitto.
            NAnus Muſaei cupit in quacun
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                locari
            Parte liber, magnum nec capit ille locum.
            Sed ne
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ſe magnis ſtudet immiſcere Poetis
            Quales Meonides maximus, at
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                Maro.
            Cern
                  •
               us hic veterum lambat veſtigia vatum,
            At
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                pio ſanctos baſiet ore pedes.
            Cum Naſone tamen ponas (hic nam
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                libellus
            Sanctior, vt multis doctior ille modis)
            Vel cum Chaucero (nec enim mihi fidus Amator
            Eſt minùs, & multo Nympha pudic a magis.)
            Plus quo
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                quam tetigiſſe pedes fortaſſe meretur,
            Quando tuas meritus ſit tetigiſſe manus.
         
         
            
            Andreas Downes Graecus profeſſor Regius Cantabrigiae.
            ANtiquos memorat vatum chorus omn is amores,
            Sed plerum
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                quibus non Venus aequa fuit:
            Foelices HOLLANDE canis foeliciter igneis
            Tu veterum, quibus hand abnuit alma Venus.
            Et REGINA fuit memorabilis, & THEODORVS:
            
            Illam qui meruit, carmine dignus erat.
            Nec tant
                  •
               m furor ambobus fuit ille ſecundus,
            Nec blandum hoc modò tum iuvit vtrum
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                iugum:
            Sed populos domuit ſaeuos genteſ
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                feroceis
            Hic tandem placidè conciliauit amor.
            Cuius nunc voluend a dies fructum attulit vitro,
            Et maiore beat munere longa dies.
            Nam
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                tribus populis diſcordibus inſula diues
            Ante colebatur, bella
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                crebra mouet.
            Verùm exhinc mox laeta duos Concordia iunxit,
            Firmus & hic ſtabili foedere vinxit amor.
            Tertia magnanimis reſtabant regna Britannis,
            Haec quo
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                magnifico ſub duce nunc coeunt.
            Hac etenim de ſtirpe venit Rex inclytus, at
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               
            
            Clara recens ſoboles, & noua progenies.
            
               
Quae penitus toto ſecluſos orbe Britannos
            Aeternâ reget in pace, fauente Deo.
            Et maioribus auſpicijs dominabitur orae,
            Circumqua
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ingens quà fluit Oceanus:
            Sceptra tenens, diadema gerens, IACOBI age honores,
            Aggredere ô magnos, maxime, laetus ouans.
            Horridulâ genitum in regione Eremanthidos Arcti,
            Sol regem vidit te ſimul at
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                hominem.
            Creuerunt animi pariter creſcentibus annis,
            Sors tandem aequa animis cedere regna iubet.
            Finibus exiguis arctari magna recuſant,
            Virtuti campum fata dedêre parem.
            Mollior horrifero Boreae ſuperadditus Auſter,
            Vna eſt virtutis facta palaestra tibi.
            Quàm ſapiens fuit Empedocies, qui foedere amoris,
            Et caelo & terrâ cuncta coire facit!
            I nunc ô vates & Theſeas at
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                Ariadnas
            Medeaſ
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                truces dic & Amazonidas:
            Materiam noster nouit ſibi ſumere dignam,
            Dignos & verſus pangere materiâ.
         
         
            
            Nicolai Hilli Carmen Teſtamentale & viaticum.
            NVnc migro, nec patrios forſan rediturus ad agros
            Vrget, & officij debita cura premit.
            Quid prohibebit enim quin veri testis honestem,
            Quem ſtudij paritas iustra
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                multa probant?
            Raptim & diſcedens verbo quod ſentio dicam,
            Totius gregis est gloria, nemo gregis.
            Ornat & egregijs Catherinam millibus effert:
            Vt canit ille ſuam, ſic canit illa ſuum.
         
         
            
            E: B: Anacreontickes.
            SCarſe 'till now hath ENGLAND ſeen
            A Poëm, but of verſes ſtore;
            Here an vnenforced green
            Hath natiue flowres, which heretofore
            Had, at moſt, well painted been,
            As was the ſeaſon which them bore:
            Arts each Venus that doth ſhine
            In antient Poëſie, heer more.
            HOLLAND, this firſt birth of thine
            Put forth imperfect, ſtands before
            The finiſhed, and ſhall in fine
            Somewhat be new for worlds t'adore:
            CYNTHIVS (as we diuine)
            And the MVSES, and the GRACES,
            And their QVEENE, by thee refine
            Baſtard Songs, whoſe common baſes
            Were but words, that KATHARINE
            Beautie ęquall to her faces
            Might enioy Here then vnhard
            A Princely Love, and learned Bard.
         
         
            
            
               Ben: Iohnſon. Ode. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            
               WHo ſaith our Times nor haue, nor can
               Produce vs a blacke Swan?
               Behold, where one doth ſwim;
               Whoſe Note, and Hue,
               Beſides the other Swannes admiring him,
               Betray it true:
               A gentler Bird, then this,
               Did neuer dint the breaſt of Tamiſis.
               
            
            
               Marke, marke, but when his wing he takes,
               How faire a flight he makes!
               How vpward, and direct!
               Whil'ſt pleas'd Apollo
               
               Smiles in his Sphaere, to ſee the reſt affect,
               In vaine to follow:
               This Swanne is onely his,
               And Phoebus loue cauſe of his blackeneſſe is.
            
            
               
               He ſhew'd him firſt the hoofe-cleft Spring,
               Neere which, the Theſpiad's ſing;
               The cleare Dircaean Fount
               Where Pindar ſwamme;
               The pale Pyrene, and the forked Mount:
               
               And, when they came
               To brookes, and broader ſtreames,
               From Zephyr's rape would cloſe him with his beames.
            
            
               This chang'd his Downe; till this, as white
               As the whole heard in fight,
               And ſtill is in the Breſt:
               That part nor Winde,
               Nor Sunne could make to vary from the reſt,
               Or alter kinde.
               "So much doth Virtue hate,
               "For ſtile of rareneſſe, to degenerate.
            
            
               Be then both Rare, and Good; and long
               Continue thy ſweete Song.
               Nor let one Riuer boaſt
               Thy tunes alone;
               But proue the Aire, and ſaile from Coaſt to Coaſt:
               Salute old Mône,
               
               
                  
But firſt to Cluid ſtoope low,
               The Vale, that bred thee pure, as her Hills Snow.
            
            
               From thence, diſplay thy vving againe
               Ouer Iērna maine,
               To the Eugenian dale;
               There charme the rout
               With thy ſoft notes, and hold them within Pale
               That late were out.
               "Muſicke hath power to draw,
               "Where neither Force can bend, nor Feare can awe.
            
            
               Be proofe, the glory of his hand,
               
                  (Charles Montioy) whoſe command
               Hath all beene Harmony:
               And more hath wonne
               Vpon the Kerne, and wildeſt Iriſhry,
               
               Then Time hath donne,
               Whoſe ſtrength is aboue ſtrength;
               And conquers all things, yea it ſelfe, at length.
            
            
               Who euer ſipt at Baphyre riuer,
               That heard but Spight deliuer
               His farre-admited Acts,
               
                  
And is not rap't
               With entheate rage, to publiſh their bright tracts?
               (But this more apt
               When him alone we ſing)
               Now muſt we plie our ayme; our Swan's on wing.
            
            
               Who (ſee) already hath ore-flowne
               The Hebrid Iſles, and knowne
               The ſcatter'd Orcades;
               
               From thence is gon
               To vtmoſt Thule: whence, he backes the Seas
               To Caledon,
               
               And ouer Grampius mountaine,
               To Loumond lake, and Twedes blacke-ſpringing fountaine.
            
            
               Haſte, Haſte, ſweete Singer: Nor to Tine,
               
               
                  Humber, or Owſe, decline;
               But ouer Land to Trent:
               
               There coole thy Plumes,
               And vp againe, in skies, and aire to vent
               Their reeking fumes;
               Till thou at Tames alight,
               From whoſe prowde boſome, thou began'ſt thy flight.
            
            
               
               
                  Tames, prowde of thee, and of his Fate
               In entertaining late
               The choiſe of Europes pride;
               The nimble French;
               
               The Dutch whom Wealth (not Hatred) doth diuide,
               The Danes that drench
               Their cares in wine; with ſure
               Though ſlower Spaine; and Italy mature.
            
            
               All which, when they but heare a ſtraine
               Of thine, ſhall thinke the Maine
               
               Hath ſent her Mermaides in,
               To hold them here:
               Yet, looking in thy face, they ſhall begin
               To looſe that feare;
               And (in the place) enuie
               So blacke a Bird, ſo bright a Qualitie.
            
            
               But ſhould they know (as I) that this,
               Who warbleth PANCHARIS,
               Were CYCNVS, once high flying
               With Cupids wing;
               
                  
Though, now by Loue transform'd, & dayly dying:
               (Which makes him ſing
               With more delight, and grace)
               Or thought they, Leda's white Adult'rers place
            
            
               Among the ſtarres ſhould be reſign'd
               To him, and he there ſhrin'd;
               Or Tames be rap't from vs
               To dimme and drowne
               In heau'n the Signe of old Eridamos:
               
               How they would frowne!
               But theſe are Myſteries
               Conceal'd from all but cleare Propheticke eyes.
            
            
               It is inough, their griefe ſhall know
               At their returne, nor Po,
               
               
                  Iberus, Tagus, Rheine,
               
               
                  Scheldt, nor the Maas,
               
               Slow Arar, nor ſwift Rhone; the Loyre, nor Seine,
               
               With all the race
               Of Europes waters can
               Set out a like, or ſecond to our Swan.
            
         
         
            
            To my Mayden Muſe.
            
               GOe Virgin Muſe to her Diuinity,
               That is the Veſta of Virginity:
               For vnto whom ſhouldſt thou goe rather
               So bound to her, and to her father?
               Be gonne, and when thou com'ſt before her,
               Vpon thy knee, ſee thou adore her.
               For thou mayſt gather by her feature,
               She is more then an earthly creature.
               In whom no Elements are combined,
               But a fift Eſſence well refined
               Aboue the vulgar groſſe confections
               Of any of the fower complexions,
               Flegme, Sanguine, Melancholy, Coler.
            
            
               Tell her that once I was her Scholer,
               And how in Grammer I was grounded
               In the beſt ſchoole ſhe euer founded,
               By two great Clerkes (two greater waſters
               Of oyle then houres) that were my Maſters:
               Where I liu'd partly of her larges,
               And partly of my parents charges.
            
            
               
               Thence was I had to learne more knolledge
               To Cambridge, and her fathers Colledge,
               Of him whoſe fame is flowne ALL-OVER
               As well beyond as this ſide Douer.
               
            
            
               On Ariſtotle oft I pored,
               And here and there him ouer-skored.
               Where Poetrie too I found defined,
               To which by birth I was enclined.
               Yet heard I worthy DOVVNES in Homer,
               
               And euery day I glean'd my gomer.
            
            
               Thus hauing there for Lea ſerued
               Though ſome ſaide Rachel I deſerued)
               Some thought the houſe could ſtand without me.
            
            
               I then began to looke about me:
               And forthwith deſperately did ventre
               The wide world, in whoſe little Centre
               My friends (of whom death hath bereft me)
               My louing friends ſome liuing left me,
               Enough (if God the grace but lend me)
               From Cold and Hunger to defend me:
               
                  
That I may ſtudy ſtill by leaſure,
               Without all paine, and at my pleaſure.
            
            
               Now the blacke Doune began to couer
               My pale Cheekes (for I was a Louer)
               And ſung Acroſticke Sonets ſweetely;
               For (if that ſome can iudge diſcreetely)
               I neede not feare that daintie DAVIES,
               Though he ſing ſweeter then the Mauis.
               And of my Loue they were. But ſtay thee,
               No more of that my Muſe I pray thee.
               For either it muſt ſhow my folly,
               Or elſe renew my Melancholly:
               Yet was ſhe faire, and Honourable,
               And Vertuous (had ſhe beene more ſtable.)
            
            
               Though ſhe perhaps did but forget her,
               And now likes May denhead the better:
               Whereof ſhe is the richeſt border
               Next CYNTHIA Soueraigne of that Order.
            
            
               When Loue my boſome thus had fired,
               Me for his Prophet he inſpired:
               
                  
That euery line, and euery letter
               Of my deuiſe might paſſe the better.
               Yet of this Legend but the writer
               Was I, and he the ſole inditer.
            
            
               For how alas can it be other?
               I am not I the Muſes brother.
               My lips I neuer yet haue ſowſed
               In Hippocrene, nor carowſed
               The luſty Liquor thence diſtilling
               The braine with holly fury filling.
            
            
               The Climat where I was begotten
               Of father Phoebus is forgotten,
               No Parnaſſe there (though Mountaines many)
               Nor Muſe (though Nymphs as faire as any)
               God wote it is too farre remoued
               From her, to be of them beloued.
               
                  Apollo, they and all the Graces,
               
               Attend her onely in all places.
            
            
               This in effect when thou haſt told her,
               Thou muſt be yet a little bolder:
               
                  
And beg that thou mayſt waite vpon her,
               Among her many May des of Honor;
               A modeſt Maide with chaſte variety,
               To lull aſleepe that ſweete Society.
               Who may as well as any other,
               Reade euery line before the Mother.
               So ſhamefa'cd are they, and ſo holly,
               Voide of all looſeneſſe, and light folly:
               Elſe had it beene too much impiety,
               To vow them to ſo great a Deity.
            
            
               This done, againe on knee lowe bended,
               And hands as high to heauen extended,
               Aſcribe me of this golden ſtory
               Onely the paine, and her the glory:
               Praying ſhe would but reade the proem,
               And ſo breath life into my Poëm
            
         
      
      
         
            
            PANCHARIS: THE FIRST BOOKE.
            
               I Sing Queene Katharine and my countryman.
               O Loue (if I before thy Altare ſpread,
               Blacke though I be, haue oft lookt pale & wan;
               And as white Turtles there haue offered,
               As are thoſe that thy whiter mother dravve)
               Draw neere, and with her Myrtle decke the head
               Of me thy prieſt, that am too rudely rawe,
               Nor once haue bin baptized in the ſpring
               Of Helicon, which yet I neuer ſaw.
               A pinion plucke me out of thine owne wing:
               And let thy godhead more propitious be
               Vnto my thoughts whiles others loues I ſing,
               Then in mine owne it hath beene vnto me.
            
            
               AND thou O ſecond Sea-borne Queene of Loue,
               In whoſe faire forehead Loue and Maieſtie
               
                  
Still kiſſe each other (as the Turtle-doue
               Doth her beloued) thou whoſe frowne, whoſe ſmile
               Preſenteth both, who doſt inſpire and moue
               This leſſer Continent, this greateſt Ile:
               Let ſmiling Loue, when Maieſty would frowne,
               Infuſe like life and motion to my Stile.
               I treate not I here of the awfull Crowne,
               (Though ſomewhat of the court) my Legend is
               Compoſde of Loue and Beautie vp and downe.
               Where if I aught haue ſaide that ſounds amiſſe,
               Immortall Maid, thou pardon mee that crime,
               Sith thy white hand which (lord) I long to kiſſe
               May croſſe out all, and rectifie my rime.
               So ſhall the amorous Readers ſeeme as thoſe,
               That haue ſeene thee full oft and many a time.
               Yet ſeeing thee againe, anone ſuppoſe
               They ſomewhat ſee they neuer ſaw before,
               Such ſpangling obiects thou doſt ſtill diſcloſe,
               As all deſire to ſee thee more and more.
            
            
               From London Weſtward doth a Caſtle ſtand
               
                  
Along the Thames, which of the winding ſhore
               Is called Windſore, knowne by ſea and land,
               For the rich Guarter and the holy George
               
               There founded firſt by the victorious hand
               Of warlike Edward, he that was the ſcorge
               And ſecond hammer of the haughty Scot.
               As the lame God in his Trinacrian Forge
               Striu'd firſt to blow the ſtubborne yron hot,
               And after laide about him like a Lord,
               Till he thereof the vpper hand had got:
               So Engliſh Edward did with fire and ſword,
               Lighten and Thunder in that Northerne Clime,
               And neuer reſpite did his foe afford,
               (No nor himſelfe almoſt) vntill the time
               As hardy Dauid grac'd faire Windſores Court.
               Where alſo Iohn of France, who long'd to clime
               The wheele of Fortune in the ſelfe ſame ſort,
               A captiue King was after ſhortly ſeene.
            
            
               Yet neither this, nor that, ſo much report
               The fame of Windſore, as faire Katherine;
               
               
                  
She that hath yet (ſaue her great Neece) no other,
               Daughter of France, of England Mother-Queene,
               The ſixt Charles daughter, the ſixt Henries mother,
               And (which is chiefeſt) the fift Henries Wife.
            
            
               Here the ſad Queene ful many a ſigh did ſmother,
               Reſolued ſtill to leade a Widdowes life.
               So chaſte was ſhe, though faire, and rich, and yong,
               That yong and olde to praiſe her were at ſtrife:
               Of her high honour all Muſitians ſung,
               And thereto each ſweet Poet tun'd his pen,
               That therewith England and all Europe rung.
               She was the wonder of all mortall men,
               Few Queenes came neere her, & none went aboue,
               In grace and goodneſſe, ſince, before, or then.
            
            
               Might once no minion dare to kiſſe her gloue
               (Much leſſe her hand) or Miſtreſſe her miſ-call;
               As men are wont, when they for faſhion loue.
               So modeſt was ſhe, and ſo mecke withall,
               That all good folkes might to her Preſence come
               No leſſe then to ſome Councellors common Hall.
               
                  
More doth the ſuter than the gaudy roome,
               Set out a Monarchs Maieſtie, by ods,
               When life or death he lookes for at his doome.
            
            
               Not they that grau'd the gold did make the gods,
               But ſuch as did before them bow to begge,
               All were they made of clay but only clods:
               Nor they the Prince that ſtill prouoke and egge,
               (That only they may golden I dolls be
               To which the ſubiect bends his ſeruile legge)
               The ſacred and annointed Maieſtie
               To robbe the realme, to gaine the ſubiects wealth,
               And looſe their hearts; But ſuch as on the knee
               Importune grace with happineſſe and health,
               Not poſted off to thoſe extreame delayes
               Of bribing fauorites, which is worſe then ſtealth,
               And ſcarce was heard of in thoſe happy dayes.
            
            
               Her ſelfe a widdow, would for widowes pleade
               With much compaſſion, and at al aſſayes,
               But as for Orphanes bills, them would ſhe reade,
               And then ſhut in her princely Orphans hand,
               
                  
Whereby along with her ſhe would him leade
               Vnto his Vncle that did rule the land:
               Hard were the heart, that in ſo iuſt a cauſe,
               With two ſuch ſuters vpon tearmes could ſtand,
               And not diſpence a little with the lawes.
            
            
               Thus with her great delight in doing good,
               Shee wanne ſuch fame and popular applauſe,
               That on a time the goddeſſe of the wood
               
                  Diana ſorely longed once to ſee
               This 
                     ••
                   ſtreet model of all womanhoode,
               And next her ſelfe the flowre of chaſtitie.
               Wherefore the (Sunne now ſcorching in the skull
               Of L
                        •
                     o) foorth a hunting needes would ſhee
               To Windeſore forreſt, which ſhe found as ful
               Of deere, as trees: yet trees ſo many ar,
               As there the darts of Phoebus are too dull;
               And pierce no more then doth the meaneſt ſtarre.
               There was the Lawrell that was glad to hide
               Her greene head from the face of Phoebus farre,
               The I ordly Oake that ſcorn'd not by his ſide
               
                  
The bragging Brier, and with wilde yuie was
               Like great God Bacchus crownd, there was, beſide
               The ſmoothskinn'd Beech all kerued as did paſſe,
               In curious knotts that did the names entwine
               Of many a Louer, and of many a Laſſe.
               There was the Elme that vnderprops the Vine,
               And Box, wherof poore ſhephards frame their pipes,
               The gentle Wood bind, and ſweete Eglantine,
               Each other clipping with their amorous gripes.
               The budded Hawthorn, and our London dames
               Holy-reformers: the Birch lacing ſtripes
               On laſie truands, with ſuch like, whoſe names
               I know not, ſaue the Willow that did guirde
               The bankes forſaken of the ſlippry Thames.
            
            
               On euery tree did ſit a ſeuerall bird,
               And euery bird did ſing his ſeuerall note:
               This to the baſe a fift, that ſung a third,
               Each one according to his aery throate.
               A Summers day me thinkes were nothing long
               With the rare Muſike which they made by rote:
               
                  
                  Phoebe her ſelfe with all her Nymphs did throng
               To heare it, as ſhe had not heauenly beene:
               And this was all the burden of their Song,
               Long liue Diana and faire Katherene.
               
            
            
               Wearied with toile, but neuer with the noyſe,
               High time ſhe thought to goe and ſee the Queene,
               For her declining brother, that enioyes
               One part in one of her three-formed realmes,
               Bade her breake vp thoſe ſports and earthly ioyes,
               Sith he muſt neuer quench his thirſty beames,
               Till ſhe to heauen returne and take his place
               To gouerne there the ſtarres, and here the ſtreames.
            
            
               She therefore to the Caſtle gan to pace
               That bounteouſly was built of faire free-ſtone,
               Whoſe guilded inſide, for the greater grace,
               Was all ſet out with many a precious one,
               And they with one that yet more precious was:
               The criſtall windowes round about it ſhone,
               That as ſhe ſtood therein the very glaſſe
               Seem'd rather to let out the luſty light.
            
            
               
               On did the goddeſſe with her meany paſſe,
               Till they came to a roome all richly dight,
               Of heauenly bliſſe and happineſſe the bowre,
               Where each of other had this happy ſight.
               The place was after calld the Maydens towre,
               But of Diana and her Maydes no doubt
               So called was, and is vnto this howre.
            
            
               Much the amazed goddeſſe look'd about,
               But moſt aſtoned at the Queene ſhee ſtood,
               That ready word ſhe could bring hardly out,
               Before the louely Queene, (who could more good
               Then halfe a world) did ſilence ſoftly breake,
               Each Lilly blending with a Roſe of blood.
               Madame (ſhe ſayde) my tongue can hardly ſpeake
               That vvorld of worth which I in you admire:
               Then all that I can doe is farre too weake
               To anſwere your deſert and my deſire:
               For ſince my Lord, my life, (God his ſoule ſaue)
               Was laide (as well may witneſſe my attire)
               My better halfe ſince he was laide in graue,
               
                  
I neuer yet came foorth in companie;
               But in my chamber my ſelfe buried haue.
               Wherefore, if perſon here, or aught there be,
               That vnto you may breede the leaſt offence,
               God knowes it is without my priuitie:
               But did I knowe, I ſoone ſhould rid him hence,
               That of this action is not humbly glad,
               And therewithall, they both lowe reuerence
               Did one another. Vp the while was had
               A Banquet to a by rome as did paſſe,
               Bisket-bread, Sucket, Marchpane, Marmalad,
               Candids, Conſerues, and all that dainty was:
               It haild downe comfects, and through euery ſpoutt
               The Sugar-Caſtles powrd out hypocras
               Walk'd vp and downe the boles, ſo as I doubt
               If I may call them ſtanding cups or no.
            
            
               And as the wine, ſo went the day about.
               
                  Diana roſe, and ready was to goe,
               When in an other cup of maſſie golde
               They crownd her wine that ſparkled to and fro.
            
            
               
               It was the king Confeſſors Cup of old,
               Who liu'd a maried man, and died a maide.
               She kiſt the cup, where grau'n, ſhe might beholde
               
                  Actaeons death, and downe it quickly laid,
               Then turn'd a little to her maydes aſide,
               Rebuk't their want of ſecrecie, and ſaide.
            
            
               Could ye no better your owne counſailes hide,
               But ouer England too it muſt be blaz'd?
               Lo heere, Actaeon in his horned hide
               While on our ſhame and nakedneſſe he gaz'd,
               Therewith ſhe pawz'd, but they no word could ſay,
               So were they at that liuely mappe amaz'd.
               And ſure the cup did all ſo wel diſplay,
               As if it white wine were that therein ſtoode.
               Then would ye ſweare Dianaes ſelfe there by,
               Nakedly clothed with the criſtall flood.
               And were it redde, there lay then would ye ſwears,
               
                  Actaeon bathing him in his owne blood.
               At laſt, as one that halfe abaſhed were,
               Vnto the Queene ſhe turn'd and vttred this.
            
            
               
               Alacke, alacke, if his owne hownds did teare
               This fond Actaeon, yet the fault was his,
               And mine the griefe: we gods are no leſſe ſory
               For mortalls puniſhments, then for their amiſſe,
               Though we, by this, and that, declare our glory,
               And our owne iuſtice in them both exalte:
               Yet ſome will ſay (and they too peremptory)
               That this his fortune was, and not his fault:
               Was't not his fault ſo to prophane a place,
               That hallowed was with franckincenſe and ſalt?
               Were't not his fault that ſhould ſurpriſe your grace
               Here in your chamber, skare you or your traine,
               And from your ſide your ſureſt ſeruants race?
               Abortiue fanſies ſwimme about his braine,
               And faile him when himſelfe he moſt aſſures:
               Runne all his plots and purpoſes in vaine,
               That ſhall the like attempts on you or yours.
            
            
               Thus ended ſhe, and with this ſpeach the day.
               On ſtole the night, that parting ſtil procures,
               As though it came to bid her come away,
               
                  
Then tooke ſhe leaue, and in her coach did clime,
               The Eaſterne hill with horſes yron gray,
               Where in ſlowe minutes ſhe muſt tell the time,
               And ſerue the vſe of man. God bade her ſo.
               When neither Cocke doth crow, nor Clocke doth chime,
               Whether we ſee her ſiluer face or no,
               Yet there ſhe walkes, as wel by day as night,
               And ſtill about her criſtall or be doth goe.
            
            
               But (lord) with what a longing and delight
               To Windſor ward ſhe downe woulde caſt her looke,
               And guild the wide Thames with hir trembling light.
               An other heauen ye would haue thought the brooke
               With Moone and Stars, and here and there a cloude:
               But in high heau'n what way ſo e're ſhe tooke,
               Queene Katharines praiſes there ſhe rung aloude,
               Set to the tune of her well tempred ſpheare,
               Much more harmonious then is harpe and croud.
            
            
               
                  Hermes, that all the ghoſts belowe can reare,
               And gently vſher with his ſnaky rod,
               To this new Caroll gaue' attentiue eare:
               
                  
And (as he is a very prating god)
               To the bright Venus hath it told anone
               From the firſt point to the laſt period.
               When ſhe in all the haſte would needes be gone
               To ſee below, what all had heard aboue,
               Of Englands Queene and peereleſſe paragon:
               Her Coach was drawne by many a Turtle-doue,
               And driuen by a coachman of great worth,
               Her little ſonne, the mighty god of Loue.
            
            
               So long he guided on his courſe by North,
               When hauing paſt the ſeauenth and vtmoſt clime,
               Out of the ſea he might ſee peeping foorth
               A ſpot of Earth as white as any lime:
               To which he thought it beſt his courſe to hold.
            
            
               Now was the Earth, for it was paſt the prime,
               That had vnmask'd her of her tawny old,
               Reueſted with a flowry diadem,
               And new greene veluet, ſpangled all with gold.
               Thus were the fields enameld all of them,
               Along the ſiluer Thames that did embrace
               
                  
The golden meades in wanton armes, and hem
               Their looſer skitts like an indented lace.
               Acroſle, and vp and downe the riuer ſwame
               Her ſacred ſwannes, who when they ſaw her Grace,
               Vnto her Coach to doe their homage came:
               And from the land came Turtles many a paire,
               Vnto her Deity who did the ſame.
            
            
               Then Citherea ſeeing them ſo repaire
               Beſpake, Sir boy, we ſure be gone amiſſe:
               (But yet, the beſt is this, the way was faire)
               Nay doubtleſſe, that no way to Windſore is,
               But to our palace in mount C
                        •
                     theron.
               
               And Cupid he was ſore afraide by this
               Leſt it were ſo indeede, when (hauing gone
               A little further) he might plainely ſee
               Where with his eye a caſtle met anone
               High on a hill (as though it ſcorn'd to be
               Built on the baſer earth) and towr'd aboue
               The lofty clowds, with ſuch a Maieſtie,
               As ſaide it could not be the Court of Loue.
               
                  
Howe often haue you ſeene together dwell
               The lordly Eagle and the lowely Doue,
               Or Loue and Maieſty concording well?
            
            
               By this, they to the caſtle-gate be come,
               That was ſhut in by warning of a bell,
               In euery roome yet ſtirring heard they ſome,
               Which made them loudly call, and loudly knocke,
               Yet none, no more then if they had bin dombe,
               Would anſwer them; a long houre by the clocke,
               They waited there; now he, now ſhe, now both:
               
                  Cupid at laſt did peepe in at the locke,
               Yet no man came; Then Venus waxed wroth,
               And ſince of force ſhe muſt her purpoſe miſſe
               To be reueng'd ſhe tooke a ſolemne othe
               And ſaide. Much worſhip haue we won iwis,
               If thus one ſilly woman may abuſe
               Two ſuch great Godheads; if wee ſuffer this,
               What wretch I pray you may not well refuſe
               To burne on our high altars his perfumes,
               And by this preſident the fact excuſe?
               
                  
Whether ſhe on our gentleneſſe preſumes,
               Or her owne greatneſſe, all is one for that,
               I ſhall ere long ſo pull her peacockes plumes,
               That though ſhe now be young and faire and fat)
               She ſhall no ſooner looke vpon a glaſſe
               But ſhe ſhall greeue and ſore repine thereat,
               And ſay, That now is hay was ſometimes graſſe.
               
               Thinkes ſhe to ſcape our hands ſo franke and free,
               That ſhee forſooth of France the daughter was,
               
                  Englands freſh bride, and thereby chaunc'd to be
               Mother to him that now is King of both?
               Alas, what's all this to a Deitie?
               No more but titles and meere toies in troth,
               As then ſhe hath deſeru'd, ſo ſhall ſhe haue,
               "Diuine reuenge comes ſure, though late and loth.
            
            
               Belike theſe giddie French thinke they may braue
               My ſonne and me at pleaſure, leaue vndone
               What at their hands moſt lawfully we craue,
               Or do all lawleſſe outrage vnder Sunne.
               They make but cu'n a Woman and a childe
               
                  
Of me and thee, and thereby thinke to ſhunne
               Our vengeance, this it is to be ſo milde
               To malefactors, that for very ſpight
               Our Temples and our Altars haue defilde,
               Left vnprophaned no religious rite,
               But hauocke made of holy maiden-head,
               As if the Charge we had renounced quite
               That appertaineth to the Bridall bed:
               Wherein the lawfull heire begotten is,
               Whom after nine months fully finiſhed,
               The ſhame-fac't father ſhall not feare to kiſſe
               At midnight to him by the Midwife borne,
               Yea he himſelfe will ſweare it to be his,
               When Lucifer lets foorth the bluſhy Morne.
               But if they ſtill my patience thus ſhall wrong
               By S. Adonis here loe haue I ſworne,
               And will not faile, I ſhall, ere it 
                     •
                  e long,
               A plague ſend on them that will quickely tame
               Their pride, and teach them ſing another ſong.
               It ſhall feede in their marow like a flame,
               
                  
And rage through eu'ry corner of the land,
               That of the nation it ſhall take the name.
            
            
               But to the point that now we haue in hand.
               Which to effect with more ſucceſſefull ſpeede,
               Sonne Cupid, you awhile my friend muſt ſtand.
               Mother (quoth he) to feare you ſhal not neede,
               For I haue ſtill beene your obſequious ſonne,
               And ſtill wil be, in thought, and word, and deed.
               Yet hold I not this dame ſo much, a Nunne
               By nature, as by vertue of the clime
               Is far remoued Northward from the Sunne.
               For ſhe hath lou'd, and ſo may do in time.
               The bird that hauing once eſcap't the net,
               Defies the fowler, may be caught by lime
               Or other engines that for him be ſet,
               And ſo may ſhe by ſome more quaint deuiſe,
               But what that is, my ſelfe knows skarcely yet)
               Maugre her heart all were it made of yce.
            
            
               Gramercie ſonne, quoth he, why then no doubt
               (Though ſhe were ten times more then ſhe is nice)
               
                  
This act we ſhall bring well inough about.
               But that I feare me which you lately tolde
               About the Climat all this Iſle throughout,
               Is all the let that euer happen could,
               For though the Sunne now in the Lion raigne,
               And his Meridian, yet an vncouth cold
               Me thinks doth hit me now through euery vaine.
               In Affricke if the Lyon liſt to rage,
               Who ſhall him from his Ladyes ſide reſtrayne?
               Yet here he ſleepeth out his idle age,
               And dreames not once of Natures kindely ſport.
               Were it not this, what grate or yron cage
               Could coope him from his pleaſure? To be ſhort,
               The Vine that with the ſcorching ſunne by noone,
               Growes quickely ripe in France, if you tranſport
               Into this Country, ripeneth not ſo ſoone:
               Yet is the ſoyle as thankful heere as there.
               Yea th'Elements, all vnderneath the Moone,
               Remou'd from their owne place, ſome otherwhere,
               Take new impreſſions to them, for the fire
               
                  
That only ſhines in his celeſtiall ſphere
               Here burnes moſt violent. And with deſire
               Said Cupid, ſhall this Saint, this Katherine
               
               In Windſhore burne whom he did ſo admire,
               The man of Monmouth when ſhe did but ſhine
               In France at Melaws, like a blazing ſtarre:
               Whoſe faire aſpect and influence diuine,
               Did ſtoppe the hoarſe and open throate of warre.
            
            
               As there great Henry fel in loue with her,
               Heere of another ſhall ſhe dote as farre,
               Except my cunning, or this hand doe erre:
               And that rich dowre, yea were it ten times moe,
               Vpon a ſubiect ſhall I ſoone conferre.
            
            
               What, on a Saxon Cupid, will yee ſo?
               Now by this Mole (quoth ſhe) vpon my cheeke,
               I rather had this high reuenge forgoe
               Which I on her ſo thirſtingly do ſeeke,
               Then any flinty Saxon ſhould ſucceede
               A Prince ſo mighty, and a Prince ſo meeke.
               Theſe Saxons cleane haue waſh'd away my ſeede,
               
                  
Swallowing the fat ſoyle like another flood.
               Thoſe ſturdy Saxons whom the ſtones did breede,
               Which Pyrrha (when yet all the earth was mudde)
               By diueli
                     •
                  h diuination backeward threw
               To take the forme of fleſh, and bones, and blood.
               Theſe men, theſe ſtones, at an aduantage ſlew
               Of thy poore kindred thouſands with the ſword,
               And all the wofull remnant did purſue
               To the bare Mountaines, that could ſcarce afford
               Foode for themſelues, or ſafety from the foe,
               Fowly intreating them indeede and word.
               Long were they torne and toſſt thus to and fro,
               Now foiling, and then foild, till at the laſt
               
                  Edward the firſt (their fates ordaining ſo)
               To make them ſubiect to his Crowne did caſt.
               His tender babe to be their Prince they tooke,
               To whoſe ſucceeding heires they ſtucke ſo faſt,
               As none of them their faith as yet forſooke,
               Saue onely one Owen ſirnam'd Glyndoore,
               
               Who became Rebell againſt Bullinbrooke,
               
               
                  
And by his pride made all his Country poore.
               Ah Harry why ſhouldſt thou a Ciuill Prince
               For one mans fault and fury play the Moore
               Or Tartar thus, and tax a whole Prouince
               With ſuch vncourteous and Barbarian lawes
               As neuer heard were of before, or ſince?
               If Ioue alas, as oft as men giue cauſe
               Did euery time but hurle a fiery ball,
               A little time then ſhould he haue to pauſe,
               And in a while himſelfe leaue none at all.
            
            
               For all yet that betide them could, or can,
               Here liues one ſtill, and ſtil I hope he ſhall,
               A gallant and reſolued gentleman,
               Faire Owen Tudyr, fire thou hir in loue
               With him, my boy. Mother (ſaid he) your Swanne
               Shall not exceede this Eagle, nor your Doue:
               Hereafter ſhall ſhe ſtoope ſo to the lure,
               Though now a while the clowds ſhe towre aboue,
               For her pure boſome with a brand as pure
               I wil ſo kindle yet before the ſunne
               
                  
Get out of Libra, that none may recure
               Her heart, but onely Owen. Well ſaide ſonne,
               (Him anſwered ſhe) why ſhould I then deſpaire?
               But (as one Owen hath vs all vndone)
               Another Owen may thoſe harmes repaire.
               For who doth know, but that in time to come,
               There may ſpring from this wel conſorted paire may
               (I will ſo bleſſe and fructifie her wombe)
               H. 7. That ſeauen times happy man, who one day
               Sit on this throne, and thence with mercy doome
               His and my people? O when will that day
               Shine from the Eaſt vpon this Northerne Clime?
               Then, then may well both Welch and Engliſh ſay,
               That they were borne in a moſt bleſſed time.
            
            
               Mother, quoth he, thereof mine be the care,
               And if I faile therein, mine be the crime:
               But ſith the court of heauen can hardly ſpare
               Vs both at once, this cauſe to me referre,
               Perhaps the Gods in no ſuch buſines are,
               Yet mortalles are. How ſhall the Mariner
               
                  
That long in the wide Ocean toſſed is,
               And nothing ſees ſaue ſea and heau'n, but ere
               When your propitious ſtarre he there doth miſſe?
               How ſhall the ſhepheard doe, that to the hill
               Leades forth his flocke, and home againe by this?
               How ſhall the ſtrugling Bride againſt her will,
               With her impatient loue this night conceaue,
               Vnles your gratious influence doe fill
               Her fruitfull lap? Gods muſt not therefore leaue
               To helpe and comfort mortall men, becauſe
               Of their due honor they the Gods bereaue.
            
            
               This ſaid, he ſtayd, and with this only clauſe
               She condeſcended, that all ſhould be done,
               As that her ſelfe therto her beſt applauſe
               Should giue, and that as ſoone too as the ſunne
               A iudge betweene the night and day became.
            
            
               O ſilly Queene! theſe ſnares how canſt thou ſhun?
               And how, O Venus (hadſt thou any ſhame?)
               Canſt thou but bluſh what haue ye reap't by this,
               Thou and thy ſonne, what great and glorious name,
               
                  
When by two Gods beguyld one Woman is?
            
            
               A month and more to make the Queene his ſlaue
               He ſought by all ſuch traines and trickes of his
               As knowe ye louers (God from them me ſaue)
               By dreames and fanſies whilſt abed ſhe lay:
               So wiſely though herſelfe ſhe did behaue,
               That once he thought it beſt to runne away.
            
            
               By this the golden Eye of heau'n the Sunne,
               From that diſaſtrous and midnight of day
               Wherin his clewe of life was cleane out ſpunne,
               
                  Henry the firſt in fame, in name the fift,
               About the ſiluer skarfe of heau'n had runne.
            
            
               Whoſe firy Courſers (howſoeuer ſwift
               To ſome glad harts) ſeeme to the ſory ſlow
               And dull as lead, then firſt the Queene did lift
               Her drooping Ey-liddes from the Earth belowe.
               As one that hauing horded vp his cheefe
               His only treaſure, ſtill his eye doth throwe
               Backe to the place as to his beſt releefe;
               So was the Queene and all the Court to gloſe
               
                  
The more with her did flatter this her griefe:
               For like the Prince the people them compoſe.
            
            
               Moou'd for their ſakes, God wot, more then her owne,
               The Dowager Queene (like to the Virgin Roſe
               That all night is bedew'd, and newly blowne
               Vnto the morning Sunne for comfort ſeekes)
               Thoſe purer Roſes wiping that were ſowne
               Among the Lillies in her louely cheekes;
               And with her teares bedewed day and night
               By the full ſpace of two and fiftie weekes,
               Reſolu'd at laſt to come by candle-light
               Into the Preſence chamber, and to glad
               Her heart a little with the peoples ſight,
               Who to ſee her againe were nothing ſad.
               For all the luſty Courtiers did deuiſe
               (So ſoone as notice of her minde was had)
               To entertaine her with ſome ſtrange diſguiſe,
               Done by Dan Lidgate a great learned Munke,
               Who then in Poeſie bare away the priſe;
               For after Chaucer had he deepely drunke
               
                  
Of Helicon, as few beſides haue yet.
            
            
               Now when the Sunne into the Sea was ſuncke,
               They all together in the Wardrobe met,
               And them among (though farre aboue them all)
               The gentle Owen was, a man well ſet:
               Broad were his ſhoulders, thogh his waſte but ſmal;
               Straight was his backe, and euen was his breaſt,
               Which no leſſe ſeemely made him ſhew, then tall.
               Such as Achilles ſeem'd among the reſt
               Of all his army clad in mighty braſſe:
               Among them ſuch (though all they of the beſt)
               The man of Mone magnifique Owen was.
               He ſeem'd an other Oake among the Breers:
               And as in ſtature, ſo did he ſurpas
               In wit, and actiue feates, his other peeres.
               He nimbly could diſcourſe, and nimbly daunce,
               And ag'd he was about ſome thirty yeeres:
               But armed had ye ſeene him go to France,
               
               Ye would haue ſaide, that few on foote or horſe
               Could haue ſo toſs'd a Pike, or cowch'd a Lance,
               
                  
Wherewith to ground he brought full many a corſe.
               That oft alone when I recount the ſame,
               My tender heart cannot but haue remorſe.
               To write it then, alas, I were too blame:
               Of onely Loue, and of his armes I ſing,
               Thy warres (O Mars) I meant not once to name,
               Yet hardly could I ſpare that haughty ſtring,
               Did not the Boy mine eare pull now and then
               Beyond my bounds for feare I chance to fling.
               The fame and ſplendor of my Countrymen
               Inuite me ſo. What is he that can holde
               In his rude fingers ſuch a flaggy pen,
               If aught by chance of Agincourt be tolde,
               But into teares his eies would quickely thawe,
               In ſteade of inke, to write the manifolde
               And goodly ſlaughters which our men did drawe
               That day in blood' But O thou mighty ghoſt
               Of Henry Monmouth, who yet holdes in awe
               My bolder Ditty that ſo longs to boaſt
               Thoſe olde Heroês crown'd with holie bayes,
               
                  
That vnder him did vſe to leade his hoſte;
               
                  Beauforts, Veres, Neuills, Talbots, Cliffords, Grayes:
               
               O pardon thou, and they that I leaue out
               Th' immortall mortall fights and blody frayes
               By force of armes there fairely brought about.
            
            
               And thou Iohn Huntington, whoſe acts I more
               Admire than all, before whoſe face the rout
               Of fearefull Normans, when thou cam'ſt aſhore
               From the triumphed Ocean fled away
               As heartleſſe Hares the Greyhounds doe before▪
               
               Redoubted Earle, of pardon I thee pray.
               God wot I would, yet halfe ſo great a taske
               I dare not vndertake: and ſooth to ſay,
               That argument a lowder Trump doth aske.
               To ſound a March too ſlender is my Reede,
               Inough is it to tune a Courtly maske,
               Then to high purpoſe and the point proceede.
            
            
               While they made ready there, ye might haue ſeen,
               One or an other in a masking weede,
               Go friske about vpon the ruſhes greene,
               
                  
And wiſh if aught he chanced well to do,
               That all were done no worſe before the Queene.
            
            
               Some one the God of Loue did pray vnto,
               With his milde mother, ſo to ſtand his friend,
               As he thereby his Ladies loue might woe,
               To whoſe ſweete praiſe his paines he did commend.
               Another, that he might good honors make
               As eu'ry Meaſure did beginne or end
               Whereof his Miſtris might due notice take.
               One that the dropping linkes defilde him not
               For his white ſuite of coſtly ſatten ſake:
               An other that his Impreaſe or his Mot,
               Or aught of his the Princeſſe minde might pleaſe.
            
            
               Full many a ſuite in broken ſighes, God wot,
               Was offered there, yet all could not appeaſe
               His kindled ire, who by this eaſie baite
               Thought now or neuer on the Queene to ſeaſe
               That had ſo often made him ſound retraite.
            
            
               It fell that foure and twenty Pages were
               Appoynted on the Reuelers to waite,
               
                  
Who two by two, before each paire ſhould beare,
               The linkes aloft, and for the greater ſhowe,
               Like ſuites to them and vizards alſo weare.
            
            
               The wily god that all this did foreknow,
               By putting on the perſon of a page,
               Made vp the compt, his quiuer and his bowe
               To buy a viſard which he layd to gage;
               But turned into a blazing torch his brand.
               A pretty ſtrippling, much about the age
               Of fourteene yeares he ſeem'd when he did ſtand
               Among the reſt. Now was it time to ſup:
               So coſtly nothing was by ſea or land
               But it was had, while ſtill the frothy Cup
               Did haſte to deale about the luſty wine.
            
            
               When all was ended, and the boord was vp,
               In heau'n aboue the ſtarres began to ſhine:
               Where alſo burned Cithere the bright,
               To Cupid nodding, who knewe well the ſigne.
               And like an other heau'n with ſtarry light,
               Adorn'd was all the Preſence round about,
               
                  
That into day againe did turne the night,
               Although the cheefeſt light was yet without.
            
            
               With this the trumpets lo began to ſound,
               And eke the multitude aloude to ſhout,
               (That all the roome did eu'n againe rebound,
               Reecchoing no particle amis)
               God ſaue your Grace, & God your foes confound.
            
            
               To ſome her hand of ſnowe ſhe gaue to kis,
               She talk'd with other, and gaue thanks to all,
               Along the chamber as the manner is.
            
            
               Behold how many fiery ſparkles ſmall,
               The Moone about her ſiluer or be doth ſpend,
               When Heſperus the Euening foorth doth call:
               So many glorious ladies glad to tend
               Vpon the Queene vnto her princely State,
               Downe to the ground before her Grace did bend.
            
            
               As there in Maieſty awhile ſhe Sate
               With ſhame fac'd lookes lowe fix'd vpon the ground
               Loe three faire damſels fal'ne at foule debate,
               And them before a Trumpet hard to ſound.
               
                  
The Damſells dreaſt in white and blew and blacke
               Were asked, whence they were, and whither bound?
               Whom they did looke for, or what they did lacke?
            
            
               A while they pauſ'd, and oft they changed hew,
               The one ſtill to the other looking backe,
               Till ſhe, that all appareld was in blew
               Stept foorth at laſt, and making Curt'ſy low
               Beganne aloud. Moſt Mightie Queene, to you
               In humble manner we preſent this ſhowe
               A ſilly Maide, a Widow, and a Wife,
               As by our habits you may partly know.
               A late betwene vs hapned heauy ſtrife,
               Whether the Wife, the Widow, or the Maide
               Liues the moſt happy and contented life?
            
            
               All what we could, we three therin haue ſaid,
               And women (as men clatter) want no words.
               Yet heere (alas) the matter hath not ſtaide,
               For acted it muſt needs be by the ſwords
               Of Martialiſts, but your Maieſtike hand,
               That vnto miſers mercy ſtill affoords,
               
                  
The ſame by your authority with ſtand;
               Which is ſo ſoueraigne, and doth carry weight
               With all the mighty Sprites of the land,
               That ended all this ſturre will heere be ſtreight.
            
            
               Eight hardy Squiers doe holde of Maidenhead,
               (Whereof is Owen Tudyr chiefe) and eight
               Maintaine that it much better is to wed,
               The laſt eight by like arguments approue
               The life ſequeſtred from the nuptiall bed.
            
            
               Renouned Empreſſe, then let pitty moue
               Your royall breaſt to ſaue them from the ſpoile,
               What heart of yron hath ſhe that doth loue
               To ſee one man in fight an other ſoile?
               Or once abide to ſee the blood to ſtreame
               That in the manly boſome wonts to boile?
            
            
               Heere at, as one awak'd out of a dreame,
               The ſoftly ſighing Queene vp ſtarted ſoone,
               Guilding the world with ſuch a glorious Beame
               As doth the Sunne this Hemiſpheare by noone,
               With morning ſhowrs though ſomewhat ouerſpred:
               
                  
Or, as when in ſome miſty night the Moone
               Breaks through the clouds, and ſhews her ſiluer head.
            
            
               And thus ſhe ſpake. Ye vertuous Maid and Wife,
               (For ſuch ye ſeeme) and thou whoſe halfe is dead,
               Whoſe other halfe reſolues to leade the life
               That alſo doth thy Queene; not all this Ile
               A fitter one could yeeld to ſtint your ſtrife,
               Extended out though it lie many a mile,
               And, but the Sea, abides not any bound.
               For all three courſes haue I knowne awhile.
               A very Maide of me King Henry found,
               (Whoſe ſoule God pardon, and to mercie take)
               To whom my loue my faith kept euer ſound,
               That all the world my honour might not ſhake,
               Ne wracke my fame againſt ſo foule a ſhelfe.
               As vnto him, ſo for his onely ſake
               I will remaine no leſſe true to my ſelfe:
               For Henries Wife and Widow will I die.
               Honours, vaine pleaſures, tranſitory pelfe,
               I force not of ſuch gawdes a whit, not I:
               
                  
Yet doth this traſh the mindes of many tempt
               To Loues delights, from whoſe vile tyranny
               Princes, no more then other, are exempt.
               But onely him I lou'd, ſo doe I now,
               And euer ſhall, of whom both thought and dreamt
               I haue ſo oft, that no man elſe may bow
               My ſetled heart: onely (were he aliue)
               He might perhaps preuaile againſt my vow.
            
            
               And God I begge it now, ſo let me thriue,
               If aught I ſpeake the worlds good word to woo
               Beyond my worth, but with his thunder driue
               Mee quicke thoſe vgly ſhades of hell into,
               Before, O ſhamefaſtnes, that I forſake
               Thee, or yet any lawe of thine vndoe.
            
            
               Might I with me my little Henry take
               To ſome remote and ſolitary denne;
               Your noble Prince, his ſeruant God him make,
               (Whereto the people cried Amen, Amen)
               
               I could be well content no more to come
               Among the preaſe and multitudes of men.
               
                  
Not that I doubt but vertuous there be ſome,
               I know there be, and many in this place.
               This of my ſpeech then is the very ſumme;
               That oft alone when I recount my caſe,
               No life me thinkes is like to widdowhoode,
               So God but guide it with his holy grace.
            
            
               Heereat the Maide and Wife aſtoned ſtoode.
               Miſtake me not, quoth then the louely Queene,
               For often hath it beene no leſſe a good
               To marry wel, then to liue ſingly ſeene.
               Perhaps the more, if heart as well as hands
               Be rightly tied the married paire betweene:
               Not altogether wedded vnto lands,
               Ne wealthy dowres: ah, neuer may ſhe thriue,
               That on the purſe aboue the party ſtands.
               She that ſo weds (as I know none that did)
               Beguiles her husband, he hath but the hiue,
               Another eates the hony. God forbid
               That euer any courtly Dame ſhould carry
               A heart ſo baſe within her boſome hid.
               
                  
As for my ſelfe, had I not lou'd my Harry,
               
               Perdy I make a vow, that for my part
               No kingdome could haue tempted me to marry
               Againſt the loue and liking of my hart.
            
            
               But ah, not long had I enioyed my Ioy
               When vgly Death comes ſtealing with his dart,
               (For hand of man could neuer him annoy)
               And him of life, and me of loue depriues.
               Yet hath he left behinde a princely boy,
               That in my breaſt his heau'nly ſhape reuiues.
               So like the father doth he daily grow,
               As any you haue ſeene in all your liues,
               Yea like him hee already learnes to goe▪
               
               So would he bend the browe, ſo would he looke,
               His eies his hands, he caſt he carried ſo.
            
            
               But whither haue I like a wandring brooke
               Thus err'd by loue? Few liquid pearles then guſht
               From out her eies, and there her breath ſhe tooke.
               But (Lord) then how the louely Virgine bluſht,
               When all the people did the Queene purſue
               
                  
With freſh applauſes; till, when all was huſh'd,
               The Queene did her continued ſpeech renew.
            
            
               Ladies it ſeemes (and therewithall ſhe ſate)
               It ſeemes I ſay to vs, that each of you
               So pleaſed is with her peculiar ſtate,
               That all the world may not your wills reclaime.
               Me leuer alſo weare your loue then hate,
               Whereat no vertuous Prince did euer aime.
               Tyranny feare, and feare this hate begot.
               What duety then can want a priuy maime
               That of the ſubiectes loue proceedeth not?
               I then conclude, no kinde of life amis
               That is ſo fixt, and alters not a iot:
               Vnhappy moſt, the leaſt reſolued is,
               When as the great Commander in the warres
               Affects the Marchants life, the Marchant his,
               Who knowes each crooked motion of the ſtarres,
               The Clerke againe enuies the Courtier,
               And he the Clowne. To leaue particulars
               In vs, and you, (for oft thus one may erre)
               
                  
I muſt (I hope to none of your diſgrace)
               Together when all courſes I conferre,
               Of force define, that both reſigne the place
               To maidenhead, as Copper doth, or Braſſe,
               When Indy Gold their glory doth deface.
            
            
               A worthy wife no doubt Suſanna was,
               Redeem'd from death, as ſhe was thereto led:
               Yet did the widdow Iudith her ſurpaſſe;
               Who ſmote off, as he breath'd his laſt abed,
               That horrid head, yet breathing warre and luſt.
            
            
               But vnto MARY well of Maidenhead,
               This, and that other yeeld of duty muſt.
               The Maide where three times three months did repoſe
               The Sunne, in whom repoſde is all my truſt.
            
            
               A virgin is but eu'n a very Roſe,
               For once if hand of man thereon be laide,
               Both ſent and colour it will quickly loſe,
               So tender in the bloome is eu'ry Maide.
            
            
               That innocent and euer happy ſtate
               (Had our forefathers not ſo fondly ſtraide)
               
                  
Wherein God humane nature did create
               In holy maidenhead reſembled is,
               Whence hauing falne too ſoone, we grieue too late:
               When all the world doth point at our amis,
               Then ſee we naked ſhame with open eies.
            
            
               Yea maidenhead goes farre beyond all this.
               For in that earthly place of paradiſe,
               As heere we doe, they did by Gods beheſt:
               But in that heau'n where his owne owner lies,
               As are his Angells, ſuch are all the reſt;
               Maides and vnmarried: heere then I conclude
               That Maidenhead of all is only beſt.
               And as ſhe ſaide, ſo ſaide the multitude.
            
            
               Then all three Ladies (who did now relent
               And pardon aske that they had beene ſo rude)
               Beſought the night in ſportes might now be ſpent,
               Whom ſo to doe with many thankes ſhe praide.
            
            
               So they vnto the foure and twenty ſent
               To certifie them what the Queene had ſaide,
               And therewithall to bid them haſte away.
               
                  
The meſſenger ſo did, and they obaide.
            
            
               Alacke for pitty now what ſhall I ſay?
               A wily traitor and a very thiefe,
               That all the while in ambuſh cloſely lay,
               Among the Maskers is become the chiefe:
               And to the Caſtle is already come,
               Good Queene, I feare me to thy further griefe.
            
            
               Herewith was heard the Trumpet and the Drum,
               As if they had beene marching for the field:
               By two and two they entred all and ſome
               Each after other offering vp his ſhield,
               While ſhe, that in all curtſie did abound,
               To euery man particular thankes did yeeld.
            
            
               The ſofter muſicke then beganne to ſound,
               And eke the Ladies were had out to dance:
               It alſo pleaſde the Queene to walke a round,
               The Courtly ſportes the more to countenance,
               With whom (bicauſe he did the Meaſures leade)
               To couple it was Owens happy chance.
            
            
               Then all in order gan it ſoftly treade
               
                  
Vp and downe, in and out: the planets ſeauen,
               Rapt with harmonious ſpheres (as we may reade)
               So daunce about the lofty pole of heauen.
            
            
               The Meaſures ended, it grewe very late,
               (For it was halfe an houre nigh paſt eleauen.)
               Then bade the Queene, that one belowe the State,
               A ſtoole for her ſhould ſet vpon the ground:
               This done, anone downe therevppon ſhe ſate,
            
            
               Some in their cinqueapaſe did nimbly bound,
               Some did the Croſ-point, ſome high Capers cut,
               And on the toe ſome other turned round,
               While ſtill the Minſtrell on the trembling gut,
               Stroue with diuiſion to outrunne the time
               That haſted on the Reuells vp to ſhut,
               (For midnight now the clock began to chime.)
               Then iſſued Owen out among the reſt,
               Reſerued vntill then as only prime
               Of all the Maskers, and the very beſt.
            
            
               LOVE that did all the while no wile forſloe,
               That holp to ſett afire her ſnowy breſt,
               
                  
Reſolu'd at laſt, that it muſt needs be ſo.
            
            
               Wherefore, as Owen did his galliard daunce,
               And grac'd it with a turne vpon the toe;
               (Whether his eyes aſide he chaunc'd to glaunce,
               And like the louely God became ſo blinde,
               Or elſe perhaps it were his happy chaunce,
               I knowe not, and record none can I finde)
               This is the ſhorte; The Queene being very nigh,
               He fell, and (as he forwarde downe declinde)
               His knee did hit againſt her ſofter thigh.
               I hope hee felt no great hurt by the fall,
               That happy fall which mounted him ſo high.
               For vp he quickly ſprang, and therewithall
               He fetch'd me ſuch a frisk aboue the ground,
               That, O well doone, cried out both great and ſmall.
            
            
               The Queene aroſe then, and dealt thanks around
               To all of them, but vnto Owen moſt:
               The Trumpets alſo they began to ſound,
               For on ſhe paſſt, and after her an hoaſt
               Of louely ladies, while the people praied,
               
                  
That God would guide her with his holy ghoſt.
            
            
               Thus all the Court was very well apaide,
               And euery dauncer in delight did ſwimme,
               But Owen onely, who was ſo diſmaide,
               That all the Company came to comfort him.
               Amongſt all, one wiſht it had beene his happe:
               I can not blame him, though he loſt a lim,
               That long'd to pitch in ſuch a princely lappe.
            
            
               But out alas, what ſhall there more be ſaide?
               This was but eu'n an engine and a trappe,
               That for the ſeely foule was lately laide:
               The faireſt foule I weene that euer was,
               This onely tricke ſo fowly hath betraide.
            
            
               As into ſome one centre of the glaſſe
               The Sunny beames we doe contract to light
               Diuine Tabacco, that all balme doth paſſe,
               Becauſe all vnion hath the greater might:
               So fierce Cupido cauſde his fiery brand
               Vpon that Eagle-eye of his to light;
               That in the very turning of a hand,
               
                  
Reflected it might ſet afire her heart,
               That obſtacles none might it once withſtand.
            
            
               The wound did at the firſt not greatly ſmart,
               For it was inward, and there ſoftly bled
               Feeding the fire, till (hauing got apart)
               Her yuory body laide in yuory bed,
               She there afreſh of all beganne to thinke
               (For idle fancies there be ſooneſt fed)
               And vnawares let Loue in ſoftly ſinke
               Betweene the lillies of her louely breſt.
            
            
               What ſhould ſhe doe? ſhe could not ſleepe a wink,
               Nor any reſpite take, nor any reſt,
               Nor once but dreame (for how can one awake?)
               That in was got ſuch an vnruly gueſt.
               Which on the gods behalfe did greatly make.
            
            
               It was the very dead of drowſy night,
               When euery creature elſe his eaſe did take
               But onely yong Queene Katharine the bright,
               Whoſe eies (like two faire Diamonds ſet in rings,)
               Awak'd her outward little world to light.
               
                  
For vgly night with her broade Rauen-wings
               Had ouerhild the golden goodly face,
               As well of heauenly as of earthly things,
               And the dull humour powred downe apace
               On weary miſerable mortall men:
               Loe, then beganne her eyes firſt to embrace
               An eaſie ſlumber: her deuotions then
               She ſoftly ſigh'd, and Requiem alſo ſaide,
               For her deere Lord; thus (hauing breath'd Amen,
               
               And ſofter checke vpon ſoft pillow laide)
               Fell faſt aſleepe: who then but Cupid ſung?
               Who laugh'd, who danc'd, or half ſuch herods plaid?
               For here and there the fire about he flung,
               As did in Aetna his ſuppoſed Sire:
               That where before ſhe was but only ſtung
               A little in the fancie with deſire,
               And quickely might haue cur'd the ſame againe
               (Had ſhe but vſde the meanes:) his raging fire
               Diffuſde the venim now through eu'ry vaine.
            
            
               As Elementar fire doth cloſely creepe
               
                  
Betweene ſome plankes the greater height to gaine,
               Not daring out of his blinde Cell to peepe,
               Before alas (as oft it doth befall)
               The goodman of the houſe be faſt aſleepe:
               Then oppoſition finding none at all,
               About the Noone of night inuades the ſparres,
               And many hundred thouſand ſparkles ſmall,
               About the welkin hurls to mocke the ſtarres:
               At laſt in ſmoaky flames it chokes the skies,
               And of the building all the beauty marres,
               Or once the Owner halfe can ope his eyes.
            
            
               O mercy God, O Loue, O Charity,
               What is this heate, or how doth it ariſe?
               Is it begot but of a wanton eye,
               And ſo conceiued in a gentle hart?
               If it be ſo, then aske I reaſon why?
               Thy ſelfe, O Loue, of eyes depriued art▪
               
            
            
               But if by fatall reuolution
               Of any ſtarre, O god thou guide thy dart
               (Sith that we know the certaine motion
               
                  
Of euery Starre in heau'n, both her degree,
               Her oppoſition, and coniunction,
               With euery other hidden qualitie,
               Portending what is likelieſt to befall)
               Reueale, O God, reueale thou vnto me
               That am thy Prieſt (though worthy leaſt of all)
               So long haue I rebel'd againſt thy law,
               Blaſpheming it as ceremonial,
               Enacted onely fooles to keepe in awe:
               Yet ſith I doe recant my folly now
               That into danger youth might haply draw,
               Reueale the reaſon, and the cauſe, why thou
               In all thy deedes ſo diuerſe euer art;
               And doe, I pray, inſtruct thy Prophet, how
               In euery pageant thou doſt play thy part,
               Prouoking here to loue and there to luſt.
               
                  
                     •
                   Why ſhould a Lady like with all her hart
               (Her ſelfe borne vnder Ioue and Venus iuſt)
               A tawny face befurd with ſable haire,
               Borne vnder old Saturnus ſtarre combuſt?
            
            
               
               What appetite the foule hath to the faire
               Is euident, for euery ſeelv ſoule
               Knowes with perfection how things long to paire:
               But that the faire ſhould ſtoope vnto the foule,
               A wonder it doth ſeeme to me no leſſe
               Then if an Eagle ſhould vnto an Owle.
               Yet more may be then I can haply geſſe,
               I might be numbred eighth among the Wiſe,
               If all to know my ſelfe I ſhould profeſſe.
            
            
               Is it becauſe that in faire womens eyes
               Blacke men ſeeme pearles (and women all iwis
               Would be: or elſe, which doth aſwell ſuffice,
               Reputed faire?) or is it haply this,
               That any beauty layde againſt the blacke,
               Of much more beautie and more brightnes is?
               Is it becauſe we like (though nought we lacke)
               What other haue? or elſe becauſe this hue
               Lends liuelier heate and moiſture to the backe?
            
            
               Why ſhould a Queene to whom ſo many ſue,
               So many Princes would be prowde to ſerue,
               
                  
Bid all the glittering pompe of Court adue,
               And to a priuate loue her ſweets reſerue?
               Why ſhould ſhe ſpend with him her happy dayes,
               That hardly doth to ſerue her but deſerue?
            
            
               This is thy power, O Loue, this is thy praiſe,
               For vnto Gods it only doth belong
               The mighty downe to pull, the meeke to raiſe;
               Thou findeſt likes, or elſe ere it be long,
               Thou frameſt ſuch of ſundry qualities:
               It is then open and no petty wrong,
               To charge thee ſo with incongruities:
               For onely thou alone in all thy deedes,
               As at the firſt yet work'ſt by contraries.
            
            
               Whenas together all the ſundry ſeedes
               Of vndigeſted Chaos did conſpire
               To mould the body that ſo many breedes:
               The Earth, the Aire, the Water and the Fire,
               (For each was vnto either deadly foe)
               To ſundry rankes did all at once retire:
               The leight got vp, the heauy ſtay'd below,
               
                  
The Sea did ſtart aſide to ſhow the land,
               The windes did on the billowes ſtifly blove
               All which be now tied in ſo friendly band,
               As they may not beyond their limits range,
               And this was done by thy Almighty hand.
               Nor art thou Lord (for all thou ſeeme ſo ſtrange)
               Yet halfe ſo mutable as any man:
               But as reſolued and vnapt to change,
               As at the day when firſt the world began.
            
            
               Perhaps by ſome to ſcorne I ſhall be laught
               For bolding ſo, ſay all they what they can,
               This is the truth, thus other ſhall be taught:
               Yea (though therefore I ſhould be tortured)
               I would not alter any word for aught,
               For all is right, if it be rightly read.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            Richardo Martino Hugo Hollandius Optimo Oratori Peſſimus Poëta, veteris & perfecti amoris ergò nouum ſed imperfectum poëma mittit. Sonulus Hendecaſyllabi
                  •
               us.
            
               HOc Martine tibi vetus ſodalis
               Nuper mitto nouum poema coeptum,
               Nec doctum ſatis id, nimiſue ineptum:
               Veſter Pegaſus eſt, nec opſe talis
            
            
               Qui t antis vehar incitatus alis.
               Verùm me videor ſat eſſe adeptum,
               Si carmen tibi tale ſit receptum:
               Nec lectum tibi non fuiſſe malis.
            
            
               Quod (ſi quid ſaperem) domo quiet â
               Annus debuerat videre nonus:
               O ſed famâ ego gloria
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ſpretâ
            
            
               In peſſum cecidi poeta pronus;
               "Tanto peſſimus omnium poeta,
               "Quanto tu optimus omnium patronus.
            
         
         
            
            To Sir Robert Cotton Knight, Lord of Cunnington.
            
               MY Reaſons can no longer hold out, nor yet my Modeſty: Nature indeed hath armed me againſt Bluſhing, not againſt Baſhfulnes. Haue here thē this double imperfect Poëm. Firſt, though ill, not all done: Secondly, through all il done. The faults I confes in making (as they be many) are mine: the fault in ſetting forth (if it be any) is yours, & ſo much the more yours, by how much the more you would haue mine publiſhed. It was (if you remember) the worke, or rather the Paſtime of one Vacation. Howbeit that can no way iuſtly excuſe me. For (if the Deſtiny of theſe leaues ſhould out-ſpin

Nature in our liues) how ſhould poſterity be informed in how ſhort time the ſame were written? All the writings of old time were as the Teſtaments of the writers: But moſt of the writers of our dayes, are as Executors to their writings, not vnlike Hecuba in the Tragedy, who in her owne life time ſaw the death of all her children. And to ſay but truth (had not I beene the more indulgent father) theſe Rimes of mine (which nigh vpon two yeares haue nowe layen by me) had long ſince made windeing-ſheetes for perfumed gloues in the EXCHANGE. The laſt Summer I began to put this Infant (then about ſome twelue-moneths old) out of his foule and ſwatheling clowts; and (like our London Nurſes, who when they bring their foſter-children to be ſhewed the friends, dreſſe them vp in their beſt habilimen
                  •
               ) wrote it out curiouſly with mine own hand, think to haue gone into Scotland and to haue giuen it the King. Towards whom my loyaltie, I was in thoſe dayes as daring to powre into your boſome, as I

found it ready to endeere the ſame. Your loue to me, and our duty to him gaue vs both confidence therevnto: to ſpeake nothing of particular Intereſt, his Maieſty and you deſcended of two brothers, hee from Rob. le Bruſe, and you from Bernard. But ill newes carried me into Wales, and vpon my returne Maiſter Secretary Herbert (with whom was in commiſſion the Noble and gentle Lord Eure, and the right worthy and vertuous Maiſter Doctor Dun) being ready to goe into Germany (which was his thirteenth publike Employment) I ſignified to his Honour the deſire I had but once in my life to ſee the world (for vntill then I had beene alwayes one of the Queenes Decre) and he louingly conſented thereunto. Beleeue me Sir Rob. hee is the man I tooke him for, and told you of. I will not ſpeake of honors and titles, things (like repreſentations in glaſſes) actuated by other: but rather of his learning, his wiſdome, 
                  〈◊〉
                honeſty, the firſt and laſt whereof are goodly Vertues in a man of his Fortune, all three lying within

the ſpheare of our owne actiuitie. At Amſte
                     •
                  red
                     ••
                  
                in my way homeward (for I returned before their Lordſhips) I met thoſe good ill-newes of the Queen
                  •
                death, to whoſe honour and memory (néque me m
                     •
                  
                  
                  
                     •
                  iniſſe pigebit ELISAE) as by the Preface may appeare I had once entended this firſt booke of the Praeparation or Praeludium of the loue betweene Owen Tudyr and the Queene. Which Praeface notwithſtanding I will haue printed with the reſt, that I doe ſo much right to that dead Lady, ſometimes our Soueraigne Queene and Miſtreſſe. The very Goſpel itſelfe (next which no gladder tidings could haue pierced our eares, then that King IAMES his head ſhould be inueſted with the Royall Diadem) did allow the Law an honorable buriall. Neither ſhould we faſhion ourſelues to ſuch whoſe affection to her waxed cold before her body, who thought they had done her a ſtout piece of ſeruice that they forſooke not her body before her ſoule did. I iudge modeſtly of them all, and hope it was but a longing they had to ſee his

Maieſty, whom God of his mercy long preſerue, leſt he, who hath freed vs from one curſe of a Kingdome, that is, a Woman, leaue vs vnto another, that is, a Childe. I haue written an Acroſticke Sonet to his Maieſtie, a Canzonet to the Queene, and another Acroſticke vnto the Prince; whoſe Seruant I am by vow, and ſubordinate Subiect by birth, For I doubt not but his Noble Father will ſhortly kiſſe him, and deliuer him the Verge of gold with his Patent, whereby hee is entituled Prince of Wales. Which (though now high in nothing but Mountaines) I hope one day ſhall be raiſed by his Graces preſence. In whom we claime a double intereſt, as well by Walter Stewarte, as Owen Tudyr: both of them lineally deſcended from the moſt haught and magnanimous Princes of Wales. My ſecond booke (if God ſpare life) of the entertainment of their loue (which I principally vow to the honour of the better parte of his Graces Principallity my beloued Country gentle Northwales, where by the way I am to ſpeake ſomewhat

of the warres of Owen Glindoure, with the worthy deeds of the two thunder-bolts of warre, the Noble Percies) I purpoſe to conſecrate vnto his Highneſſe: As alſo the third booke of the perfection of their loue vnto the Queens Right excellent Maieſtie. For vnto whom ſhould I dedicate the perfection of Loue but to the perfection of Beautie? I ſpeake this but by heare-ſay, you haue ſeene her and know I flatter not: from which fault (if from any) I am moſt free. For in flattery (ſaith Tacitus) is the foule fault of Slauery, and freedome of ſpeach will be thought Malice. Howbeit after the faire Example of our good friend M. Martin (who with like libertie, as eloquence was not afraide to tell the King the truth) I will ſo comporte my ſelfe and wade warily betweene both, that I euer carry the heart of a Monarchy, and the tongue of a Common-wealth: the one loyall, the other liberall. In which reſolution I end, Commending this Poëm to the conceipt of the Reader, my ſelfe to you, and you to God.
            
               Your very louing Hugh Holland.
            
         
         
            
            
               
            
         
      
   