
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  ❀ A TREATISE
AGAINST
VVITCHCRAFT:
OR
A Dialogue, wherein the greatest doubts
concerning that sinne, are briefly answered: a Sathanicall
operation in the Witchcraft of all times is truly prooued:
the moste precious preseruatiues against such euils are
shewed: very needful to be knowen of all men, but chiefly
of the Masters and Fathers of families, that they may
learn the best meanes to purge their houses of all vnclean
spirits, and wisely to auoide the dreadfull impieties and
greate daungers which come by such abhominations.
                  HEREVNTO IS ALSO ADDED
a short discourse, containing the most certen meanes
ordained of God, to discouer, expell, and to
confound all the Sathanicall inuentions
of Witchcraft and
sorcerie.
                  He that ouercommeth shall inherite all things, and I will be his God and
he shall be my sonne: but the fearefull and vnbeleeuing, and the abhominable,
and murtherers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters,
and all lyars shall haue their part in the lake which burneth with
fire and brimstone, which is the second death.
                  Rev. 21. 7, 8. & 22. 14, 15.
                  CAMBRIDGE
Printed by Iohn Legatt, Printer to
the Vniuersitie of Cambridge. 1590.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE RIGHT
HONOVRABLE LORD
Robert Devorax, Earle of Essex and
EWE, Vicount of Hereford and Bourchier, Lord Ferrers
of Chartley, Bourchier and Lovaine, Master of the
Queenes Maiesties Horse, and Knight of the most
Honourable order of the Garter. H. H. wisheth
with his heart, grace from God the Father by
Iesus Christ, increase of al vertues, and constancie
in the truth of the Gospell
to the ende.
                  
                     THE Scriptures of God (right Honourable) in sundrie
places, doe most euidently teach vs, that there are two
spirituall kingdomes in this world, which haue continual
hatred & bloody wars, without hope of truce for
euer The Lord and king of the one, is our Lord Iesus,
the tyrannical vsurper of the other, is Sathan, Again,
this also we are as clearely taught, that all men liuing
without exception, are eyther true subiects of the one,
or slaues vnto the other. For albeit, the Neuters of this worlde, dreame that
they may indifferentlie view the scarres and woundes of other men, and neuer
approch neere those bloody skirmishes: yet the truth is, they are fowlie
deceiued: for the great Lord and King hath said with his owne mouth,Matth. 12. 30. 
                     Hee
that is not with mee, is against mee. Wherefore, all that build not vp, as much as
in them lyeth, the kingdome and Citie of God, and batter downe the holdes
of Sathan, must be numbred with the rebels and enemies of our Lord Christ,
when the warrefare shalbe ended. The enemies of Christ haue euer beene
many, some open, cruell, foes without: some subtill, close conspirators within
the house of God, most daungerous vnderminers of the Citie of God, if
they be not discouered. In this secret conspiracie, albeit Sathan haue many
Champions, and many artes, mille artes, mille nocendi modos: there is no
arte more effectuall and dreadfull in my iudgement, then those his wicked
faculties in Witchcrafte. I haue indeauoured (right Honourable)
in this small Treatise, according to my poore strength, to shewe the

principall meanes ordained of God for to confound and to discouer them. I
doe here therefore humbly aske your Honourable protection, for the defence
of the trueth and the glory of God, against all the patrones of all such vile
artes, and horrible abhominations. Thus doeing, your Honour shall not
onely encourage me, but also, imbolden others, which are better able, and wil
be willing also, to lay open the secret delusions and practises of Sathans inventions.
Nobilitie without godlines and vertue (as your Honour well knoweth)
is blood indeede, as a learned man speaketh, but blood without bones
and sinewes. I knowe therefore that to increase in your Honour true Nobilitie,
you are well assured, that it principally standeth in purchasing vnto
Christ and his Church, true honour and glorie, and in beating downe
(as much as in your Honour lyeth) all the holdes of Sathans
kingdome. God increase in your heart (right Honourable)
all his good graces to his glory,
your own saluation, and the benefit
of his Church. Amen. The
yeere of our saluation.
1590.
                  
                     Your good Lordships euer to vse
and command in the Lord,
Henr. Holland.
                  
               
               
                  
                  TO THE CHRISTIAN
READER, GRACE,
MERCIE AND PEACE BE
multiplied in Iesus Christ.
                  
                     THE holy Apostle labouring2. Cor. 10. 
                           •
                        . to set foorth the divine
maiestie and powerfull might of the ministerie
of the Gospel, sheweth how that a man must be,Theoplilact. as
it were conquered thereby, before he doe yeelde sincere
and sound obedience vnto Christ. And certen
it is, that before men be brought downe to that subiection,
they fall often into daungerous errours in
minde, and sundrie fearefull sinnes in life. In this question of Witchcraft,
some haue preferred the wicked folly of mā, before the holy wisdom
of God, & would haue vs to credit their owne practise,Discouery. 16. book. p. 478. the knowledge
also and experience of Cornelius Agrippa, Iohn Wyerus, Nero, Iulian
Apostata, and such like: Their experience, to say no more, was
vnsufficient, most wicked and detestable. Let vs then humble our selues
before the wisdome of God, and see what direction wee haue in this controuersie
by the holy Scripture. First for the being of this abhomination,
the holy word of god most clearely cōfirmeth it. For if there were no such
sinne, wherefore then are there so many kindes named and distinguished,
Deut. 18. 10, 11. Mecasephim, kozemim, &c. Al which,Com in Gal.
                     Gal. 5. 20.
the Apostle comprehendeth (as Ierome saith) in that one word, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
Witchcraft? Secondly, wherfore haue we so many examples of the
practitioners of this profession, pointed at so often vnto vs? as the inchaunters
Exod. 17. of Egypt, the Witch ofSam. 28. Endor, the witches ofDan. 2. Persia, Simon
MagusAct. 8. of Samaria, ElymasAct. 13. 6. the sorcerer at Paphus, the PythonistAct. 16. 16. Dialog. c. 2. P. 30.
at Philippi? &c. Thirdly, what meaneth the Lord to geue such
lawes against this sinne, as may be seene. Exod. 22. 18. Lev. 20. 27.
Deut. 18, 10, 11. For this is Maxime in Law, as Danaeus saith, and
the lawyers graunt it, De ijs rebus quae non sunt, leges non promulgantur,
There are no lawes made of things which haue no being:
If this be true of the lawes of men, how much more of the blessed Lawes
of God, wherein we must not imagine a want or superfluitie: and therefore

                     Hemingius saith,De superstios. magic. 
                     Sapientissimus Deus non potest leges ferre,
de rebus quae vel non sunt, vel esse non possunt: The moste wise
God can not geue lawes of things which haue no beeing, or can
haue no beeing. VVherefore I conclude that witchcraft is a sinne, &
a filthie worke of the flesh, (as Paul speaketh) and therefore an abominable
worke of the devill, as Iohn
                     Iohn. 3. 8. saith, and consequently, not so lightly
(as it is made of some) to be regarded. The adversaries here are glad to
betake the selues to th
                        •
                      first refuge:Discov. p. 472.
                     Witchcraft is but coozening or
poisening arte, practised by humane industrie, whereunto Sathan
communicates no reall conference, or communication. What may
be said out of the booke of God, against this bold 
                        〈◊〉
                     ? what were
Pharaos coniurers in the court of Egipt, & Nebuchadue 
                        〈◊〉
                      wise men
in Babylon, but coozeners and porseners? poiseners of all others haue no
place nor free accesse vnto princes, and coozeners are most vnfit to be
their counsellers, so as all those Egiptian and Babilonian witches were,
as lerome writeth: Habuisse Babylonem omnem
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Chaldaeam incantatorum,
                     Ierom. Com. in Esay. 57.
                     &c. studium, &c. Danielis Prophetae lectio probat
qui ad eorum consilia, cunctareges Babilonios fecisse Comm
                           •••
                        
                        rat:
The kings of Babilon, &c. (saith he) did all things after the aduise
and councels of there inchanters. Againe, what was the PythonistAct. 16. 16.
at Philippi, had not shee a reall conference with Sathan? for she got
her master great aduantage with her continuall practise of divination?
To be short,Com. in 1. Sam. 28. I can not see but hee that can doe the greater, may doe the
lesse: Non mirum est (saith P. Martyr) si exteriores hominum oculos
perstringat, cum antea occupauit oculos mentis. It is no marueile,
that he hold fast shut the eyes of the body, which so blindeth
the eyes of the minde. He that can worke so mightely by suggestion1. King. 22. 22. Eph. 2. 2. in
the children of disobedience, may also haue both a real possession of thē, &
conference with thē.Angelus pol. pan. epist. p. 473. Lastly, wee must not so fondly confound diabolicall
& naturall magicke, which so many learned men in al ages, haue clearely
distinguished.Ioh. Bap. Nea. ma. 1. l. 11. c. 1. Caelius Rhodignius. l. 9. c. 23. lectionum antiquarum. Discov. p. 317. This shift beeing thus vncouered, they shelter themselues
vnder a second refuge, which is this: The witches of our time
can work at no hand, so as the witches mentioned in the Scripture
haue done. Against this conclusion, we may reason on this manner. If
our Witches, Coniurers, &c. can not work the like as Iannes & Iambres
did, the witch of Endor, &c. the defect must be eyther in Sathan, or the
witch, or both: first for Sathan,160. 162. 163. bee wants at this day, neither will nor

might, to doe the like. First, no will, for he see
                        •
                      his kingdome will not last
long, and therefore now towards the end of the world, he is, and will be
more and more enuious, and deceitfull, working all the wonders that euer
he can, to blinde infidels, 2. Thes. 2. 9. 10. and to deceiue if it were
possible, the very elect, us our Sauiour hath forewarned vs. Secondly, no
strength: he is elder indeede but not weaker. The God,Eph. 6. 12, 13. the princes, and
gouernours of this world, with whome we wrestle, wax not weaker as we
doe, nor the red dragon wilRev. 12. 17. not cease to make warre with the Saints, as
long as the world endureth. Againe, he is rather more wise in experience,
and knowledge of all naturall causes, and therefore more readie in
his artes then euer he hath beene. And wherefore then Sathan for his
part, will not, or can not practise those former artes, it is impossible to be
prooued, and doe not we know, that Sathan hath multiplied, rather then
shortened the number of his artes? for we read and vnderstand, that before
and since the Gospel was published, he hath had great varietie in
all ages, of false artes for the practises of his sciences.See Bodin. de Daemonoaninia. l. 2. c. 1. 2. Cicero de divinat. lib. 1. Secondly, for
his copartner the witch, Man or Woman, I would learne what wantes
they haue at this day, more then in former times, that by Sathans
helpe, they can not produce the like lying woonders. I am sure the
wicked also in the worlde, and the reprobates towardes the ende, waxe
worse and worse, and therefore in any wise ma
                        ••
                      iudgement, are
more fitte for this sinne, for the more vncleane.Matth. 12. 43. Discov. 13. book. p. 305. p. 302. a man is, the more apt
is he for Sathans seruice. But they obiect, they can not haue at this
day, such knowledge in naturall causes as Iannes and Iambres
had, &c. I answer, that Sathan as he regardes not characters, figures,
wordes, periapts, &c. so doeth hee not a mans knowledge, to make
him his vassale to worke his woonders, vnlesse it be for this end, to vaile
and couer his delusions, as sundrie Sathanicall Astrologers in Chalde
and Egipt haue done. And in very truth there are in this age, as
wise in knowledge of all tongues, Philosophie, liberall artes, &c. (as the
learned know) since the Gospell was preached, as euer was in any age
in Christendome. Wherefore if there was by meanes of naturall
knowledge, and humane industrie, a Sathanicall operation in witchcraft
in elder times, I say, there may be the like at this day, and vnto the
worldes end. The last, and most miserable refuge is this.Disco. epist. to the Reader. 
                     Our witches,
strigae, lamiae, our witches are not once mētioned in Scripture: our

old woman, &c. you shall not reade in the Bible of any such Witches.
                     P. 100.
This if they could haue graunted, that God worde might not
fight against them, they know then, they might easilie triumph, for the
weapons of God are so mightie, to cast downe these holdes, that no arte
nor power of Sathan, or inuention of man, may withstand thē: but where
they strike, downe must all high proude things, the proud reason of man,
Sathan2. Cor. 10. 5, 6. 2. 3. Law. himselfe and al his kingdome. Albeit the Scripture giueth vs
no such historicall relations of the witches of our time: yet are they
mentioned there both in generall and speciall manner: in general, where
all the sinnes of idolatrieEs. 47. 2. & 21. 6. & 23. 24. and blasphemie are condemned; in speciall,
where the like sinnes are named. M. Cicero disputeth in his booke of
Divination, of the beeing of the old Auguries and magicall divinations
of his time: where after he hath distinguished them into two kindes: naturall,
and artificiall: (Vnto the naturall, belong all those divinations
which we may call meere diabolicall, as coniurations, and al the practise
of Pythonistes, which haue an expresse league and confederacie with
Sathan: vnto the artificiall appertaine all those artes, which men (saith
hee) haue learned by long obseruation, Astrologie, Palmistrie, and such
like: these we say, are mixt diabolicall, and belong vnto the secret couenant
and confederacie, which Sathan hath with witches.) In the ende
he concludeth on this manner: Quid est igitur cur dubitandum sit,
                     De Divin. L. 1.
                     quin sint ea quae disputaui verissima, si ratio mecum facit, si eventa,
si populi, si nationes, si graeci, si barbari, si maiores etiam nostri, si
deni
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         hoc semperita putatum est, si summi philosophi, si poetae, si
sapientissimi viri, qui res publicas constituerunt, qui vrbes condiderunt?
an dum bestiae loquantur expectamus, hominum consentiente
authoritate contenti non sumus? If this Heathen could confirme by
such reasons this conclusion, how much more boldly may wee doe the
same, hauing not onely all these his arguments with vs: but also the
heauenly Oracles of God, the light, the lawes, the examples, and the
iudgements in Gods worde, denounced against these sinnes, which the
Scripture hath recorded for our instruction. Wherefore I conclude with
Master Calvine, Certè sacrilega esset Audacia negare vnquam in
vsu fuisse artes magicas,
                     Com. in Deut. 18. 
                     quia hoc modo Deus incogitantiae argueretur,
ac silegem tulisset de rebus quae nullae sunt. Surely it were
gracelesse boldnes, to denie that the artes of magicke haue euer
beene practised, for so God might be argued to want iudgement,
as if he had giuen a Law of things which haue no beeing. Nowe

to be short, concerning this treatise which here I offer thee (good Reader)
albeit I cannot teach thee, as I would, to discouer and to auoide the
Sathanicall delusions of witchcraft: so variable, so straunge, and so secret
are Sathans practises: yet that good which I purposed, I haue, I
trust, in some part performed. Whatsoeuer I haue written, in all humble
submission, I offer it to the Censure and iudgement of all the godly
learned in the Church of God. I was the more bolde to publish this discourse,
for that but few haue written to any purpose any thing, which
may giue light in this argument, in the english tongue, master George
Gifford onely excepted vnto whom we are much bound in the Lorde.
An other cause which mooued me is the continuall trafficke and market
which the rude people haue with witches. For like as the old heathen
(as Tulli saieth) de reb. maiorib, semper aut delphis oraculum,De Divinat. Lib. 1.
                     aut ab Hammone, aut à Dodona petebant, that is, in their greatest
affaires sought alwaies after the master witches: and in common
affaires hid their common auguries: so likewise our blockish Christians,
they haue their common base witches, and their master coniurers,
vnto whom they ride and goe in all their neede, some twentie, some
thirtie, some fortie miles, and what is moste lamentable, such is their
brutish ignorance, they thinke it not vnlawfull for them so to doe.
Wherefore I doe here also humbly request all those, whome God hath
blessed with knowledge and giftes to discerne, in any measure these hid
and horrible abhominations, that they would with all their might helpe
to vncouer them. The ministers of Christ must both in doctrine and
conuersation oppose themselues vnto the ministers of Antichrist. Th
                        •
                     
doctrine of the Gospell, which we professe, is flat contrarie (we knovv)
vnto all the principles of poperie: so let our conuersation also be vnto
the practise of all the Romish prelates. The monkes, the friers, and all
of the shauen ministerie, were not in any account for learning, which
made not an open profession of these sciences: and of the Popes themselues
sundry of them attained their popedome by these holy meanes: as
Sylvester the 2. Benedictus the 8. Geegorie the seuenth. Iohn. 20. 21.Act. & m. p. 167.
Alexander the 6. if we may credit their ovvne Platina and others.
Our enimies then worshipping the beast and his image and bearing
these brandes of sorcery,Rev. 21. 8. vvitchcraft, idolatrie, and all impietie in
their handes and foreheads: let vs with all might avoide them, for

without repentance, (the scripture hath forewarned) they shall drink
of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured into the
cuppe of his wrath, and shall bee tormented in fire
and brim stone which is the second death. Accept
what I haue written (good reader) or
of thy curtesie giue it free passage
vnto others.
                  FAREWEL.
Thine in Christ Iesus.
HENRY HOLLAND.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  CHAP. I.
                  
                     Of the witches mentioned in Scripture, where is shewed by euident demonstrations,
how they had a reall conference & confederacy with
Satā himselfe, by whom they practised & wrought their abominatiōs.
                  
                  Theophilus. Mysodaemon.
                  
                     
                        WHat sayest thou Mysodaemon, is it not strange,
that men at this day make so small account
to discouer, and auoid the moste horrible and
dreadfull sinnes of witchcraft.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     I would gladly heare somwhat
of you concerning this argument, for
the common sort of men, indeed, doe lightlie
regard this sinne, and the rather because some men (as they say)
of learning and reputation, affirme, that this art being rightly discouered,
containeth nothing but cousenage and secret practises
of wicked men, and foolish women which are full of restles melancholick
imaginations.
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     True it is, they say so indeed: but how prooue they all
such strong affirmations? they speake much and fill volumes of
many bookes, but prooue litle soundly of that which they haue
vainely and wickedly conceiued: for when their proofe is out of
the Scripture, they neuer faile to wrest and bend that blessed word
most prophanely to their owne purpose. And as for other learned
men, which haue written painefulle of this argument, they are all
without difference scorned, reiected, andDis. p. 17. railed vpon in moste
vile manner. Their best proofe is from their owne braine, and
most wicked experience, and yet some wise men (as they say) beleeue
them.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     Surely Theophilus I can not myselfe be anie way
perswaded that the common sorte of our witches worke by the
deuill, or haue any conference with him, for so I remember Bodin
                        De Daemonomania. lib. 1. cap. 1.& others define a witch to be one that wittingly & willingly
vseth deuilish artes to atteine that hee purposeth, & therefore

                        
                           〈…〉
                         women are no witches, for they haue no such artes, alack
                              •
                           
poore fooles they are no seducers,
                        Dis. p. 71. but rather poore seduced soules.
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     I see Mysodaemon you haue read ouer some of their
great volumes, can you so pretely bemone our old witches? true
it is, manie of the common sort (I beleeue well) are not right
witches indeed, notwithstanding they are guiltie of other most
vile sinnes, and most worthie of death.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     As for other sinnes, as coosnage, poisoning, and
such like, I will not couer them, our witches are full of such practises,
but that these seely women, haue anie artes to coniure the
deuill, or to conuey him into a boxe (as they say) to raise tempests,
to kill and make aliue, I thinke all these are but vaine surmises
of credulous and foolish people.
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     Satan is full of delusions,
                           
                              •
                           . Thes. 2. and filleth the mindes, eies,
and eares of such as the Lorde hath iustlie giuen ouer vnto his
handes for the contempt of the truth to beleeue lies, he is a flying
serpent and not so narrowly inclosed, albeit hee perswadeth his
vassals by such vaine delusions least (wanting his presence) they
should bee discouraged in his seruice. But let vs come vnto the
purpose, that there haue bene, are, and may be such Sathanicall
witches, which worke indeed many wonders by the help and ministrie
of Satan.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     I knowe not where to turne mee in this controuersie,
for they say the scripture hath not answered this question,
wee haue
                        Dis. p. 110. 
                        no scripture against our vvitches or which can discouer
them.
                     
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     If the scripture will not suffice and serue vs for this
purpose, let vs impute that to our weakenes, and not to the want
of that most perfect booke of God, which is said to be so sufficient
that it is able to make the man of God
                        2. Tim. 3. 16. 17. 
                        absolute. And hath not the
Scripture prophesied of the chaunge of Empyres, of the variable
state of the Church before and after Christes incarnation, of Antichrist
his comming,
                           
                              •
                           . Thes. 2. his miracles, &c. And doe we not finde all
those diuine and propheticall predictions true? Shall wee then imagine
that there are some sinnes crept into the worlde which
the Lord did not foresee, or hath not forewarned vs of: no, no,
let Satan turne his coate as often as hee list, yet will that blessed
worde bewraye him and his practises. The Apostle telleth vs

that whatsoeuer is written, is written for our learning:
                        Rom. 15. 4. the Lord therfore
hauing so manifestly taught vs and reuealed his will, & what
is necessarie to bee knowen in this argument, let vs bee content
with his word, and suffer our selues to be taught by it.
                  
                  
                     Myso-daemon.
                     I remember one learne'd manDanaeus in Dialog. faith so: And
surely it behooueth vs Christians to rest our selues vpon the words
of Christ: but I thinke, Theophilus, thou canst not finde this sinne
spoken of in all the
                        Dis. praesae. 
                        new Testament.
                     
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     Yea truely: for it is numbred among those workes
of the flesh, which (without repentance) seclude vs from the
kingdome of heauen, Gal. 5. 20. vpon which placeIerom. com. in Gal. 5. Ierome saith
thus: Ne forsitan veneficia, & malificae artes non viderentur in Novo
prohibitae testamento, ipsae quo
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            inter carnis opera numerantur:
Least peradventure witchcraft, and other magicall artes (mentioned
in the olde Testament) should not seeme to be forbidden in the
Newe Testament, they are also counted among the workes of the
flesh.
                  
                  
                     Miso-daemon.
                     But our witches are properly those whom the
Poets call sagae, Thessalae, Magae, Lamiae: I say this then, and that
boldly, that theseDis. praef. words are not once found, neither in the New
nor Olde Testament: I pray you shew me any of them if you can.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     The scripture hath no such words in the original tongue
for it is Hebrew & Greeke, and these words are poeticall Latine
wordes. Againe one thing may haue many and diuers improper
names. Sathan him selfe is sometime called a2. Cor. 4. 4. ephes. 2. 2. and 6. 12. 13. 2. cor. 11. god, sometimes a
Prince, sometimes an Angel, a gouernour, a dragon, a serpent, &c.
and yet is he in verie trueth, but a wicked lying spirite, the executioner
of Gods iustice vpon the children of disobedience: the
witches are sometimes in Poets improperlie also called Thessalae,
                        Horac. Ovid.
Thessalian witches, Sagae, Wise women, Magae, Persian witches,
Lamiae, Ladies of the fayrie, Striges, Hegges: and yet a witch is
but a wicked man or woman that worketh with the deuill. But
as for the matter it selfe, which by those borrowed wordes the
Poets and other authours meant, the Scripture is mostrich and
plentifull for our instruction. Let vs then attend with reuerence
what the Lorde saith, and not doate on that manner about questions
and strife of wordes: for thus the Apostle writeth: l If any
man consent not to the wholesome wordes of our Lord Iesus Christ, and

to the doctrine which is according to godlines, he is puft vp and knoweth
nothing, but doteth about questions and strife of wordes, whereof commeth
envie, strife, railings, euill surmisings,
                        Or, forward. 
                        vaine disputations of men
of corrupt mindes, and destitute of trueth: how saiest thou now Miso-daemon,
is it not best counsell to leane vpon the Scriptures?
                  
                  
                     Myso-daemon.
                     Truelie the Apostles wordes are most certen,
for these sinnes haue ouertaken some men that haue written of
this argument, as may be seene in their works: let me heare then
first Theophilus, what thou canst say of those witches which are
mentioned in scripture.
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     First this I say, that the Lord in Scripture hath clearelie
numbred and distinguished 7. or 8. speciall artes of the deuill,
practised by wicked men and women, Deut 18. 10. 11. v. for albeit
most agree in the interpretation, yet some varie in the number,
The place is commonlie translated on this manner: Let none be
found among you that maketh his sonne or his daughter to go through
the fire, or that vseth witchcraft, or a regarder of times, or a marker of
the flying of foules, or a sorcerer, or a charmer, or that counselleth with
spirits, or a sooth sayer, or that asketh counsell at the dead.
                     
                  
                  
                     Myso-daemon.
                     What was the occasion of this great charge of
God vnto his people, and where had these artes their beginning?
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     
                        Hemingius writeth on this manner:Admonit. de superst. magic. Like, as Sathan
vsed the serpent in the beginning to seduce our first parents from
the obedience of Gods worde vnto his service: so it is not to be
doubted that after that fall, he vsed man him selfe his instrument
by magicall arts to withdraw men frō faith in the promise of their
redemption by Christ. Methodius saith thus:Methodius. In the 340. yeere of
Iered, there arose some of the posteritie of Cain, inventers of euill
artes, as Ibbeth & Tholuscal, the sonnes of blind Lamech, who yealding
themselues to the dominion of the deuill, became practisers
of all magicall sciences. After the flood,Ludov. Viu. Tom. 2. p. 4. 
                        Zoroastres in the dayes
of Ninus King of Babylon, and is thought to be that cursed Cham,
the sonne of Noah; this wicked man, as most writers affirme, practised
also all these artes, and commended them to his posteritie;
for Misraim was his sonne, of whome came the Egiptians, Babylonians,
Persians,
                        Cicer. de divinat. which nations of al others were most famous in the
world for these Sathanical sciences. Hereby it may most manifestly
appeare, for what cause the Lord giueth this great charge vnto

his people, concerning these artes, that they might not be found among
them.Exod. 7. First, for that they were lately come from that Idolatrous
nation, where this horrible impietie was continually professed,
practised,Es. 47. & maintained Secondly, least afterward they should
learne these exercises of other nations round about them,Daniel 2. or of
the Babylonians and Persians (among whom also they should soiourne
for a time) by wicked acquaintance and conversation.
                  
                  
                     Myso-daem.
                     Now teach me briefely what those artes were, so
distinctly nūbred in that place, & let me see where any examples
of their practise is mentioned, that so we may the better vnderstande
whether they were practised by man onely, or by Sathan
him selfe by the ministerie of man.
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     Let vs then begin with that kind first whereof the law
is giuen, exo. 22. 18. for vnder this saith M. Calvin & Gaellasius,
                        Gallas. in Exod. 22. all
the rest are vnderstoode in that place: the witch there named is
Mecasephath, in Hebrue:Dialog. p. 19.
                        Tremel. & Pagnin. translate it praestigiatricem,
a witch working diuelish delusions. Heming. Danaeus, & Bodin
                        De demo. do the same,Annot. in Deut. 18. 
                        Luther turneth the word maleficam, but in the
same sence, and to the same purpose.
                  
                  
                     Mys.
                     Yea, but I remember Andreas Massius the
                        Dis. p. 109. 
                        most famous
hebritian in the world, saith this word signifieth a poisoner, because
the Greeke Septuagint translate it 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , and therefore this law
is giuen directly against poysoners.
                  
                  
                     Th.
                     The Greeke translators might well name a witch by that
name, for all writers agree that their greatest practise is by poison
& powders, which the deuil teacheth them to hurt withall. Bodin
faith, Pars magorū maximamedicos solet & exorcist as agere: the most
part of witches play the phisiciās & are exorcists. And it is knownDe Dem. p. 472.
true by common experience. Danaeus faith,Dial. c. 4. p. 55. 
                        Alijs venena confecta
& parata praebet, alios docet nova conficere & miscere: The deuil ministreth
vnto some witches poyson readie made, & he teacheth others to
cenfect & compound new. Again, the Apostle vseth the greek word,

                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , not for poisoning, but for almagical artes, as both Ierom
& Musculus
                        Ierom. & Muscul. in Gal. 5. testifie in their Comment. vpon this place: the same
word is vsed in the same sense. Rev. 22. 15. & 21. 8. 9. 21. And surely
it appeares plainlie, this kinde of witch was not one that dealt
with poison, Dan. 2. 2, 3. for Nebuchadnezzer calleth for
these Mecasephim to interpret his dreame. And Hierome saieth,Com. in Esa. 57.
                        Rages Babilonios fecisse cuncta ad eorum consilia, They were

then belike the Kings wise counsellers, and therefore no poysoners
or coozeners. The cause why the Lewe is giuen of a woman
witch, is (saith Bodin) because women commonlie practise these
artes, according to the Hebrewe prouerbe, Quo
                              •
                            plus mulierum co
                              •
                           
plus magorumest, The more women the more witches. The same
saith M. Calvin, Borrahus,
                        Com. in Exod. 22. 
                        Gellasius, and others.
                  
                  
                     Myso-daemon.
                     Nowe tell me, are there anie examples which
haue practised this kind of witchcraft mentioned in the scripture?
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     That there are: for the witches of Egypt, Exod. 7.
11. and the witches of Babylon, Dan. 2. 2. are called by these
names mecasephim, and chartummim.
                     
                  
                  
                     Myso-daemon.
                     And what can you finde in the sorcerers of Egipt,
more then iagling, legerdemaine, couzenage, naturallD. p. 
                              •
                           9. 8. magicke, &c.
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     The circumstances of that storie, and al interpretors
say plainelie they wrought by the deuill. For the Scripture Exod.
7. saith plainlie they wrought their wonders in the presence of
Pharaoh and his nobles: v. 10. and before Moses and Aaron. If
these witches then could haue shewed but the feares of naturall
magicke, &c. they had bene soone discouered. Pharaoh himselfe
thought verelie they wrought the same waie that Moses & Aaron
did: forthus one saith,Iacob. Ziegle. com in. cap. 8. Exod. 
                        Pharaoh arbitrabatur istud inter vtrosque
differre: quod hi amplius illis in magicis artibus profecissent: Pharaoh
thought this was the difference betweene both, that the one
had more profited in the artes of magicke then the other▪ and
not in iugling, coosenage, naturall magicke, &c. And surely Hierome
and others thinke they were in great reputation with their
Kings both in Egipt and Babylon, and therefore it is like they professed
a more deepe science, then anie rude facultie of coozenage,
& practised greater matters then the iollie feats of leger-demaine.
                     And that thou maiest vnderstand, Myso-daemon, that others also
are of the same iudgement concerning these magicians: one
saith of them,Procopius Gaz. soph. in Exod 7. 
                        Has machinas apponit Diabolus, &c. It is the deuill
that vseth these engines: meaning that Iannes & Iambres did vse
diabolicall artes against Moses & Aaron. M. Calvin writeth thus:
Calvin. com. in Exod. 7.
                        Quum ex genuina philosophia prolapsi essent magi Egyptij, retinent sapientum
nomen v
                              •
                            fidem illusionibus acquirerent: when the magitians
of Egipt had fallen from the true philosophie (whereby he
meaneth naturall philosophie and naturall magicke) they would

still be called wisemen, to win credit to their delusions: & then he
addeth, est horribile exemplum laxat as magis habenas: this is a horrible
example, that magitians should haue this libertie. Againe, he
saith, Deum
                        Com. in c. 8. 15. 
                        arti suae hostem opponunt: they oppose God as an enemie
to their arte: by these few words, it may soone be vnderstood,
what magitiās these were, in this learned mans iudgement. Brentius
Com. in Exod. 7. saith, Miracula Eg
                              •
                           ptiorum erant ludibria Sathanae: The Egiptians
miracles were the delusions of Sathan. GellasiusCom. in Exod. 7. 11. writeth on
this manner: Ist
                              •
                            astrologiae & physicae, magiam ac divinationem, inuocationem
demonum, &c. adiunxerat. These Egiptians added to their
astrologie and natural philosophie, magicke and divination, inuocation
of deuils, &c. Musculus, Com. in Genes. 41. 8. saith plainely,
these had their artes of Sathan. All these (as thou seest My sodaemon)
testifie, that the magitians of Egipt, wrought by the deuill.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     Now let me heare what is the second kinde of
witches, mentioned in Scripture.
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     The witches of the second kinde, are called in the originall
tongue, Aob, Aoboth: by this word, the holy Ghost vnderstandeth
certaine familiar spirites, which whisper with their witches,
at it were, out of a tubbe or bottle, saieth Danaeus, Heming.
Calv Luth. Bodin, and others: for the worde properly signifieth a
bottle; as Iob. 32. 19. Ceoboth cadashim, as new bottles. But whatsoeuer
is the cause of that borrowed name, for this witches deuill,
this must be obserued diligently, that this witch & her spirit, are alwaies
clearely distinguished. For the witch, 1. Sam. 28. v. 6, 7. is not
called Aob, but Bagnalath, maried to Aob, for so the word signifieth,
Aob, or possessing Aob. Predita pythone, saith Tremel. & Shoel Aob,
Deu. 18. 10. one which enquireth, or saluteth praieth, & intreateth
Aob, if therfore here be but coosenage, there must be two cooseners
at the lest, so there are, & the witch is one, the deuilan other.
Againe, Lev. 20. 27. Ciijh
                              •
                           eh bahem Aob, if Aob, that is, the deuill,
be in them.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     If this Aob, was but a pythonist, as Tremel▪ and
others say, then I prooue it to be but coosenage, on this manner.
Apollo the pythonist, and the oracles at Delphos were of this kind,
& were most famous indeede, yet but meere coosenage, & therfore
this was the like. I prooue mine Antecedent.Dis. p. 137. 138. 
                        Gregori Neocaesariensis,
soiouruing with Apollos priest one night, after his departure

the oracle ceased: the priest sought after him and requested him
not to hinder his wonted reuelations:Dis. p. 137. 138. Gregorie yeilded and said
to the oracle, permit to tibi redire in locum tuum & agere quae consuevisti,
I permit thee to returne to thy place, and doe as thou wast woont.
If there had bene a deuil there, it is not like this holy man would
haue giuen him that libertie. Euseb. hath this storie in his 7. booke
chap. 25.
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     I assure thee Mysodaemon, I can find no such thing in
all that historie.See Grinaeus last edition & Christopherson. See Grinaeus last edition, and Christophersons, and
Grinaeus marginall note vpon Ruffinus translation. I thinke this
be but some legends fable, for it sauours much like such stuffe: as
for the Gregories,
                        Socr. li. 4. ca. 22. 
                        Socrates saith ther were foure of them in number:
one was Origens scholler, & that was this Neocaesariensis, the
2. was Basils brother, the 3. was Gregor. Nazianzen, the 4. was
Gregor. Alexandrius. And as for this Gregor. Neocaesar. he was a
faithfull pastor of a Church in Pontus as Euseb.Lib. 6. ca. 29. &c. writeth, Gregorius
& Athenodorus fra
                              •
                           res, paraeciarum quae in Ponto sunt pastores.
Gregorie and Athenodore brethren, were pastors of parishes in Pontus.
It is not like then that this man (being so excellent for learning
and godlines as Socrates reporteth him to be in the forenamed
place) would permit the deuils oracle that libertie, if he could restraine
it. Wherefore Mysodaemon, I thinke thou groundest thy
reason vpon a fable. And as for this oracle of Apollo, if it were but
cousenage, wherefore did this cousenage cease when the gospell
shined, for cousening hypocrites are in the Church, and will bee
foreuer where the gospell is preached. And wherefore must the
deuill in Constantines time creepe (as it were) into some hollow
caues, was it be cause cousenage creeps in corners? for Euseb. saith,
Apollinem autem id temporis,
                        De vita Const. lib. 2. cap. 49. 
                        ex antro quodam & tenebricoso recessu,
non ex sacerdotis ore, hoc or aculum aedidisse ferunt.
                     
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     Well I am content to yeild, I knowe not what
strength my reason hath, if that storie bee not there to be found.
What haue you a nie examples which hath practised this kind of
witchcraft?
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     The witch of Endor is saide to be one of this sort: for
she is called 1. Sam. 28. v. 7. Bagnalah Aob, married to Aob, or
possessing Aob, or (as the common translation is) hauing Aob,
that is, a familiar spirit. And here My sodaemon, before I do any further

answer thee, note what obseruations that place of scripture
offereth vnto vs, in this question of witchcraft for our instruction.
First obserue there, the great feare this vile kind of witches are in,
for she was very loth, least her practise should be publikely noted,
espied, & known. v. 9. 10. Secondly, how the deuil perswades witches,
he must be coniured out of hell, & out of the earth frō among
the dead, by characters, figures,Heming. de superst. mag. c. 1. pe
                           •
                        iaptes, &c. that his vassals
might be the more studious to serue him on that maner, & that mē
might haue his witches for their art in the more estimatiō. v. 11. 12.
Thirdly how Satan can transfrome himself before his witch as he
please: for v. 13. she saith I saw gods, or an excellent person, which
thē appeareth forth with in the form of old Samuel himself. Fourthly,
what Satan desireth most of his witches & such as consult with
them: namely to adore him as a God, as Saul did the deuill in the
presence of the witch, v. 14. Lastly how bold Satan is somtimes in
predictions, either when he hath some warrant of gods word, or
is sent of God to execute his iustice vpon in sidels. For this deuill
speaking thus boldly of Saules death, it is like he knew gods purpose
concerning him: for where hee wanteth knowledge, hee is
commonly most doubtfull in his prophesies, as those latine rimes
of Apollos oracle can teach vs.
                  
                  
                     Misodaemon.
                     
                        But Ecclesiasticus saith, it was very Samuel himselfe
which did appeare in that place.Dis. p. 39. 
                        Chap. 46. v. 19. 20.
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     So dothAntiq. lib. 6. cap. 15. Iosephus also in his antiquities, for the most
Iews of those times did imagin ther might be had some conferēce
with spirits and soules of men: but both haue erred in this point.
                  
                  
                     Myso-daemon.
                     It is most vnlikely of all that God would answer Saul
by a deuil,Dis. pa. 140. that denied to doe it by a Prophet.
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Not so Mysodaemon, I can returne this weapon vpon
thine own head. For therefore was it more like to be Satan, because
God had denied to answere him by dreams, by Vrim, & by the Prophets,
1. Sam. 28. 6. againe Saul was now fast bound in Satans snares for
his disobedience against the1. Sam. 15. 15. 23. word of God: therefore no maruell
though Satan was bold to visit him on that maner.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     When Saul had told her that he would haue Samuell
brought vp, shee departed from his presence into her closet,Dis. pa. 146. vvhere
doubtlesse she had her familiar spirit, towit, some lewdcraftie priest:
ergo, all that play was but a priestly cousenage.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Theoph.
                     I tel the truly Mysodaemon, this doubtlesse of the craftie
preeste, is a magicall glose out of thine owne braine, and clean beside
the text.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     The counsellDis. p. 149. giuen to Saule, by that Samuel, greatly
disagreeth from Sathans nature and purpose.
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     If you will aduisedly consider all the circumstances of
this text, you shall soone espie that all that Samuels counsels and
words were wicked & diuelish, & tended most to perswade Saul &
his companie to idolatre,True Samuel would not haue done this. and for the confirmation of these artes.
Againe it is certen, the deuill can speake sugred words, and mean
Sathanically, as the deuill in the Gospel, the Pythonist at Philippi,
at Ephesus, and els where.
                  
                  
                     Myso-daemon.
                     This is straunge Theophilus, and yet for all thou
canst say of this place, there are some (as I heare) that cha
                           •
                        lenge
Dis. p. 151. all the learned men in the world, vpon the adventure of their liues, to
prooue eyther here in this witch or in any other, one piece of a miracle,
such as Christ did.
                     
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     There challenge, is but a bold, vndiscreete, and witles
bragge. And as for witches miracles, DanaeusDialog. 4. 4. p. 78, 79, 80. 81. and others saie
right well: that they may more properly be called, Sathanicall
Mira non miracula. woonders, which the deuill can with greater facility effect (saith
he) then the cunningest man, because he excelleth in nature, in
swiftnes of motion, and in knowledge. Of these wicked wonders,
the Scripture speaketh, 2. Thess. 2. 9. Revel. 16. 14. Sathans woonders
are produced of natural causes, & not supernatural, as Christs
were.
                  
                  
                     Myso-daemon.
                     Now, doe but shew me the iudgement of some
learned Authors, which will testifie also, that this witch hath a reall
conference with Sathan himselfe, and I shalbe satisfied and resolued
in one point, wherein Theophilus I haue a long time greatly
doubted.
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     1. BrentiusBrentius in 1. Sam. 28. 
                        on this manner, writeth vpon this place:
Apertè significat Scriptura, quòd Sathan nō perse tantū, verumetiam
per organa suae, quae sunt incantatores, & malificae, hominib. malefaciat.
The Scripture speaketh plainly that Sathan doth not only hurt himselfe,
but worketh also by his instruments, such as inchaunters and witches
are. And then he addeth: Colloquium ipsum cum Saule, perspicuè testatur,
non fuisse verum Samuelem, sed Sathanam effigie Samuelis apparentem.

The conference which Saule plainely testifieth, that this was
not the true Samuel, but Sathan hims
                           •
                        lfe who appeared in Samuels
likenes.
                     2. Another saith thus.
                        Victor Strigel. Saule consulit venificam seupithonissam,
manes ex orco educentem. i. confugit ad Diabolum. Saule asked counsell
of a witch, which coniured spirits out of hell, that is, he fled for helpe
to the Devill.
                     3. To be short, and that one may speake for many, Peter Martyr
vpon that place, hauing shewed many mens iudgements, addeth
in the end his owne, and saith manifestly it was a deuill. Then
he concldeth in these wordes, Scio istas rationes non adeo firmas
esse, vt possint persuadere, homini pertinaci. I know (saith he) these arguments
are not so strong, that they ca
                           •
                         perswade a stubborn wit.
                     4De superst. mag. Hemingius is of the same iudgement.
                     5Dialog. Danaeus is of the same iudgement.
                     6 Tremellius writeth of this kinde thus: Lev. 20. 27. Pythones
diabolicis artibus reliquos à dei cultu & sui sanctificatione avocant.
Pythonists seduce others by Sathanicall artes, &c.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     I pray you haue you euer heard, reade, or euer
seene any one example, of this kinde in these times?
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     
                        I read and heare of many: but I come not yet to speak
of the witchcraft in our time: notwithstanding to satisfie thy request,
Mysodaemon, I will shew the one example, which I finde in
a learned credible writer of this age.
                        Lectionum antiquarum. lib. 8. c. 10. Ludovicus Caelius Rhodigius,
writing of Pythonistes, hee addeth this which followeth, for
confirmation of his purpose. Idne quis vt fabulosum, risu excipiendumputet,
testatum volumus, tempestate hac, imò verò haec prodente
me, fuisse in patria mea, multerculam humili loco, Iocobam nomine, ex
cuius ventre immundi spiritus vocem, praetenuem quidem, sed tamen
vbi vellet dearti
                           •
                        ulatam, & prorsus intelligibilem, audivi ipse: verum
& innumeri alij, non Rhodigij modo, sed in tota fere Italia: quando futuri
avida potentum mens, saepe accersitam ventriloquam, ac omni
exutam amictu, ne quidfraudis occultaelateret, inspectare ac audire cō
                        cupiuit,
Cincinnatulus daemoni nomen erat, hac ille appellatione gestiens,
ac clamanti sub
                           •
                        nde respondebat. Si de preteritis aut de praesentibus
sciscitareris, quae reconditissima forent, responsadabat saepè mirifica,
si de futuris semper mendacissimus. Sed & inscitiam suam nonnunquam
murmure incerto, velbombo veriùs ignorabili retegebat. Least

any should account this (meaning what hee had written of pythonistes)
as fabulous, we will adde this confirmation. There was at this
time, euen when I was a writing hereof, a poore woman in my countrie
named Iacoba, out of whose bellie, I my selfe, heard the voyce of an vnclean
spirit, It was but small indeed, but yet as oft as it listed, it was both
a distinct voyce and very intelligible. Many others also heard the same
not at Rhodigium onely, but in a manner through out all Italie. For noble
men affecting praedictions greatly desired to heare, and to behold this
pythonist, whome therefore they sent for often, and stript her of all her
apparell, that no secret fraud might be hidden. The devils name was
Cincinnatulus,⸫Marke here you curle pated Gentlemē that glory so much in your vilde excrements, the deuill is your brother. he delighted much to be thus named, and gaue answer
otherwhiles to him that so called vnto him. If a man did aske him of the
most secret things past or present, he answered oft times most straungely,
but concerning future events, he alwaies erred. He couered also his
ignorance with a secret muttering, or to speake more plainly, with an obscure
kinde of buzzing.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     And what is the third kinde of witches mentioned
in the Scripture?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     The third sort of witches are they, which in Hebrue
are called kosemim of kasam, divinours or soothsayers, as all
writers agree. These witches, saithChap. 1. p. 17. 
                        Danaeus, would faine seeme to
worke by some inspiration, and instinct of Gods spirit, and therefore
they are more subtile, secret, and close in their workes, then all
the rest. This kinde is cunning in praedictions, saithHeming. q. de Divinat. mag. 
                        Hemingius,
because God permitteth their deuill often to infect the aier, water,
earth, fruites, &c. and to worke mightely in the children of disobedience.
They are also well seene in naturall causes, and therefore
haue a great foresight in naturall events. Againe, he saith, that
in praedictions they are sometimes holpen also by the writtē word
of God, wherein they haue great knowledge. By all these meanes
they perswade their ministers that they are1. Sam. 28. 13. gods, & there vassals
likewise perswade infidels, that they forsooth, are wise men, and
worthie of great honour and estimation, as may be seene by these
examples which practised this kinde of sorcerie.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     Haue we any examples then of this kinde in
Scripture?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     Yea truely: for Balaam that famous false prophet,
is called by this name, Iosh. 13. vers. 22. Bilgnam ben begnor hakosem.

Billham the sonne of Beor the diviner.
                     
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     Shal we thinke that Balaam wrouglit magically,
or that he was prompted (as they say) of the devill, when Balak
sent messengers withNum. 22. 7. gifts vnto him? surely the story seemeth
altogether to say the contrarie, for God is said to haue mette him,
and hee is saide to blesse and not to curse the people of
God.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     It is most apparant by many places of Scripture,
that he was the deuils prophet, albeit the Lord made him speake
what he would not at that time, as he did Caiphas at the death of
Christ,Ioh. 18. 14. for the text there saith, that hee bad the messengers stay all
night, ver. 8. that he might goe whisper in the night time, and seeke
some magicall revelations. For so it is written of him, Chap. 24. 1.
His custome was to goe, likrath nechashim, to fetch inchauntments.
Againe, how fayne he would haue wrought the deuils will appeares
in it, albeit God had forbidden him to goe to Balak, ver.
12. yet hee purposed still in hart to goe, and went indeede. Againe,
hauing his tongue tied from cursing, yet for lucre and vaine
glories sake, he invented and taught Balak in what sort he might
best annoy the Israelites, and that was by causing them to commit
whoredome and idolatrie. Which wicked counsell had also
that effect which he foreshewed: for as soone as occasion was offered,
the children of Israel fell into those impieties, whereupon
there dyed inNum. 25. 9. a plague foure and twentie thousand. Saint Iude
also, vers. 11. speaketh of the deceit of Balaam wages: and Saint
Iohn saith, that this was the doctrine of Balaam. Hee taught to
put a stumbling blocke before the children of Israel, that they
should eat of things sacrificed to idols and commit whoredome.
To be short, it is to be seene in his owne wordes, what little
hope he hath of Gods fauour and grace (for all magitians haue
renouncedDanae. Dial. God and there saluation) beeing tormented in conscience,
hee bursteth out into this exclamation: Oh that I might

                              〈◊〉
                            the death of the righteous,
                        Num. 23. 10. 
                        and that my last ende might be like
his. And the Lorde telleth vs afterwardes, that his vengeance
failed not to ouertake this witch, for his wicked doctrine & counsell
against the Church of god, for he was slain also by the Israelites
in the great slaughter of the Moabites.
                        Iosh. 13. By all these places of the

Scripture and circumstances of that storie, it is to be thought none
otherwise, but that this divinor, wrought by the deuill.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     But where finde you a real prompting,Dis. p. 170. the real
conference, &c. of a deuill in Scripture.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     What was the Pythonist at Philippi, had not shee
a reall conference with Sathan? for doeth not the Scripture speake
plainely that shee was possessed
                        Act. 16. 16, 17. 
                        of a deuill, and the Apostle biddeth
him come out of her, and she spake those holy words, these are the
seruants of the most high God, which shew vnto vs the way of saluation,
by a meere diabolicall reuelation. And leaste wee should any
way doubt in this matter, S. Luke saith manifestly that she practised
Sathanicall divination, for he addeth, This Pythonist gate her
masters much aduantage with divining. And had not Sathan also a
reall communication with Eve & many others? To be short, I can
not see, but he that can doe the greater, may doe the lesse: Non mirum
est (saith P. Martyr)Com. in 1. Sam. 28. 
                        siexteriores hominum oculos perstringat,
cum antea occupauit oculos mentis: It is no marueile that hee hold
fast shut the eyes of the bodie which so blindeth the eyes of the minde. He
then that can worke so mightely by suggestions (as may appeare in
the prompting1. King. 22. 22. of Achabs prophets) and preuaile also because
God giueth him leaue, I can not see, but that hee may haue a reall
possession of them, when God permitteth, and conference with
them.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     By what wordes of the storie, and other testimonies
can that be shewed, that hee vsed any deuelish artes?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     This witch saith thus of himselfe and his artes,
Num. 23. 27. Lonachash beiagnakob ve lokesem: No inchantment or
soothsaying can preuaile against Iacob. Vpon which words, Tremellius
saith, Ipse suis fascinis & incantationibus nihil illis nocere poterat:
He confesseth (saith Tremellius) that hee could not hurt them by his
witchcrafts and inchantments. Again, it is said, Chap. 24. 1. He went
certaine times before Likrath nechashim to fet inchantmēts: by which
wordes, I doubt not, but the holy Ghost meaneth to shew vs that
he was the deuils minister indeede. Master Calvine writeth of
this witch, saying, Figmenta hinc inde mutuatus est, quae diaboli tantumpraestigias
saperent: He borowed here and there certeine forger
                              •
                           es,
which sauoured onely of the deuils illusions. And then he addeth: Deus
omnem cum daemonibus societatem detestatur. God abhorreth all societie

with deuils. Tremel, he saith plainelie that Balaam wrought
by the deuill: for vpon these wordes, Chr. 24. 22. then strength is as
an Vnicorne, he saith, nec plus v
                              •
                           lent adue
                              •
                            sus eum artes diabolicae,
quam venena contra monocerotem. Balaams Sathan
                              •
                           call artes can
hurt the people of God, no more then poison can hurt the Vnicorne, Cha.
22. 6. curse me this people, that is, saith he▪ 
                        fasc
                              •
                           naeum vt maie pere
                              •
                           t,

                              •
                           ewitch them that they may perish. See more of him 2. Es. 6. Trem.
Annot. Ioh. Fr. P
                              •
                           cus Mirand. writeth of him thus: primigeneris habitus
est Balaam, cut dominus di
                              ••
                           tur fu
                              •
                           sse locutus, quanquam Prophetaesset
daemonum & artolus. Bala
                              •
                           m was one of the first kind, vnto
whome the Lord is said to haue spoken,
                        Lib. 4. de prenot. c. 5. 
                        albeit he were the deuils 
                              •
                           rophet,
and a soothsayer.
                     
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     Nowe let vs heare what may bee found of the
fourth kinde of witches mentioned in the Scripture.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     The witches of the fourth kinde are called megnonim,
                        Com. in Deu. 18.
from what roote it is not certenly knowne:C. 1. p. 18. Master Calvine,
Danaeus, and others here vnderstand, iudiciall astrologers,
and deuilish mathematicians, which vnder colour of false artes
worke many euils by meanes of Satan, that instructeth and prompteth
them.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     And haue wee anie examples or practisioners of
this kinde of witchcraft in Scripture.
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     We haue examples also of this kinde,There these are called ashaphim, which word the be
                              ••
                            Hebriciās translate astro
                              •
                           ogers. Dan. 22. for this
sort is mentioned in that counsell which was gathered for Nebuchadnezzars
consultation. These therefore were no doubt of no
lesse estimation, then Mecasephim and Chartummim were. For
these professed great knowledge in predictions by the position
of starres, constellations, &c. as may be seene, Esa. 47. where
it is apparant how these witches vsed to publish their prophesies
and prognostications concerning the prosperitie of that kingdome:
yet were they deceiued for the Persians soone after spoiled
Babylon and enioyed all that Empire, so that the deuill often bewraies
himselfe and his prophets in predictions, for the Lord hideth
from Satan moste commonly the knowledge of future euents.
Notwithstanding the Babylonians (as may be seene in
that chapter, verse 12. 13. 14.) had these men in an especiall
reputation. Wherefore I conclude,There they are called Hobrei shamaijm▪
                           
                         if the former magitians
wrought by Satan, as by probable and credible reasons we haue

before shewed, certenly these iollie companions also must not
come one foot he hind thē: albeit we finde not their couenant with
the diuel so manifestly expressed, as in the former practises, for this
kind of wizards and some which follow haue many shadowes to
vale and couer their diabolicall confederacie with Satan.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     And by what other argument can you shewe
the abomination of this kinde of witchcraft.
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     Howe detestable and deuilish this kinde also is, may
appeare by the fearfull iudgements and wrath of God, which fell
vpon the Iewes for the practise of this sorcerie: as may be seene,
Esa. 6. for there it is saide: surely thou hast for saken thy people, the
house of Iacob, Cim
                              •
                           lu mikedem
                        Here that very word is vsed. 
                        vegnonim, because they are full of
the east manners and astrologers as the Philistims, and abound with
strange children. We must not imagine it then a light cousenage
that causeth the Lord so to forsake his people. And this was one
ofHere that very word is vsed. 2. K. 12. 6. Vegnonim venichesh.
                         a Manasses witches, which caused destructiō vpō his kingdom.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     What was the 5. witch named in Scripture?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     The 5. the Hebrewes call chober, chobarim, of the

                           •
                        oote Chabar, to ioyne together, to binde together, or to associate,
say the interpreters. And so doethCommen. in Deut. 18. Master Caluine,De Demo
                              •
                           . lib. 1. c. 6. p. 89. Bodin,
Dialog. ca. 1. p. 19. Danaeus take it, because (as most thinke) these haue often familiaritie
and societie with the deuill. Trem. Psal. 58. vers. 6. Fafcinatoresisti
hebraea appellatione, nominantur, consociantes societatem,
quia diaboli societatem ad artes suas adhibent: that is, this hebrewe
name is giuen them because of their familiaritie with Satan in the vse
of their artes. This kinde we commonly call a chamer and a sorcerer,
of the rude Latine worde ortiarius, which is come in vse by
custome (saith Danaeus) and hath the place of a better worde sortilegus.
                     
                  
                  
                     My.
                     Haue we any example in Scripture of charmes or charmers.
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     Of both: for these are named also among the Babilonian
witches, Es. 4. 7. where it is saide, that this kinde of sorceres
swarmed in all that nation, for they were far more common belike
then (as they be now) then the great master witches, the highest
doctors of the deuils diuinitie. And that they did so abound
then, the Prophets own words do testifie: for he saith, v. 9. that the
Chaldeans and the babilonians had Gnatsmath chobareimeod, that
is, a wonderfull multitude, or as it were a strong armie of enchanters

or charmers, or (as we commonly say) sorcerers.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     I thinke the deuil would not debase him selfe, or
vouchsafe to communicate his presence and conference with this
vile sort of witches?
                  
                  
                     Theo.
                     Yea most of all: for this kinde hath most need of his presence
and help, because of the great wants this ragged sort of wizards
haue in the world.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     But these wretches can gaine him no credit, nor
adde one inch of estimation vnto him or his artes.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     These common sorte may serue well to delude,
blind, and besot the common sort of infidels, like as his greater
masters, serue in high places. And what these can worke among
the doating multitude of infidels,Es. 4. 7. may bee well obserued also in
that Chapter:V.
                              •
                           , 9, 10. for it is there said that this sorcerie and diuinations
had filled that people full of carnall securitie, pride, and rebellion
against God, and his poore Church. And the same sinnes accompanie
this witchcraft to this day.
                  
                  
                     My.
                     Is there mention also made of charmes in Scripture?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     There is a charme of serpents mentioned in the 58.
Psalme. ver. 6. where it is thus written asher to ijsmagn lecol melacheshim
chober chabarim mechencam, that is, which heareth not
the voice of charmers, albeit he be most expert in muttering charmes.
For Lachash doth signifie a secret muttering of charmes: by
which wordes we may well obserue, that the sorcerers also of our
time varie not much from the old charmers, for they euer (asDe Demon. 2. c. 1. 
                        Bodin
saith) are mumbling to themselues some holy wordes, full of
prayers, crossing themselues at each worde, &c.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     But here, Theophilus, I must by your good leaue
dissent from you somewhat. This place must bee expounded by
Ieremy. Chapter 8. verse 18. and then this Psalme (whereupon
your authours ground so much for charming, shall make most
against you. for Tremell. expoundeth this place but by a shifte, and
others by Ouid and Virgil:
                        D. p. 249. 250. 
                        but Ieremie saith plainlie that serpents can
not be charmed.
                     
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     You are ouer bold now Mysodaemon with good writers,
and I could somewhat beare with this boldnes, but take heed lest
you be found insolent also against God in the abuse of his blessed
worde, for that kinde of pride is moste daungerous. I will answere

to all your doubtes in order. But first marke here where Master
Calvine writeth vpon that place. Si nullae
                        Cal. com. in Ps. 58. 6. 
                        essent incantationes,
pueril
                              •
                            & absurdum foret, quod hic dicitur: if there were no charmes
or s
                              •
                           rcerie this were but a childish and absurd thing which is here spoken:
And againe in the same place: Certe si nullae essent incantationes
frustra lege 
                              •
                           Dei prohibitae ac damnatae essent. Surely if there were no
charmes then were they vainelie forbidden, and condemned in the lawe
of God. And as for other authors vsing the helpe of Poets, I answer,
albeit they despise not the good experience of wittie poets,
yet doe they not expound Scripture by them.But they remember what August. hath well saide for this point, quis quis bonus verusque Chri
                                 •
                              tianus est domini sui esse intelligat. vbicunque inveneri
                                 •
                               veritatem quam cō
                              ferens & a noscens etia in liter
                                 •
                              s sacr
                                 •
                              s, &c. De doct. Chr. Lib. 2. cap. 18. Again as for Trem.
he expoundeth not this place by a shift nor by any poetrie, but shee
with three learned mens iudgements vpon that place in these wordes:
aurem
                        Trem. in Ps. 58. 6. 
                        vtramque ab e
                              •
                            obturari, alteram in terram defigendo, alteram
extrema sui parte contege
                              •
                           do, atque occludendo, testes sunt in

                              •
                           unc locum, Ieronimus, Augustinus, Casidorus, & alij. The aspe shutteth
both her eares by laying the one side close to the ground, and by couering
and stopping the other eare with her hinder partes, so saith Ierome,
Augustine, Casidore, and others: and this was Tremell shift.
Nowe let vs come vnto the Scripture, and see briefelie how you
vse or rather abuse the holy worde of God. For you sound the
Prophets words thus: I will send serpents among you that cannot be
charmed. The Geneua translation is, which will not be charmed. And
Tremell better, contra quos nulla prodest mussitatio. Massius belike
hath taught you Mysodaemon, (to please your owne vaine
fantasie) to say that serpents can not be charmed, and to found the
words as if serpents could not be charmed. And wherers the wordes
are borrowed, and by serpents there are ment the Babilonians
whome the Lorde affirmeth shall so come vpon the Iewes for
their sinnes,2. King. 17. 17. as no sugred words or charmes shall be able to skare
them away: your masters vse them as if they were spoken in proper
and naturall signification.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     And what was the sixt kind of witches spoken
of in the Scripture?
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     The witches of the sixt kind are called Menacheshim
of Nachash, which signifieth to coniecture by sundry figures, Characters,
roddes, obseruations of daies and houres, say some Hebrewes,
and so sayP. 18. Danaeus andP. 89. Bodin also.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     Haue we any examples of this kinde of witches
in the scripture?
                  
                  
                     
                     Theophilus.
                     The witches which Manasses fauoured and caused
to multiplie in his time, were named by this name. 2. King. 21. 6.
and surely these were not inferiour in practise of Sathanicall artes,
vnto the rest before named, for we finde Gods wrath wonderfully
kindled against both the kingdomes of Israel & Iudah, for seeking
after this kinde, & that other of diuination, which is before named
in the third place: The words of God are 2. King. 17. 17. vaijkesnin
kesamim, vainacheshu, they diuined diuinations, and vsed to coniecture
by sundrie meanes: therefore the Lord was wroth, & put them out
of his sight. Againe, 2. King. 21. 6. Manasses vsed vegnoven, astrologie,
& venichesh, magical cō
                           
                              •
                           ecturings. Then the iudgements which
followed, are added, Chap. 24. 3. The kingdome was destroied for the
sinnes of Manasses, according to all that he did: or rather as Tremellius
saith: Propter peccata similia ijs quae fecerat Manasche, for sinnes
like vnto those which Manasses committed, that is, the aforenamed
artes of the deuill. This kinde of witchcraft then hauing such
strong cordes to pull downe the wrath of God also vpon that
noble kingdome, where the Church of God had onely her visible
aboade here on earth at that time, must not be thought to be a
light coosenage, or an experienced knowledge in natural magick,
neither must it be coloured or conveyed vnder any other such like
vaile of witchcraft. The popish reliques of this kinde are left amongst
vs, for men for want of faith in Gods prouidence, are too
credulous and readie most vainely and wickedly, to depend vpon
the flying, crooking and chattering of each birde, obseruation
also of sundrie daies, houres, and times, &c. The Lord illuminate
his Saints with the true knowledge of his prouidence,Brentius in Lev. 19. and to this
ende graunt them in al places a true ministerie, that such Sathanicall
and popish delusions may be packing.
                  
                  
                     Mys.
                     But who wil say with you, that Manasses artes were sathanicall,
or that he consulted with Sathan, when he sought after
and fauoured these witches?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     
                        Ioh. Wolph. saith plainely thus:Ioh. Wolph. com. in 2. reg. 21. 
                        Manasses relicto
Deo confugit ad malos spiritus: Manasses forsooke God, and sought after
euill spirits. And least thou shouldest deeme Mys. that Sathan
can haue no such artes, by such obseruations of the chattering &
flying of birdes, &c. Marke here what anPrecop. in Lev. 19. other saith: Operationes
Daemonum quibus nos ludificantur & decipiunt se quoque extendunt

in aves. The workes of the deuill whereby they delude and
deceiue vs, are extended also to the obseruation of birdes,
&c.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     Nowe let vs heare something of the seuenth
kinde.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     The witches of the 7. kind, are in Hebrew called
I
                              •
                           dgnonim of a common vsuall roote iadang: which signifieth to
know, to vnderstand. DanaeusP. 19. saith, that Palmisters are here vnderstood,
and such magitians as did diuine by the entrals of beasts,
&c. Bodin
                        P. 89. differeth not much in iudgement. Master Calvin cals
them cognitores, gnostae; and wee may name them not vnfitly, wise
men or wizards.
                  
                  
                     Mys.
                     And what example haue we in Scripture, which practised
this kind of witchcraft?
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     This kind also is one of the foure diabolicall sciences,
which Manasses fauoured and set vp in his time, and multiplyed
in the land, vntill the noble King Iosiah came, who is said to haue
found among the dunghill gods, (sterchoreos deos, saith Tremel.)
these two kind of witches, pythones, pythonists and ijdgnonim, wise
men, & he caused their braines to be beaten out with stones,2. King. 23. 24 Lev. 20. 27. Gen. 41. 8. according
to the wordes of the law of God.
                  
                  
                     Mys.
                     And what, Theoph. doe you thinke that these witches
had any sight in the secret myste
                           •
                        ies of Sathans sciences? Palmisters
& expounders of dreames are but poore simple fellowes, our
common Egyptian vagabonds (as we call them) can tell vs some
points of this profession. Surely then those witches were like to be
but plaine cooseners.
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     That these witches & some also of the former practised
more then common coosenage, &c. I can shew it by sufficient
proofe out of the Scripture on this manner. 1. All sinnes which the
Scripture calleth abhominations,Note these Arg. & applie them to all those kinde of withcrafts which Manasses fauoured, & Iosiah punisheth with death. are greater and more dreadfull
then any sleights of iugling, or cōmon coosenage: but this kind is
so named, 2. King. 23. 24. therfore this sinne is not coosenage, &c.
2. That sinne against the which the holy Ghost sheweth like, or
greater detestation, then against the vilest idolatrie, is farre more
dreadfull & more wicked then common coosenage, &c. The Lord
sheweth such detestation against this sinne in that place. Ergo. 3.
That sinne which is one great cause of the destruction of a whole

kingdome, is a most dreadfull impietie. This kind of witchcraft
was one of the foure which Manasses liked and2. King. 21. 6. fauoured, & for
the which that kingdom2. King. 24. 3. was destroied: therefore it is one most
dreadfull sinne. 4. That kinde of witchcraft which the law of God
so abhorreth, & against the which it pronounceth death without
mercie, is no doubt, a most deuelish and as Sathanicall a practise,
as all the rest: but the law of stoning to death (which was the cruellest
death amōg the Iewes) was directly giuen against this kind.
If a man
                        Lev. 20. 27. & v. 6. & chap. 19. 31. 
                        or woman be pytho, or ijdgnoni, a wise man, they shall die the
death, they shall stone them to death, there blood shall be vpon them. 5.
That sinne which the noble prince Iosiah, by the aduise of his wise
Iudges and Magistrates, &c. directed by the law of God, so sharply
punished, and sought after so dilligently, that his Church might
be clean purged, &c. must not be thought a light impietie, but rather
the contrarie: and that Iosiah did so, against these witches and
others, it is2. King. 23. 24. recorded by the holy Ghost for his euerlasting praise.
God put into the hartes of our Honourable Iudges to doe the like
in these times, where and when occasion is offered. And to this
end, Strilegius writeth against these witches, and to the commendation
of Iosias on this manner.Victor Strigel. com. in reg. 23. 
                        His seuerissimis mandatis Iosias obtemperans
non tantum exscindit, sed etiam evellit omnes vates & incantatores
diabolicos, ne rursus fruticentur: eandem severitatem omnes
magistratus sequantur in tollendis èmedio magis, &c. & alijs qui se
ministros diabolorum praebent. Iosiah obeying the most seuere rules of
Gods law (Lev. 20. 27.) did not onely cut downe, but rooted vp all diviners
and deuelish enchanters, least they should bud or seede any more:
let all magistrates (saith he) vse the like severitie, to take away
witches, and all such as giue them selues to the ministerie of
Sathan.
                     
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     And what was the last kinde of witches named
in that place of Deut. 1 8. v. 11.
                  
                  
                     Th.
                     The last words there are, doreshel hammuthim, one that enquireth
or seeketh counsel at the dead, but it is to be doubted whether
the Lord meaneth in these words an other special kind, or rather
sheweth by thē,1. Sam 28. Es. 8. 19. by what meanes som of the rest there nūbred
practised these artes, namly, by cōsultation with the spirits of dead
mē (as was thought) but with deuils indeed, howbeit some affirm,

that Necromancie, another and speciall kinde of witchcraft, is here
to be vnderstoode: but Samuel & Esay say plainely that Aobooth,
pythonistes, and ijdgnomim wizards, practised this Necromansie: for
Esay saith, that such as consult with Aobooth and 
                           
                              •
                           dgnonim, goe
from the liuing elh
                              •
                           mmuth
                              •
                           m, that is, to ask counsel of dead soules
(as some supposed) but of the deuills indeed, Maister Luth. saith,
that Necromantici spiritus nocturnos & obamb
                              •
                           lantes consulunt. Necromancers
cōsult with night walking spirits,Annot. in Deut. 18. &c. or as Esay saith,
They lye and remaine among the graues, Chap. 65. 4. Howsoeuer
it be, whether these words contei
                           •
                        e an other speciall kind, or no,
I know not, but one thing we are sure of, that these witches also
had there marchandize with Sathan him selfe: for the spirit of the
righteous returne vnto God that gaue them, Eccles. 12. 7. and the
soules of the vnrighteous,Luk. 16. 23. are (as our Sauiour Christ saith) in hell
torments. Wherefore they must be Sathanicall spirits, and not
soules departed, which come to conference and to trafficke with
witches here vpon earth. But some intendingIo. Fr. p. mirandula de prae. lib. 4. c. 55. to finde an essentiall
difference, haue thought it best to call that practize of pythonistes,
Sciomant
                              •
                           a, to discern it from this last kinde of witchcraft, as
if there did appeare but shadowes onely in the one, but reall bodies
in the other. Wherefore this difference is but to smal purpose,
in my iudgement.
                  
               
               
                  CHAPTER II.
                  
                     Of the witches of our time, and of their bargaines, societie, and
acquaintance with Sathan.
                  
                  Theophilus Mysodaemon.
                  
                     
                        SVrely, Theophilus, I loue not sophistically to
cavill in this controuersie, but soberly to come
(if God so please) vnto the knowledge of the
trueth. Seeing that the light of Gods word is
so manifest, that these magical artes mentioned
in the Scripture, were such horrible impieties,
abhominations, &c. and so detestable
before almightie God, that they caused his wrath to be kindled
in such manner against his people, for fauouring, following, and

practising them: I must and will willingly subscribe, Theophilus,
that these artes were more indeed then coosenage, poisoning, naturall
magike, or any other such like invention, onely practised by
humane industrie.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     Neuer doubt of it, they were Sathanicivenefici,
& Sathanicimagi, Sathanicall magitians and Sathanicall poisoners
indede: and so call them, Mysodaemon, asDan. c. 1. p. 20. learned men haue
done, and thus I trust thou seest what the witches were which are
mentioned in Scripture.
                  
                  
                     Mys.
                     I doe so, Theophilus, I thanke you. But shall we imagine
that our poore doating old women (which are commonly called
witches) at this day, are like in any point vnto those 7. which are
mentioned in Scripture. Surely I haue no light of reason, or Scripture,
as yet wherefore we should so thinke.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     Thou art here also caried away with some fabulous
volumes of withcraft, or thou markest the follie of the multitude,
or both. For what, Mysodaemon? shall Sathan in this age be
lesse cruell, or infidels more holy then they haue beene? some
are not ashamed to say indeede, saith Hemingius, that there is great
difference betweene heathenish and Christian magike. Ill
                              •
                            daemones,
                        Hem. admonit. de sup. mag.
                        hi sanctos invocant, illi prophanis, hi sacris verbis vtuntur, illi characteres
ignotos, hi signaculum crucis vsurpant. The heathens called
vpon deuils the Christians pray vnto Saints, they vsed prophane
terms, but these vse holy words, they practised vnknowen characters,
but these are full of crosses in there witchcraft. Therefore the
witches in the Church are more wicked then the Heathen
Witches, for these abuse the Worde and Sacramentes of
God.
                  
                  
                     Mys.
                     I say not so, but I reason thus: Myracles
                        D. p. 156. 
                        are ceased: Ergo:
All the miraculous works of witchcraft are ceased, & consequently,
I say, that our witches can in no wise worke so as those witches
mentioned in Scripture haue done.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     I answer thee first: For thine argument, the consequent
followeth nine myles behinde the Antecedent. For as thou
hast hard partly before, the witches spokē of in Scripture wrought
no miracles, but, as the Scripture saith,2. Thes. 2. Read Danaeus dial. c. 4. p. 78. 79. 80. lying wonders. For all
true miracles haue supernatural causes, and so haue not the deceitfull
delusions of the deuill.
                  
                  
                     
                     Mysodaemon.
                     You haue not heard all that I can say, for I tell
you, my reason stands vpon good ground, and hath great strength.Dis. p. 160.
                        Oracles (as you know) are ceased, and no doubt whatsoeuer hath affinitie
with such miraculous actions, as witchcraft, coniuration, &c. it
is knocked on the head, and nayled on the crosse with Christ, who hath
broken the power of the deuills. What say you to this, Theophilus.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     Surely I can but wonder, Mysodaemon, that any
should teach you by speach or by writing, such blacke diuinitie in
this bright shining light of the Gospel. For babes in Christianitie,
vnderstande that Christ on his crosse, hath so farrefoorth broken
the power of sinne, as that it shall neuer haue strength to the
condemnationRom. 8. 1. of his elect. But hee neuer ment so to take away
sinne, as that it should haue no beeing in the world, much lesse to
knocke in the head (as thine Author saith) the sinnes of Sathan &
reprobates, for they are predestinate al to burne in that lake which
is prepared for the deuill and his angels. And wherefore doeth he
not reason thus. Sinne is brayned and nayled on the crosse with Christ:
Ergo: witchcraft, murder, theft, &c. is ceased. It is because then his argument
should appeare before the sonne, to be a most impious &
Anabaptisticall reason, as it is indeede, howsoeuer hee coloureth
it.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     Wherefore then haue Oracles ceased, as Plutarch,
and Eusebius, and others write, and it is knowen true by experience,
for there temples are fallen, and there is no more mention
made of them.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     True it is indeede, Eusebius saith they fell in Constantines
time, and before when, the Gospel began to be published,
and the word of God had free passage among the Gentiles, but
thinke not albeit at this day, these Oracles are not heard, nor these
artes so publiquely professed and maintained, as among the olde
Gentiles they haue beene: that therefore Sathan is dead or his
wonders ceased: but the rather thus we are to iudge, because Sathan
can not haue such Temples nowe erected for his seruice,
since the Gospell came vnto the Gentiles, that he is more besturring
him selfe in another more secret manner, wheresoeuer the
light of Christ is wanting, for so he doeth indeede, as afterwardes
shalbe shewed.
                  
                  
                     
                     Mysodaemon.
                     Againe, Theophilus, I pray you giue me leaue
to speake what I can for our old women, for I am greatly agreeued
to see the rude multitude so cruell against them, and some
Iudges so mercilesse, as to put these poore innocents to death.
I reason thus by law against this vniust crueltie: I say shee is iniuriouslie
dealt withall if shee be the deuills
                        Dis. in epist. 
                        instrument, in practising
his will, my reasons are. 1. Shee is put to death for an others offence.
2. Actions are not iudged by instrumentall causes: and therefore
I conclude these olde women may not dye for Witchcraft.
This is Lawyers Logicke I tell you,Rostoch. disp. prop. 46. Theophilus. What can you
say to this?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     First, as for the ignorant people, they are caried
away in deede with many fonde opinions concerning
witches, the Lorde graunt his Saintes his Worde and Spirit,
that they may truely discerne the delusions of Sathan, and
avoide them: and as for thine argument, if it be lawyers inventions,
I tell the truelie, they be bad aduocates in an euill
cause. They reason as if they would haue the Honourable
Iudges to hang the deuill, and to suffer the witches to
escape. The same reason may serue anabaptisticallie applied
for a libertie vnto all finne, for why may not the Thiefe
and the Adulterour say the like: the Witch therefore
muste dye as accessarie to the cause, for the Iudges can
not apprehende the head master of this euill, the flying serpent?
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     I will see what may be saide in their behalfe,
before wee intreate any further of them: what if I reason thus:
Christ didDis. p. 39. A grosse errour. clearely remit Peter, though his offence were committed
both against his diuine and humaneDiuine and humane nature he would haue said. Person: yet afterwardes hee
did put him in trust to feede his sheepe, &c. and therefore wee see not
but wee may shewe compassion vpon these poore soules, if they
shewe them selues sorowfull for their misconceites and wicked imaginations.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     This reason is vnsufficient and very anabaptisticall,
for it wrings out of the civill Magistrates hande all his
power and iurisdiction. Shall euery penitent malefactour be
deliuered from a temporall punishment, farewell then all
execution of iustice. But vnderstande here, Mysodaemon,
                        
that where God remitteth his secret iustice, & pardoneth sinnes
in Christ, there must not the ciuill Magistrate be remisse in bodily
punishment and iustice, except he haue an extraordinary warrant
and reuelation from God, for his direction. The lawe is, Thou shalt
not suffer a witch to liue, vnlesse the iudge haue warrant to repeale
this law from Iesus Christ (as Peter had) all witches lawfully convicted
must haue their punishments answerable to their demerits.
Againe, thou dost not well to call our witchcraft misconceite &
wicked imagination, for I tell thee, it is more. But thou art ouer
hastie to make as yet, such apologies for witches, for these pointes
should be discussed in the end of our conference. But goe on, demaund
what thou wilt, and I will answer thee as I can.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     Pardon me this disorder, Theophilus, I will be as
briefe as I can, I pray you answer me but a few questions.C. 5. p. 87. Danaeus,
Lib. 4. c. 2. 3. Bodin,De supest. mag. Hemingius, and others, would haue witches punished
(if the evidence against them for 
                           •
                        sorcerie be not manifest) for
their known idolatry, blasphemie, apostasie, seducing of others, &c.
I say the Magistrates ought not to yeeld to this counsell.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     Wherefore Mysodaemon.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     First, I prooue they are no idolators, for this is a
true definition of idolatrie: They are
                        D. p. 70. 
                        idolators which doe externall
worship to idols or straunge gods. Now the witches haue no such visible
sight of Sathan that they can so adore him.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     No rather, Mysodaemon, he is an idolater also which
worshippeth God otherwise inwardly or outwardly, then God
hath reueiled in his holy word that he should be worshipped: againe,
suppose not so, Mysodaemon, but that Sathan can shew himselfe
in a visible forme, faire or foule,Dan. 4. c. p. 55. l. 17. Idola sunt similitudines vel ad deum vertum▪ vel falsos, vel eorum virtutes reprae sentandas, prohominis arbitrio sine Dei mandato factae. Fen Theolog. lib. 5. p. 120. (as many places of Scripture
can testifie) and so offer him selfe visiblie to be adored. And
is not Sauls Idolatrie so manifest, as none but a stubborne witte
(as P. Martyrsaith) can denie it?
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     Let me heare then what you can say to my secōd
reason: they are no Apostates, because they want sound iudgement,
for they haue but a poore deale of any religion, and most of
them seem to wāt very sense. What Apostacie thē can such haue?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     I answer, indeede the more graces men receiue,
if they fall from grace, the greater is there Apostacie, as in Iulian
and others: but count you their baptisme, wherein they haue offered

vnto them all the benefits of their redemption, their visible
incorporation into the societie of the Saints: their outward profession
in the face of the Church nothing? and to renounce and abiure
all these gifts and graces, and to betroth them selues with Sathan,
is all this no Apostacie?
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     But all these things want proofe as yet.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     Thou shalt see these points proued, & some more
which seeme so incredible vnto thee, when thy doubtes are answered:
hast thou any more to say?
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     
                        Againe, I can not see how they can be seducers, for
they haue no Rhetorick, nor any such arts, to seduce men by any coosenage.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     Albeit, Mysodaemon, they neuer read Tullie nor
Quintillians Rhetorick, yet are they deuelish deceiuers, for Simon
the sorcerer had but a small fight, I thinke, in these artes, yet could
he seduce the people of Samaria for many yeeres, vntill they receiued
Act. 8. 8, 9, 10 the Gospel, and then he fled to Roome and seduced many
others, as Euseb. writeth. So could Elimas his companion, who
would haue likewise seduced andAct. 13. 7. 8. turned Sergius Paulus from
the faith.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     But what say you, if our witches are but carried
away in their fond practises, with the humors of melancholie? may
they not then poore fooles be pardoned?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     As for this figge leafe, Bodin bloweth it away
withConfurat. Wyeri. p. 431. 432. 433. one breath.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     Well, I rest my selfe, Theophilus, vntil I see what
you can speake of our witches. Let me heare then brieflie what
you can say. There are many things which are said to be in the witches
of our time, which were neuer heard of in these old witches,
mentioned in Scripture, as namely these points: there transportations,
there bargaine with the Deuill, there Sathanicall sabaoths,
there oyntments of the fatte of young children, their transformations,
and such like myracles or wonders (as you say, Theophilus.)
now prooue all these, or any of these points true in our witches, by
Scripture, or any good reason, or authoritie, and I wil beleeue that
we haue also in our time right diabolicall witches indeede.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     
                        I will assay to prooue them true, aske of them in
order as thou hast euen now propounded them.
                  
                  
                     
                     Mysodaemon.
                     What say you then to transportations? for our
witches are said to flie in the ayer, and in the night season to be caried
to places farre distant, to meere with Herodias, Diana,
and Minerva, and the same night to returne againe: incredible
wonders.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     
                        I will not denie, Mysodaemon, but the deuill may delude
his witches many waies in these transportations, & that many
fabulous pampheletsFaustus. Drunken Dunstan. art. & in p. 156. are published, which giue little light and
lesse proofe vnto this point in controuersie. This first vnderstand,
that whatsoeuer is saide of transportations, contrarie
to the nature of our bodies, as to ride on the moone to meete
Herodias, &c. all such thinges are indeede but meere delusions:
but this that learned men affirme of the transportations
of witches by Sathan, it hath no such impossibilitie in nature,
but that it may be performed. Peter MartyrI. c. cl. 1. c. 10. s. 29. writeth thus.
Cumque tantae sint daemonum vires, quantas antea descripsimus,
nihil obstat quin homines interdum tollere possint, atque auferre
in nemora. Seeing the Deuills haue such strength as vvee
haue before shewed, nothing can let them, to take vp, and carrie
men sometimes into vvoddes. Then hee addeth Simon Magus
example, who was so famous for such flying in the aier, &
other magicall trickes, that hee was adored (as Eusebius
                        Eccles. hist. 2. l. b. c. 13. 14. writeth)
in Samaria and at Roome also, and his picture was set
vp with this title, Simoni deo sancto, To Simon the holy god.
But Eusebius addeth,Art. & in p. 34. that the Gospell did discouer him and
wrought his discredit in all places. BodinLib. 2. c. 4. de Daemon. saith, De exportatione
autem post vnctionem transvehi magos legimus, vel
sine vnctione saepe, hirco, pegaso, scopis, baculo, vel sine baculo
& iumento vllo. And as for transportation (saith he) we reade that
after their annointing, they are carried away, and sometimes without
oyntments, vpon a goate, or winged horse, or a broome, or a staffe,
and sometimes without a staffe or any beaste. And we must not
imagine that all are but fables, which learned Authors in elder
times also haue written, as Plutarch of Romulus, Philostrates of
Appolonius Tyanaeus and others of Pythagoras transportations.
Neither must wee reiect all the late Inquisitors, which by the
accusations, confessions, condemnations and executions of
innumerable magitians, haue learned and gotten some credible

experience of the trueth of transportations.Lib. 2. c. 4. Bodin
andDial. c. 4. Danaeus haue also sundrie late examples, when thou hast
opportunitie, Mysodaemon, thou maist read them.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     But I can not so like, Theophilus, of all these, as
of one probable argument of Scripture.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     What saiest thou, Mysodaemon, to the transportation
of our Sauiour mentioned, Math. 4. 8. Luk. 4. 9. If Sathan durst
touch so pure and so blessed a bodie, as our Lord Christ had (when
God gaue him leaue) whereon he had no dominion, by reason of
sinne: if that he could also take vp and carrie Christ through the
aier vnto the pinacle of the Temple; no doubt, that bould champion
feareth not to handle, and to carie these vncleane and vnsauerie
bodies of sorcerers and witches, for that he knoweth before
that both their soules and bodies belong vnto him. If God hath giuen
Sathan power ouer the soules of sorcerers to seduce them
from the faith: it is much more like that he giueth him leaue both
to touch & to beare their bodies: for God giueth him lesse authoritie
and dominion ouer mens soules, then he doth ouer mens bodies:
as may be seene in Iobs example, Chap. 2. v. 6.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     But I remember M. CalvinD. p. 103. 104. saith, this transportation
of Christ was in a vision onely.
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     As I can in no wise abide the abuse of holy Scripture,
so can I not beare with any, which force good writers to speake
that which they would not. For M. Calvin doth not say resolutely,
that the translation of our Sauiour was in a vision only: his own
words are, In re dubia & quam abs
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            periculo nescire licet, malo iudicium
suspendere, quam contentiosis praebere litigandi ansam. In a doubtfull
matter wherein I may be ignorant without daunger, I had rather
suspend my iudgement, then offer any occasion vnto contentious men of
strife. And then he addeth, that other interpretors affirme boldly
that it was a reall transportation. And so much for the first point
of our witches wonders.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     
                        I dare not reiect all the authorities, Theophilus,
albeit I am not througly resolued. And what can you say for their
bargaine with the deuill, or there Sathanicall sabbaoth, for we neuer
read of such things mentioned in Scripture?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     
                        I will not be long in the confirmation of these
pointes, for that other writers haue written much of this

matter. First, for the witches bargaine and obligation with the deuill,The witches bargaine with the deuill.
answer me a few questions, Mysodaemon: are you resolued that
there were euer any witches in the world?
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     That I am, those mentioned in the Scripture:
and peraduenture some other beside.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     And canst thou imagine that Sathan would binde
him selfe to any of them (as the witch of Endor for example) to be
present when they would, and to minister vnto their necessities, as
we read he did, before such time as the witch also for her part doe
renounce God & all religion,1. Sam. 28. & adore him as her God: yea and
binde her selfe in some euident manner, to persist in this profession,
and continually to performe these pointes, and all other
articles conteined in his obligation.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     If there be such a bargaine, the deuil, no doubt,
wilbe sure enough for his part: and I think he wil not greatly bind
him selfe before the witch also doe the same.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     It is most like to be true, Mysodaemon, for sometimes
thereLib. 2. c. 4. obligations are found written with their own blood,
as Bodin reporteth of one, Theophilus, to haue done.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     
                        I will not heare, I tell you, neither of Bodins
*Dis. in the praeface. bables, nor Sprengeus fables: I pray you shew me one example
out of some credible Authour, if you can.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     
                        Master Fox in the storie of M. Luther, hath one
singular example for this purpose. There was (saith he) a young man
about Wittemberge, who beeing kept bare and needie by his father, was
tempted by way of sorcerie, to bargaine with the Deuill, or a familiar
(as they call him) to yeeld him selfe bodie and soule into the deuils power,
vpon condition to haue his wish satisfied with money: so that vpon
the same, an obligation was made by the young man, written with his
owne blood, and giuen to the deuill. This case you see how horrible it was,
and how damnable: now heare what followed. Vpon this sodaine wealth
and alteration of this young man, the matter first beeing noted, began
afterwaerdes more and more to be suspected, and at length after long &
great admiration, was brought to M. Luther to be examined. The
young man whether for shame or feare long denied to confesse, and would
be knowen of nothing. Yet God so wrought beeing stronger then the deuill,
that be vttered vnto Luther the whole substance of the case, as well
touching the money as the obligation, Luther vnderstanding the matter,

and pittying the lamentable state of the man, willed the whole congregation
to pray: and he himselfe ceased not with prayers to labour, so
that the deuill was compelled at the last to throw in his obligation at the
window, and bad him take it againe vnto him. Thus farre Master Luther.
                     
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     Surely this is a not able example: and it may be
this is not so incredible a matter, as some haue marueilous boldly
and confidently auouched: but where make they such bargaines?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     At their common meetings, which they cal their
sabboth, for there the deuill hath many witnesses, and there these
obligations are autentically sealed. For thou must vnderstande,Sathanical sabbothes.
                        Misodaemon, that as thou knowest Sathans purpose is euer most to
rebell against God: so his drift in all the artes of magike principallie
is, to vse all the mockerie that euer he can inuent against God,
and his Word and all the partes of true religion. And to this end, he
hath ordained his sabbothes for his seruice. In these horrible meetings,
Sathan himselfe appeares sometime in one forme, sometime
in another: (for 
                           •
                        o he can as the ScriptureCor. 11. testifieth) for somtimes
his ministers behould him in the likenes of a man, but most commonly
of a foule stinking goate. There they haue sundrie suites
vnto him: and hee ministreth and teacheth them to confect poysons
and pouders, and many things for the destruction of man and
beast, and in the end he addeth (when his congregation is to be
dismissed) with a terrible thundring voice, this speech, or something
to the like effect. Vlciscimini vos, aut mortem oppetetis. Revenge
your selues, or else die the death.
                     
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     Well, Theophilus, these things may be true,
yet some haue doubted how there can be any firme bargaine
                        Dis. p. 45. 
                        betweene
a carnall bodie and a spirituall.
                     
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     The Scripture telleth vs plainely that he can transforme
him selfe into many shapes; the Apostle saith, he can chāge
himselfe into an2. Cor. 11. 14. angell of light.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     
                        But I cannot heare, Theophilus, any wise man,Dis. p. 45. or
honest man tell vs any thing, which hath beene himselfe eyther a partie,
or a witnesse of such horrible bargaines.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     There is no man, I thinke, of learning or godlynes,
that would require this testimonie at an honest mans handes,

to be an eye witnesse of such dreadfull abhominations: thou speakest
therefore, Mysodaemon, of a thing impossible: for honest men
haue no such conuenticles: notwithstanding to satisfie in some
sort thy desire, see I pray thee, the examinations, confessions, and
practise of M. A. of Barking, and M. B. of Rochester, confirmed by
sufficient credible witnesses. Ann. 1584. And to end this question
of these Sathanicall bargaines: DanaeusDialog. 3. chap. p. 45. and other graue authors
say, That it is the vniforme consent of the witches of all nations and of
all times: for there confessions all agree, and haue many hundreth yeres
so agreed. Quae
                        Ioh. Fr. P. Mir. de Praenotion. l. 1. c. 2. 
                        fuisse affirmantur ab omnibus, ea non fuisse qui contendit,
calumniatur.
                     
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     It may be some of our Master witches frequent
such publique assemblies, and haue some open bargaine and confederacie
with Sathan: but it is not like that al deale so openly with
him, for many of them with one consent constantly affirme in
their death, that they neuer saw the deuill in their liues.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     Therefore some learned men haue distinguished
these Sathanicall couenants into theirIoh. Fr. P. Mir. de Praenotion. l. 4 c 5. Bodin. lib. 2. de Demonom. c. 1, 2, 3, 4. sorts; for some haue an open,
expresse, and euident league and confederacie with Sathan:
some a more hid and secret: some a mixt and meane betweene
both. Vnto the open and expresse confederacie, belong all manifest
coniurations and practises of Pythonistes: vnto the secret
kinde, all close and secret operations by Sathan, in diuining, astrologie,
palmistrie, and such like: vnto the third kinde, apperteine all
the practises of superstitious magicke in all sorceries whatsoeuer.
And following this distinction of diabolicall confederacies: we
may not vnfitly distinguish also their artes, for the better manifestation
of the trueth on this manner. Some beFeneri Theolog l. 5. p. 121. meere diabolical,
some mixt diabolicall: meere diabolicall as of Pythonists, and all
such as are of the open league: mixt, as all other which vse any other
meanes appointed by Sathan for their practise, and are of the
second and third kinde of confederacie.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     
                        I pray you then vnto which league belong
the common sort of our witches, which seeme indeede to worke
by the deuill (so wicked are their liues, so deuelish are their inuentions,
and such dreadfull euents follow them) and yet haue no
manifest operation by Sathan to their owne knowledge, as most

of them say in the very houre of death.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     They doe belong therefore, no doubt, to the second
or third kinde of confederacie: and they worke secretly
by the deuill,
                           
                              •
                           . Fr. P. M. de Praenot. l. 4. 
                        Quanquam haec ipsinon advertant & norint.
                        c. 5. 
                        Albeit
they neither perceiue nor know this thing.
                     
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     But you haue not one syllable in all the Scriptures
of God, to prooue any such league or couenant betweene
Sathan and witches.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     We haue not indeede any such wordes or phrases,
and yet may we truely conclude, that there are such things,
by Scripture; for the Scripture shewing vs the great readines and
acquaintance of Sathan, with the enchaunters of Egypt, the Pythonist
of Endor and Philippi: doe therein significantly giue vs
to vnderstande, that there was some precontract and confederacie
betweene them: for Sathan will neuer worke in such
manner, but with whome hee hath some league and acquaintance.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     And what can you say of our witches oyntments,Witches oyntments.
for I remember Ioh. Bap. Neap. did prooue by his owne experience,
that this was but meere coosenage and a fable in witchcraft,
as we may read in his little booke of naturall magicke, lib. 2.
cap. 26.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     First, as for the strength of any oyntmentes to
worke any magicall inuentions, I answer, Mysodaemon, it is none
at all. For oyntments can mooue Sathan, no more then figures,
crosses, circles, periaptes, the superstitious mutterings of holy
wordes, and such like abhominations. Secondly, that they haue
notwithstanding such stuffe in their practise, I am induced to beleeue,
for that Sathan wants not in his seruice (as is before saide)
all theNonne manifestèd abolus morositatem illam Iudaeorum imitatus est? apish imitations of Gods religion,Tert. de Praes. haeret. that can be deuised
by new found and forged sacraments. Againe, Mysodaemon,
if this making of oyntementes, of the fatte of young children,
seeme so straunge vnto thee, vnderstande this, that
albeit the deuill little regardeth such oyntementes, yet is hee
right glad to behould and see the murder and bloodshedding
of young infantes: for wherefore else did the Heathen kill
and sacrifice their children vnto Moloche? and that thou
maiest vnderstande also, what that abhominable practise was,

David sheweth that, complaining because this horrible idolatrie
crept into the Church: for he saith, They offered their sonnes and
daughters vnto deuills. And that the deuill stirreth Sathanicall magitians,
to offer these bloody sacrifices vnto him, the ecclesiasticall
stories of Maxentius and Iulian, and others, can testifie vnto vs. For
ofMaxent. Euseb. eccles. hist. lib. 8. c. 15. & de vita Const. lib. 1. c. 30. the one, it is said, Contulit se magicis studijs ad incantationem &
iam mulieres praegnantes discidit, iam infantium recens natorum viscera
inquisiuit, & arcano quodammodo daemones advocauit. He gaue
himselfe to the studie of magick for inchantment, and then he ript
women with child, and sought diuinations in the entrals of young
infants, and called or coniured deuils secretly. And of thesul. Theod. lib. 4. c. 26. 27, 25. other
it is written: Antiochiae verò, aiunt, multas arcas in regia, refertas humanis
capitibus, inventas esse, multis
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            in puteis cadavera humana.
There were found at Antioche (as they say) many chestes full of deade
mens sculles, and many dead corses were found in wells: and a little
before his death in the Persian warre, it is said in the same place,
that he ript an other woman with child to practise vpon her his diuinations,
and then he hung her by the heare, purposing to learne
more by her dead bodie at his returne, but therein he fayled, albeit
his deuils told him the contrarie. Againe, Plinie writing of Nero
and his magicke, saith thus of him, Homines etiam immolare gratissimum
ei fuit: He was most delighted to sacrifice men vnto deuills. Apollo
taught his witches to sacrifice a noble Virgin, to stay the
plague among the Lacedemonians. Polyxena Priamus daughter,
and Iphigenia Agamemnons, were both sacrificed to Sathan in
like manner.Tertullian in suo Scorpiaco. The witches of Scithia offered men in sacrifice vnto
Diana: The witches of Fraunce vnto Mercurie: The witches of
Africa vnto Saturne, And what was Diana, Mercurie, & Saturne,
but Sathan and his fellowes, which coloured and shrowded them
selues vnder such names and titles (as Mirandula
                        De praenot. saith rightwell)
among the blinde and prophane Gentiles? The Romane witches
taught the old Romanes to sacrifice two men yeerely, to appease
the Gods, and to cast them into Tyber. In Cyprus also, they sacrificed
a man vnto Apollo. To conclude, Baals witches shew plainly
how greatly Sathan delighteth himself, to see mens blood shed
in his seruice,1. King. 18. 28. for it is written of them, They cryed loud, and cut them
selues, as the manner was, with kniues and launces, till the blood gushed
out vpon them. And this hath, is, and euer will be the ende of all

spirituall whoredome with Sathan in witchcraft.Read of the storie of yofng infants murdered in Lenton Abbey, & found in the 8. yere of Q. Elizabeth. Act. & Mon. p. 1947. The like effects
could I shew by examples of corporall whoredome also: for these
two kinds of pollutions,What sacrifices, witchcraft & whordome, the two eldest daughters of poperie haue euer offered vnto Sathan. as they haue great affinitie in nature, and
in filthie practises accompanie one the other: so for this ende in
murder and bloodshedding, they haue not much varied, but euer
in all ages offered Sathan these bloodie sacrifices vnder sundrie
and diuerse pretenses, as it is by the continuall obseruation of wise
men truly testified vnto vs.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     No doubt, Theophilus, if Sathan haue that
bloodie purpose in witches oyntments, he will vse all the meanes
he can, to worke his wonders by such oyntments indeede: for the
scripture telleth vs, that he is a roaring lyon seeking without rest whom
he may deuoure and destroy both in bodie and soule. But least I wearie
you, Theophilus, in these things wherein I know you be not greatly
delighted: I pray you let me heare in a word what can be saide
of lycanthropeia, transformation of men and women into wolfes
and cattes, &c. for these things are cleane contrarie against nature,
and must be meere poeticall fables, if the trueth be tryed.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     Truely my greatest delight in this conference,
Mysodaemon, is to helpe thee what I can to come vnto the knowledge
of the trueth, & to make thee more able to auoyde (if God so
please) all the daungers of these Sathanicall delusions: for I may
speake truely as anotherDanaeus Dial. doeth, for mine owne part: Equidem de
diabolis eorum
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ministris sortiarijs lubenter disputare non soleo, &c.
eatenus mihi nota sunt eorum studia & artes quatenus de ijs verbo Dei
sacrosancto omnes edocemur. Surely I list not willingly to dispute of deuills
and there ministers the witches, &c. and I am so farre acquainted
with their studies, as we are all taught by the word of God. And as for
transformations, I warned thee before to looke for no supernaturall
works in witchcraft. I answer thee therefore this question,
with Danaeus also:C. 3. p. 49. 
                        Quare illa etiam falsissima censenda sunt, quae de
lycanthropis quibusdam narrantur: These things are to be thought most
fabulous, which are reported of transformations. Content thy selfe,
Mysodaemon, I pray thee with this answer, for these things be not
the great grounds of witchcraft. Howbeit I denie not, but witches
may haue also sundrie such Sathanicall delusionsI. Fernelius de partium morbis & symptomatis. 5. c. 2. in many,
which abounde in melancholy, but no reall transformations indeede.
                  
                  
                     
                     Myso-daemon.
                     But before we end our conference, Theophilus,
I must be bold to aske you yet a fewe more questions: wherein I
would most gladly be resolued, both for mine owne instruction,
and the benefite of some of my friendes.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     If thy questions be needfull and necessarie for
thy selfe or any friend to know, I will answere them: but as for2. Tim. 2. 23. 
                        foolish
and vnlearned questions (the Apostle hath forewarned vs) they
doe but ingender strife.
                     
                  
                  
                     Myso-daemon.
                     I promise you, Theophilus, I wil no more cumber
you, but onely with a few points which shalbe good for the vse
of edifying First, I would knowe what your iudgement is of some
bigge volumes of witchcraft, which (as farre as I can see) conteine
sundrie intollerable prophane and wicked Treatises and
formes of idle and vaine iuglings and blasphemous coniurations.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     Surely this I thinke, Myso-daemon, all the godly
learned men, who tenderly regard the good state of the Saintes of
God, are no doubt agrieued in hart to see such horrible impieties
suffered to be broched in the open face of the Church of God: for
young wits are more apt to practise these wares of Sathan which
are thus put to sale, then to search for anie good purpose in them,
which is most hard to be founde. Againe, this in a worde I adde,
that the Lawyers tell vs such authours are ouertaken by Lawe: for
the Lawe saith: Libros magicae artis apudse nemini habere licet,
                        The Dis. must be commended to Vulcan. 
                        et si
penes quoscunque reperti sunt, bonis ademptis, ambustis
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            ijs publice, in
insulam deportantur, humiliores capite puniuntur. It is lawfull for no
man to haue the bookes of Magicke, and with whome soeuer
they are founde, their goodes confiscate, and their bookes openly
burnt, they are banished, and the poorer sort are punished
with death. Avoide therefore, Myso-daemon, such dreadfull impieties,
I warne thee.
                  
                  
                     Myso-daemon.
                     Well then, I will (if God assist me) followe
your counsell, & redeeme also the time (if I can) in better studies,
which I haue so vainely and wickedly lost▪ my next question is,
whether there may be in verie trueth at this daye such coniuration,
and calling vp of deuilles (which they call Necromancie)
so as the witch of Endor did? for albeit it bee not vnlike
but that Sathan practiseth with witches in these dayes

as in former times, as you haue partly shewed: yet in my iudgement
it is a thing impossible to call vp, or to conjure deuils
by any atte out of hell: for the
                        D. p. 431. Scripture saith that all passages
are stopt concerning the egresse out of hell, in the 16. Chap. of Saint
Lukes Gospell.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     I counsell thee, Myso-damon, neuer to credite
any more such magicall glosses vpon holy Scripture: for albeit the
reprobates departed are tormented for euer with deuils in hell:
yet the prince, the2. Cor. 4. 4. Eph. 2. 2. chap. 6. 13, 14. god, and the gouernours of this worlde
are in the ayer also, rounde about vs, and may be coniured Myso-daemon,
as well from aboue as from belowe: for the Apostle
sayeth, They are not in hell onely, but in high places also.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. III.
                  
                     What a dreadfull and fearefull sinne it is
to consult at any time or neede, with witches and
sorcerers.
                  
                  Mysodaemon, Theophilus.
                  
                     
                        I Woulde gladly be resolued in another
doubt, Theophilus: most men are wont
to seeke after these wise men, and cunning
women, such as they cal witches, in sickenesse,
in losses, and in all extremities: what
thinke you of this, Theophilus?
                     
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     I am assured, Mysodaemon,
that such miserable people commit a most
horrible & dreadfull sinne, that they are iustly brought into Sathās
snares, for the contempt of God & his word, that they seeke helpe
of the same serpent that stung them, that against the knowen principle
of the Gospel they would haue Sathan to drive out Sathan:
and to be short, that they are in very trueth, but meere Gentiles, &
Pagans in religion▪ blind in their mindes, hardened in their harts,
strangers from the life of God, and that if God giue them not speedie
repentance, they will become past feeling by custome & continuance
in their sinnes.
                  
                  
                     
                     Mysodaemon.
                     What reason haue you to prooue this custome
so vnlawfull and so vile, as you would haue it to appeare to be: for
those sinnes which God would haue vs most to dread, to feare, &
to auoide, he warneth vs of them many waies, by his Worde, by
examples, and by his iudgements from heauen against them.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     It is well obserued, Mysodaemon, and surely God
warneth vs all these waies of the greatnes of this sinne; wherefore
it is, no doubt, a most dreadfull abhomination.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     How, First by his Word?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     First, thou knowest, Mysodaemon, how the Lorde
in his Word chargeth vs to renounce the workes of the Gentiles:
the Apostle saith, This
                        Eph. 4. 18. Lev. 18. 26, 27, 28. Deut. 14, 1, 2. 
                        I say and testifie in the Lord, that you hencefoorth
walke not as other Gentiles walke in vanity of their minde: think
not that hencefoorth euery thing is lawfull vnto them, that the rest
of the Nations (which are without God in the world) thinke it not
vnlawfull for them to doe. The same charge Moses giueth often.
Now this practise was most rife among all those idolatrous Gentiles:
for theGen. 41. 8. Exod. 7. & 8. chap. Egyptianes in all their neede called for their wise
men: so did theNum. 22. 23. 24. Moabites, so did the Petsians, andDan. 22. Esd. 47. 12, 13. Babylonians.
So did the Romanes, as there histories record, euen there Emperours,
Romulus, Nero, Maxentius, Iulian, and others: and the great
Chame of Tartary and the Persians (asDial. c. 6. p. 89. Danaeus saith) seeke after
these helpes of the deuill in all their necessities, euen to this
day.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     What manifest and cleare testimonies of Scripture
haue you against this practise?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     There is nothing cleare and manifest, Mysodaemon,
vnto those inloh. 2. 14. whome the word of God abideth not, and which
haue not ouercome that wicked one, which is the deuill: for Sathan so
amazeth them, that they are more ready to reele into euery sinne,
though it be neuer so monstrous, then to see the greatest light
that God offereth them. Are not those prohibitions of God in
his Law and in his Prophets so plaine and so evident, that (as the
Prophet saith) he that runneth, may reade and vnderstand them?
the Law of God is this,Lev. 19. 31. 20. 6. Deu. 18. 10, 15 
                        You shall not regard them that worke with
spirits, neither soothsayers, yea shal not seeke them to be defiled by them,
I am the Lord the God. Againe, anon after, to make the greatnes
of this sinne the better to appeare, he repeateth the same wordes

in more fearefull manner: If any turne after such as worke with
spirites, and after soothsayers to goe a whoaring after them, then will
I set my face against, that person, and will cut him of from his people.
And againe, that God people might be sufficiently warned, they
haue a third charge against this sinne in Deut. 18. where they
are commaunded in all there necessities to seeke vnto God, and
the ministerie of his worde: which place Es. commendeth
to the Church of his time, on this manner: VVhen they shall
say vnto you,
                        Es. 8. 18. 
                        enquire at them that haue a spirite of diuination, and
at the soothsaiers which whisper and murmur, should not a people enquire
at their God? from the liuing to the dead? to the law and to the
testimonie, if they speake not according to this worde, it is because there
is no light in them. And thus, Mysodaemon, the Lord hath most
louingly warned, and most sharply charged his people to auoyde
this sinne.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     But some vnderstand the Law of God, Theophilus,
as the Emperours ciuill Law expoundeth it.Codic. Iust. lib. 9. tit. 8. l. 4. 
                        Eorum est scientia
punienda, &c. qui magicis artibus contra salutem hominum,
&c. nullis verò criminibus implicanda suntremedia humanis quaesita
corporibus. Hereby it is manifest, that hurtfull magitians and
witches which kill and hurt mens bodies and goods, are onely to
be auoyded, and so they doe amongst vs, but such of these practitioners,
as can and will cure the sicke, finde thinges loste,
haue a good neere gesse in praedictions, are not in any wise to
be blamed, saieth this Lawe, and therefore these are often
sought after in necessities vnto this day, and they seeme to
doe no man harme, but much good, and they speake the
very truth often, and men will doe much, Theophilus, in extremities.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     First for that Lawe, it is a moste wicked and
prophane law, and if it be one of Constantines constitutions, it
was published, no doubt, before his conuersion to the faith: and
as for the good that miserable men receiue of the sorcerers,
assure thy selfe, Mysodaemon, the more they seeme to benefite
mens bodies, the more harme they doe both soule and bodie:
for who would receiue gold at an enemies hande without
feare, and good assurance for his safetie? and is not Sathan
the bloodiest enemie that man hath liuing? and lastly, where

as they would be credited for their trueth: one counselleth vs in
these wordes. Si vera quando
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            dixerint non ideo credendum eis,
sed imitare Christum, qui reprehendebat damones, quamvis vocitarent
ipsum filium Dei. Albeit witches speake trueth nowe and
then, wee must not therefore beleeve them, but followe thou Christ
(saith he) who reprehended the deuills, when they named him often
the very Sonne of God. And because wee be impatient in extremities:
he addeth. St non illico sentis auxilium divinum, quid
tum? patientia opus est. If in thy great necessities thou findest
not present helpe from God, what then? thou muste vse patience.
                     
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     And how doeth God wame vs of this sinne by
examples?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     Thou maiest finde a multitude of examples,
which God layeth before vs in the Scripture,2. King. 1. 3, 16. & 17. 17. & 21. 6. &c. by them
to reclaime vs from this sinne, but I will here name but
Saule onely, hee alone can teach all men vvith vvhat
coardes of sinne all these witchmakers are fettered aboute,
and howe that they are in trueth, most prophane in life, and
Athistes in religion: for first, hee had reiected the worde of
God in heart, and all sincere obedience thereunto. 1. Sam. 15.
23. Againe, hee was a very murderer, for howe often sought
hee to murder David, and rested not till hee had slaine a great
number of the moste religious and innocent Priestes of the
lande. 1. Sam. 22. 18. And hee was also a verie hypocrite
in profession. 1. Sam. 26. 21. Vnto all these sinnes,
hee added this fearefull contempt of GOD, 1. Chron.
10. 13. Hee asked counsell of a familiar spirite, and in
the ende in great desperation he murdered him selfe. 1. Sam.
31. 4.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     But thinke you that al these sinners, are as wicked,
or any thing like that desperate Saule?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     I will not say that the measure of their sinnes
is growne to that height that his was, but that they be most
blinde in their mindes, and wicked in their liues, experience
deilie tellethvs. For who but Papistes and rebellious Athistes ride

and goe dailie to this market? And vnto such God doeth iustly
sende strong delusions, that they should beleeue lyes,2. Thes. 2. 11. 22. that they
might be damned, because they beleeued not the trueth, but had
such pleasure in vnrighteousnes.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     Surely the greater part of them which make
this trafficke with witches, haue in deede but a small deale
of any good religion: but these were Gentiles, and therefore
were worthelie plagued for infinite more sinnes: let
me heare howe God punished this sinne among his owne people.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     Farre more fearefully: for whereas the Lorde
loued them aboue all nations vnder heauen: this sinne was one
of the principall causes of that long diuorcement which was
betweene him and that people, for the Prophet saith:Es. 2. 6. again Es. 8. 21▪ 22. 
                        Surely
thou hast for saken thy people the house of Iacob, because they are full
of the East manners and are sorcerers as the Philistines, and abound
with strange children. And of the destruction of both the kingdoms
of Israel and Iudah. 1. Of Israel, 2. King. 17. 17. They made
their sonnes and daughters to passe through the fire, and vsed witchcraft
and inchauntments, &c. therefore the Lord was wroth with Israel,
and put them out of his sight. 2. Of Iudah, 2. King. 24. 3. Surely
the commaundement of the Lord came vpon Iudah, that he
might put them out of his sight: Propter peccata similia ijs quae fecerat
Manasche. For sinnes like vnto those which Manasses committed,
and his sinnes are numbred, 2. King. 21. 6. He caused his
sonnes to passe through the fire, he gaue him selfe to witchcraft and
vsed them that had familiar spirites, and were soothsayers, &c. Achaziah
would not enquire of Gods word, but sought after the
god of Ekron in his extremities, 2. King. 13. 16. Maxentius in like
manner, the Romane Emperour, consulted with his witches before
his destruction, and so did the vnhappie Iulian, and they had
both an vnhappie end.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     Surely the Lord, I see, hath giuen vs in these
daies more testimonies of his hatred against this sinne, then hee
did the old Church,Rom. 15. 4. for all these examples & iudgements are written
(as the Apostle speaketh) for our learning: & therfore such in

these times as commit spirituall whoredom with Sathan, are worthie
to drinke more deepely of the cup of the Lords wrath.
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     That they are: for the greater light offered men doe
reiect, the greater shalbe their condemnation.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     But alas, it greeueth me to thinke, how these
witches children,Esa. 57. 3. (as the Prophet calleth them) of our time beleeue
not, that sorcerers and coniurers are so euill.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     They erre greeuouslie, because God hath giuen
them ouer in his iustice for the contempt of his word: for they
consider but their figures, glasses, circles, periapts, & other vayles
of witches profession: and so did Saule, he looked vpon the woman,
and was caried away with a strong imagination and liking
of her artes, he vewed Samuels old mantle, gray heare, and listened
vnto his iollie graue speeches, &c. And yet it is said the Lorde
slew him for this sinne.
                        1. Chr. 10. 13. The people therefore of our time, hauing the
same drift and purpose with Saule, that is, with full sayle seeking
after Sathan if he may be found, must be subiect to the like (if God
giue not repentance) or the greater condemnation.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     And may not the Magistrate prouide against
this euill?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     
                        The Almightie God chargeth him so to doe, Deu.
18. 9, 10, 11. Lev. 20. 6, 27. for
                        
                           
                              •
                           . King. 1. 16. these sinnes are said to goe a whoaring
from God, and fall into a most dreadfull apostacie, and therefore
the Lord will haue them cut off from among his people. The
Apostle saith,
                        Rom. 1. That euill doers are not onely worthy of death, but as
many also as consent vnto them or fauour them. Wherupon one writeth
thus.
                        Heming. de superst. mag. Iuxta Pauli doctrinam, eiusdem impietatis reus peragitur,
& eisdem paenis obnoxius est apud Deum, & qui artem exercet magicam,
& qui ex ea remedium petit: that is, According to Saint Paules
doctrine, he which practiseth witchcraft, and he that seeketh helpe therby,
are both alike guiltie of the same impietie, and before God subiect
to the same punishment.
                  
               
               
                  
                  CHAP. IIII.
                  
                     Wherefore the Lorde doeth permit the
sinnes of witchcraft in our time: who are in most daunger
thereby, and what are the most soueraigne preservatiues against
witchcraft?
                  
                  Mysodaemon. Theophilus.
                  
                     
                        THE people say, Theophilus, that witches can
kill and make aliue whome they please: wherefore
doeth Almightie God suffer witches to
hurt and to destroy man and beast on this manner,
for surely I thinke they can doe much indeede?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     The multitude is in this grosse errour▪ 
                        Mysedaem,
that witches haue power to turne the world vpside down at their
pleasure: but the trueth is, it is nothing so. for, as I taught thee before,
they are but Sathans instruments, and can not worke these
wonders without him, and as for Sathans power also, it is limited
by the Lord. for he can do nothing, but where, and when the Lord
sends him: when therefore he is sent for the execution of Gods iustice,
he perswades his witches, that he can drive heauen and earth
together at his pleasure, and they perswade the wicked worlde,
that they can likewise worke wonders, whereas neither they, nor
Sathan him selfe by them can take away the least haire from the
greatest sinner vpon earth, but when God permits them: for as
the Lord by hisPsal. 147. 11, 19, 20. speciall loue, mercie, and prouidence doeth embrace
all his Saintes, so likewise his generall prouidence and mercie
(saith the Prophet)Psal. 145. 9, 15. Com. in Iob. cap. 1. v. 16. is ouer all his workes. Thus much in effect
hath M. Beza written the last yeere in his commentarie vpon
Iob, in these wordes: Caeterum ostendit etiam hic locus impuros illos
spiritus non temerè ab Apostolo vocari aeris principes, sicuti summum
illum lovem horum daemonum principem, Graeci & Latini multis propterea
epithet is cognominarunt, 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           , fulguratorem,
tonantem vocantes: qui tamen vel minimum quiddam in caelo,

vel in terra movere nisi Deo concedente non possunt, sed Dominū quiddem
illorum opera, quoties ipsi libuit, in huiusmodi excitandis tempestatibus
vti, ipsos verò donec in abissum mittantur, in aere & in alijs mundi
partibus versantes, & nulla remagis, quàm omni rerum confusione,
& hominum praesertim exitio gaudentes; Adde etiam omnium naturalium
causarum ad excitandas omnes eius generis impressiones requisitarum
summè peritos, quàm facillimè & quàm libentissimè, Deo concedenti,
vel etiam imperanti, suam in his rebus operam praestare constat,
sagarum etiam & magorum omnis generis adhibito interventu.
And then he addeth a confirmation of his assertion concerning
witches, and a great complaint against negligent Magistrates on
this manner. Quadere cùm tam apertè tam multis, tam certis & sacrarū
literarum testimonijs, & omnium seculorum apud omnes gentes
historijs cōstet, mirū est ac penè incredibile adhuc inter Christianos, praesertim
magistratus ac Iudices inveniri, qui vana & futilia haec esse omnia
existiment. Which thing (saith he, speaking of witchcraft) seeing
that it is so apparantly knowen, by so many and so certaine testimonies
of holy Scripture, and by the histories of all times, among
all nations: it is to be wondered, and in a manner incredible, that
as yet there are found among Christians, and especially among
magistrates and iudges, which doe suppose all these things to be
but vaine and fabulous. But to returne againe to thy demand, Mysodaemon,
wherefore God permitteth witchcraft in these our daies?
as for the causes of this permission, if thou wouldest knowe them,
they are many in number, but I will commend vnto thee foure
principally for thine instruction.
                  
                  
                     Myso-daemon.
                     VVhat then is the first cause of this permission?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     The euill artes and workes of Sathan by witchcraft,
are for a signe of the contempt and fall of men from the Gospell
and syncere profession of religion, wheresoeuer they be either
suffered or maintained, we see and knowe by daily experience,
that men haue but small measure of the pure light of God in that
place.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     This is to be seene most true in poperie, where
all superstition and magicall artes are bred, professed, and maintained:
and what is the second cause?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     The seconde cause why God suffereth Sathan

thus to triumph by his artes, and to rule ouer infidels, is, that he
might fatherly forewarne his Saintes to1. Pet. 1. 17. passe their dwelling
here in feare and with all diligence, to avoyde the contagion of
the wicked▪ with whome they haue any conversation.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     And what is the third?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     The third cause of this permission is, that by these
delusions of the deuill, God might in iustice punish them which
would not receiue his trueth: for the Apostle saith, that they which
will not2. Thess. 2. 11 beleeue the truth: God will send them strong delusions that
they may beleeue lyes.
                     
                  
                  
                     Myso-daemon.
                     It is most true we see: for such as hunt after
our doating witches are most sottish idiottes of all the people,
who when they bee stung by Sathan, runne foorthwith to be cured
by him: what nowe is the fourth cause?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     The tryall of Gods Saintes: for GOD permitteth
all heresies and superstitions to spring in his Church,
that those that are his, might be knowen, as the Lorde teacheth
1. Cor. 11. 19 deut. 13. 1, 2, 3. vs.
                  
                  
                     Myso-daemon.
                     Howe farre then may Sathans power reach,
when God so permitteth him, or sendeth him for the execution of
his iustice?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     Almightie God doeth vse Satan for to worke
his signes and iudgements in the heauens, in the ayer, and in the
earth, and to execute his iustice vpon all the children of disobedience:
yea and to afflict his Saintes, as ofter as the Lord knoweth
it expedient for his glorie, and their saluation. For the Scripture
speaketh plainelie, that he can driue downe lightnings and
flames ofIob. 1. 10. fire from heauen, to hurt the creatures vpon earth.
Againe, that he can infect and poyson the ayer and water with
pestiferous exhalations when God sendes him, as in the plagues
of Egypt, which were wrought by the ministerie of Sathan: for it
is written, that God cast foorth his indignation and wrath vpon
them in all those plagues,Psal. 78. 49. 
                        By sending out euill angels among them.
He can destroy also the other creatures, and man him selfe, by
Iob. 1. Iudg. 9. 23. Esd. 19. 14. 1. Tim. 4. 12. fyers, by windes and tempestes, when he is let loose against
them.
                  
                  
                     Myso-daemon.
                     The witches boast indeede that Sathan

can do much, and they likewise by their acquaintance with him;
but some thinke that all this is but to fray men, & many men often
hurt themselues and others by fond imaginations.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     As for Sathans might, it is but weake: if the Lorde
graunt him not strength to execute his will, he can not doe it: and
whereas some suppose that all these artes are but strong phantasies,
they be greatly deceiued, for albeit that some doe hurt themselues
with euill imaginations, &c. yet let a witch or any other
imagine what he will against thee, his imagination can neither kill
thee, Myso-daemon: nor take away one haire from thy head, but we
knowe and see, that Sathan by witches can doe both, and this is the
confession of the witches of all times, nations and people, euen at
the very point of death.
                  
                  
                     Myso-daemon.
                     If Sathan can hurt the bodies and soules of
men, I will neuer doubt he may soone hurt the other creatures, tell
me therefore first, what can he doe to infidels and wicked prophane
people?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     
                        
                           As for the wicked the Scripture saith
                           1 Sathan is their God. 1. Cor. 4. 4.
                           2 Sathan is their father. Ioh. 8. 44. act. 13. 10.
                           3 Sathan hath the vse of their bodies & soules.

                                 Eph. 2. 2.
                                 Matt. 12. 43
                              
                           
                           4 Satan workes his owne workes in them.

                                 1. Ioh. 3. 8.
                                 Ephes. 2. 2.
                              
                           
                           5 Sathan blyndes their minds, and makes them fooles in vnderstanding.

                                 2. Cor. 4. 4.
                                 Eph. 4. 18.
                                 1. Cor. 2. 14
                              
                           
                           6 Sathan robs them of the good vse of Gods word by many delusions, Luk. 8. 12. and makes them storme and fret against it, Prou. 14. 16.
                        
Now then seeing that Sathan hath this dominion ouer the soules,
which are farre more precious then their bodies, he may no doubt
and doeth often tosse their bodies, when God permits him, at his
pleasure.
                  
                  
                     Myso-daemon.
                     My heart trembles and quakes, Theophilus, when
I vnderstand by the holy Scripture, how all prophane and wicked

men in the Church euen among vs, are thus fast bound in Sathans
snares and chaines, and what is more miserable, they are so blind,
they know it not.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     Yea, and what is most dreadfull in these daies,
God hath giuen ouer sundry men (for the contempt of his word) so
farre into Sathans power, and into a reprobate sense, that men reiect
the very naturalRom. 1. 30. prov. 11. 23. course of ciuil life, that men sport themselues
in doeing wickedly, that men worke allEph. 4. 19. vncleannes, euen with
greedines. And such is the impudent boldnes, and grouth of sinne
in these times, that if any one man refraine from euill, he is a monster
among men, a gazing flocke, and as theEs. 59. 15. Cypr. l. 2. ep. 2. Prophet saith, maketh
himselfe a pray. S. Cyprian complaineth of his time, Esse iam
inter nocentes innoxium cr
                              •
                           men est, malos quisquis non imitatur offendit.
And the Milesians prouerbe was, men thinke there ought to
be no place for any honest man among them.
                  
                  
                     Mys.
                     The Lord defend vs from them, and graunt vs that wee
may so liue by them, that we be not hurt of them: but may not Sathan
and his witches hinder and hurt the Saints of God also?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     No doubt they may: for Sathan sought to winnow,
euen the veryLuk. 22. 23. 1. thes. 2. 18. Apostles, and preuailed somewhat, and hindred
them often in the course of their ministerie.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     How shewe you that Sathan can hurt their
bodies?
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     The Apostle had the messenger of Sathan2. Cor. 12. 7. iob. 2. to buffet
him, & as for Iob, Sathan so poisoned his bodie all ouer, that there
was no part of him whole, from the crowne of his head to the sole
of his foot: yea & what is more feareful, it may be seene byLuk. 8. 2, 3. 
                        Mary
Magdalens example, that (if god permit) he may not onely hurt the
bodies of the Saints, but before grace also haue a reall possession of
them. Again, our continual warfare is against him, & if we want any
part of our armour described, Eph. 6. he may soone hurt vs.
                  
                  
                     Mys.
                     Teach me two things more, Theophilus, and then I
cease to molest you. First, how I may be cured, if witches do hurt
me: and secondly, how I may best auoid them: for I see wel we be
in daunger all by them.
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     First, as for the cure of any man, poisoned by Sathan,Fernel. de Abdit. rerum causis.
it is knowen by the experience of many learned phisitions, a thing
most difficult: the reason is, sathan vseth poisons that haue hidden,

vnknowne, and straunge operations in the bodies of men, for he is
an Empiricke of many yeeres experience; notwithstanding wee
ought to vse all good meanes that Phisicke offereth vs, continually
intreating the Lord so to blesse thē, as they may be for our health,
if it shall seeme expedient for his glorie and our saluation: and if
by these meanes we can not receiue health, we must wait patiently
vpon God, commit and commend our bodies and soules vnto
his hands, for he saith, The
                        Ps. 37. 18. Eccl. 8. 8. 
                        Lord knoweth the daies of vpright men,
and their inheritance shalbe perpetuall. Againe: man is not Lord ouer
the spirit, to reteine the spirit, neither hath he power in the day of death
nor deliuerance in the battaile, neither shall wickednes deliuer the possessors
thereof.
                     
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     I heare often that many great mens houses are
troubled with straunge visions: What thinke you, Theophilus, are
these vncleane spirits, and how may such euils be auoided?
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     It is well you speake of great mens houses: for there
commonly are the greater sinnes. Nero could hardly rest for fearefull
and straunge apparitions: Suetonius
                        De vita Neronis. saith, Saepe confessus exagitari se
materna specie, verberibus furiarum, ac taedis ardentibus. The
like say the stories of Brutus, Pysistratus, and others. The greater
sinnes defile any place, the greater libertie is giuen Sathan, & the
more it isMath. 12. 43. swept and garnished for his continuall habitation. To
expell all such euills, these rules following in all such families must
be carefully practised. 1. The lords, masters, and fathers of families,
must draw nere vnto God themselues by vnfained repentance,
that their owne bodies and soules may be truly sanctified: so must
the strong man be first conquered, Luk. 11. 21, 22. 2. Their families
also, with like diligence often purged, Gen. 35. 2 Ps. 101. 7.
Epist. to Philemon, Deut. 21. 18, 21. 3. In Gods most holy word
faithfully instructed, Gen. 18. 19. 1. Cor. 14. 34, 35. Deut. 6. 6. Eph.
6. 4. 2. Tim. 3. 15. 4. They must also go before, and direct their
houshold in praier & thankesgiuing, when they be present: 10. 6.
11. Ps. 55. 17. 127. 1. Tim. 4. 4. that the seruants may doe the like,
when they be absent: Gen. 24. 12, 13. without interruption, 1. Pet.
3. 7. 5. They must dwell with their wiues as men of knowledge,
1. Pet. 5. 7. not bitter vnto them, Col. 3. 19. contract with the faithfull
onely, Gen. 6. 2, 3. in the Lord, 1. Cor. 7. 39. the marriage bed
sanctified with praiers. 1. Tim. 4. 3, 4. vsed to bridle and asswage, &
not to feed & stirre vp lust, Ro. 13. 14. abstaining it at certen times

appointed for fasting & praier, 1. Cor. 7. 5. & in the time of womens
seperation, Ezec. 18. 6. & 22. 10. Lev. 20. 18. 6. The wifes subiect
to their husbands, Col. 3. 19. in pure conuersation which is with
feare, 1. Pet. 3. 1, 2. 7. The children brought vp in the information
of the lord, Eph. 6. 4. obeying in al things their parents, Col. 3.
20. in the Lord, Eph. 6. 1. 8. The masters must do that which is
iust and equall to seruants, Col. 4. 1. without threatnings, Eph. 6. 9.
9. The seruants auoide eye seruice, do their dueties in Gods feare
as vnto the Lord, Col. 3. 21, 23. with feare & trembling. Eph. 6. 5.
10. They must also direct, & command their familie to a priuate
fast, when publique or priuate calamitie, or such like needful occasion
so requireth. Hest. 4. 16. Neh. 1. 4. Act. 10. 30. 11. Conduct
them to the publique ministerie where it may be found, Amos 8.
11. 12. 2. King. 4. 23. Act. 20. 28. Heb. 13. 7, 17. & by priuate conference,
Mal. 3. 16. Act. 17. 11. see how they profit, assēbling their
familie at certen times appointed. Act. 10. 24. Neh. 8. 13. Iob. 1. 5.
12. A godly domestic all discipline must be vsed: 1. admonition,
Math. 18. 15, 19. 2. penalties ordained answerable to the offence
committed, lighter for the lesse, Prov. 23. 13, 14. sharper for the
greater, Epist. to Phil. 3. and if neede require, the Church must be
told, Math. 18. 17. 4. the last refuge is, the civill Magistrate, Deut.
21. 18, 21.
                  
                  
                     Mys.
                     These rules I graunt are right good indeed, & the practise
& obedience you speak of, is to be wished, but to speak as I think,
Theophilus, such families as you require, are as hard to be found, as
blacke swans, or the families of Europia.
                  
                  
                     Theoph.
                     Not so, Mys. your eyes be to dimme, I know my selfe
where (God be blessed) some such may be found in our land: and
yet if they were neuer so few, yet must the men that will auoyd the
dāgers which haue bin before mētioned, carefully obserue this order
prescribed of God,Iosh. 24. 13. & say with Ioshua: Albeit others, yea all the
world, choose the gods of the Amorites: yet I and my house will serue the
Lord. Now for the 2. point, how a man may best be preserued frō
the poison of witchcraft, I will shewe thee, Misodaemon, onely by
Iobs example, how thou maiest best be preserued.
                  
                  
                     Mys.
                     
                        I loue greatly to view often the examples of the holy fathers:
for no dout they are Gods glasses for our instruction, & I remember
we are charged not to be slothfull, but followers of them

which through faith and patience inherit the promises, Heb. 6. 12. But
I pray you, what preseruatiues had Iob,Learne here all Fathers & Masters of families, how to purge your houses, & how to attaine the best preseruatiues against witches. for we read all fayled him,
and Sathan brought him vnto a wonderfull miserie?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     His preseruatiues were most soueraigne, and they
failed him not, albeit he fainted often, beeing long wearied in that
conflict with Sathan: his pretious preseruatiues were these. First,
faith, 2. prayer, 3. arighteous life, 4. the word of God, 5. repentance,
and sixtlie the continuall most gratious prouidence of God
ouer him.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     How did faith preserue him?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     
                        S. Iohn saith, that faith is the victorie
                        1. Ioh. 5. 4. 
                              •
                           . Pet. 5. 9. Eph. 6. 16. 
                        that ouercommeth
the world: and S. Peter chargeth vs to resist the deuil, steadfast
in faith: and S. Paule biddeth vs aboue all things (to auoide the fierie
dartes of Sathan) to take the shield of faith. By these few places it
appeareth, that faith is a most sure shield against Sathan. Nowe
that Iob had faith, many rare vertues in him doe testifie: his innocent
life, his feare and reuerence of God, his godly repentance
and singular patience,Iam. 5. 11. Heb. 10. 36, 37, 38. which can neuer be without faith, for patience
is a quiet wayting and exspectation of the promises, which
faith assureth vs shalbe performed. His owne wordes are in his
most bitter temptations: Iob. 13. 15. Lo though hee slay me yet will I
trust in him, and I will reprooue my waies in his sight. Wherefore, Misodaemon,
if thou wilt follow Iob, call vpon God earnestly for this
preciousIoh. 6. 29. Eph. 2. 8. gift of faith, and thou shalt haue one most strong target
to auoide safely all Sathanicall darts of witchcraft.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     And what is the second preseruatiue?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     Iobs second preseruatiue was Prayer: of this the
Apostle saith, that when the Saints haue on their compleate armour
against Sathan, yet they can not be safe, vnlesse they
                        Eph. 6. 18. Iob. 1. 5. 
                        pray
alway. Iob had this, for it is written that Iob offered burnt
offerings, early in the morning for him selfe and all his children:
and it is added,Iame. 5. 16. 
                        Thus did Iob euery day. Prayer is a comfortable
conference and talke with the Lord, and is most strong if
it be feruent, and beeing offered by a righteous man, such as Iob
was, it is a sweete sacrifice vnto God. Wherefore vse also, Misodaemon,
                        Cyp. l. 2. epi. 2.
this preseruatiue and thou shalt be free from many euils: sit
tibi veloratio assidua, vellectio, nunc cum Deo loquere, nunc Deus tecum:
Either read or pray alway, one while talke thou with God, another

while let God talke with thee.
                     
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     So I will, and purpose Theophilus, for we are often
charged so to do: what was the third preservatiue?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     A righteous, sober, and vpright conversation
is a most sure brestplate against Sathan: for when he findeth our
faith and profession to haue the seale of a righteous life, he wil flee
from vs: as appeareth notably in Iobs exāple, for he being an
                        Iob. 1. 8, 9, 10. 
                        vpright
and iust man, one that feared God and eschewed euill, Sathan
might well spurne at him, but could not annoy him, nor iustly accuse
him before his God of any euill.
                  
                  
                     Myso-daemon.
                     And what is the fourth preservatiue?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     The worde of God: and that mightie worde is a
most strong two edgedHeb. 4. 12. Eph. 6. 17. Matth. 4. sworde, and notably preserueth vs from
Sathan if we can wisely handle it, as our Sauiour hath taught vs by
his owne example. As for Iobs time, it is vndoubtedly to be
thought that he liued before the Lawe, because of his long life,
Chap. 42. 16. Psal. 90. 10. and sacrifices in a straunge land, which
by the Lawe were commanded to be done before the Arke, or in
the tabernacle of God. Some thinke that he was about the time
the Church was in Egypt. All the Patriarkes and holy fathers of
that time and before, had great knowledge and many yeeres experience,
and were preachers of the word of God in their families,
Gene. 18. 19. and receiued it partly by their fathers instruction,
Psal. 78. 3. partly by visions and sundrie other meanes from God
him selfe, Hebr. 1. 1. And as for Iob he had both instruction by
man, Chap. 42. 5. and reuelations from God, Chap. 38. and 42. 5.
and taught the same vnto his people, Chap. 1. 5. and 29. 22.
and 22. 22.
                  
                  
                     Myso-daemon.
                     Nowe tell me, what was the 5. preservatiue?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     Repentance: the life of Gods saints is a continuall
repentance; because of their continuall infirmities and offences.
The penitent hath two good properties: One is, he feareth
God truely, and so is humbled: the other is, he resteth vpon God
Iob. 13. 15. Psal. 147. 11. faithfully, and so is strengthened. The Lord is greatly delighted in
them that feare him, & attend vpon his mercie, but if any proude rebellious
sinnes haue snared them, the Lord leaueth them as naked,
and as it were in Sathans iurisdiction, asPsal. 22. 1, 2, 77. 10, 69. Dauid often, andCant. 5. 6. others.
And as for Iob, he walkedIob. 1. 20, 21, 22. 42. 6. most circumspectly within the

boundes of true repentance before the Lorde his God. Whefore
Mysodaemon call mightely vpon God for this great blessing also:
for repentance is the precious gift2. Tim. 2. 25. 26. and worke of God.Act. 5. 30.
                     
                  
                  
                     Myso-daemon.
                     And what was his 6. and last preseruatiue?
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     The prouidence of almightie God was his most
strong to wre and moste soueraigne preseruatiue against all euill.
Of this Dauid glorieth and singeth often sweetly in his Psalmes: as
in the 91. v. 9, 10, 11, 12. on this maner. Because (thou hast saide)
the Lord is mine help, and hast set the moste high for thy refuge: there
shall none euill come vnto thee, neither shall anie plague come neere thy
tabernacle: for he shall giue his Angels charge ouer thee, to keepe thee
in all thy waies, they shall beare thee in their hands, that thou shalt not
hurt thy foot against a stone: thou shalt walke vpon the lyon and aspe, the
young lyon and the dragon shalt thou tread vnder thy foot. Nowe that
Iob was most safe vnder this shelter and could not be anoied by
Satan, the deuill confesseth it himselfe. For he saieth, he can not
come neere him by reason of a certen hedge wherewith he and all
his were compassed about: the wordes are these: Then Satan saide,
doth Iob feare God for nought?
                        Iob. 1. 9, 10. 
                        hast thou not made an hedge about him
and about his house, and about al that he hath on euery side? And thus
thou seest, Mysodaemon, how Iob was preserued from Satan and
all his artes: wherefore if thou canst purchase these preseruatiues
for any price, or by any meanes come by them, I will assure thee
for thy safety in all dangers of bodie and soule.
                  
                  
                     Myso-daemon.
                     But I see not yet how hee was preserued: for
the deuill ouercame him, & most fearefully consumed him and al
his goods.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     The deuill ouercame him not, nor could not work
his wil & purpose vpon him. For Satans chiefe purpose against Iob
was to cause him to blaspheme God, to renounce God and religion,
to fall from the faith, from repentance, and from the grace of
God. And to this end when the LordV. 12. gaue him entrance, he destroied
his goods with strange fire and theeues, he murdered his
children with a tempest,Ch. 2. 9. he consumed his bodie with byles, and
mooued also his friends and his owne wife to reuile and to scorne
him and his profession.Ch. 1. 22. Notwithstanding all these engines of Satan,
Iobs preseruatiues were so good and precious, that the deuill
was vtterly vnable to bring any of those euils he most desired vpon

him; for the Lord witnesseth of him, saying, In all this Iob sinned
not, nor charged God foolishlie. And to be short, when Satan had assaulted
him with all extremities that could be deuised, albeit his
faithIob. 7. 15. & 13. 15. fainted, yet it failed him not: for he continued in faithfull
repentanceIob 42. 5, 6. & 16. 17. and grace of God vnto the end. And thus haue I
taught thee, Mysodaemon, what things I thought expedient for
thee, and most needfull concerning witchcraft. I doubt not but
many of our friends could say more. Wherefore giue them no rest,
but cause them by al good meanes to communicate vnto vs both
their knowledge and experience in this argument. Farewell Mysodaemon,
I must now leaue thee.
                  
                  
                     Mysodaemon.
                     Farewell good Theophilus, & I moste hartelie
thanke you: I doe not now farre dissent from your iudgement:
but because (I so hate the deuill & all his delusions as you know)
I will stirre vp all the friends I can (as you desire) to impart vnto
vs their knowledge and experience in these points.
                  
                  
                     Theophilus.
                     Farewell in Christ, Mysodaemon, and do so.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  ❀ A SHORT
DISCOVRSE SHEWING
THE MOST CERTEN
AND PRINCIPAL MEANES ORdeined
of God to discouer, expell, and to confound
all the Sathanicall inuentions
of witchcraft and Sorcerie.
⸫
                  What communion hath light with darkenesse? and what
concord hath Christ with Beliall. 2. Cor. 6. 14, 15.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  CHAP. I.
                  
                     THAT THE MINISTERIE
OF GODS WORDE IS THE
most certen and principall good meanes ordained
of God, for the discouerie and confusion
of Witchcraft.
                  
                  Looke what meanes the Lord principallie
commendeth vnto vs, for the discouerie and confusion of Sathan
and his artes, that may best effect his discouerie, and ought most
to be practised.
                  God hath commended principallie for this purpose, the ministerie of
his worde:
                  Therefore this ministerie may best discouer Sathan and his artes,
and ought of vs most to be practised.
                  
                     1. Proposition or Major.
                     
                        THE first Proposition is most certen, and because
the Worlde seeketh many vnlawfull
meanes to discouer and auoide the euill arts &
harmes of Sathan, after the brayne of man, and
the inuention of the deuill him selfe: therefore
it comes to passe, that such men be more and
more blinded in their mindes, benummed in
their sinnes, besotted of Sathan: yea, tumbled and tossed in the
world at his pleasure, the Lord in his iustice because of the contēpt
of his glorious Maiestie, & will revealed in his word, giuing them
ouer to their owne ignorance and hardnes of heart, Therfore haue
men vsed to scare away the deuils, and arts of magick, in the thick
mist of poperie, with holy water, certen nūber of masses, halowed
bels, consultation with wizards, and saithDe Daemonomania. 2. c. 1. Bodin: Ne quem circumueniant
magi ipsorum carmina abundant pulchris orationibus:
That none be circumvented with magicke or witchcraft, their charmes
are full of godly prayers, psalmes, and haue often the name of Iesus, and

of the holy Trinitie, they crosse themselues at each worde, they vse also
certain words of the Cannon of the masse, Gloria in excelsis, omnis spiritus
laudet Dominum,
                        I. Iacob. Weker. de Secret. lib. 15. c. 16. 
                        à porta inferi, credo videre bona Domini, &c. so
farre Bodin. They haue vsed also exorcists, scratchings, & many other
meanes, &c. but all in vaine: for it is most certen, that so seeking
to scare away the deuill and his artes from their bodies and
their goods, he had greater hold and possession of their soules: for
so doing, they prooued his vassals themselues, and instruments for
the execution of his owne will and pleasure.
                  
                  
                     2. Proposition or Minor.
                     That the holy ministerie of Gods word is ordained of God for
this purpose, wee may see it, if aduisedly we consider the Lordes
words: Deut. 18. 10, 11, 19, &c. Let none be among you that maketh
his sonne or his daughter to go through the fire, &c. (& thē he addeth)
the Lord God will raise thee vp a Prophet like vnto me,
                        Vers. 5. 13. 
                        from among you,
euen of thy brethren, vnto him shall yee hearken: vers. 19. Whosoeuer
will not hearken vnto my wordes which hee shall speake in my name, I
will require it of him. Here, I say, the Lord hath appointed a remedie
for the sinnes of witchcraft and sorcerie,Luth. annot. in Deut. 18. the ordinarie ministerie
of Gods worde published by his Prophets, whereunto as
many as did hearken, that is, receiued it with true faith and obedience,
they were freed from those Sathanicall inuentions, named
in that place: for Sathans rotten mist is so scattered and discouered
by the bright beaines and glorious light of Gods word, that hee
can not long lurke or abide the light of that place, and therefore
we read that in the darke countries where his arts were professed,
there did inhabite the most idolatrous nations of al theCic. de Diuinat. lib. 1. Gentiles,
as the Egiptians, Chaldeans, Indians, Persians, Cananites,Esay. 19. 3. as prophane
histories together with the bookeDan. 2. 2. of God,Psal. 47. 12. plentifully doe
testifie and record vnto vs.
                     2 Esay maketh the ministerie of Gods word, & of Sathans arts
two professions, so opposite that he that forsaketh the one and leaneth
vnto the other, forsaketh God, embraceth the deuill, refuseth
the liuing seeking the dead, reiecteth the law & testimonie of god,
& resteth vpon sathanical inuētions: & lastly, hath no light in him,
but is ful of darknes: his words are these: When they shal say vnto you,
                        Chap. 8. 19, 20.
                        enquire at them that haue a spirit of diuination, and at the soothsayers,
which whisper & murmure, should not a people enquire at their God? frō
                           
the liuing to the dead? to the law and to the testimonie,
                        Tremel. (or rather as another
saith) against the law and the testimonie? if they speak not according
to this word, it is because there is no light in them.
                     
                     3 The Lord God promiseth his Church by the Prophet Zacharie,
that assoone as the glorious ministerie of the gospell should
shine forth among men, he wold therby dispel the clouds of ignorance,Zach. 13. 2.
                        and cut off the names of Idols out of the land, that they should no
more be remembred, and cause the false prophets and the vncleane spirit
to depart out of the land. And that this was performed generally in
all places, wheresoeuer the powerfull ministerie of the glorious
Gospel was purely receiued, Ecclesiasticall histories doe testifie
for times past, and common experience can prooue for time present,
as afterward shalbe shewed.
                  
                  
                     2. Argument.
                     Looke by what meanes all vncleaneMath. 12. 43. spirits are driuen out of naturall
men, by the same good meanes; may the spirits of sorcerie be
descried, confounded, and cast foorth.
                     But Iesus Christ the great Lord that is stronger then thatLuk. 11. 21. strong
man, worketh the first by his blessed word and spirit.
                     Ergo, the second
                  
                  
                     2. Proposition or Assumption.
                     THe Apostle cōfirming the Authority of his ministery, against
false teachers in Corinth, sheweth it to be glorious. First, from
the efficient cause therof, which was God himselfe. 2. from the effects
thereof, which were these. First, for that it was able to cast down
                        2. Cor. 10. 4, 5, 6.
                        holdes,
                        Eus. eccles. hist. l. 2. 14. meaning all the munitions of Sathan and carnall men. 2.
all carnall wisdome, 3. all high thinges that are exalted against
the knowledge of God, 4 for that it is able to bring into captiuitie
euery thought to the obedience of Christ. 5. and lastly, from a
vengeance that is an ordinarie consequent foreuer, vnto the contempt
of that ministerie. If that ministerie be so powerfull therfore
to cast out Sathan out of naturall men, and to worke in them the
greatest worke vnder heauen, the work of regeneration by the immortall
1. Pet. 1. 23. seede that it soweth abroad into mens hearts: it is most
certen that it may confound all artes and delusions of deuills in all
sorts of men, but some will not beleeue what the Scripture speaketh
most clearely, that Sathan so possesseth naturally men, and
worketh in them, as Paule speaketh:Eph. 2. 2. let such therefore

                        listen what an auncient learned man speaketh of this point, on
this manner. Daemonibus est superOrig. Num. Hom. 27. omnia genera tormentorum, &
super omnes poenas, si quem videant verbo Die operam dare, scientiam
diuinae legis & mysteria Scripturarum intentis studijs per quirentem,
in hoc eorum omnis flamma est, in hoc vruntur incendio, possident enim
omnes qui versantur in ignorantia. Vnto the deuills it is a torment aboue
all kindes of torments, and a paine aboue all paines, if they see any
man reading the worde of God, and with feruent studie searching the
knowledge of Gods lawe and the mysteries and secrets of Scriptures,
herein standeth all the flame of the deuills, in this fire they are tormented:
for they are seased and possessed of all them that remaine in ignorance.
                  
                  
                     3. Argument.
                     That thing which Sathan most dreadeth, most repugneth, most persecuteth
with all his artes and instruments, worketh, no dout, most
his ouerthrow, discouerie, and confusion in all this worlde.
                     Sathan hath euer withstood and feared the ministerie of the Gospel,
and persecuted all the ministers and professors thereof with all his
might, &c.
                     Therefore this is an especiall meanes and gift of God, for to discouer
his artes, to cast downe his kingdome, and to confound him &
all his practises.
                  
                  
                     The 2. Proposition or Assumption.
                     
                         LVke 22. 31, 32. Our Sauiour saith to his Apostles, before his
Passion, Sathan desireth to winnow you as wheat: this he did because
the saw they were called and ordained for the great work of
the Gospel, the ouerthrow of his kingdome, and the enlarging of
Christes kingdome.
                     
                         1. Thess. 2. 18. We would haue come vnto you (I Paule at least once
or twise) but Sathan hindred vs. Wherefore did Sathan hinder
Paule, Syluanus, and Tymotheus from comming to Thessalonica,
by the Iewes his Limmes, and those wickedAct. 17. 5. vagabonds of
that citie? because hee feared by their ministerie some ouerthrowe
of his kingdome, and some grouth of Christes
Church.
                     
                         And wherefore doeth Sathan suffer naturall men to be

so wise in naturall causes and holdeth the blind in matters of religion?
The Apostle answereth:2. Corin. 4. 4. because he would not that Gods
glorious gospell should shine vnto them: for then he should be discouered.
                     Acts the 13. 8. mention is made of one of these Sathanicall wizards 
whome Satan vsed as his instrument, to hinder the worke
of the ministerie of Paul and Barnabas in the conuersion of the
deputie Sergius Paulus a prudent man. For thus it is written, that
great man desired to heare the worde of God, but Elimas that sorcerer
withstood
                        1. Thess. 3. 5. read the 9. 10. 11. ver. 
                        them, and sought to turne awaie the deputie from the faith:
for by the conuersion of such a man, Sathans kingdome shoulde
haue beene sore weakned.
                     Sathan hath his synagogue wherein his ministers continuallie 
fight against this holy ministerie of Christ. Revelat. 2. 9. & 3. 9.
& 2. 15.
                     In Theodosius the Emperours time, the yeare of our L. 396. the 
young Valentinian Emperour of Rome was strangled, and one
Engenius an enimy to Christian religion sought the Empire, who
was perswaded thereunto by one of these wizardly prophets: for
he was promised faithfully by a great professor of these artes,Sozonn. lib. 7. cap. 22. that
he should both get the victorie against Theodosius, and extinguish
all the light of Christian religion:Obiect. but both praedictions prooued
false to his confusion.
                     But Satan sometimes would preach the gospell him selfe, and
he seemeth to loue it, and to delight to heare it sounding: else
wherefore would his wicked exorcistes, and coniurers so often
chatter it vnto him: And by the maid which had the spirit of diuination
at Philippi, he cried, or made her speake: these men are the
seruants of the most high Godwhich shewe vnto vs the way of
                        Act. 16. 17. 
                        salvation:
And in the Gospell it is written they doe most honourably
speake of Christ; thou art Christ the very sonne of God.
                     
                     I answere, those wicked exorcists and coniurers delight Satan
much in abusing with their prophane lippes,Answ. the holy worde of
God: for the truth is, he nothing regardeth the outwarde letter of
the worde, no more then their characters, signes, crosses, figures,
&c. but this he will haue them doe, the more to blinde them and
others, and to keepe men in the externall lippe seruice, least men
shoulde vnderstand the powerfull working vertue of that holie

word and the graces of true religion. Therefore our sauiour & the
Apostle in the forenamed place, knowing right well his purpose,
charge him to keepe silence, for he must not fight or minister in
that campe which is ordained of God, to batter and beat downe
all the houldes and corners of his kingdome.
                     The deuill in the oracle of Apollo would giue Iulian the Apostata
no answere, when he sacrificed vnto him, vntill he had giuen
him occasion to persecute the christians: and to abuse the sepulchres
of the Saintes and martyrs. Ruff. 1. booke. cha. 35. of the fall
of this oracle,De praeparat. Euang. these verses were thus written.
                     
                        Ve, ve, mihi tripodes lugete perijt Apollo:
                        Perijt quoniam ardens mihi vim infert caeleste numen.
                     
                     And Eusebius the Historigrapher mentioneth alike cause: for
he writeth that many saylers as they passed by the Isles called Echinades,
heard a voice in the ayer crying often, Thamans, Thamans,
(this was the pilots name) and saying vnto him, that when
he did passe by Pelodis he should sound these wordes the great Pan
is dead: whereupon the words being so spoken in that place, there
followed a hideous noise without the visible appearance of any
thing.q. cur oracula filuerunt. The same storie is in Plutarch. Now what that caeleste numen,
that is, magnus Pan did signifie, diuerse men haue diuerslie coniectured:
Cicero likewise, as all heathen writers) speaketh great and
glorious wordes in the commendation of this oarcle, but is vtterly
ignorant what should bee the cause of that silence which it
came vnto in his time. He coniectureth only with Plutarch,Dedivin. li. 1. that
those exhalations wherewith it was thought Apollo inspired his
priestes and oracle, were by age consumed.Zach. 13. 2. 
                        Potest autem vis illa
terrae quae mentem pythiae diuino afflatu concitabat euanuisse vetustate.
But the holy Prophet Zacharie will teach vs the true cause of the
confusion of these oracles as it is before shewed.
                  
                  
                     4. Arg.
                     
                        Bodin the ciuilian seeing that the gospell published and preached
after Christes institution, hath this strong arme and continuall
might against Sathan and all his inuentions; writeth on this
manner:
                        De Daem. 30. cap. 1. pa. 233. quam
                           •
                        brem vt mala haec vitari possint, legem Dei, s
                           ••
                        pe oportet
praedicari, metum eius, summis, medijs, infimis inculcari, & ante
omnia fidem in cum imprimi. Wherefore (saith be) to avoid these euills
(meaning Sathanicall artes of magick and witchcraft) the lawe of

God must be often preached, & the feare of god beaten into mens minds,
of high, meane, and lowe estate, and aboue all things they must haue
faith in good wrought in them. Again in the same page he commendeth
this good meanes in these wordes: Hic maximus, hic pulcherrimus,
hic facillimus omnino modus eijciendiè rep. magos, artes magicas,
maleficia, & malignos spiritus: tantisper enim dum hic blasphemia,
illic 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         obtinet, nulla plane spes ostenditur, malignos spiritus,
magos, pestem, bella famem que depellendi: that is, this is the greatest
(speaking of the preaching of the gospell) the fairest, the easiest
meanes to cast out magitians, the artes of magicke, sorceries and euill
spirits out of the common wealth, for as long as blasphemie and Atheisme
reigneth here and there, there is no hope to driue away euill
spirits, coniurers, plagues, warre and famine out of the land.
                  
                  
                     5. Arg.
                     That good meanes whereby God wrought the subuersion of the
temples and all the deuils artes at Ephesus. Actes Chap. 19. verse 20.
26. at Corinthus, the 1. Corinth. Chap. 10 vers. 20. and else where,
is the best meanes left vs also for the same end and purpose, namely the
confusion of Sathanicall men, and the discouerie of their abmhominable
practises.
                     But that first conquest against Sathan and his ministers &c. was by
the Lordes good ministry. ergo.
                  
                  
                     The Assumption.
                     THe ministerie of the gospell gaue the deuill and his oracles
a great fall in Dioclesius time, and therefore Satan stirred that
tyrant by all meanes to persecute the Christians: This writeth
Eusebius
                        De vita Cont. 49. & 50. ch. The oracle of Apollo in Dioclesius time gaue answere
out of a hollow caue, and not out of any temple by the ministrie
of his priestes after the old wonted manner: for the deuill said that
iusti homines in terris, certen iust men on the earth were such lets vnto
him, that he could not speake as in former times. Then began
this tyrant to enquire who those men were, and his priestes answering
that they were the Christians, he sought after them with
all his persecutions: much like to this was the persecution of Petrus
Flistedius, and Adolphus, and Larebachus, by the popish diuines
of Colen to stay the sweating sicknesse. Actes and monum.
pag. 885.
                     
                        
The Persians were full of professed magitians and coniurers,
who fearing the ouerthrowe of their kingdome, by Maruthus a
godly B. of Mesopotamia, who was sent indeed to Persia for that
purpose from the Emperour of Rome, as writethLib. 7. cap. 8. 
                        Socrates. They
How the magitians were the archenemies of the gospel in Persia, read act. & m. 10. perseq. p. 98. laboured with all their artes against the preaching of the gospell,
perswading their king Isdigerdes not to receiue the Christian
religion, & the faith which was preached vnto him. Notwithstanding
the gospell consumed them and beat downe their kingdom
in that kings daies. And therefore in the next kingsBartanes or Varranes. raigne they
were so enuious against the professors of the gospell, that (as saith
the sameCh. 18. author) they murdered the Christiās with al the Persian
torments that could bee deuised. They continued also the same
fury against the Christians in that land inSosom. 2. Ch. 8. 
                        Sapors time another
king of that kingdome, who was in like maner prouoked vnto his
sauadge and furious crueltie by the same vile enemies of the gospell.
                  
                  
                     6. Arg. experience.
                     Looke by what meanes the magicke, the witchcraft of elder time, the
diuinations, the sorcerie, the faries, the goblins, the hegges, &c. which
came vnto the Church with the rotten mist of popery, were discouered
and put to flight from amongst vs, not many yeare past: by the same good
meanes may the remnants of these diabolicall delusions be discouered
& cut off, at this time present.
                     But it is knowne by the good experience of all countries round about
vs, where the beames of the gospell haue shined in this latter age, togitherwith
our owne, that this glorious ministerie of God, the publishing
and preaching, I say, of the gospel of Iesus Christ hath scattered that
vnsauerie miste of Sathan, wherein he couered all his delusions, &c.
therefore the conclusion followeth.
                  
                  
                     Assumption.
                     Eusebius for elder times writeth, that Simon magus the sorcerer
of Samaria was a great aduersarie to the faith, and withstoode
the Apostles and their doctrine, and how that he was discouered
with his artes & confounded by the ministerie of Gods worde.
For the saith,Euseb. eccles. hist. lib. 2. c. 14. 
                        Verum diuina & supra caelestis gratia ministris suis opem
ferens, per illorum apparitionem ac praesentiam, accensam malislammam
confestim extinxit, humiliata per eos ac deturbata quavis
sublimitate, quae secontra scientian Dei ext
                              •
                           llebat, quapropter nec

Sir
                              •••
                           s obluctatio, nec cuiusquam alterius eorum, qui tunc prodbant
Apostolicis illis temporibus subsistere potuit. veritatis enim splendor ac
diuinus ille sermo qui iampridem hominibus divinitus illuxeratin
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                           
terra obtinebat,
                        2. Cor. 10. 5. 
                        & in Apostolis suis agebat, cuncta vincebat ac superabat.
But the divine and celestiall grace gaue strength vnto his ministers,
and by their appearing and presence, quenched that flame so wickedly
kindled, for by them were brought lowe and cast downe all high
things, which did lift vp themselues against the knowledge of God. Therfore
neither Simons rebellion, nor any other which did appeare in these
Apostolicall times, could stand: for the brightnes of the trueth, & that
diuine word which not long before had shined from heauen, & ruled vpon
earth, and wrought in his Apostles, conquered & subdued all things.
                     
                     2 Bodin saith for his experience, on this manner: SedDe Demo▪ 3. c. 1. p. 229. legis divinae
promulgatio vires Sathanae plurimum ener vavit, & quicun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         populi
manserunt diu infideles, aut adhuc permanent, ij grauissimè fuerunt
infestati à spiritibus, malignis, & adhuc dies noctes
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         infestantur:
vt fit in Norvegia, Finlandia, Lapenlandia, & alijs regionibus, ad Boream
sitis. The publishing of Gods worde (saith he) hath greatly weakned
Sathans power, and what people soeuer haue long continued in infidelitie,
or soremaine as yet, they haue beene & are grieuously vexed of evill
spirits, as it is to be seene in Norway, Finland, Lapenland, and other
regions which are in the North parts.
                     Heming ius for his countrey of Denmarke, can testifie sufficiently,
who writeth of his experience also on this wise: Cum primum
ante annos plus minus, 40. doctrina Evangelij caepit in hoc regnoper
pios ministros dei repurgari, & à tenebris pontificijs vindicari, cessauere
omnes istae diabolicae impostura. Lucente etenim Evangelij clarissima
luce, tenebrae superstitionum evanuerunt, siquidem luxillamagn
                           •
                        
verbi coelestis fulgore suo omnes superstitiones dispulit & discussit, non
secus at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         sol oriens in Horizonte nostro tenebras noctis depellit: that
is: when first heretofore, 40. yeeres past or there abouts, the Gospel began
by the godly ministers of God, to be diligently purged, freed & restored
from the darknes of poperie, all these deceits of the deuill ceased: for
when the light of the Gospel shind, the clouds of superstition vanished away:
for that great light of the heauenly word droue away & beat downe
with his beames, all superstition, like as the sunne rising in our Horizon,
chaseth away the darke clouds of the night. And then lest any should
say, that there remained yet great store of this sinne in that kingdome,

as there do
                              •
                           th also remaine some reliques of the 
                              〈◊〉
                            amongst
vs in England: he addeth presently & answereth, that because
men contemne & refuse the good ministerie of Gods word,
therefore such sinnes can not be auoyded: his words are these. Cum
ergò & audimus & videmus augeri quotidie eorum numerum, qui seistis
imposturis magicis dedunt, scia
                           •
                        mus signum certissimum obscurati
Evangelij, & deficientis fidei in plurimis hominibus diuina permissione
nobis propositum esse: that is: Forasmuch as we heare and see daily, that
their number is encreased which giue themselues to the practise of magicall
delusions, let vs vnderstand that we haue giuē vnto vs a most sure
token of the corruption of the Gospel, & of faith decreasing in most men
by Gods permission. Thus farre Hemingius for Denmarke.
                     
                         P. Martyr a worthie writer, speaketh of his knowledge and experience
in this cause, on this manner. Notabimus verum Deum
explodere solere commentitios: vnde statim cum effet natus Christus,
omnia deorum oracula conticuerunt, quae antea fuerant celeberima: etenim
cum lux ipsa qui est Christus, venisset in mundum, tenebraenecesse
fuit vt evanescerent:In iudie. 5. in initio. 
                        that is: Let vs obserue, how the true God chaseth
away the false gods: & therfore when Christ was borne, all the oracles of
the gods ceased, which were in former times most famous. For when that
light, which is Christ, came into the worlde, darkenes must of necessitie
haue vanished away. And then reiecting Plutarchs reasons of the silence
of those oracles, & disliking them, he saith: est igitur huius eventialia
causa, quam Plutarchus videre non potuit, nimirum aduersarias
potestates à Christo fraenatas, (that is) there is therfore of this euent
another cause, which Plutarch could not see: that is, that the aduersarie
powers were curbed by Christ: then he addeth his own experience,
in these words. Quod etiam hodie videmus in regionib amplect
entibus Evangeliū euenire, vbi non tantum Idololatriae, verum diuinationes
& ficta miracula statim facessunt: We see also (saith hee) this
to come to passe in those countries which receiue the Gospell, where not
onely Idolatrie, but all diuinations also or inchauntments, and fayned
miracles are presently packing away.
                     
                         Aretius also, that learned divine of Berne, hee writeth thus after
his knowledge and experience.
                        Loc. Com. 176. Nullibi enim efficatiùs hic spiritus
erroris dominatur, quam vbi fidem non reperit, vbi carent homines
Christivera cognitione, vt apud septentrionales populos, quod certissimum
est argumentum Christianismum vehementer esse passim in

                        
                           〈◊〉
                         corruptum, cum tot magi & incantat ores reperiantur: apud nos
similiter licet ex doctis nemo reperiatur: tame
                           •
                         in plebe, & inter medicos
non rara sunt, quae arguunt non satis firmiter eos Christo credere. Idem
dici poterat de his qui tales consulunt, &c. rogandus est sedulo dominus
vt talia scandala aliq
                           •
                         ando exterpet ab Ecclesia sua. This spirit
of errour (saith he, speaking of magicke and witchcraft) beareth
rule no where with greater efficacie, then where he findeth no faith, and
where men want the true knowledge of Christ, as among the people of
the north parts, which is a sure argument, that Christianitie is euerie
where corrupted in popery, for that so many magitians and forcerers are
found among them: and with vs also, albeit of the learned there is none
such, yet of the people and of the Phisitians, there are not a few, which
is a true token that they beleeue not truely in Christ. The like may be
said of those men also which consult with such divmers, &c. wee must
therefore earnestly call vpon God to roote out in time such scandals out
of his Ch
                           •
                        rch.
                  
                  
                     Conclusion.
                     I Conclude then of all the former premisses, that seeing God hath
so ordained his holy ministerie as our best refuge against these
euills: so opposite to Sathans arts, and promised to be of greate
strength vnder the Gospell, for the confusion of these most detestable
enormities: The promise also performed in the great fall of
Sathans temples, & oracles by this holy worke of God: Againe, for
that natural men are thus purged & freed from Sathan, & restored
to grace in Christ, & that the deuil hath euermore resisted this holy
ordinance with all his might: & lastly that the common experience
of the reformed Churches round about vs testifie the same:
I conclude, therefore, I say, that Gods pure ministerie is one principall
meanes, & good gift of God, for the discouerie, confusion, and
extirpation of the most horrible and detestable sinnes of witchcraft
and sorcerie.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. II.
                  
                     How carefully, wisely, and discreetly, the godly minister of the Gospel is
to vse and bend all his strength, labour and wisdome for the discouery
of witchcraft, and the conuersion of such fearefull sinners, if God giue
grace, vnto true repentance.
                  
                  
                     
IF the kingdom of Satha• be so mightie, as the holy word of God
testifieth vnto vs in sundrie places: then it stands men in hand
which vndertake to warfare against him, that they be welprouided
of armour, wisdom, courage, experience, & many good graces
of Gods spirit. And as for Sathans strēgth, first what reasons may
better perswade vs therof, then for that the lord calleth him sometimes
the god of this2. Cor. 4. 3. world, the princeIoh. 12. 31. of this world, the princes
Eph. 6. 12. of the darknes of this world, him & his ministers, the princeEph. 2. 2. that
ruleth in the ayer, angels,Math. 25. 41. gouernours, &c. for certenly hee wants
no might, courage, or wil, to destroy any thing in this world, when
the hedgeIob. 1. 10. of God his prouidence, is broken before him. Secondly
his knowledge is woonderfull, as the name 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      importeth
vnto vs, for he hath now 5000. yeeres experience & more. Againe,
he is seene into the causes of most naturall things, his ministers are
most swift, & can in a moment descry things farre distant, & hee is
placed in the ayer, whence hee hath a most free prospect, to viewe
most things here vpon earth. Again, he is singulerly seen in the historie
Iam. 2. 19. of the holy Scripture. Lastly hee is often called for the execution
of Gods iustice; wherefore it is certen, that this old serpent
is most strong also in respect of his knowledge as for his arts
                        The Poet saith, Tibi nomina mille, mille nocendi artes. they
are infinite in number, & haue varied in all ages of this worlde, as
they might best serue his purpose: as these which follow,Diuination by fire. Pyromantiam,
by the ayer. aeromantiam,by water. hydromantiam,by the earth. geomantiam,by the dead. necromantiam,
by a siue. coscinomantiam,by a cocke. alectryomantiam,by a twibble or an axe. axinomantiam,
by a ring. dactuliomantiam,by Ise. pagomantiam,by meale. alphitomantiā, alenromantiam,
by a stone. lithomantiā,by a lawrell. daphnomantiam,by an asses heade, kephaleonomantiā,
by smoake. kipnomantiā,by a rodde. rabdomantiam,by peeces of wood. xulomantiam,by a basen of water. lekanomantiā,
by certen round vessels of glasse full of water. gastromantiam,by rubbing of the nayles, &c. omimanteia, & such like: among the Egyptians,
Chaldees, Babilonians, Archadians, Indians, &c. of late yeres,
they commonly leaue the most of the former specials, and practise
their Christolomantiā, by christall, & Catoptromantiam by glasses
& such like inuentions. If Sathan then be so mighty, so strong, so
full of knowledge, so full of artes, then haue the ministers of Gods
word that will encounter with him, great need of many good graces,
& great strength of Gods spirit, if they will worke the confusion
of Sathan, the discouerie of his artes, and the conuersion of such
sinners vnto true repentance. My poore aduise & counsell, according
to Gods word, I humbly offer vnto them on this manner.
                  
                     
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      that in their pastorall charge and Church of God they be
most diligent to publish and preach the word of God (as the Apostle
teacheth, 2. Tim. 4. 2.) for this is that light that this enimie
most dreadeth, as is before shewed: instructing
                     2. Tim. 2. 25, 26. 
                     with patience, and
proouing if God will at any time giue this (vile kinde of men also) repentance,
that they may know the truth, and that they may come to
amendment out of the snare of the deuill, which are taken of him at his
will.
                  
                  Secondly, they must take beed, that the same Worde, the same
Christ, and holy Spirit (whose graces they labour to minister and
giue vnto others) be found also working inEph. 3. 20. 1. Thes. 2. 13. themselues. For he
that hath experience of his owne regeneration can best tell, what
things are most needfull for the conuersion of others.
                  Thirdly: they must be carefullie bent, to beautifie and adorne
their profession with a godly, sober, and innocent life, and heedfullie
watch that they fall not into any presumptuous sinnes of disobedience.
For such men Satan hathEph. 2. 2. entrance into them, and if
they be possessed of Sathan themselues in soule or body or both,
then haue they but small strēgth to cast forth theMat. 12. 43. vnclean spirits
out of others. Here may that sweete martyr of God M. Tindall,
giue vs a most worthie president for our imitation: for that religious
and holy man of God, with his presence, discouered and
confounded a famous magitian in Antwerpe in his time there: M.
In the storie of M. Tindall. p. 1053. Foxe hath recorded it as followeth. There was at Answerpe on a
time, amongst a companie of marchants, as they were at supper, a certaine
Iugler, which through his diabolicall inchantments, or arte magicall,
would fetch all kindes of viands and wine from any place they
would, and set it vpon the table incontinent before them with many other
such like things: the fame of this Iuggler being much talked of, it
chanced that as M. Tindall heard of it, he desired certaine of the marchants
that he might be also present at supper to see him play his partes:
to be breefe, the supper was appointed and the marchants with Tyndall
were there present. Then the Iuggler being required to play his feates
and to shewe his cunning: after his wonted boldnes, began to vtter all
that he could doe, but all was in vaine, at the last with his labour sweating
and toyling, when he saw that nothing would go forward, but that
all his inchantments were voide, he was compelled openly to confesse,
that there was some man present, which disturbed and letted all his

doings. So farre Master Foxe.
                  
                      Fourthly they must also be such men as can speake wisely, can
mightely, and talke familiarlie (as men wellIob. 22. 21. 22. acquainted with
God) in their praiers. For praier is an especiall meanes appointed
of Christ for thisMat. 17. 21. purpose. And S. Iames saith that the prayer of a
                     Iam. 5. 16. Euseb. eccles. hist. l. 7. ca. 16.
                     righteous man (such as the minister of god must be) auaileth much
if it be feruent. By praier Astirius a noble Christian at Caesarea Philippi
bewraied and confounded Satan with all his magicall delusions.
Anno Christi. 261.
                  
                      And to the end that their praier may be the more seruēt: & peirce
the verie heauens, and the cloudes vnto God, and effectuall for
this purpose, our Sauiour commandeth to ioyne true fasting vnto
praier: Mat. 17. 21. the same say the Apostles where they mention
Eph. 6. 18. 1. Pet. 5. 8. our conflict with Satan: and S. Paul chargeth ministers by his
example, that they beat
                     1. Cor. 9. 27. 
                     down their bodies, and bring them to subiection,
least by any meanes after they haue preached to others, they themselues
should be reprooued.
                  
                  
                      They must be carefull with as great reuerence to minister the
holy sacraments of Iesus Christ, according to our Lords own most
holy institution: & here they must not without choise or regard,
hand ouer head confusedly suffer impenitent knowne sinners to
be partakers with the saints of God of the holy misteries.
                  
                      M. Calvin teacheth this in these words: for it is most true (saith
he) that he to whome the distribution of it (meaning the holy supper)
is committed: if he wittinglie and willingly admit an vnworthie
man,Inst. 4. c. 12. s. 5. hom. in Mat. 3▪ Ezech. 4. 18. & 33. 10. whome he might lawfullie put back, is as guiltie of sacriledge,
as if he did giue abroad the Lords bodie to dogs. Wherefore
Chrysostom griuouslie inu
                        •
                     ieth against those Pastors, which
while they feare the power of great men dare debarre no man:
The blood, saieth hee, shall bee required at your handes: if yee
feare man ye shall be laughed to scrorne, but if ye feare God, yee
shall be reuerenced also among men: let vs not fearemaces, nor
purple, nor crownes: we haue here a greater power.
                  
                      In putting back offenders, they must remember the distinction
betweene publique and priuate sinnes: publique are those that
haue not onely one or two witnesses,Inst. 4. c. 12. s. 6. but are committed openly,
and with the offence of the whole Church: priuate or secret are
these, not which are altogether hidden from men, as the sinnes of

hipocrites, for these come not into the iudgement of the Church,
but those of the meane kind, which are not without witnesses, and
yet are not publique.
                  In this dutifull vigilancie and examination, if he find out in his 
Church or congregation anie of the forenamed sinners, witches,
wizardes, sorcerers, or fauourers of such abomination, or that seek
helpe at such in their necessities, he is to deale most circumspectly
and faithfully, most warily and wisely, least he admit any such to
prophane the holie table and supper of our Lord Iesus Christ.
                  And among this sort of sinners hee must also wisely distinguish 
first betweene such as are onely suspected to be such sinners, and
those which are manifestly knowne practisioners of such arts and
sciences. 2. betweene those which practise there artes for the benefit
and good of othert, as they pretend,Heming. Admon. and those which vse
their in chantments for the hurt and dammage of others, as they
professe and confesse.
                  The weaker sort and the first kind, the Pastors must labour with 
all exhortations, prayers &c. for their conuersion; and for that
they pretend loue, they must vnderstand that this is an Apostolicall
canon: we must not doe euill, that good may come of it: and that
no action that wanteth the warrant of Gods worde can haue anie
godlines or goodnes in it, and that nothing can profite the bodie
that killeth or destroieth the soule, so as all these execrable artes
doe: and they must be tolde also what a horrible abhomination
their sinne is before god, what a prophanation of his blessed name,
what an Apostacie from God, and how they haue vtterly renounced
God and betaken themselues slaues and vassals to the deuil,
how lightly soeuer they doe regard it.
                  If any such be sory and begin to shew any tokens of true repentance,
which either haue sought vnto, or practised any sorcerie, or
the worship of deuils; as Iohn saith,Rev. 9. 20, 21. they must be wisely informed
and comforted, for that Iesus Christ can and will cast forth
the vncleaneMat. 12. 43. Luk. 11. spirit, if in trueth of heart with weeping, fasting, &
mourning, he be sought vnto, by repentance. And such must bee
also by the vigilant pastor warchfullie ouerseene: for if he fall againe
to his olde vomite, let him remember the wordes of
our Lord Iesus,Mat. 12. 45. 
                     the ende of that man is worse then the beginning.
And of the holie Apostle: for if
                     2. Pet. 2. 20. 
                     they after they haue escaped

from the filthines of the world, through the knowledge of the Lord, and
of the Sauiour Iesus Christ; are yet intangled againe therein, and ouercome,
the latter end is worse with them then the beginning.
                  
                  
                      And as for the other open practisioners of these Sathanicall sciences,
assoone as the good minister by his godly and watchfull
diligence, and by the holy ministerie of Gods worde & sacraments
hath detected, descried, and discouered them: he must vse
no lesse care and labour that his congregation may be purged of
such impes of Satan, and that his ministrie be not hindred, his people
infected, &c. to bring them to the publique censures of the
Church and so to the ciuill magistrate, that these wretched men
may with some greater torments (if God so please) 
                        •
                     ome to repentance,
that so they may be saued. Thus doing and labouring
faithfully and vigilantly in this holy function: such godly Pastors
shall
                     2. Tim. 4. 4. 
                     make their ministrie fullie known, as the Apostle commādeth:
and shall be seene that they profit among all men, and continuing
                     Negligēt pastors, non residents, blinde guides, &c. cause the arts of witchcraft to breed and continue in our land. 
                     in
this blessed state, shall so doing, both saue themselues, and them that
heare them. And so much for the discouerie and confutation of
witchcraft by the ministerie of the gospell.
               
               
                  CHAP. III.
                  
                     Of the Christian Magistrate, the 2. good meanes ordained of
God for the discouerie and confusion of witchcraft.
                  
                  
                     THe godlie Kinges, Princes, Iudges, and all
Magistrates fearing God of the olde Church
before Christ and the Christian princes &c. vnder
the gospell, were most carefull at all times
to banish this sinne out of their kingdomes &
common wealthes: And like as they were
moste diligent in this point, so the wicked
kings, princes, &c. in all countries and nations &c. were bent to
the contrarie practise, as to nourish, to prouide, and to maintaine
as it were seminaries for such professors as practised the artes and
inuentions of the deuill. I will shewe this to bee true by examples
and reasons out of the holy booke of God on this manner.
                  Moses (a moste wise and godly magistrate, a singuler president

for all others) was most sharpely bent against this sinne, as may be
seene by his conflict with this vile sort of men in Egypt, Exod. 7.
& 8. for it is thought these were those Iannes and 
                        •
                     ambres which
withstood him, 2. Tim. 3. 8. & God by him gaue most sharp lawes
Deut. 18. 10. 11. against these sinnes, and that holy man, no doubt, practised them
in his time most carefullie.
                  2 Saul,Exod. 12. 18. as long as he followed the word of God by the ministerie
of Samuel,Lev. 20. 27. was sharply set against these euills, and so exactly &
diligently searched and sought out by his Iudges and Magistrates
these witches and wizards, that he left few or none in all his land:
as may be seen by the words of the witch her selfe vnto him, when
he came vnto her after his fall from God, 1. Sam. 28. 9. the wordes
are these. The woman said, behold, thou knowest what Saule hath done,
how he destroied the sorcerers and soothsaiers, out of the land, wherefore
then seekest thou to take me in a snare, to cause me to dye? Where wee
may see, 1. how that the wicked Saule was very forwarde during
the time of his good ministerie, to execute Gods will against this
sinne: & 2. how that as soone as the light of Gods word was darkned,
the holy priests & prophets murdered, these horrible abhominations
began to spring vp, & to creepe into the Church againe.
                  3 David was the next King, and carefully prouided for a good
ministerie: in his time prophecied Nathan1. Sam. 2. 4. 11. 2. 12. & Gad,2. Chr. 29. 35. & his religious
priests Zadock2. Sam. 15. 27. & Abiathar: and many others, no doubt, godly
priests and prophets, by whose good ministerie together with the
industrie and diligence of his wise Iudges & Magistrates in the execution
of iustice, this sinne appeared not greatly in his kingdome
during his time: for we read nothing of this sinne (that I can remē
                     ber)
in that long historie which the holy Ghost hath commended
vnto vs, concerning his life and kingdome.
                  4 Hezekiah was a right wise, godly, zealous prince, and religigiouslie
prouided a good ministerie: hee reformed many euills
which had crept into the Church in Vriah, Iotham, & Achas daies:
for as for Idolatrie (wherof the sinne of witchcraft is an inseperable
companion, as the wise & godly learned haue obserued) it is saide,
He brake the images,
                     2. Chr. 31. 1. 
                     cut downe the groues, and brake downe the high
places & the altars throughout Iudah & Beniamin, in Ephraim also &
Manasseh vntill he had made an ende. It is certen therefore that hee
searched most carefully for this sinne, & prouided watchfully that

his wise Iudges should proceede in iustice against the same: for in
his time prophecied the holy Prophets, Esay, Hosea, Micah: who
preached most vehemently against these euills, as may be seene in
theirEsa. 44. 25. 47. 9. 12. 13. Mich. 5. 12. Prophecies.
                  
                      Iosiah was a very religious, godly, & zealous Prince, & diligently
prouided also for wise Magistrates & Ministers, by whose painfull
industry & godly wise pollicie, he purged his Church as of all
Idolatrie, so likewise of this great abhominatiō: for in his time prophecied
Ieremiah, Zephaniah, and others, who no doubt stirred vp
the king & all his magistrates, to root out these Sathanicall inuentions,
for it is written that Iosiah so did. Iosiah also tooke
                     2. King. 23. 24 
                     away them
that had familiar spirits, & the soothsayers, and the images, and the Idols,
and all the abhominations that were espied in the land of Iudah and
in Ierusalem, to performe the word of the law, &c.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of the Emperours,
                     Lib. 3. c. 1. de Daemono. p. 224. 
                     Kings, Princes, &c. vnder the Gospell. Bodin
writeth on this manner. Ita
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      sortilegi, cum sortilegijs fuerunt damnati,
& iudicijs infesti, primum Tiberio imperante, vt apud Tacitum legitur:
post Domitiano longe acrius, & diligentius quaestionem &c. tum etiam
Diocletiano: Sed omniū seuerissime cum imperatores fidei Christi
sese adiunxerunt. tune enim euersa sunt templa & oracula, sacrificia
gentium, tota
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      aruspicina illicita pronunciata, & auguralis scientia,
eorum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      inte
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     ctus vsus, indicta in auruspices mortis poena, deportationes
in eos qui augures & auruspices consulerent. Sorceries (saith he)
began to be sought after vnder the heathen Emperours, Tiberius, Domitian,
and Dioclesian: But assoone as the Emperours which followed,
professed the faith of Christ, they did most seuerely search out these practises
of Sathan. For then their Temples were cast down and their oracles,
heathenish sacrifices, & all the arts of magick were proclaimed vnlawfull,
& the vse of them was forbidden, & death was ordained for the
punishment of sorcerie, and banishment for all those which consulted
with soothsaiers, sorcerers, & the rest of that Sathanicall order. And
thus farre of good magistrates. The contrarie practise of evil Princes
and Iudges followeth.
                  
                  
                      First, to begin with Pharao and that auncient Idolatry and magicke
of Egypt: The false priests & magicians of that land, wanted
no prouision for the sustaining of their deuilish profession. for it is
written that they had an ordinarie of Pharo: and they did eat their
ordinarie which Pharoh gaue them, so that in the famine time

theyGen. 47. 22. Exod. 7. 11. were not constrained to sell their landes, as others were.
In this land was magicke notably professed, as all writers of histories
haue testified. Hence came that famous Nectanebus, who by
his inchauntments so bewitched Olympias, the Queene of Macedonie,
that he begat on her Alexander the great Monarch, making
Phillip the King and the worlde to beleeue, that Alexander
was Iupiters sonne, as Curtius and others haue recorded.Q. Curtius. Such prouision
for this hellish profession there was, no doubt, also in all other
kingdomes and countries, where these artificers were fostered,
as in Chaldei,Cic. de Divin. Lib. 1. Archadia, India, and in Persia, as I haue before
shewed out of the Ecclesiasticall stories of Socrates and Sozomenes.
                  When the kingdome of Israel fell from the true God, from his 
word, seruice, and religion, it is said, they contemned all the good
Prophets and the godly ministerie. For the Lord saith, they made
them Priests which were the very dregges and ragges,
                     1. Kin. 12. 31, 
                     or lowest or basest
of the people. When the ministerie was thus polluted, and the
worde of God put vnder a bushell and contemned, immediately
Sathan thrust into the kingdome idolatrie and witchcraft, which
continued in that land vnto Hosheas time, vnder whome these
sinnes brought destruction vnto the kingdome of Israel: as it is
written, 2. King. 17. where the holy Ghost rehearsing the sinnes
of Ieroboam and his successors vnto Hosheas time, and shewing
the iust causes of the destruction of that kingdome, he concludeth
on this manner. 1. Finally they left all the commaundements of the
Lord their God. 2. they made them molten images, euen two calues,
                     2. Hos. 17. v. 16, 17.
                     and made a groue, and worshipped all the host of heauen, and serued
Baal, 3. They made their sonnes and daughters passe through the fire
and vsed witchcraft and inchauntments, yea sould them selues to doe euill
in the sight of the Lord to anger him.
                  
                  The same euills came in like manner vpon the kingdome of 
Iudah, for the contempt of Gods word, his religion, his Prophets,
and his ministerie, as vnder Manasseh, of whome it is saide,2. Kin. 21. 3. 
                     hee
went backe, that is, from all good thinges which his father did,
and then followeth this sinne, vers. 6. Hee caused his sonnes
to passe through fire, and gaue him selfe to witchcrafte and

                           •
                        orcerie, and hee vsed them that bad familiar spirites, and

were soothsaiers, & did much euill in the sight of the Lord to anger him.
And the lord assureth vs that these sinnes of this mā, were the cause
of the destruction also of this kingdom of Iudah: for thus it is written.
2. King. 24. 3. Ier 19. & 15. v. 4. Surely by the commandement of the Lord came vpon this
Iudah, that he might put them out of his sight for the sinnes
                     50. yeres after his death. 
                     of
Manasseth according to all that hee did.
                  
                  And thus like as we haue seene that when good kings, Iudges,
and Magistrates gouerned the Church of the Iewes, & were carefull
to preserue a pure ministerie, pure religion, & the sacred Scriptures
among them: these Sathanical artes of magick, sorcerie, and
such like abhominations,Conclus. were soone banished that lande, so likewise
in all Christendom, both before poperie began to darken the
face of Gods Church, & after that rotten mist in sundrie places had
vanished, & was scattered by the beams of the Gospel, this Sathanicall
kinigdome was cast down, his ministers confounded, & his
delusions were continually discouered. Wherfore I conclude thus
with Bodin.p. 234. de Dae 
                           •
                        onom. 
                     Beatus est populus cui sapientes moderatores, boni magistratus,
& bonipastores p
                           •
                        aesunt, qui benè institunnt ipsum: non sunt in
eomalign
                           •
                         spiritus diu habituri sedem. Blessedis that people ouer whom
wise gouernours, good magistrates, and godly pastors are placed, which
doe well instruct and gouerne them: euill spirits are not like to haue any
long aboad or continuance in that place.
                  
               
               
                  CHAP. IIII.
                  
                     What the Christian Iudges and Magistrates haue done, and may doe
for the discouerie and extirpation of Witchcraft.
                  
                  
                      FIrst, if any man doe imagine that I purpose in this place, to
frame any speech, counsell, or direction, for the Honourable
wise Iudges and Magistrates of the land, how to proceede in
iustice against these abhominations: let such vnderstand, that I
meane no such thing: for their Honours, &c. are wise, I know right
well, to see into these euills, & willing with all diligence to discouer
them, & God I trust will more and more inflame their hearts,
with such measure of the loue of his glorie and the saluation of his
Saints, that they will most carefully redresse them, where & when
they finde them. Againe, I confesse my selfe to be moste vnexpert

and vnacquainted with their profession. Notwithstanding
it may be in some sort lawfull for me, and most expedient for this
cause in hād, to teach others in sober maner (rudely as I can) what
magistrates are, & wherefore ordained of God, & how they haue
done & may do to preuent, discouer & confound these abominations:
wherfore I hope I shal giue no iust cause of offence vnto any,
but an occasion rather vnto some to remember in what place the
Lord hath set ouer vs these honourable iudges and magistrates,
to batter and beat downe our common enemy his kingdome and
all his Inuentions and munition, which he daily practiseth for the
destruction of our bodies & soules: and therefore I offer to al men
good cause to cōmend thē to God, most earnestly in their praiers.
                  The magistrates (saith the Lord) must
                     Exod 18. 21. 
                     be men of courage, men 
fearing god, men dealing truly, mē hating couetousnes: for they supply
after a sort Gods own place,Inst. 4. 20. ch. sect. 4. & resemble his maiestie, & therfore
are often called GodsExod. 22. 8. Psal. 82. 1, 6. in scripture, a name of great importāce, &
Fathers & Pastors in the Prophets in sundry places. And Solomon
saith,Prov. 8. 15. that when kings raigne, & counsellers decree righteouslie,
when Princes beare principality & the iudges of the earth execute
iudgement: it is Gods good will, his own worke & good pleasure.
And for this cause Moses & Iehosaphat said to the iudges (whom
they appointed in euery seuerall city) that theyDeut. 1. 16. 1. Chro. 16. 6. shoulde sit in
iudgement not for man but for God.
                  Againe all authours ecclesiasticall & prophane agree with the 
word of God,Heming. adm. q. de offic. magift. affirming that their office is extended to both the tables
of the law: & most ecclesiasticall writers call them cust odes vtrius
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
tabulae,
                     Inst. 4. ch. 20. s. 9. 
                     preseruers & keepers of hoth the tables of Gods law: &
the very heathens (for nulla gens sine lege, sine rege, sine Deo: all nations
haue their king, their law, & their God) the heathens, I say, in making
lawes, they haue alway begon at religion and the worship of
god, & so proceed to politick lawes, and lastly commend all their
lawes and religion to the care and custody of their Princes, Iudges,
magistrates and gouernours.
                  And the good gouerners, kings, princes, & magistrates in the
Church of God, haue euer had their first & principal care to maintaine
& defend the laws of the first table of God: that is the religiō,
the seruice, the word, the honor & glorie of God: for so God cō
                     mandeth,
& the forenamed holy princes, Moses, Dauid, Hezekiah,

Iosiah, lehosaphat and others haue so done as we haue partly before
shewed: for they accounted themselues Gods vicegerents here
on earth, and thereefore they were most mindfull of his glorie.
                  
                      Among al other sinnes of the first table there is none more horrible,
more fearfull, that more dishonoureth God, & impareth his
glory, then the most detestable sins of magike and sorcerie. wherfore
I may conclude that it is the duty of al Christian princes, iudges
and magistrates to bend all the powers of their mindes most
religious
                        •
                     ie and carefully, for the discouerie & seuere punishment
of all the practisioners and fauoures of all Sathanicall magick and
deuilish diuinations.
                  
                      Such men therfore as forbid the honourable iudges, magistrates
&c. to intermeddle or comber themselues in the behalfe of Gods
glorie, the good state of Gods Church, in the discouerie of these
deuilish practises of Satan and his ministers: they do as much as in
them lyeth resist Gods glory, prophane his seruice, set vp Satan for
their God, his arts for Gods word, & would haue Athisme to come
in place of pure religion. Wherfore if they erre of ignorance, they
erre dangerously against the very foundation of Christian religion,
if they erre of malice, they are the very imps & limmes of Satan:
and seeing that they seeme to turne such honourable personages
from faith and religion, and from true obedience vnto the
worde of the Lord, as Elimas the sorcerer sought to turne Sergius
Paulus that prudent man (when he desired to heare the word of God)
from the faith; let them vnderstand that Paul may thunder more
iustly against them professing Christianity in the Church, as he did
against that vile Pagan sorcerer in this maner: OAct. 17. 10. 
                     full of all subtiltie
& all mischiefe, the child of the deuill and enimy of all righteousnes,
wilt thou not cease to peruert the straight waies of the Lord?
                  
                  The ground and the mother of all good lawes is the law of god,
 and all other lawes do giue attendance therupon, and haue their
being to this end, to keep and preserue the holy lawes of God inuiolable:
and if they want this scope (as the learned say) they are
vnnecessary in the Church or common wealth. The lawes of god
are most sharp against this sinne, and punish it with death (as all
other sinnes of the first table were punished) the words of the lawe
are these,The moste feareful death as the Hebrues write. Exod. 20. 18. Thou shalt not suffer a witch to liue. Againe
Lev. 20. 27. & if a man or a woman haue a spirit of diuination; or sooth
saying in them, they shall dye the death: they shall stone them to death,

their blood shall be vpon them. Againe, Deut. 18. 10, 11. many kinds
of magitians are numbred which the Lorde straightly chargeth
should not be left to liue in the land. These lawes of God did the
forenamed godly kings, their iudges, rulers, and magistrates most
religiousllie and zealouslie obey and put in practise, and wherfore
Christian princes,Com. in lob. 1. c. v, 16. iudges, &c. ought not with greater care, loue,
zeale, & religion, do the same vnder the gospel: no man liuing shal
euer be able with any sensible reason to prooue vnto vs. Wherfore
such iudges, as are so sharp sighted in the lighter sinnes of the 2.
table, and as it were blind in the disobedience of the first, are (as M.
Beza, Danaeus,De sorti. c. 5. & BodinLib. 4. c. 1. say truly) great contēners of God thē
                     selues:
& therefore the greater account shall they make. Bodin cō
                     plaineth
in these wordes: Equidem saepe miratus sum, cur à multis
principib. quaestiones institutae, & iudices extra ordinem dati, delegati
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
fierent, in fures, quaestores aerarios, faeneratores, & viarū obsessores, per
quos tamen turpissima,
                     First treatise ch. 4. 
                     & summè horrenda, impia
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         magorū facta manserunt
impunita. This lawyer (as you see) wondreth at the custome
of some countries,M. Beza. com. in lob. c. 1. v. 16. where he knoweth the iudges and magistrates
are very sharp against theeues, robbers, vsurers, and such like common
sinnes, but to passe ouer the most horrible sinnes of sorcerie
vnpunished. M. Beza also complaineth against this negligence in
magistrates, as we haue before shewed.
                  Danaeus saith, that to make lawes doth belong & appertain to 
kings & princes: notwithstanding he wisheth (albeit lawes might
seem to be wāting) that the honourable iudges & magistrates, &c.
would punish magitians & sorcerers for sundry other sortsC. 5. of sin,
which they do impiously commit. Bodin numbreth their sinnes in
this order. First they renounceDeut. 13. 5. God and all true religion. 2. they
blasphemeLev. 14. 14. & prouoke his diuine maiesty with vnspeakable contempt.
3. they beleeue in the deuill, adore him, &Exod. 32. 4, 27. sacrifice vnto
him. 4. they offer their childrenDeut. 18. 10. vnto deuils. 5. they sweare vnto
Satan & promise to bringDeut. 13. 5. as many as they can vnto his seruice &
professiō. 6. they inuocate Satan in their praiers, & sweareler. 5. 7. & 12. 16. by his
name. 7. they commit incestuous adulteries, for Satan telleth thē
that none can proue a perfect magitian or sorcerer, but such a one
as is of the father & the daughter, or the mother & the son: whereupon
Catullus wrote these verses.
                  
                     Nam magus ex matre & gnato gignatur oportet,
                     Si vera est Persarum, impia religio.
                     
                        
The right magitian by the sonne, of mother is begotte,
                     Sayth Persian faith, if that be true, tis Satans birde I wotte.
                  
                  8. They cōmit horrible murdersLev. 24. 21. Deut. 19. 11, 12. & kil yong infants. 9. al sorcerers
for the most part exercise poison,De civ. Dei. 15. in cubos peragere mulierum concubitus &c. hoc negare impudentiae esse videatur. & to kill with poison is far more
heinous then simple murder: for so the law speaketh: grauius est occidere
veneno quam ferro: 10. they kill mens cattel, &c. 11. & lastly
the witches (as themselues confesse) cōmit abominatiōs & filthines
with their deuils when they ly with their husbands: Aug. saith that
to denie this is great impudency. These sinnes here named, euery one
euē the lest deserueth a most exquisite death, as can be deuised: for
all such sinners are cōmanded to be stoned to death: which kinde
of death was a most dreadful death among the Iews. And surely it
is well known by common experience that al professed sorcerers,
&c. are guiltie of many most monstrous impieties: & for this cause
the law saith simply, Mechasephath, Lo tichieth, let not a witch liue:
expressing vnto vs how expedient it is that iustice be speedily exercised
against these vile kind of men.
                  And thus far I thought good to shew, how wise and religious magistrates,
haue, doe, and may proceed against the discouery of the most horrible and
detestable sinnes of witchcraft or 
                        •••
                     ery: not for that I can or would teach
any our honourable, wise, & learne
                        •
                      magistrates their duties in this pointe:
but to let the common sort of Christians see, what the lawe of God commandeth,
and what diligence good Magistrates haue vsed in elder times against
these euils. Wherefore if we, which professe Christ Iesus in this cleare
Sunne shine of the gospell, be found more remisse, colde, & backward in performing
these duties to God and his Church: that I may say more, we seeme
to come to farre behind those noble presidents, in the loue of 
                        〈◊〉
                      hatred
of sinne, and behinde (I feare) if wee so persist, shall wee come 
                        •
                     nto the
kingdome efheauen. To conclude therefore, let vs all as many as haue
the place of inferiours in this Christian common wealth, pray mightely vnto
God, so to illuminate our superiours, the wise and honourable magistrates,
our godly learned ministers, with his holy word to know his will: and so to
enflame their hearts with his holy spirit, that they may moste diligently put
the same in practise, as for the discouery, confusion, & extirpation of al sinnes,
so more particularly, & most carefully of these most horrible, dreadfull, & detestable
sinnes of witchcraft and sorcery, &c. that so God may be purely worshipped,
his saints comforted, his greatest enemies either conuerted to their
good, or confounded with their deuills to their endlesse shame and confusion.
So be it.
                  
                     Vnto the King euerlasting, immortall, inuisible; vnto God onelie vvise be
honour and glorie, for euer and euer. Amen.
                  
                  
               
            
         
      
   