
      
         
            
            
            THE ILIADS OF HOMER Prince of Poets. Neuer before in any languag truely translated. With a Com̄ent vppon some of his chiefe places; Donne according to the Greeke By Geo: Chapman
            
            
               At London printed for Nathaniell Butter
            
            
               William Hole sculp:
            
            Qui Nil molitur Ineptè
         
         
            
            
            TO THE HIGH BORNE PRINCE OF MEN, HENRIE THRICE Royall inheritor to the vnited kingdoms of Great BRITTAINE, &c.
            
            
               
                  SInce perfect happinesse, by Princes sought,
               Is not with birth, borne, nor 
                     •…
                  xchequers bought;
               Nor followes in great Traines; nor is possest
               VVith any outward State; but makes him blest
               That gouernes inward; and beholdeth theare,
               All his affections stand about him bare;
               That by his power can send to Towre, and death,
               All traitrous passions; marshalling beneath
               His iustice, his meere will; and in his minde
               Holds such a scepter, as can keepe confinde
               His whole lifes actions in the royall bounds
               Of Vertue and Religion; and their grounds
               Takes-in, to sow his honours, his delights,
               And complete empire. You should learne these rights
               (Great Prince of men) by Princely presidents;
               VVhich here, in all kinds, my true zeale presents
               To furnish your youths groundworke, and first State;
               And let you see, one Godlike man create
               All sorts of worthiest men; to be contriu'd
               In your worth onely; giuing him reuiu'd,
               For whose life, Alexander would haue giuen
               One of his kingdomes: who (as sent from heauen,
               And thinking well, that so diuine a creature
               VVould neuer more enrich the race of Nature)
               
                  Kept as his Crowne his workes; and thought them still
               His Angels; in all power, to rule his will.
               And would affirme that Homers poesie
               Did more aduance his Asian victorie,
               Then all his Armies. O! tis wondrous much
               (Though nothing prisde) that the right vertuous touch
               Of a well written foule, to vertue moues.
               Nor haue we soules to purpose, if their loues
               Of fitting obiects be not so inflam'd.
               How much then, were this kingdomes maine soule maim'd,
               To want this great inflamer of all powers
               That moue in humane soules? All Realmes but yours,
               Are honor'd with him; and hold blest that State
               That haue his workes to reade and contemplate.
               In which, Humanitie to her height is raisde;
               VVhich all the world (yet, none enough) hath praisde.
               Seas, earth, and heauen, he did in verse comprise;
               Out-sung the Muses, and did equalise
               Their king Apollo; being so farre from cause
               Of Princes light thoughts, that their grauest lawes
               May finde stuffe to be fashiond by his lines.
               Through all the pompe of kingdomes still he shines,
               And graceth all his gracers. Then let lie
               Your Lutes, and Viols, and more loftily
               Make the Heroiques of your Homer sung,
               To Drums and Trumpets set his Angels tongue:
               And with the Princely sport of Haukes you vse,
               Behold the kingly flight of his high Muse:
               And see how like the Phoenix she renues
               Her age, and starrie feathers in your sunne;
               Thousands of yeares attending; euerie one
               Blowing the holy fire, and throwing in
               Their seasons, kingdomes, nations that haue bin
               Subuerted in them; lawes, religions, all
               Offerd to Change, and greedie Funerall;
               Yet still your Homer lasting, liuing, raigning;
               And proues, how firme Truth builds in Poets faining.
            
            
               
                  A Princes statue, or in Marble caru'd,
               Or steele, or gold, and shrin'd (to be pres
                     •…
                  d)
               Aloft on Pillars, or Pyramides;
               Time into lowest ruines may depresse:
               But, drawne with all his vertues in learn'd verse,
               Fame shall resound them on Obliuions herse,
               Till graues gaspe with her blasts, and dead men rise.
               No gold can follow, where true Poesie flies.
            
            
               Then let not this Diuinitie in earth
               (Deare Prince) be sleighted, as she were the birth
               Of idle Fancie; since she workes so hie:
               Nor let her poore disposer (Learning) lie
               Stil bed-rid. Both which, being in men defac't;
               In men (with them) is Gods bright image rac't.
               For, as the Sunne, and Moone, are figures giuen
               Of his refulgent Deitie in Heauen:
               So, Learning, and her Lightner, Poesie,
               In earth present his fierie Maiestie.
               Nor are Kings like him, since their Diademes
               Thunder, and lighten, and proiect braue beames;
               But since they his cleare vertues emulate;
               In Truth and Iustice, imaging his State;
               In Bountie, and Humanitie since they shine;
               Then which, is nothing (like him) more diuine:
               Not Fire, not Light; the Sunnes admired course;
               The Rise, nor Set of Starres; nor all their force
               In vs, and all this Cope beneath the Skie;
               Nor great Existence, term'd his Treasurie.
               Since not, for being greatest, he is blest;
               But being Iust, and in all vertues best.
            
            
               VVhat sets his Iustice, and his Truth, best forth,
               (Best Prince) then vse best; which is Poesies worth.
               For, as great Princes, well inform'd and deckt
               VVith gracious vertue, giue more sure effect
               To her perswasions, pleasures, reall worth,
               Then all th'inferiour subiects she sets forth;
               Since there, she shines at full; hath birth, wealth, state,
               
                  Power, fortune, honor, fit to eleuate
               Her heauenly merits; and so fit they are
               Since she was made for them, and they for her:
               So, Truth, with Poesie grac't, is fairer farre,
               More proper, mouing, chaste, and regular,
               Then when she runnes away with vntruss't Prose;
               Proportion, that doth orderly dispose
               Her vertuous treasure, and is Queene of Graces;
               In Poesie, decking her with choicest Phrases,
               Figures and numbers: when loose Prose puts on
               Plaine letter-habits; makes her trot, vpon
               Dull earthly businesse (she being meere diuine:)
               Holds her to homely Cates, and harsh hedge-wine,
               That should drinke Poesies Nectar; euerie way
               One made for other, as the Sunne and Day,
               Princes and vertues. And, as in a spring,
               The plyant water, mou'd with any thing
               Let fall into it, puts her motion out
               In perfect circles, that moue round about
               The gentle fountaine, one another, raising:
               So Truth, and Poesie worke; so Poesie blazing,
               All subiects falne in her exhaustlesse fount,
               VVorks most exactly; makes a true account
               Of all things to her high discharges giuen,
               Till all be circular, and round as heauen.
            
            
               And lastly, great Prince, marke and pardon me;
               As in a flourishing, and ripe fruite Tree,
               Nature hath made the barke to saue the Bole;
               The Bole, the sappe; the sappe, to decke the whole
               VVith leaues and branches; they, to beare and shield
               The vsefull fruite; the fruite it selfe to yeeld
               Guard to the kernell, and for that all those
               (Since out of that againe, the whole Tree growes:)
               So, in our Tree of man, whose neruie Roote
               Springs in his top; from thence euen to his foote,
               There runnes a mutuall aide, through all his parts,
               All ioyn'd in one to serue his Queene of Arts.The soule.
               
               
                  In which, doth Poesie, like the kernell lie
               Oscur'd; though her Promethean facultie
               Can create men, and make euen death to liue;
               For which she should liue honor'd; Kings should giue
               Comfort and helpe to her, that she might still
               Hold vp their spirits in vertue; make the will,
               That gouernes in them, to the power conform'd;
               The power to iustice; that the scandals, storm'd
               Against the poore Dame, clear'd by your faire Grace,
               Your Grace may shine the clearer. Her low place,
               Not shewing her, the highest leaues obscure.
               VVho raise her, raise themselues: and he sits sure,
               VVhom her wing'd hand aduanceth; since on it
               Eternitie doth (crowning Vertue) sit.
               All whose poore seed, like violets in their beds,
               Now grow with bosome-hung, and hidden heads.
               For whom I must speake (though their Fate conuinces
               Me, worst of Poets) to you, best of Princes.
            
            
               
                  By the most humble and faithfull implorer for all the graces to your highnesse eternised by your diuine Homer. Geo. Chapman.
            
         
         
            
            AN ANAGRAM OF THE NAME OF OVR DRAD PRINCE, MY MOST Gracious and sacred Moecaenas; HENRYE PRINCE OF VVALES OVR SVNN, HEYR, PEACE, LIFE.
            
               
                  BE to vs as thy great Name doth import,
               (Prince of the people;) nor suppose it vaine,
               That in this secret, and prophetique sort,
               Thy Name and Noblest Title doth containe
               So much right to vs; and as great a good.
               Nature doth nothing vainly; much lesse Art
               Perfecting Nature. No spirit in our blood,
               But in our soules discourses beares a part.
               What Nature giues at randon in the one,
               In th'other, orderd, our diuine part serues.
               Thou art not HEYR then, to our state alone;
               But SVNN, PEACE, LIFE. And what thy powre deserues
               Of vs, and our good, in thy vtmost strife;
               Shall make thee to thy selfe, HEYR, SVNN, PEACE, LIFE.
               
            
         
         
            
            TO THE SACRED FOVNTAINE OF PRINCES; SOLE EMPRESSE OF BEAVTIE AND VERTVE; ANNE, Queene of England, &c.
            
               
                  WIth whatsoeuer Honour we adorne
               Your Royall issue; we must gratulate yow
               Imperiall Soueraigne. Who of you is borne,
               Is you; One Tree, make both the Bole, and Bow.
               If it be honour then to ioyne you both
               To such a powerfull worke, as shall defend
               Both from foule Death, and Ages ougly Moth;
               This is an Honor, that shall neuer end.
               They know not vertue then, that know not what
               The vertue of defending vertue is:
               It comprehends the guard of all your State,
               And ioynes your Greatnesse to as great a Blisse.
               Shield vertue, and aduance her then, Great Queene;
               And make this Booke your Glasse, to make it seene.
            
            Your Maiesties in all subiection most humbly consecrate,
            
               Geo. Chap
                     •…
                  an.
            
         
         
            
            
            TO THE READER.
            
               
                  LEst with foule hands you touch these holy Rites;
               And with preiudicacies too prophane,
               Passe Homer, in your other Poets sleights;
               Wash here. In this Porch to his numerous Phane,
               Heare ancient Oracles speake, and tell you whom
               You haue to censure. First then Silius heare,
               Who thrice was Consull in renowned Rome;
               
               Whose verse (saith Martiall) nothing shall out-weare.
            
            Silius Italicus. Lib. 13.
            
               HE, in Elysium, hauing cast his eye
               Vpon the figure of a Youth, whose haire
               With purple Ribands braided curiously,
               Hung on his shoulders wondrous bright and faire;
               Said, Virgine, What is he whose heauenly face
               Shines past all others, as the Morne the Night;
               Whom many maruelling soules, from place to place,
               Pursue, and haunt, with sounds of such delight?
               Whose countenance (wer't not in the Stygian shade)
               Would make me, questionlesse, beleeue he were
               A verie God. The learned Virgine made
               This answer: If thou shouldst beleeue it here,
               Thou shouldst not erre: he well deseru'd to be
               Esteem'd a God; nor held his so-much breast
               A little presence of the Deitie:
               His verse comprisde earth, seas, starres, soules at rest:
               In song, the Muses he did equalise;
               In honor, Phoebus: he was onely soule;
               Saw all things spher'd in Nature, without eyes,
               And raisde your Troy vp to the starrie Pole.
               Glad Scipio, viewing well this Prince of Ghosts,
               Said, O if Fates would giue this Poet leaue,
               To sing the acts done by the Romane Hoasts;
               How much beyond, would future times receiue
               The same facts, made by any other knowne?
               O blest Aeacides! to haue the grace
               That out of such a mouth, thou shouldst be showne
               To wondring Nations, as enricht the race
               Of all times future, with what he did know:
               Thy vertue, with his verse, shall euer grow.
            
            
               
                  Now heare an Angell sing our Poets Fame;
               Whom Fate, for his diuine song, gaue that name.
            
            Angelus Politianus, in Nutricia.
            
               More liuing, then in old Demodocus,
               
               
                  Fame glories to waxe yong in Homers verse.
               And as when bright Hyperion holds to vs
               His golden Torch; we see the starres disperse,
               And euery way flie heauen; the pallid Moone
               Euen almost vanishing before his sight:
               So with the dazling beames of Homers Sunne,
               All other ancient Poets lose their light.
               Whom when Apollo heard, out of his starre,
               Singing the godlike Acts of honor'd men;
               And equalling the actuall rage of warre,
               With onely the diuine straines of his pen;
               He stood amaz'd, and freely did confesse
               Himselfe was equall'd in Maeonides.
               
            
            
               Next, heare the graue and learned Plinie vse
               His censure of our sacred Poets Muse.
            
            Plin. Nat. hist. lib. 7. Cap 29.
            Turnd into verse; that no Prose may come neare Homer.
            
            
               Whom shall we choose the glorie of all wits,
               Held through so many sorts of discipline,
               And such varietie of workes, and spirits;
               But Grecian Homer? like whom none did shine,
               For forme of worke and matter. And because
               Our proud doome of him may stand iustified
               By noblest iudgements; and receiue applause
               In spite of enuie, and illiterate pride;
               Great Macedon, amongst his matchlesse spoiles,
               Tooke from rich Persia (on his Fortunes cast)
               A Casket finding (full of precious oyles)
               Form'd all of gold, with wealthy stones enchac't:
               He tooke the oyles out; and his nearest friends
               Askt, in what better guard it might be vsde?
               All giuing their conceipts, to seuerall ends;
               He answerd; His affections rather chusde
               An vse quite opposite to all their kinds:
               And Homers bookes should with that guard be seru'd;
               That the most precious worke of all mens minds,
               In the most precious place, might be preseru'd.
               The Fount of wit was Homer; Learnings Syre,Idem. lib. 17. cap. 5. Idem. lib. 25. cap. 3.
               
               And gaue Antiquitie, her liuing fire.
            
            
               VOlumes of like praise, I could heape on this,
               Of men more ancient, and more learn'd then these:
               But since true Vertue, enough louely is
               
                  With her owne beauties; all the suffrages
               Of others I omit; and would more faine
               That Homer, for himselfe, should be belou'd
               Who euerie sort of loue-worth did containe.
               Which how I haue in my conuersion prou'd,
               I must confesse, I hardly dare referre
               To reading iudgements; since, so generally,
               Custome hath made euen th'ablest Agents erre
               In these translations; all so much applyOf Translation, and the naturall difference of Dialects, necessarily to be obserued in it.
               
               Their paines and cunnings, word for word to render
               Their patient Authors; when they may as well,
               Make fish with fowle, Camels with Whales engender;
               Or their tongues speech, in other mouths compell.
               For, euen as different a production
               Aske Greeke and English; since as they in sounds,
               And letters, shunne one forme, and vnison;
               So haue their sense, and elegancie bounds
               In their distinguisht natures, and require
               Onely a iudgement to make both consent,
               In sense and elocution; and aspire
               As well to reach the spirit that was spent
               In his exanple; as with arte to pierce
               His Grammar, and etymologie of words.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               But, as great Clerkes, can write no English verse;
               Because (alas! great Clerks) English affords
               (Say they) no height, nor copie; a rude toung,
               (Since tis their Natiue): but in Greeke or Latine
               Their writs are rare; for thence true Poesie sprong:
               Though them (Truth knowes) they haue but skil to chat-in,
               Compar'd with that they might say in their owne;
               Since thither th'others full soule cannot make
               The ample transmigration to be showne
               In Nature-louing Poesie: So the brake
               That those Translators sticke in, that affect
               Their word-for-word traductions (where they lose
               The free grace of their naturall Dialect
               And shame their Authors, with a forced Glose)
               I laugh to see; and yet as much abhorreThe necessarie nearen
                        •…
                     e of translation to the example.
               
               More licence from the words, then may expresse
               Their full compression, and make cleare the Author.
               From whose truth, if you thinke my feet digresse,
               Because I vse needfull Periphrases;
               Reade Valla, Hessus, that in Latine Prose,
               And Verse conuert him; reade the Messines,
               
               That into Tuscan turns him; a
                     •…
                  d the Glose
               Graue Salel makes in French, as he translates:
               Which (for th'aforesaide reasons) all must doo;
               And see that my conuersion much abates
               
                  The licence they take, and more showes him too:
               Whose right, not all those great learn'd men haue done
               (In some maine parts) that were his Commentars:
               But (as the illustration of the Sunne
               Should be attempted by the erring starres)
               They fail'd to search his deepe, and treasurous hart.
               The cause was, since they wanted the fit key
               Of Nature, in their down-right strength of Art;The power of nature, aboue Art in Poesie.
               
               With Poesie, to open Poesie.
               Which in my Poeme of the mysteries
               Reueal'd in Homer, I will clearely proue.
               Till whose neere birth, suspend your Calumnies,
               And farre-wide imputations of selfe loue.
               Tis further from me, then the worst that reades;
               Professing me the worst of all that wright:
               Yet what, in following one, that brauely leades,
               The worst may show, let this proofe hold the light.
               But grant it cleere: yet hath detraction got
               My blinde side, in the forme, my verse puts on;
               Much like a dung hill Mastife, that dares not
               Assault the man he barkes at; but the stone
               He throwes at him, takes in his eager iawes,
               And spoyles his teeth because they cannot spoyle.
               The long verse hath by proofe receiu'd applause
               Beyond each other number: and the foile,
               That squint-ey'd Enuie takes, is censur'd plaine.
               For, this long Poeme askes this length of verse,
               Which I my selfe ingenuously maintaine
               Too long, our shorter Authors to reherse.
               And, for our tongue, that still is so empayr'dOur English language, aboue all others, for Rhythm
                        •…
                     call Poesi
                        •…
                     .
               
               By trauailing linguists; I can proue it cleare,
               That no tongue hath the Muses vtterance heyr'd
               For verse, and that sweet Musique to the eare
               Strooke out of rime, so naturally as this;
               Our Monosyllables, so kindly fall
               And meete, opposde in rime, as they did kisse:
               French and Italian, most immetricall;
               Their many syllables, in harsh Collision,
               Fall as they brake their necks; their bastard Rimes
               Saluting as they iustl'd in transition,
               And set out teeth on edge; nor tunes, nor times
               Kept in their falles. And me thinkes, their long words
               Shew in short verse, as in a narrow place,
               Two opposites should meet, with two-hand swords
               Vnweildily, without or vse or grace.
               Thus hauing rid the rubs, and strow'd these flowers
               In our thrice sacred Homers English way;
               What rests to make him, yet more worthy yours?
               
                  To cite more prayse of him, were meere delay
               To your glad searches, for what those men found,
               That gaue his praise, past all, so high a place:
               Whose vertues were so many, and so cround,
               By all consents, Diuine; that not to grace,
               Or adde increase to them, the world doth need
               Another Homer; but euen to rehearse
               And number them: they did so much exceed;
               Men thought him not a man; but that his verse
               Some meere celestiall nature did adorne.
               And all may well conclude, it could not be,
               That for the place where any man was borne,
               So long, and mortally, could disagree
               So many Nations, as for Homer striu'd,
               Vnlesse his spurre in them, had bene diuine.
               Then end their strife, and loue him (thus reuiu'd)
               As borne in England: see him ouer-shine
               All other-Countrie Poets; and trust this,
               That whose-soeuer Muse dares vse her wing
               When his Muse flies, she will be truss't by his;
               And show as if a Bernacle should spring
               Beneath an Eagle. In none since was seene
               A soule so full of heauen as earth's in him.
               O! if our moderne Poesie had beene
               As louely as the Ladie he did lymne,
               What barbarous wo
                     •…
                  ldling, groueling after gaine,
               Could vse her louely parts, with such rude hate,
               As now she suffers vnder euery swaine?
               Since then tis nought but her abuse and Fate,
               That thus empaires her; what is this to her
               As she is reall? or in naturall right?
               But since in true Religion men should erre
               As much as Poesie, should th'abuse excite
               The like contempt of her Diuinitie?
               And that her truth, and right saint sacred Merites,
               In most liues, breed but reuerence formally;
               What wonder is't if Poesie in herits
               Much lesse obseruance; being but Agent for her,
               And singer of her lawes, that others say?
               Forth then ye Mowles, sonnes of the earth abhorre her;
               Keepe still on in the durty vulgar way,
               Till durt receiue your soules, to which ye vow;
               And with your poison'd spirits bewitch our thrifts.
               Ye cannot so despise vs as we you.
               Not one of you, aboue his Mowlehill lifts
               His earthy Minde; but, as a sort of beasts,
               Kept by their Guardians, neuer care to heare
               Their manly voices; but when, in their fists,
               
                  They breathe wild whistles; and the beasts rude eare
               Heares their Curres barking; then by heapes they flie,
               Headlong together: So men, beastly giuen,
               The manly soules voice (sacred Poesie,
               Whose Hymnes the Angels euer sing in heauen)
               Contemne, and heare not: but when brutish noises
               (For Gaine, Lust, Honour, in litigious Prose)
               Are bellow'd-out, and cra
                     •…
                  ke the barbarous voices
               Of Turkish Stentors; O! ye leane to those,
               Like itching Horse, to blockes, or high May-poles;
               And breake nought but the wind of wealth, wealth, All
               In all your Documents; your Asinine soules
               (Proud of their burthens) feele not how they gall.
               But as an Asse, that in a fi
                     •…
                  ld of weeds
               Affects a thistle, and falles fiercely to it;
               That pricks, and gals him; yet he feeds, and bleeds;
               Forbeares a while, and licks; but cannot woo it
               To leaue the sharpnes; when (to wreake his smart)
               He beates it with his foote; then backward kickes,
               Because the Thistle gald his forward part;
               Nor leaues till all be eate, for all the prickes;
               Then falles to others with as hote a strife;
               And in that honourable warre doth waste
               The tall heate of his stomacke, and his life:
               So, in this world of weeds, you worldlings taste
               Your most-lou'd dainties; with such warre, buy peace;
               Hunger for torment; vertue kicke for vice;
               Cares, for your states, do with your states increase:
               And though ye dreame ye feast in Paradise,
               Yet Reasons Day-light, shewes ye at your meate
               Asses at Thistles, bleeding as ye eate.
            
         
         
            
            THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
            
               OF all bookes extant in all kinds, Homer is the first and best. No oneAll bookes of humane wisedome. before his (Iosephus affirmes,) nor before him (saith Velleius Paterculus) was there any whom he imitated: nor after him, any that could imitate him. And that Poesie may be no ca
                  •…
               se of detraction from al the eminence we giue him; Spondanus (preferring it to all Arts and sciences) vnanswerably argues and proues. For to the glory of God, and the singing of his glories, (no man dares deny) man was chiefly made. And what art performes this chiefe end of man, with so much excitation, and expression as Poesie? Moses, Dauid, Salomon, Iob, Esay, Ieremy, &c. chiefly vsing that to the end abouesaid. And since the excellence of it cannot be obtained by the labor and art of man (as all easily confesse it,) it must needs be acknowledged, a diuine infusion. To proue which in a word, this distich, (in my estimation) serues something nearely:
            
               Great Poesie, blind Homer, makes all see
               Thee capable of all Arts, none of thee.
            
            For out of him (according to our most graue and iudicial Plutarch) are all Arts deduced, confirmed, or illustrated. It is not therfore the worlds vilifying of it, that can make it vile: for so we might argue, & blaspheme the most incomparably sacred. It is not of the world indeed: but (like Truth) hides it selfe frōit. Nor is there any such reality of wisdomes truth in all humane excellence, as in Poets fictions. That most vulgar & foolish receipt of Poeticall licence, being of all knowing men to be exploded; (accepting it, as if Poets had a tale-telling priuiledge aboue others,) no Artist being so strictly, and inextricably confined to all the lawes of learning, wisedome, and truth, as a Poet. For were not his fictions composed of the sinewes and soules of all those; how could they differ farre from, and be combined with eternitie? To all sciences therefore, I must still (with our learned and ingenious Spondanus) preferre it; as hauing a perpetuall commerce with the diuine Maiesty; embracing and illustrating al his most holy precepts; and enioying continuall discourse with his thrice perfect, and most comfortable spirit. And as the contemplatiue life is most worthily & diuinely preferred by Plato, to the actiue; as much as the head to the foote; the eye to the hand; reason to sence; the soule to the bodie: the end it selfe, to all things directed to the end: quiet to motion; and Eternitie to Time; so much preferre I diuine Poesie to all worldly wisedome. To the onely shadow of whose worth yet, I entitle n
                  •…
               t the bold rimes of euerie Apish and impudent Braggart, (though he dares assume any thing) such I turne ouer to the weauing of Cobwebs; and shall but chatter on molehels (farre vnder the hill of the Muses) when their fortunat'st selfloue and ambition hath aduanced them highest. Poesie is the flower of the Sunne, & disdains to open to the eye of a candle. So kings 
                  •…
               ide their treasures, & counsels frō the vulgar; ne euilescant (saith our Spond.) we haue example sacred enough; that true Poesies humility, pouerty & contempt, are badges of diuinity; not vanity. Bray then, and barke against it ye Wolf-fac't worldlings; that nothing but

honours, riches, and magistracie, nescio quos, turgidè spiratis (that I may vse the words of our friend still,) Qui solas leges Iustinianas crepatis; paragraphum vnum aut alterum, pluris quàm vos ipsos facitis, &c. I (for my part) shall euer esteeme it much more manly and sacred, in this harmelesse and pious stu
                  •…
               e, to sit till I sinke into my graue, then shine in your vainglorious bubbles, and impieties; al your poore policies, wisedomes, and their trappings, at no more valuing then a musty Nut. And much lesse I wey the frontlesse detractions of some stupide ignorants; that no more knowing me, then their owne beastly ends; and I, euer (to my knowledge) blest from their sight; whisper behind me vilifyings of my translation: out of the French affirming them; when both in French, and all other languages but his owne, our withall-skill enriched Poet, is so poore and vnpleasing, that no man can discerue from whence flowed his so generally giuen eminence, and admiration. And therfore (by any reasonable creatures conference, of my sleight comment, and conuersion) it will easily appeare how I shunne them: and whether the originall be my rule or not. In which, he shall easily see, I vnderstand the vnderstandings of all other interpreters, and commenters in places of his most depth, importance, and rapture. In whose exposition and illustration, if I abhorre from the sence that others wrest, and racke out of him; let my best detractor examine how the Greeke word warrants me. For my other fresh fry, let them fry in their foolish gals; nothing so much weighed as the barkings of puppies, or foistinghounds; too vile to thi
                  •…
               ke of our sacred Homer, or set their prophane feete within their liues lengths of his thresholds. If I faile in something, let my full performance in other some restore me; haste spurring me on with other necessities. For as at my conclusion I protest, so here at my entrance, lesse then fifteene weekes was the time, in which all the last twelue books were entirely new translated. No cōference had with any one liuing in al the nouelties I presume I haue found. Only some one or two places I haue shewed to my worthy and most learned friend, M. Harriots, for his censure how much mine owne weighed: whose iudgement and knowledge in all kinds, I know to be incomparable, and bottomlesse: yea, to be admired as much, as his most blameles life, and the right sacred expence of his time, is to be honoured and reuerenced. Which affirmation of his cleare vnmatchednesse in all manner of learning; I make in contempt of that nastie obiection often thrust vpon me; that he that will iudge, must know more then he of whom he iudgeth; for so a man should know neither God nor himself. Another right learned, honest, and entirely loued friend of mine, M. Robert Hews, I must needs put into my confest conference touching Homer, though very little more then that I had with M. Harriots. Which two, I protest, are all, and preferred to all. Nor charge I their authorities with any allowance of my generall labour; but onely of those one or two places, which for instances of my innouation, and 
                  •…
               ow it shewed to them, I imparted. If any taxe me for too much periphrasis or circumlocution in some places, let them reade Laurentius Valla, and Eobanus Hessus, who either vse such shortnesse as cometh nothing home to Homer; or where they shun that fault, are ten parts more paraphrastical then I. As for example; one place I will trouble you (if you please) to conferre with the originall, and one interpreter for all. It is in the end of the third booke; and is Hellens speech to Venus, fetching her to Paris, from seeing his cowardly combat with Menelaus: part of which speech I will here cite:
            
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
            
            
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                &c. For auoiding the common readers trouble here, I must referre the more Greekish to the rest of the speech in Homer, whose translation ad verbum by Spondanus, I will here cite; and then pray you to conferre it with that

which followeth of Valla.
            
            
               
                  Quoniam verò nunc Alexandrum, Menelaus
               
                  Postquam vicit; vult odiosam me domum abducere;
               
               
                  Propterea verò nunc dolum (ceu dolos) cogitans aduenisti?
               
               
                  Sede apud ipsum vadens, deorum abnega vias,
               
               
                  Neque vnquam tuis pedibus reuertaris in coelum,
               
               
                  Sed semper circa 
                        •…
                     um aerumnas perfer, & ipsum serua
               
               
                  Donec te vel vxorem faciat, vel hic seruam, &c.
               
            
            
               Valla thus:
            
               Quoniam victo Paride, Menelaus, me miseram, est reportaturus ad lares, ideo tu, ideo falsa sub imagine venisti, vt me deciperes ob tuam nimiam in Paridem beneuolentiā: eò dum illi ades, dum illi studes, dum pro illo satagis, dum illum obseruas atque custodis, deorum commercium reliquisti, nec ad eos reuersura es ampliùs; adeò (quantum suspicor) aut vxor eius 
                     •…
                  fficieris, aut ancilla, &c.
            
            Wherein note if there be any such thing as most of this in Homer; yet only to expresse (as he th
                  •…
               nkes) Homers conceipt, for the more pleasure of the reader, he vseth this ouerplus dum illi ades, dum illi studes, dum pro illo satagis, dum illum obseruas, atque custodis, deorum commercium reliquisti. Which (besides his superfluitie) is vtterly false. For where he saith, reliquisti deorum commercium, Hellen saith, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , deorum autem abnega, or abnue vias, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , (vel 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                as it is vsed poetically) signifying denegare, or abnuere; & Hellen (in contempt of her too much obseruing men) bids her renounce heauen, and come liue with Paris till he make her his wife or seruant; scoptically or scornefully speaking it: which both Valla, Eobanus, and all other interpreters (but these ad verbum) haue vtterly mist. And this one example I thought necessarie to insert here, to shew my detractors that they haue no reason to vilifie my circumlocution sometimes, when their most approued Grecians, Homers interpreters, generally hold him fit to be so conuerted. Yet how much I differ, and with what authoritie, let my impartiall, and iudiciall reader iudge. Alwaies conceiuing how pedanticall and absurd an affectation it is, in the interpretation of any Author (much more of Homer) to turn him word for word; whe
                  •…
                (according to Horace and other best lawgiuers to translators) it is the part of euery knowing and iudiciall interpreter, not to follow the number and order of words, but the materiall things themselues, and sentences to weigh diligently; and to clothe and adorne them with words, and such a stile and forme of Oration, as are most apt for the language into which they are conuerted. If I haue not turned him in any place falsly (as all other his interpreters haue in many, and most of his chiefe places;) if I haue not left behind me any of his sentence, elegancie, height, intention, and inuention: if in some few places (especially in my first edition, being done so long since, & following the cōmon tract) I be somthing paraphrasticall & faulty; is it iustice in that poore fault (if they will needs haue it so) to drowne all the rest of my labour? But there is a certaine enuious Windfucker, that houers vp and downe, laboriously engrossing al the aire with his luxurious ambition; and buzzing into euery eare my detraction; affirming I turne Homer out of the Latine onely, &c. that sets all his associates, and the whole rabble of my maligners on their wings with him, to beare about my empaire, and poyson my reputation. One that, as he thinkes, whatsoeuer he giues to others, he takes from himselfe; so whatsoeuer he takes from others, he addes to himselfe. One that in this kinde of robberie, doth like Mercurie, that stole good, and supplied it with counterfeit bad

still. One like the two gluttons, Phyloxenus and Gnatho, that would still emptie their noses in the dishes they loued, that no man might eate but themselues. For so this Castrill, with too hote a liuer, and lust after his owne glorie, and to de
                  •…
               oure all himselfe, discourageth all appetites to the fame of another. I haue striken, single him as you can. Nor note I this, to cast any rubbes, or plasters out of the particular way of mine owne estimation with the world; for I resolue this with the wilfully obscure:
            
               
                  Sine honore viuam, nullo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      numero ero.
               
               Without mens honors I will liue, and make
               No number, in the manlesse course they take.
            
            But to discourage (if it might be) the generall detraction of industrious, and wellmeaning vertue. I know I cannot too much diminish, and deiect my selfe; yet that passing little that I am, God onely knowes; to whose euer-implored respect, and comfort, I onely submit me. If any further edition of these my sillie endeuors shall chance, I will mend what is amisse (God assisting me) and amplifie my harsh Comment to Homers farre more right, and mine owne earnest, and ingenious loue of him. Notwithstanding, I know, the curious, and e
                  •…
               uious, will neuer sit downe satisfied. A man may go ouer and ouer, till he come ouer and ouer; and his paines be onely his recompence: euery man is so loded with his particular head; and nothing in all respects perfect, but what is perceiued by few. Homer himselfe hath met with my fortune, in many maligners; and therefore may my poore-selfe, put vp with motion. And so little I will respect malignitie; and so much encourage my selfe with mine owne knowne strength, and what I finde within me, of comfort, and confirmance; (examining my selfe throughout, with a farre more iealous and seuere eye, then my greatest enemie; imitating this:Iudex ipse sui totum se explorat ad vnguem, &c.)That after these Iliads, I will (God lending me life and any meanest meanes) with more labour then I haue lost here, and all vncheckt alacritie, diue through his Odysses. Nor can I forget here (but with all heartie gratitude remember) my most ancient, learned, and right noble friend M. Richard Stapilton, first most des
                  •…
               rtfull mouer in the frame of our Homer. For which (and much other most ingen
                  •…
               ous and vtterly vndeserued desert) God make me amply his requiter; and be his honorable families speedy and full restorer. In the meane space, I intreate my impartiall, and iudiciall Reader; that all things to the quicke he will not pare; but humanely and nobly pardon defects; and if he find any thing perfect, receiue it vnenuied.
            
               Of Homer.
               OF his countrey, and time, the difference is so infinite amongst all writers, that there is no question (in my coniecture) of his antiquitie beyond all. To which opinion, the nearest I will cite; Adam Cedrenus placeth him vnder Dauids & Solomons rule; & the destruction of Troy vnder Sauls. And of one age with Solomon, Michael Glycas Siculus affirmeth him. Aristotle (in tertio de Poetica) affirmes he was borne in the Ile of Io, begot of a Genius, one of them that vsed to dance with the Muses, and a virgine of that Ile, comprest by that Genius, who being quicke with child (for shame of the deed) came into a place called Aegina, and there was taken of theeues, and brought to Smyrna, to Moeon king of the Lydians, who for her beautie maried her. After which, she walking neare the flood Meletes; on that shore being ouertaken with the throwes of her deliuerie, she brought foorth Homer, and instantly

died. The infant was receiued by Moeon, and brought vp as his owne till his death; which was not long after. And according to this, when the Lydians in Smyrna, were afflicted by the Aeolians, and thought fit to leaue the citie, the Captaines by a Herald willing all to go out that would, and follow them; Homer (being a little child) said he would also 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   (that is, sequi.) And of that, (for Melesigenes, which was his first name) he was called Homer. These Plutarch.
               
               The varieties of other reports touching this, I omit for length: and in place thereof, thinke it not vnfit to insert something of his praise, and honour amongst the greatest of all Ages; not that our most absolute of himselfe, needs it; but that such autenticall testimonies of his splendor and excellence, may the better conuince the malice of his maligners.
               First, what kind of person Homer was, (saith Spondanus) his statue teacheth; which Cedrenus describeth. The whole place we will describe, that our relation may hold the better coherence; as Nylander conuerts it. Then was the Octagonon at Constantinople consumed with fire; and the Bath of Seuerus, that bore the name of Ze
                        •…
                     xippus: in which there was much varietie of spectacle, and splendor of Arts; the workes of all Ages being conferred, and preserued there, of Marble, Rockes, Stones, and Images of Brasse; to which, this onely wanted; that the soules of the persons they presented, were not in them. Amongst these master peeces, and all-witexceeding workmanships, stood Homer, as he was in 
                     •…
                  is age; thoughtfull, and musing: his hands folded beneath his bosome; his beard vntrimmed, and hanging downe; the haire of his head in like sort thinne on both sides before; his face with age and cares of the world (as these imagine) wrinkled and austere; his nose proportioned to his other parts; his eyes fixt or turned vp to his eye browes, like one blind (as it is reported he was) not born blind (saith Vell. Paterculus) which he that imagins (saith he) is blind of all senses. Vpon his vnder coate he was attired with a loose robe; and at the base beneath his feet, a brazen chaine hung. This was the statue of Homer, which in that conflagration perished. Another renowned statue of his (saith Lucian in his Encomion of Demosthenes) stood in the temple of Ptolomy, on the vpper hand of his own statue. Cedrenus likewise remembreth a Library in the Pallace of the king, at Constantinople, that contained a thousand a hundred and twentie bookes: amongst which there was the gut of a Dragon, of an hundred and twentie foote long; in which, in letters of gold; the Iliads, and Odysses of Homer were inscribed: which miracle (in Basiliscus the Emperours time) was consumed with fire.
               For his respect amongst the most learned; Plato in Ione calleth him, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Poetarum omnium, & praestantissimum, & diuinissimum. In Phaedone, 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , diuinum Poetam, and in Theaetetus, Socrates citing diuerse of the most wise and learned for confirmation of his there held opinion, (as Protagoras, Heraclitus, Empedocles, Epicharmus, and Homer) who (saith Socrates) against such an armie, being all led by such a Captaine as Homer, dares fight or resist, but he will be held ridiculous? This for Scaliger, and all Homers enuious and ignorant detractors. Why therefore, Plato in another place banisheth him with all other Poets out of his Common-wealth, dealing with them like a Politician indeed; vse men, and then cast them off, (though Homer he thinks fit to send out crowned and annointed;) I see not, since he maketh still such honorable mention of him; and with his verses, (as with precious Iemmes▪) euerie where enchaceth his writings. So Aristotle, continually celebrateth him. Nay euen amongst the Barbarous, not onely Homers name, but his Poems haue bene recorded and reuerenced. The Indians
                  
(saith Aelianus var. hist. lib. 12. cap. 48.) in their owne tongue had Homers Poems translated and sung. Nor those Indians alone, but the kings of Persia. And amongst the Indians (of all the Greek Poets, Homer being euer first in estimatiō;) whensoeuer they vsed any diuine duties according to the custome of their housholds and hospitaliies, they inuited euer, Apollo, and Homer. Lucian in his Encomion of Demosth. affirmeth all Poets celebrated Homers birth day; & sacrificed to him the first fruites of their verses. So Thersagoras answereth Lucian, he vsed to do himselfe. Alex. Paphius (saith Eustathius) deliuers Homer, as borne of Egyptian Parents; D
                        •…
                     asagoras being his father, and Aethra his mother; his nurse being a certaine Prophetesse, and the daughter of Oris, Isis Priest; from whose breasts, oftentimes, honey flowed in the mouth of the infant. After which, in the night, he vttered nine seuerall notes or voices of fowles, viz. of a Swallow, a Peacocke, a Doue, a Crow, a Partrich, a red-Shank, a Stare, a Blackebird, and a Nightingale: and being a little boy, was found playing in his bed with nine Doues. Sibylla being at a feast of his Parents, was taken with sodaine furie; and sung verses, whose beginning was 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  polynice, signifying much victorie; in which song also she called him 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   great in glorie; and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , signifying gyrlond-seller; and commanded him to build a temple to the Pegridarij, that is, to the Muses. Herodotus affirmes, that Phaemius (teaching a publicke schoole at Smyrna) was his maister; and Dionysius in in 56. oration saith, Socrates was Homers scholler. In short; what he was, his workes shew most truly; to which (if you please) go on and examine him.
            
         
         
            
            Faults escaped.
            In the margin. page 176. for pastime, reade past time. Page 177. for whom, reade who. Page 188 in the margine for 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , reade 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . p. 195. for totas, reade totus. p. 197. for backe, reade backs: for possessions, reade possession. p. 200. for defiderat, reade desideat. p. 202. for inconstant, reade in constant. in the same p. for through r. though. p. 205. in the margin, ioyne the disioyned note of Iup. Nept. Pluto. p. 213. for hill, r. wood. p. 214. for gainst, r. against. p. 223. for a bowle of mightie wine, reade a mightie bowle of wine. p. 226. for heads, r. head. p. 141. for nere more, r. now no. p. 244. in the margin, for imitable, r. inimitable. in the same p. for ofs, r. oft. p. 248. at the end. for or, r. our. p. 250. for t'Aiaces this, r. th'Aiaces. p. 256. for friend, reade fiend. p. 263. for the spritely, r. their spritely. in the same p. for were, r. where. p. 264. for larg'd, r. lardge. p. 266. in the Comment, for to which, r. which. in the same. for the eares, r. th'eares. p. 284. for steeles, r. seeles. p. 290. for with blinde, r. which blinde. p. 293. for hands, r. sands. p. 303, for all the feete, r. at the feete. p. 306. for fetcht, r. 
                  •…
               tch. p. 324. at the end, for Teucer, reade Teucers.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE FIRST BOOKE OF HOMERS ILIADS.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  
                     APollos Priest to th' Argiue sleete doth bring
                  Gifts for his daughter, prisoner to the King;
                  For which, her tenderd freedome, he intreats.
                  But, being dismist, with contumelious threats,
                  At Phoebus hands, by vengefull prayer he seekes,
                  To haue a plague inflicted on the Greekes.
                  Which had, Achilles doth a Councell cite,
                  Emboldning Chalchas, in the Kings despite,
                  To tell the truth, why they were punisht so.
                  From hence their fierce and deadly strife did grow.
                  For wrong in which, Aeacides so raues,Aeacides, sirname of Achilles being the grand child of Aeacus.
                  
                  That Goddesse Thetis, from her throne of waues,
                  (Ascending heauen) of Ioue assistance wonne,
                  To plague the Greekes, by absence of her Sonne:
                  And make the Generall himselfe repent,
                  To wrong so much his Armies Ornament.
                  This, found by Iuno, she with Ioue contends,
                  Till Vulcan, with heauens cup, the quarell ends.
               
            
            
               Another Argument.
               
                  
                     Alpha, the prayer of Chryses, sings:
                  The Armies plague: the strife of Kings.
               
            
            
               
                  His proposition and inuocation.
                  
                     AChilles banefull wrath resound, O Goddesse, that imposd,
               Infinite sorrowes on the Greekes; and many braue soules losd
               From breasts Heroique: sent them farre, to that a inuisible caue
               That no light comforts: & their lims, to dogs & vultures gaue.
               To b  all which, Ioues will gaue effect; c from whom, first strife begunne,
               Betwixt Atrides,
                  Atrides sirname of Agamemnon; being son to Atreus. Eris the Goddes of contention. Narration. king of men; and Thetis godlike Sonne.
            
            
               What God gaue Eris their command, and op't that fighting veine?
               
                  Ioues, and Latonas Sonne; who fir'd, against the king of men,
               For contumelie, showne his Priest; infectious sicknesse sent,
               To plague the armie; and to death, by troopes, the souldiers went.
               Occasiond thus; Chryses the Priest, came to the fleetc, to buy
               For presents of vnualued price, his daughters libertie.
               The golden scepter, and the crowne, of Phoebus, in his hands
               Proposing; and made suite to all, but most to the Commands
               Of both th' Atrides,
                  Agamemnon & Menelaus: called the Atrides being brothers, & both sonnes to Atreus. who most rulde. Great Atreus sonnes (said he)
               And all ye wel-grieu'd Greekes; the Gods whose habitations be
               In heauenly houses, grace your powers, with Priams razed towne,
               
                  And grant ye happy conduct home: to winne which wisht renowne
               Of Ioue, by honouring his sonne (farre-shooting Phoebus) daine
               For these fit presents to dissolu
                     •…
                  , the ransomeable chaineChryses, the Priest of Apollo, to the Atrides, and other Greekes.
               
               Of my lou'd daughters seruitude. The Greekes entirely gaue
               Glad d acclamations, for signe, that their desires would haue
               The graue Priest reuerenc'd, and his gifts, of so much price embrac'd.
               The Generall yet, bore no such mind, but viciously disgrac'd,
               With violent termes, the Priest, and said: Doterd, auoid our fleete,
               Where lingring be not found by me, nor thy returning feeteAgamemnons 
                        〈◊〉
                      repulse of Chryses.
               
               Let euer visite vs againe, lest nor thy Godheads crowne,
               Nor scepter saue thee. Her thou seekst, I still will hold mine owne,
               Till age defloure her. In our court, at Argos (farre transferd
               From her lou'd countrie) she shall plie, her web, and see
                     See my bed made, it may be englisht: the word is 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , which signifies cōtra stan tem; as standing of one side, opposite to another on the other side which yet others 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      capessentem, & adornantem; which, since it showes best to a reader, I follow. The prayer of Chryses to Apollo.
                   prepard
               (With all fit ornaments) my bed. Incense me then no more,
               But, (if thou wilt be safe) be gone. This said, the sea-beate shore,
               (Obeying his high will) the Priest, trod off with haste, and feare.
               And walking silent, till he left, farre off his enemies eare;
               
                  Phoebus (faire-haird Latonas sonne) he stird vp, with a vow,
               To this sterne purpose: Heare, thou God, that bear'st the siluer bow,
               That Chrysa guard'st, rulest Tenedos, with strong hand, and the e round
               Of Cilla most diuine dost walke: O Smintheus, if crownd
               With thankfull offerings thy rich Phane, I euer saw, or fir'd.
               Fat thighs of oxen, and of goates, to thee: this grace desir'd
               Vouchsafe to me: paines for my teares, let these rude Greekes repay,
               Forc'd with thy arrowes. Thus he praid, and Phoebus heard him pray;
               And vext at heart, downe from the tops, of steepe heauen stoopt; his bow
               And quiuer couerd round; his hands, did on his shoulders throw;
               And, of the angrie deitie, the arrowes as he mou'd
               Ratl'd about him. Like the night, he rang'd the host, and rou'd
               (Apart the fleete set:) terribly, with his hard-loosing hand
               His siluer bow twang'd, and his shafts, did first, the Mules command,
               And swift hounds: then the Greekes themselues, his deadly arrowes shot.Apollo sends the plague among the Greekes.
               
               The fires of death went neuer out, nine daies his shafts flew hot
               About the armie, and the tenth, Achilles cald a court
               Of all the Greeks: heauensIuno. white-arm'd Queene, (who euery where cut short
               Beholding her lou'd Greeks by death) suggested it: and he
               (All met in one) arose, and said: Atrides, Now I seeAchilles to A
                     
                        •…
                     .
               
               We must be wandering againe, flight must be still our stay,
               (If flight can saue vs now) at once, sicknesse and battell lay
               Such strong hand on vs. Let vs aske, some Prophet, Priest, or proue
               Some dreame interpreter (for dreames, are often sent from Ioue)
               Why Phoebus is so much incenst? If vnperformed vowes
               He blames in vs; or Hecatombs; and if these knees he bowes
               To death, may yeeld his graues no more; but offering all supply
               Of sauours, burnt from lambes, and goates; auert his feruent eye,
               And turne his temperate. Thus he sate; and then stood vp to them
               
                  Chalcas, sirnam'd Thestorides, of Augures, the supreme:Calchas the Prophet.
               
               He knew things present, past, to come; and rulde the Equinpage,
               
                  Of th'Argiue fleete to Ilion, for his Prophetique rage
               Giuen by Apollo: who well seene, in th'ill they felt, proposd
               This to Achilles: Ioues belou'd? would thy charge see disclosd,Calchas to Achilles.
               
               The secret of Apollos wrath? then couenant, and take oth,
               To my discouerie; that with words, and powrefull actions both,
               Thy strength will guard the truth, in me; because I well conceiue
               That he whose Empire gouerns all, whom all the Grecians giue,
               Confirm'd obedience, will be mou'd; and then you know the state,
               Of him that moues him. When a king, hath once markt for his hate,
               A man inferior; though that day, his wrath seemes to digest
               Th'offence he takes; yet euermore, he rakes vp in his brest,
               Brands of quicke anger; till reuenge, hath quencht to his desire,
               The fire reserued. Tell me then, if, whatsoeuer, ire
               Suggests, in hurt of me, to him; thy valour will preuent?
            
            
               
                  Achilles answerd; All thou know'st, speake, and be confident:Achilles to Chalchas.
               
               For by Apollo, Ioues belou'd (to whom, performing vowes,
               O Calchas, for the state of Greece; thy spirit Prophetique showes
               Skils that direct vs) not a man, of all these Grecians here,
               (I liuing, and enioying the light, shot through this flowrie sphere)
               Shall touch thee, with offensiue hands; though Agamemnon be
               The man in question, that doth boast, the mightiest Emperie,
               Of all our armie. Then tooke heart, the Prophet vnreprou'd,
               And said: They are not vnpaid vowes; nor Hecatombs, that mou'd,
               The God against vs: his offence, is for his Priest, empaird,Calchas discouers to the Greekes the cause of their plague.
               
               By Agamemnon; that refusd, the present he preferd,
               And kept his daughter. This is cause, why heauens farre-darter darts,
               These plagues amongst vs; and this still, will emptie in our hearts
               His deathfull quiuer, vncontaind; till to her loued sire,
               The blacke-eyd damsell be resign'd; no redemptorie hire,
               Tooke for her freedome; not a gift; but all the ransome quit;
               And she conuaide, with sacrifice; till her enfranchisd feete,
               Treade Chrysa vnder: then the God (so pleasd) perhaps we may
               Moue to remission. Thus he sate; and vp, the great in sway,
               Heroique Agamemnon rose; eagerly bearing all:
               His minds seate ouercast with fumes: an anger generall,
               Fill'd all his faculties; his eyes, sparckl'd like kindling fire;
               Which, sternly cast vpon the Priest, thus vented he, his ire;
            
            
               Prophet of ill? For neuer good, came from thee towards me;Agamemnon incenst, to Calchas
               
               Not to a words worth: euermore, thou tookst delight to be
               Offensiue in thy Auguries; which thou continuest still;
               Now casting thy prophetique gall, and vouching all our ill
               (Shot from Apollo,) is imposd; since I refusd the prise
               Of faire Chryseis libertie; which would in no worth rise,
               To my rate of her selfe; which moues, my vowes to haue her home;
               Past Clytemnestra louing her; that grac't my nuptiall roome,
               With her virginitie, and flowre. Nor aske her merits lesse,
               For person, disposition, wit, and skill in housewiferies.
               And yet, for all this, she shall go; if more conducible
               
                  That course be, then her holding here. I rather wish the weale
               Of my lou'd armie, then the death. Prouide yet, instantly,
               Supplie for her, that I alone, of all our royaltie,
               Lose not my winnings: tis not fit, ye see all, I lose mine
               Forc't by another: see as well, some other may resigne,
               His Prise to me. To this, replied, the swift-foote God-like sonneAchilles to Agamemnon.
               
               Of Thetis, thus: King of vs all, in all ambition;
               Most couetouse of all that breath; why should the great-soul'd Greekes
               Supply thy lost prise, out of theirs? nor what thy auarice seekes,
               Our common treasurie can find; so little it doth guard
               Of what our rac'd towns, yeelded vs; of all which, most is shar'd,
               And giuen our souldiers; which againe, to take into our hands
               Were ignominious, and base. Now then, since God commands,
               Part with thy most-lou'd prise to him: not any one of vs,
               Exacts it of thee: yet we all, all losse thou sufferst thus,
               Will treble; quadruple in gaine, when Iupiter bestowes
               The sacke of well-wall'd Troy on vs; which by his word, he owes.
            
            
               Do not deceiue your selfe with wit, (he answerd) God-like man;
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to Ahilles.
               
               Though your good name may colour it; tis not your swift foote can
               Out runne me here; nor shall the glosse, set on it, with the God,
               Perswade me to my wrong. Woulst thou, maintaine in sure abode
               Thine owne pris
                     •…
                  , and sleight me of mine? Resolue this: if our friends
               (As fits in equitie, my worth) will right me with amends,
               So rest it; otherwise my selfe, will enter personally
               On thy prise; that of Ithacus, or Aiax, for supply;
               Let him, on whom I enter, rage. But come we'le order these,
               Hereafter, and in other place. Now put to sacred seas
               Our blacke saile; in it rowers put, in it fit sacrifise;
               And to these, I will make ascend, my so much enuied prise,
               Bright-cheekt Chryseis. For conduct, of all which, we must chuse
               A chiefe out of our counsellors; thy seruice we must vse,
               
                  Idomeneus; Aiax, thine, or thine, wise Ithacus;
               
               Or thine, thou terriblest of men, thou sonne of Peleus;
               
               Which fittest were, that thou mightst see, these holy acts performd,
               For which thy cunning zeale so pleades; and he whose bow thus stormd
               For our offences, may be calmd. Achilles, with a frowne,Achilles to Agamemnon.
               
               Thus answerd: O thou impudent! of no good but thine owne,
               Euer respectfull; but of that, with all craft, couetous;
               With what heart can a man attempt, a seruice dangerous,
               Or at thy voice be spirited, to flie vpon a foe,
               Thy mind thus wretched? For my selfe, I was not iniur'd so,
               By any Troian, that my powers, should bid them any blowes;
               In nothing beare they blame of me. Phthia, whose bosome flowes
               With corne and people, neuer felt, empaire of her increase,
               By their inuasion: hils enow, and farre-resounding seas,
               Powre out their shades, and deepes, betweene: but thee thou frontlesse man,
               We follow, and thy triumphs make, ▪with bonfires of our bane:
               Thine, and thy brothers vengeance sought (thou dogs eyes) of this Troy
               
                  By our exposd liues; whose deserts, thou neither dost employ,
               With honour, nor with care. And now, thou threatst to force from me,
               The fruite of my sweate, which the Greekes, gaue all; and though it be
               (Compar'd with thy part, then snatcht vp) nothing: 
                     •…
                  or euer is,
               At any sackttowne: but of fight, (the fetcher in of this)
               My hands haue most share: in whose toyles, when I haue emptied me
               Of all my forces; my amends, in liberalitie
               (Though it be little) I accept, and turne pleasd to my tent:
               And yet that little, thou esteemst, too great a continent
               In thy incontinent auarice. For Phthya therefore now
               My course is; since tis better farre, then here endure, that thou
               Should
                     •…
                   still be rauishing my right, draw my whole treasure drie;
            
            
               And adde dishonor. He replied: If thy heart serue thee, flie:Agamemnon to Ahilles.
               
               Stay not for my cause; others here, will aid, and honor me;
               If not, yet Ioue I know, is sure; that counsellor is he
               That I depend on: as for thee, of all our Ioue-kept kings,
               Thou still art most my enemie: strifes, battels, bloodie things,
               Make thy blood feasts still. But if strength, that these moods build vpon,
               Flow in thy nerues; God gaue thee it; and so tis not thine owne,
               But in his hands still: what then lifts, thy pride in this, so hie?
               Home with thy fleete, and Myrmidons; vse there their Emperie,
               Command not here: I weigh thee not, nor meane to magnifie
               Thy rough hewne rages; but in stead, I thus farre threaten thee:
               Since Phoebus needs will force from me, Chryseis; she shall go;
               My ships, and friends, shall waft her home: but I will imitate so,
               His pleasure; that mine owne shall take, in person, from thy tent
               Bright-cheekt Briseis; and so tell, thy strength how eminent
               My powre is, being compar'd with thine: all other, making feare
               To vaunt equalitie with me; or in this proud kind beare
               Their beards against me. Thetis sonne, at this stood vext; his heartAchilles angri
                        •…
                      with 
                        •…
                     
                     non.
               
               Bristled his bosome, and two waies, drew his discursiue part;
               If from his thigh, his sharpe sword drawne, he should make roome about
               
                  Atrides, person slaughtring him; or sit his anger out
               And curb his spirit. While these thoughts, striu'd in his bloud and mind,
               And he his sword drew: downe from heauen, Athenia
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . stoopt, and shind
               About his temples; being sent, by th'Iuorie-wristed queene
               
                  Saturnia; who, out of her heart, had euer louing bene,
               And carefull for the good of both. She stood behind, and tooke
               
                  Achilles by the yellow curles; and onely gaue her looke
               To him apparance: not a man, of all the rest could see.
               He, turning backe his eye; amaze, strooke euerie facultie;
               Yet straight, he knew her, by her eyes; so terrible they were
               Sparkling with ardor, and thus spake: Thou seed of Iupiter,
                  Achilles to 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Why com'st thou? to behold his pride, that bosts our Emperie?
               Then witnesse, with it, my reuenge; and see that insolence die,
               That liues to wrong me. She replied, I come from heauen to see
               Thy anger settled: if thy soule, will vse her soueraigntie,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to Achilles.
               
               In fit reflection. I am sent, from Iuno, whose affects,
               
                  Stand heartily inclind to both: Come, giue vs both respects,
               And ceasse contention: draw no sword; vse words, and such as may
               Be bitter to his pride, but iust; for trust in what I say,
               A time shall come, when thrice the worth, of that he forceth now,
               He shall propose for recompence, of these wrongs: therefore throw
               Reines on thy passions, and serue vs. He answerd: Though my heart
               Burne in iust anget; yet my soule, must conquer th'angrie part,Achilles Palladi, hoc est, rationi obsequitur.
               
               And yeeld you conquest. Who subdues, his earthly part for heauen,
               Heauen to his prayres subdues his wish. This said, her charge was giuen,
               Fit honor: in his siluer hilt, he held his able hand,
               And forc't his broad sword vp; and vp, to heauen did reascend
               
                  Minerua, who in Ioues high roofe, that beares the rough shield, tooke
               Her place with other deities. She gone, againe forsooke,
               Patience his passion; and no more, his silence could confine
               His wrath, that this broad language gaue: Thou euer steep't in wine,Achilles againe infurie.
               
               Dogs-face? with heart, but of a Ha
                     •…
                  t? that nor in th'open eye
               Of fight, dar'st thrust into a prease; nor with our noblest, lie
               In secret ambush. These works seeme, too full of death for thee;
               Tis safer farre, in th'open host, to dare an iniurie,
               To any crosser of thy lust. Thou subiect-eating king,
               Base spirits thou gouernst; or this wrong, had bene the last fowle thing
               Thou euer author'dst: yet I vow, and by a great oath sweare,
               Euen by this scepter; that as this, neuer againe shall beare
               Greene leaues, or branches, nor increase, with any growth, his sise;This simile Virgil directly translates.
               
               Nor did, since first it left the hils, and had his faculties
               And ornaments bereft, with iron; which now to other end
               Iudges of Greece beare; and their lawes, receiu'd from Ioue, defend;
               (For which, my oath to thee is great.) So whensoeuer need
               Shall burne with thirst of me, thy host, no prayres shall euer breed
               Affection in me, to their aid; though well deserued woes
               Afflict thee for them; when to death, man-slaughtring Hector throwes
               Whole troopes of them; and thou torment'st, thy vext mind with conceit
               Of thy rude rage now: and his wrong, that most deseru'd the right
               Of all thy armie. Thus he threw, his scepter gainst the ground,
               With golden studs stucke; and tooke seate. Atrides breast was drownd
               In rising choler. Vp to both, sweet-spoken Nestor stood,
               The cunning Pylian Orator; whose tongue powrd foorth a floodNestors age and eloqu
                        •…
                     e.
               
               Of more-then-hony sweet discourse: two ages were increast
               Of diuerse-languag'd men; all borne, in his time, and deceast
               In sacred Pylos, where he reignd, amongst the third-ag'd men:
               He (well seene in the world) aduisd, and thus exprest it then.
            
            
               O Gods, our Greeke earth will be drownd, in iust teares; rapefull Troy,Nes
                        •…
                     or to Achil les, and Agame
                        •…
                     n.
               
               Herking, and all his sonnes, will make, as iust a mocke, and ioy
               Of these disiunctions; if of you, that all our host excell,
               In counsell, and in skill of fight, they heare this: Come, repell
               These yong mens passions: y'are not both, (put both your yeares in one)
               So old as I: I liu'd long since, and was companion
               With men superior to you both: who yet would euer heare,
               
                  My counsels with respect. My eyes, yet neuer witnesse were,Decorum 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Nor euer will be, of such men, as then delighted them;
               
                  Perithous, Exadius, and god-like Polypheme;
               
               
                  Ceneus, and Dryas, prince of men; Aegean Theseus.
               
               A man, like heauens immortals formd; all, all most vigorous,
               Of all men, that euen those daies bred; most vigorous men, and fought
               With beasts most vigorous; mountain beasts, (for mē in strength were nought
               Matcht with their forces) fought with them; and brauely fought them downe;
               Yet euen with these men, I conuerst, being cald to the renowne
               Of their societies, by their suites, from Pylos farre, to fight
               In th'Asian kingdome; and I fought, to a degree of might
               That helpt euen their mights; against such, as no man now would dare,
               To meete in conflict; yet euen these, my counsels still would heare,
               And with obedience, crowne my words. Giue you such palme to them;
               Tis better, then to wreath your wraths. Atrides? giue not streame
               To all thy powre, nor force his prise; but yeeld her still his owne,
               As all men else do. Nor do thou, encounter with thy crowne
               (Great sonne of Peleus) since no king, that euer Ioue allowd
               Grace of a scepter, equals him. Suppose thy nerues endowd
               With strength superior, and thy birth, a verie Goddesse gaue;
               Yet he of force, is mightier; since, what his owne nerues haue
               Is amplified, with iust command, of many other. King of men
               Command thou then thy selfe; and I, with my prayres will obtaine,
               Grace of Achilles, to subdue, his furie; whose parts are
               Worth our intreatie; being chiefe checke, to all our ill in warre.
            
            
               All this, good father (said the king) is comely, and good right;Agamemnon to Nestor.
               
               But this man breakes all such bounds; he, affects past all men height.
               All would in his powre hold, all make, his subiects, giue to all
               His hote will for their temperate law: all which he neuer shall
               Perswade at my hands. If the Gods, haue giuen him the great stile
               Of ablest souldier; made they that, his licence to reuile
               Men with vile language? Thetis soone, preuented him, and said:
            
            
               Fearefull and vile I might be thought, if the exactions laidAchilles to Agamemnon.
               
               By all meanes on me I should beare. Others command to this,
               Thou shalt, not me; or if thou dost, farre my free spirit is
               From seruing thy command. Beside, this I affirme (affoord
               Impression of it in thy soule) I will not vse my sword
               On thee, or any, for a wench: vniustly though thou tak'st
               The thing thou gau'st; but all things else, that in my ship thou mak'st
               Greedie suruey of, do not touch, without my leaue; or do
               Adde that acts wrong to this; that these, may see that outrage too;
               And then comes my part: then be sure, thy bloud vpon my lance,
               Shall flow in vengeance. These high termes, these two at variance
               Vsd to each other; left their seates, and after them aroseThe Grecian counc
                        •…
                     ll dissolued.
               
               The whole court. To his tents and ships, with friends and souldiers, goes
               Angrie Achilles. Atreus sonne, the swift ship lancht, and put
               Within it twentie chosen row'rs: within it likewise shut
               The Hecatomb, t'appease the God. Then causd to come abord
               
                  Faire cheekt Chryseis. For the chiefe, he in whom Pallas pourd
               Her store of counsels, (Ithacus) aboord went last, and thenChriseis sent to her father.
               
               The moist waies of the sea they saild. And now the king of men
               Bad all the hoast to sacrifice. They sacrific'd and, cast
               The offall of all to the deepes: the angrie God they grac't
               With perfect Hecatombs; some buls, some goates along the shore
               Of the vnfruitfull sea, inflam'd. To heauen the thicke fumes bore
               Enwrapped sauours. Thus though all, the politique king made shew
               Respects to heauen; yet he himselfe, all that time did pursue
               His owne affections. The late iarre, in which he thunderd threats
               Against Achilles, still he fed, and his affections heats
               Thus vented to Talthybius, and graue Eurybates
               
               Heralds, and ministers of trust, to all his messages.
            
            
               Haste to Achilles tent, where take, Briseis hand, and bringAgamemnon to Talthybius and Eurybates his Heralds.
               
               Her beauties to vs; if he faile, to yeeld her; say your king
               Will come himselfe with multitudes, that shall the horribler
               Make both his presence and your charge, that so he dares deferre.
            
            
               This said, he sent them with a charge, of hard condition.
               They went vnwillingly, and trod, the fruitlesse seas shore: soone
               They reacht the nauie and the tents, in which the quarter lay
               Of all the Myrmidons, and found, the chiefe Chiefe in their sway,
               Set at his blacke barke in his tent. Nor was Achilles glad
               To see their presence; nor themselues, in any glorie, had
               Their message; but with reuerence stood, and fear'd th'offended king.
               Askt not the dame; nor spake a word. He yet, well knowing the thing
               That causd their coming; grac'd them thus: Heralds, ye men that beareAchill
                        •…
                     s Princely receipt of the Heralds.
               
               The messages of men and Gods; y'are welcome, come ye neare.
               I nothing blame you, but your king; tis he, I know, doth send
               You for Briseis; she is his. Patroclus? honourd friend,
               Bring 
                     •…
                  oorth the damsell; and these men, let leade her, to their Lord.
               But, Heralds, be you witnesses, before the most ador'd;
               Before vs mortals, and before, your most vngentle king,
               Of what I suffer: that if warre, euer hereafter bring
               My aide in question; to auert, any seuerest bane,
               It brings on others; I am scusde, to keepe my aide in wane,
               Since they mine honour. But your king, in tempting mischiefe, raues;
               Nor sees at once, by present things, the future; how like waues,
               Ils follow ils; iniustices, being neuer so secure
               In present times; but after plagues, euen then, are seene as sure.
               Which yet he sees not; and so sooths, his present lust; which checkt,
               Would checke plagues future; and he might, in succouring right, protect
               Such as fight for his right at fleete; they still in safetie fight,
               That fight still iustly. This speech vsd, Patr
                        •…
                     clus did the rite
               His friend commanded; and brought forth, Briseis from her tent;Briseis led to Agamemnon.
               
               Gaue her the heralds, and away, to th'Achiue ships they went:
               She sad, and scarce for griefe, could go; her loue, all friends' forsooke,
               And wept for anger. To the shore, of th'old sea, he betooke
               Himselfe alone; and casting forth, vpon the purple sea,
               
                  His wet eyes, and his hands to heauen, aduancing; this sad plea,
               Made to his mother: Mother, since, you brought me forth to breath,Achilles to Thetis.
               
               So short a life: Olympius, had good right to bequeath
               My short life, honor; yet that right, he doth in no degree:
               But lets Atrides do me shame, and force that prise from me
               That all the Greekes gaue: this with teares, he vtterd, and she heard;
               Set with her old sire, in his deepes; and instantly appeard,
               Vp, from the gray sea, like a cloud: sate by his side, and said;
            
            
               Why weepes my sonne? what grieues thee? speake; conceale not what hath laidThetis to Achilles.
               
               Such hard hand on thee: let both know. He (sighing like a storme)
               Replied: Thou dost know; why should I, things knowne; againe informe?Achilles to Thetis.
               
               We marcht to Thebs, the sacred towne, of king Eetion,
               
               Sackt it, and brought to fleete the spoile, which euerie valiant sonne
               Of Greece, indifferently shar'd. Atrides had for share,
               Faire-cheekt Chryseis; after which, his priest, that shoots so farre,
               
                  Chryses, the faire Chryseis sire, arriu'd at th'Achiue fleete,
               With infinite ransome; to redeeme, the deare imprison'd feete,
               Of his faire daughter. In his hands, he held Apollos crowne,
               And golden scepter; making suite, to euerie Grecian sonne,
               But most, the sonnes of Atreus, (the others orderers)
               Yet they least heard him; all the rest, receiu'd with reuerend eares,
               The motion: both the Priest, and gifts, gracing; and holding worth
               His wisht acceptance. Atreus sonne, yet (vext) commanded forth
               With rude termes, Phoebus reuerend Priest: who, angrie, made retreat,
               And prayd to Phoebus; in whose grace, he standing passing great,
               Got his petition. The God, an ill shaft sentabrode,
               That tumbl'd downe the Greekes in heapes. The host had no abode,
               That was notvisited; we askt, a Prophet that well knew
               The cause of all; and from his lips, Apollos prophecies flew;
               Telling his anger. First my selfe, exhorted to appease
               The angerd God; which Atreus sonne, did at the heart displease.
               And vp he stood, vsde threats, performd. The blacke-eyd Greeks sent home
               
                  Chryseis to her sire; and gaue, his God a Hecatome;
               Then, for Briseis to my tents, Atrides Heralds came,
               And tooke her, that the Greekes gaue, all. If then thy powres can frame
               Wreake for thy sonne, affoord it; scale, Olympus, and implore
               
                  Ioue, (if by either word, or fact; thou euer didst restore
               Ioy to his greeu'd heart) now to helpe. I oft haue heard thee vant
               In court of Peleus; that alone, thy hand was conuersant,
               In rescue from a cruell spoile, the blacke-clowd-gathering Ioue;
               
               Whom other Godheads, would haue bound. (The powre whose pace doth moue
               The round earth; heauens great Queene, and Pallas) to whose bandsNeptune, Iuno, and 
                        〈◊〉
                     , confederates in the binding of Iupi
                     
                        •…
                     .
               
               Thou cam'st with rescue; bringing vp, him with the hundred hands,
               To great Olympus; whom the Gods, call Briar
                        •…
                     us; men
               
                  Aegaeon; who, his sire surpast, and was as strong againe;The fiction of 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               And in that grace, sat glad, by Ioue; th'immortals stood dismaid
               At his ascension; and gaue, free passage to his aid.
               Of all this, tell Ioue; kneele to him; embrace his knee, and pray
               
                  (If Trois aide he will euer deigne) that now their forces may
               Beate home the Greeks to fleete, and sea; embruing their retreat
               In slaughter: their pains paying the wreake, of their proud Soueraigns heart:
               And that farre-ruling king may know, from his poore souldiers harms,
               His owne harme fals: his owne, and all, in mine; his best in arms.
            
            
               Her answer she powr'd out in teares: O me, my sonne (said she)Thetis to Achilles.
               
               Why brought I vp, thy being at all; that brought thee forth to be
               Sad subiect of so hard a fate? O would to heauen, that since,
               Thy fate is little, and not long; thou mightst without offence,
               And teares performe it. But to liue, thrall to so sterne a fate
               As grants thee least life; and that least, so most vnfortunate,
               Grieues me t'haue giuen thee any life. But what thou wishest now
               (If Ioue will grant) ile vp, and aske. Olympus crownd with snow
               Ile clime: but sit thou fast at fleete: renounce all warre, and feed
               Thy heart with wrath, and hope of wreake: till which come, thou shalt need,
               A little patience: Iupiter, went yesterday to feastIupiters feast with the Aethiops.
               
               Amongst the blamelesse Aethiops, in th'Oceans deepned breast;
               All Gods attending him: the twelfth, high heauen againe he sees,
               And then his brasse-pau'd court Ile skale; cling to his powrefull knees,
               And doubt not, but to winne thy wish. Thus made she her remoue,
               And left wrath tyring on her sonne, for his enforced loue.
            
            
               
                  Vlysses, with the Hecatomb, arriu'd at Chrysas shore:Nauigation to Chrysa.
               
               And when, amids the hauens deepe mouth, they came to vse the oare,
               They straite stroke saile, then rold them vp, and on the hatches threw.
               The top mast, to the kelsine then, with haleyards downe they drew;
               Then brought the ship to Port with oares, then forked anchor cast,
               And gainst the violence of stormes, for drifting made her fast.
            
            
               All come ashore, they all exposd, the holy Hecatomb
               To angrie Phoebus; and with it, Chryseis welcomd home:
               Whom, to her sire, wise Ithacus, that did at th'altar stand,
               For honour, led; and (spoken thus) resignd her to his hand:
               
                  Chryses, the mightie king of men (great Agamemnon) sends
                     
                        •…
                     lysses to Chryses.
               
               Thy lou'd seed, by my hands, to thine; and to thy God commends
               A Hecatomb, which my charge is, to sacrifice, and seeke
               Our much-sigh-mixt-woe, his recure, inuokt by euerie Greeke.
            
            
               Thus he resignd her, and her sire, receiu'd her, highly ioyd.
               About the well-built altar then, they orderly emploide
               The sacred offring. Washt their hands, tooke salt cakes, and the Priest
               (With hands held vp to heauen) thus praid: O thou that all things seest,
               Fautour of Chrysa, whose faire hand, doth guardfully disposeChryses prayer to Apollo for appeasing the plague.
               
               Celestiall Cilla: gouerning, in all powre, Tenedos:
               O heare thy Priest, and as thy hand, in free grace to my prayers
               Shot feruent plague-shafts through the Greekes: now hearten their affai
                     •…
                  es,
               With health renewd, and quite remoue, th'infection from their blood.
            
            
               He praid; and to his prairs againe, the God propitious stood.
               All, after prayre, cast on salt cakes; drew backe, kild, flaid the beeues,
               Cut out, and dubd with fat their thighes, faire drest with doubled leaues;The sacrifice.
               
               And on them, all the sweet-breads prickt. The Priest, with small sere wood
               
                  Did sacrifice; powr'd on red wine, by whom the yong men stood,
               And turnd (in fiue ranks) spits; on which, (the legs enough) they eateThe banquet.
               
               The inwards; then in giggots cut, the other fit for meate;
               And put to fire; which (rosted well) they drew; the labour done,
               They seru'd the feast in; that fed all, to satisfaction.
            
            
               Desire of meate, and wine, thus quencht, the youths crownd cups of wine
               Drunke off, and fild againe to all. That day was held diuine;
               And spent in Paeans to the Sunne; who heard with pleased eare;
               When whose bright chariot stoopt to sea, and twilight hid the cleare;The euening.
               
               All, soundly on their cables slept, euen till the night was worne:
               And when the Lady of the light, the rosie fingerd morneThe morning.
               
               Rose from the hils: all fresh arose, and to the campe retir'd.
               
                  Apollo with a fore-right wind, their swelling barke inspir'd.
               The top-mast hoisted; milke-white sailes, on his round breast they put;
               The Misens strooted with the gale; the ship her course did cut,
               So swiftly, that the parted waues, against her ribs did rore,
               Which coming to the campe, they drew, aloft the sandie shore:
               Where, laid on stocks, each souldier kept, his quarter, as before.
            
            
               But Pelius sonne, swift-foote Achilles, at his swift ships sate,
               Burning in wrath, nor euer came, to Councels of estate,
               That make men honord: neuer trod, the fierce embattaild field,
               But kept close, and his lou'd heart pin'd: what fight and cries could yeeld,
               Thirsting, at all parts, to the hoast. And now since first he told
               His wrongs to Thetis: twelue faire mornes, their ensignes did vnfold.
               And then the euerliuing Gods, mounted Olympus; Ioue
                  Iupiter and the other Gods from the A
                        •…
                     
                     thiops.
               
               First in ascension. Thetis then, remembred well to moue
               
                  Achilles motion: rose from sea, and by the mornes first light,
               The great heauen, and Olympus climbd; where, in supremest height
               Of all that many-headed hill, she saw the farre-seene sonneIupiter.
               
               Of Saturne, set from all the rest, in his free seate alone:
               Before whom (on her owne knees falne) the knees of Iupiter
               
               Her left hand held, her right his chinne; and thus she did prefer
               Her sonnes petition: Father Ioue, if euer I haue stoodThetis prayer to Iupiter.
               
               Aidfull to thee in word or worke: with this implored good
               Requite my aide: renowne my sonne, since in so short a race,
               (Past others) thou confin'st his life: an insolent disgrace
               Is done him by the king of men: he forc't from him, a prise
               Wonne with his sword. But thou, O Ioue, that art most strong, most wise,
               Honour my sonne, for my sake; adde, strength to the Troians side
               By his sides weaknesse, in his want: and see Troy amplifide
               In conquest, so much, and so long, till Greece may giue againe
               The glorie reft him; and the more, illustrate the free raigne
               Of his wrongd honour. Ioue, at this, sate silent; not a word
               In long space past him: Thetis still, hung on his knee; implor'd
               The second time, his helpe, and said: Grant, or denie my suite,
               Be free in what thou doest; I know, thou canst not sit thus mute,
               For feare of any: speake, denie, that so I may be sure
               Of all heauens Goddesses, tis I, that onely must endure
               
                  Dishonor by thee. Iupiter, the great cloud-gatherer, grieu'd
               With thought of what a world of griefes, this suite askt, being atchieu'd;
               Sweld, sigh'd, and answerd: Works of death, thou vrgest; O at thisIoue to Thetis.
               
               
                  Iuno will storme, and all my powers, inflame with contumelies.
               Euer she wrangles, charging me, in eare of all the Gods,
               That I am partiall still; that I, adde the displeasing oddes
               Of my aide to the Ilians. Be gone then, lest she see:
               Leaue thy request to my care: yet, that trust may hearten thee
               With thy desires grant, and my powre, to giue it act, approue
               How vaine her strife is: to thy praire, my eminent head shall moue,
               Which is the great signe of my will, with all th'immortall states:
               Irreuocable; neuer failes; neuer without the rates
               Of all powers else: when my head bowes, all heads bow with it still;
               As their first mouer; and giues powre, to any worke I will.
            
            
               He said; and his blacke-ey-brows bent; aboue his deathle
                     •…
                  se head,
               Th'Ambrosian curls flowed; great heauen shooke, and both were seuered,
               Their counsels broken. To the depth, ▪of Neptunes kingdome, diu'd,
               
                  Thetis; from heauens height: Ioue arose; and all the Gods receiu'd,
               (All rising from their thrones) their sire; attending to his court;
               None sate, when he rose; none delaid, the furnishing his port,
               Till he came neare: all met with him, and brought him to his throne.
            
            
               Nor sate great Iuno ignorant, when she beheld, alone,
               Old Nereus siluer-footed seed, with Ioue; that she had brought
               Counsels to heauen; and straight her tongue, had teeth in it, that wrought
               This sharpe inuectiue: Who was that, (thou craftiest counsellorIuno to 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Of all the Gods) that so apart, some secret did implore?
               Euer apart from me, thou lou'st, to counsell and decree,
               Things of more close trust then thou thinkst, are fit t'impart to me:
               What euer thou determin'st, I, must euer be denied
               The knowledge of it, by thy will. To her speech, thus replied;Iupiter to Iuno.
               
               The Father, both of men, and Gods: Haue neuer hope to know,
               My whole intentions; though my wife: it fits not, nor would show,
               Well to thine owne thoughts: but what fits, thy womans eare to heare;
               Woman, nor man, nor God, shall know, before it grace thine eare.
               Yet, what apart from men and Gods, I please to know; forbeare
               T'examine, or enquire of that. She with the cowes faire eyes
               (Respected Iuno) this returnd: Austere king of the skies,Iunos replie.
               
               What hast thou vtterd? when did I, before this time, enquire,
               Or sift thy counsels? passing close, you are still; your desire,
               Is seru'd with such care, that I feare, you can scarce vouch the deed
               That makes it publike; being seduc't, by this old sea-Gods seed.
               That could so early vse her knees, embracing thine. I doubt,
               The late act of thy bowed head, was for the working out,
               Of some boone she askt; that her sonne, thy partiall hand would please
               With plaguing others. Wretch (said he) thy subtle ielousies,Ioue incenst.
               
               Are still exploring: my designes, can neuer scape thine eye;
               Which yet thou neuer canst preuent. Thy curiositie
               Makes thee lesse car'd for, at my hands; and horrible the end
               
                  Shall make thy humor. If it be, what thy suspects intend,
               What then? tis my free will it should: to which, let way be giuen,
               With silence; curbe your tongue in time, lest all the Gods in heauen
               Too few be, and too weake to helpe, thy punisht insolence,
               When my inaccessible hands, shall fall on thee. The sence
               Of this high threatning, made her feare; and silent she sate downe,
               Humbling her great heart. All the Gods, in court of Ioue, did frowne
               At this offence giuen: amongst whom, heauens famous Artizan,
               
                  Ephatstus, in his mothers care, this comely speech began:A name of Vulcan.
               
            
            
               Beleeue it, these words will breed wounds, beyond our powres to beare,
               If thus for mortals ye fall out. Ye make a tumult here
               That spoiles our banquet. Euermore, worst matters put downe best.
               But mother, though your selfe be wise, yet let your sonne request
               His wisdome audience. Giue good termes, to our lou'd father Ioue,
               
               For feare he take offence againe; and our kind banquet proue
               A wrathfull battell. If he will, the heauenly lightner can
               Take you, and tosse you from your throne; his power Olympian
               Is so surpassing. Soften then, with gentle speech his splene,
               And drinke to him; I know his heart, will quickly downe againe.
            
            
               This said, arising from his throne, in his lou'd mothers handVultan fils and giues the cup to 
                        •…
                     uno.
               
               He put the double handeld cup, and said: Come, do not stand
               On these crosse humors: suffer, beare, though your great bosome grieue,
               And lest blowes force you: all my aide, not able to relieue
               Your hard condition; though these eyes, behold it, and this heart
               Sorrow to thinke it; tis a taske, too dangerous to take part
               Against Olympius. I my selfe, the proofe of this still feele;
               When other Gods would faine haue helpt, he tooke me by the heeleThe fall of Vulcan.
               
               And hurld me out of heauen: all day, I was in falling downe,
               At length in Lemnos I strooke earth; the likewise falling Sunne,
               And I, together set: my life, almost set too; yet there
               The Sintij cheard, and tooke me vp. This did to laughter cheare
               White-wristed Iuno; who now tooke, the cup of him and smil'd.
               The sweete-peace-making-draught went round; and lame Ephaistus fildVulcan skinker to the Gods.
               
               Nectar, to all the other Gods. A laughter neuer left,
               Shooke all the blessed d
                     •…
                  ities, to see the lame so deft
               At that cup seruice. All that day, euen till the Sunne went downe,
               They banqueted, and had such cheere, as did their wishes crowne.
               Nor had they musicke lesse diuine, Apollo there did touchApollo touches his harpe at the banquet, and the Musessing to it.
               
               His most sweete harpe; to which, with voice, the Muses pleasd as much.
               But when the Suns faire light was set, each Godhead to his house
               Addrest for sleepe, where euerie one, with art most curious
               (By heauens great both-foote halting God) a seuerall roofe had built;
               Euen he to sleepe went, by whose hand, heauen is with lightning guilt.
               (High Ioue) where he had vsd to rest, when sweet sleepe seisd his eyes:
               By him the golden-thron'd Queene slept: the Queene of deities.
            
            
               
               COMMENTARIVS.
               Since I dissent from all other Translators, and Interpreters, that euer assaid exposition of this miraculous Poeme, especially where the diuine rapture is most exempt from capacitie, in Grammarians meerely, and Grammaticall Criticks, and where the inward sense or soule of the sacred Muse is onely within eye-shot of a Poeticall spirits inspection; (lest I be preiudiced with opinion, to dissent of ignorance, or singularity) I am bound by this briefe Comment, to shew I vnderstand how all other extants vnderstand; my reasons why I reiect them; and how I receiue my Author. In which labour, if where all others find discords and dissonances, I proue him entirely harmonious and proportionate: if where they often alter, and flie his originall, I at all parts stand fast, and obserue it: if where they mixe their most pitiful castigations with his praises, I render him without touch, and beyond admiration: (though truth in her verie nakednesse sits in so deepe a pit, that from Gades to Aurora, and Ganges, few eyes can sound her:) I hope yet, those few here, will so discouer and confirme her, that the date being out of her darkenesse in this morning of our Homer; he shall now gird his Temples with the Sunne, and be confest (against his good friend) Nunquam dormitare. But how all Translators, Censors, or Interpretors, haue slept, and bene dead to his true vnderstanding; I hope it will neither cast shadow of arrogance in me to affirme, nor of difficultie in you to beleeue: if you please to suspend censure, & diminution, till your impartiall conference of their paines and mine be admitted. For induction and preparatiue to which patience, and perswasion, trouble your selues but to know this: This neuer-enough-glorified Poet, (to vary & quicken his eternal Poem) hath inspired his chiefe persons with different spirits, most ingenious and inimitable characters; which not vnderstood, how are their speeches? being one by another, as cō
                  ueniently, and necessarily knowne, as the instrument by the sound. If a Translator or Interpreter of a ridiculous and cowardly described person (being deceiued in his character) so violates, and vitiates the originall, to make his speech graue, and him valiant: can the negligence and numbnesse of such an Interpreter or Translator, be lesse then the sleepe, and death, I am bold to sprinckle vpon him? or could I do lesse then affirme and enforce this, being so happily discouered? This therfore (in his due place) approued and explaned, let me hope my other assumpts will proue as conspicuous.
               This first and second booke, I haue wholly translated againe; the seuenth, eighth, ninth, and tenth bookes, deferring still imperfect, being all Englished so long since; and my late hand (ouercome wih labour) not yet rested enough to refine them. Nor are the wealthie veines of this holy ground, so amply discouered in my first twelue labours, as my last; not hauing competent time, nor my profit in his mysteries being so ample, as when driuing through his thirteenth and last books, I drew the main depth, and saw the round coming of this siluer bow of our Phoebus; the cleare scope and cō
                  texture of his worke; the full and most beautifull figures of his persons. To those last twelue then, I must referre you, for all the chiefe worth of my cleare discoueries. And in the meane space, I intreate your acceptance of some few new touches in these first. Not perplexing you in first or last, with anything handled in any other Interpreter, further then I must conscionably make congression with such as haue diminisht, mangled, and maimed, my most worthily most tendered Author.
               
                  a 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   (being compounded ex à priuatiua: & 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , video) signifies, locus tenebricosus, or (according to Virgil) sine luce domus; and therefore (different from others) I so conuert it.
               
                  b 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   &c.) is the vulgar reading, which I r
                     •…
                  ade: 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                  
because 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   referd to 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. is redundant and idle; to the miseries of the Greekes by Ioues counsell, graue, and sententious.
               
                  c 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. ex quo quidem primùm: 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. ex quo. Here our common readers would haue tempore vnderstood; because 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   (to which they thinke the Poet must otherwise haue reference) is the feminine gender. But Homer vnderstands Ioue; as in 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , verse 273. he expounds himselfe in these words: 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. which Pindarus Thebanus in his Epitome of these Iliads, rightly obserues, in these verses:
               
                  
                     Conficiebat enim summi sententia Regis,
                  
                  Ex quo contulerant discordi pectore pugnas
                  
                     Sceptriger Atrides, & bello clarus Achilles.
               
               
                  d 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , comprobarunt Graeci, all others turne it; but since, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   signifies properly, fausta acclamatione do significationem approbationis, I therefore accordingly conuert it, because the other intimates a comprobation of all the Greekes by word; which was not so, but onely by inarticulate acclamations, or showtes.
               
                  e 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , signifies properly circumambulo, and onely metaphoricè, protego, or tueor, as it is alwaies in this place translated; which suffers alteration with me, since our vsuall phrase of walking the round in townes of garrison, for the defence of it, fits so well the propertie of the originall.
               
                  f 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Praemiserat enim Dea alba v
                        •…
                     nis Iuno? Why Iuno should send Pallas, is a thing not noted by any: I therefore answer; Because Iuno is Goddesse of state. The allegory therfore in the Prosopopoeia both of Iuno & Pallas, is, that Achilles for respect to the state there present, the rather vsed that discretion and restraint of his anger. So in diuers other places, when state is represented, Iuno procures it: as in the eighteenth booke, for the state of Patroclus his fetching off, Iuno commands the Sunne to go downe before his time, &c.
               
                  g 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : sic dixit lachrimans, &c. These teares are called by our Cō
                  mentors, vnworthie, and fitter for children, or women, then such an Heroe as Achilles: and therefore Plato is cited in 3. de Repub. where he saith, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. Meritò igitur, clarorum virorum ploratus è medio tolleremus, &c. To answer which, and iustifie the fitnesse of teares generally (as they may be occasioned) in the greatest, and most renowmed men; (omitting examples of Virgils Aeneas, Alexander the Great, &c.) I oppose against Plato, onely one president of great and most perfect humanitie, (to whom infinitely aboue all other, we must prostrate our imitations) that shed teares, viz. our All▪ perfect and Almightie Sauiour, who wept for Lazarus. This then, leauing the fitnesse of great mens teares generally, vtterly vnanswerable: these particular teares of vnuented anger in Achilles, are in him most naturall: teares being the highest effects of greatest and most fierie spirits; either when their abilities cannot performe to their wils, or that they are restrained of reuenge, being iniured, out of other considerations: as now the consideration of the state, and grauitie of the counsell, and publike good of the armie curbd Achilles. Who can denie, that there are teares of manlinesse, and magnanimitie, as well as womanish and pusillanimous? So Diomed, wept for curst heart, when Apollo strooke his scourge from him, and hindered his horse race: hauing bene warned by Pallas before not to resist the Deities; and so his great spirits being curbed of reuenge, for the wrong he receiued then. So when not-enough. vented anger, was not to be exprest enough by that teare-starting affection in couragious and fierce men, our most accomplish
                     •…
                  
                  
expressor, helpes the illustration in a Simile of his feruour, in most feruent-spirited fowles, resembling the wrathfull fight of Sarpedon and Patroclus to two Vultures, fighting, and crying on a rocke; which thus I haue afterwards Englished, and here for example inserted:
               
                  Downe iumpt he from his chariot; downe leapt his foe as light:
                  And as on some far-seeing rocke, a cast of Vultures fight,
                  Flie on each other, strike, and trusse; part, meete, and then sticke by;
                  Tugge both with crooked beakes, and seres; crie, fight, and fight, and cry.
                  So fiercely fought these angrie kings, &c.
               
               Wherein you see, that crying in these eagerlie fought fowles (which is like teares in angrie men) is so farre from softnesse or faintnesse, that to the superlatiue of hardinesse and courage, it expresseth both. Nor must we be so grosse to imagine, that Homer made Achilles, or Diomed blubber, or sob, &c. but in the verie point and sting of their vnuented anger, shed a few violent and seething-ouer teares. What Asse-like impudence is it then, for any meerely vaineglorious, and selfe-louing puffe, that euerie where may reade these inimitable touches of our Homers maisterie, any where to oppose his arrogant and ignorant castigations? when he should rather (with his much better vnderstander Spondanus) submit where he ouersees him faulty: and say thus: Quia tu tamen hoc voluisti, sacrosanctae tuae authoritati, per me nihil detrahetur.
               
               The end of the first Booke.
            
         
         
            
            THE SECOND BOOKE OF HOMERS ILIADS.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  
                     IOue cals avision vp, from Somnus den;
                  To bid Atrides, muster vp his men.
                  The king (to Greekes dissembling his desire)
                  Perswades them to their countrie to r
                        •…
                     tire.
                  By Pallas will, Vlysses stayes their flight;
                  And wise old Nestor, heartens them to fight.
                  They take their meate: which done, to armes they go
                        •…
                     :
                  And march in good array, against the foe.
                  So those of Troy, when Iris, from the skie,
                  Of Saturns sonne, performs the Ambassie.
               
            
            
               Another Argument.
               
                  
                     Beta, the dreame and Synod cites,
                  And catalogues the nauall knights.
               
            
            
               
                  THe other Gods, and knights at armes, all night slept: onely Ioue,
                  Iupiter carefu
                        •…
                      in performing his vow to Thet
                        •…
                     .
               
               Sweet slumber seisd not; he discourst, how best he might approue
               His vow made for Achilles grace, and make the Grecians find
               His misse, in much death. Al waies cast; this coūsel seru'd his mind
               With most allowance: to dispatch, a harmefull dreame to greet
               The king of men; and gaue this charge: Go, to the Achiue fleet,Iupiter cals vp a vision.
               
               (Pernicious dreame) and being arriu'd, in Agamemnons tent,
               Deliuer truly all this charge; command him to conuent
               His whole hoast arm'd, before these towres; for now Troys broad-waid towne
               He shall take in: the heauen-housd Gods, are now indifferent growne,
               
                  Iunos request hath wonne them: Troy, now vnder imminent ils,
               At all parts labours. This charge heard, the vision straight fulfils;
               The ships reacht, and Atrides tent, in which he found him laid;
               Diuine sleepe powrd about his powres. He stood aboue his head
               Like Nestor (grac't, of old men, most) and this did intimate:
            
            
               Sleepes the wise Atreus-tame-horse sonne? a counsellour of State,The vision to Agamemnon.
               
               Must not, the whole night, spend in sleepe; to whom the people are,
               For guard committed; and whose life, stands bound to so much care.
               Now heare me then, (Ioues messenger,) who, though farre off from thee,
               Is neare thee yet; in ruth, and care: and giues command by me,
               To arme thy whole hoast. Thy strong hand, the broad-waid towne of Troy,
               Shall now take in: no more the Gods, dissentiously imploy
               Their high-housd powers: Iunos suite, hath wonne them all to her;
               And ill fates ouer-hang these towres, addrest by Iupiter.
               
               
                  Fixe in thy mind this; nor forget, to giue it action, when
               Sweet sleepe shall leaue thee. Thus he fled, and left the king of men
               Repeating, in discourse, his dreame; and dreaming still, awake,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      discourseth of 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Of powre, not readie yet for act. O foole, he thought to take
               In that next day, old Priams towne; not knowing what affaires
               
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   had in purpose; who prepar'd, (by strong fight) sighes and 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               For Greekes, and Troians. The dreame gone, his voice still mur
                     •…
                  ured
               About the kings eares: who sate vp, put on him, in his bed,
               His silken inner weed; faire, new, and then in hast arose;
               Cast on his ample mantle, tied, to his soft feet faire shoes;
               His siluer-hilted sword he hung, about his shoulders, tooke
               His fathers scepter, neuer staind: which then abroad he shooke,
               And went to fleete. And now great heauen, Goddesse Aurora, scall'dThe morning.
               
               To Ioue, and all Gods, bringing light. When Agamemnon call'd
               His heralds, charging them aloud, to call to instant Court
               The thicke-haird Greekes. The heralds call'd, the Greekes made quickeresort:
               The Councell chiefly he composd, of old great minded men,
               At Nestors ships, the Pylian king: all there assembled then,
               Thus Atreus sonne begunne the Court: Heare friends, a dreame diuine,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Amids the calme night in my sleepe, did through my shut eyes shine,
               Within my fantasie: his forme, did passing naturally
               Resemble Nestor: such attire, a stature iust as hie.
               He stood aboue my head; and words, thus fashiond, did relate.
            
            
               Sleepes the wise Atreus-tame-horse sonne? A counsellor of state
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Must not, the whole night spend in sleepe; to whom the people are
               For guard committed; and whose life, stands bound to so much care.
               Now heare me then, (Ioues messenger,) who, though farre off from thee,
               Is neare thee yet, in loue, and care: and giues command by me,
               To arme thy whole hoast. Thy strong hand, the broad-waid towne of Troy,
               Shall now take in: no more the Gods, dissentiously imploy
               Their high-housd powres: Saturnias suite, hath wonne them all to her;
               And ill fates ouer-hang these towres, addrest by Iupiter.
               
               Fixe in thy mind this. This exprest, he tooke wing and away;
               And sweet sleepe left me: let vs then, by all our meanes assay,
               To arme our armie; I will first, (as farre as fits our right)
               Trie their addictions, and command, with full-sail'd ships our flight:
               Which if they yeeld to, oppose you. He sate; and vp arose
               
                  N
                        •…
                     stor, of sandy Pylos, king: who, (willing to dispose
               Their counsell to the publicke good) proposd this to the State:
            
            
               Princes, and Counsellors of Greece? If any should relateNestor to the Greekes.
               
               This vision, but the king himselfe; it might be held a tale,
               And moue the rather our 
                     〈◊〉
                  : but since our Generall
               Affirmes he saw it, hold it true; and all our best meanes make
               To arme our armie. This speech vsde, he first the Councell brake;
               The other scepter-bearing States, arose to, and obeyd
               The peoples Rector. Being abroad, the earth was ouerlaid
               With flockers to them, that came forth: as when, of frequen
                     •…
                   Bees
               Swarmes rise out of a hollow rocke, repairing the degreesSimile.
               
               
                  Of their egression endlesly; with euer rising new,
               From forth their sweet nest: as their store, still as it faded, grew,
               And neuer would ceasse sending forth, her clusters to the spring
               They still crowd out so; this flocke here; that there, belabouring
               The loaded flowres. So from the ships, and tents, the armies store,
               Troopt to these Princes, and the Court; along th'vnmeasur'd shore:
               Amongst whom, Ioues Ambassadresse, (Fame) in her vertue shin'd,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Exciting greedinesse to heare. The rabble thus inclin'd,
               Hurried together; vprore seisd, the high Court; earth did grone
               Beneath the setling multitude; tumult was there alone.
               Thrise three voiciferous heralds rose, to checke the rout, and get
               Eare to their Ioue-kept Gouernors; and instantly was set
               That huge confusion; euery man, set fast, and clamor ceast:
               Then stood diuine Atrides vp, and in his hand comprest
               His scepter, th'elaborate worke, of fierie Mulciber:
                  The 
                        〈◊〉
                      of 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Who gaue it to Saturnian Ioue; Ioue to his messenger;
               His messenger (Argicides,) to Pelops, skild in horse;
               
                  Pelops, to Atreus chiefe of men; he dying, gaue it course
               To Prince Thyestes, rich in heards; Thyestes to the hand
               Of Agamemnon renderd it, and with it, the command
               Of many Iles, and Argos, all. On this he leaning, said:
            
            
               O friends, great sonnes of Danaus, seruants of Mars; Ioue laidAgamemnon to the Greekes.
               
               A heauie curse on me, to vow, and binde it with the bent
               Of his high forehead; that (this Troy, of all her people spent)
               I should returne; yet now to mocke, our hopes, built on his vow:
               And charge ingloriously my flight; when such an ouerthrow
               Of braue friends, I haue authored. But to his mightiest will
               We must submit vs; that hath raz't, and will be razing still,
               Mens footsteps, from so many townes; because his power is most,
               He will destroy most. But how vile, such, and so great an hoast,
               Will shew to future times? that matcht, with lesser numbers farre,
               We flie, not putting on the crowne, of our so long-held warre?
               Of which, there yet appeares no end. Yet should our foes and we
               Strike truce, and number both our powers; Troy taking all that be
               Her arm'd inhabitants; and we, in tens should all sit downe
               At our truce banquet: euerie ten, allow'd one of the towne
               To fill his feast-cup; many tens, would their attendant want:
               So much I must affirme, our power, exceeds th'inhabitant.
               But their auxiliarie bands; those brandishers of speares,
               (From many cities drawne) are they, that are our hinderers;
               Not suffering well-raisd Troy to fall. Nine yeares are ended now,
               Since Ioue our conquest vow'd, and now, our vessels rotten grow,
               Our tackling failes, our wiues, yong sonnes, sit in their doores, and long
               For our arriuall: yet the worke, that should haue wreakt our wrong,
               And made vs welcome, lies vn wrought: Come then, as I bid, all
               Obey, and flie to our lou'd home; for now, nor euer shall
               Our vtmost, take in broad-waid Troy. This said, the multitude
               Was all for home, and all men else, that what this would conclude
               
                  Had not discouerd. All the crowd, was shou'd about the shore;
               In sway, like rude, and raging waues, rowsd with the feruent bloreSimile.
               
               Of th'East, and South winds; when they breake, from Ioues clouds, and are borne
               On rough backs of th' I carian seas: or like a field of corne
               High growne, that Zephyrs vehement gusts, bring easily vnderneath,
               And make the stiffe-vp-bristl'd eares, do homage to his breath:
               For euen so easily, with the breath, Atrides vsde, was swaid
               The violent multitude. To fleet, with showts, and disaraid,
               All rusht; and with a fogge of dust, their rude feete, dimd the day;
               Each cried to other, cleanse our ships; come, lanch, aboord, away.
               The clamor of the runners home, reacht heauen; and then past fate,
               The Greekes had left Troy, had not then, the Goddesse of estate,
               Thus spoke to Pallas: O foule shame, thou vntam'd seed of Ioue,
                  Iuno to Pallas.
               
               Shall thus the seas broad backe be charg'd, with these our friends remoue?
               Thus leauing Argiue Hellen here? thus Priam grac't? thus Troy?
               In whose fields, farre from their lou'd owne, (for Hellens sake) the ioy,
               And life of so much Grecian birth, is vanisht? take thy way
               T'our brasse-arm'd people; speake them faire, let not a man obey
               The charge now giuen, nor lanch one ship. She said, and Pallas did
               As she commanded: from the tops, of heauens steepe hill she slid;
               And straight, the Greekes swist ships, she reacht: Vlysses, (like to Ioue
               
               In gifts of counsell) she found out; who, to that base remoue,
               Stird not a foote, nor toucht a ship; but grieu'd at heart to see
               That fault in others. To him close, the blue-eyd deitie
               Made way, and said: Thou wisest Greeke, diuine Laertes sonne,
               Thus flie ye homewards, to your ships, shall all thus headlong runne?
               Glorie to Priam, thus ye leaue; glorie to all his friends,
               If thus ye leaue her here; for whom, so many violent ends
               Haue closd your Greeke eyes? and so farre, from their so loued home?
               Go to these people, vse no stay; with faire termes ouercome
               Their foule endeuour: not a man, a flying saile let hoice.
            
            
               Thus spake she, and Vlysses knew, twas Pallas by her voice:
               Ranne to the runners; cast from him, his mantle, which his man
               And Herald, graue Eurybates, the Ithacensian
               That followd him, tooke vp. Himselfe, to Agamemnon went;
               His incorrupted scepter tooke; his scepter of descent;
               And with it, went about the fleete. What Prince, or man of name,
               He found flight-giuen; he would restraine, with words of gentlest blame;
            
            
               Good sir, it fits not you to flie, or fare as one afraid;
                     
                        •…
                     lysses temper in restraining the flight.
               
               You should not onely stay your selfe, but see the people staid.
               You know not clearely (though you heard, the kings words) yet his mind,
               He onely tries mens spirits now; and whom his trials find
               Apt to this course, he will chastise. Nor you, nor I, heard all
               He spake in councell: nor durst preasse, too neare our Generall,
               Lest we incenst him to our hurt. The anger of a king
               Is mightie; he is kept of Ioue, and from Ioue likewise spring
               His honors; which, out of the loue, of wise Ioue, he enioyes.
               Thus, he the best sort vsd; the worst, whose spirits brake out in noise,
               
                  He cudgeld with his scepter, chid, and said: Stay wretch, be still,
               And heare thy betters; thou art base, and both in powre and skill
               Poore and vnworthie; without name, in counsell, or in warre.
               We must not all be kings: the rule, is most irregularre,
               Where many rule; one Lord, one king, propose to thee; and he
               To whom wise Saturns sonne hath giuen, both law, and Emperie,
               To rule the publicke, is that king. Thus, ruling, he restrain'd
               The hoast from flight: and then, againe, the Councell was maintain'd
               With such a concourse, that the shore, rung with the tumult made;
               As when the farre-resounding sea, doth in his rage inuade
               His sandie confines; whose sides grone, with his inuolued waue,
               And make his owne breast eccho sighes. All sate, and audience gaue;
               
                  Thersites onely would speake all. A most disorderd store
               Of words, he foolishly powrd out; of which his mind held more
               Then it could manage; any thing, with which he could procure
               Laughter, he neuer could containe. He should haue yet bene sure
               To touch no kings. T'oppose their states, becomes not iesters parts.Thersites description.
               
               But he, the filthiest fellow was, of all that had deserts
               In Troyes braue siege: he was squint-eyd, and lame of either foote:
               So crooke-backt, that he had no breast: sharpe headed, where did shoote
               (Here and there sperst) thin mossie haire. He most of all enuideAchilles.
               
               
                  Vlysses and Aeacides, whom still his splene would chide;
               Nor could the sacred king himselfe, auoid his saucie vaine,
               Against whom, since he knew the Greekes, did vehement hates sustaine
               (Being angrie for Achilles wrong) he cride out; railing thus:
            
            
               
                  Atrides? why complainst thou now? what wouldst thou more of vs?Thersites to Agamemnon.
               
               Thy tents are full of brasse, and dames; the choice of all are thine:
               With whom, we must present thee first, when any townes resigne
               To our inuasion. Wantst thou then (besides all this) more gold
               From Troyes knights, to redeeme their sonnes? whom, to be dearely sold,
               I, or some other Greeke, must take? or wouldst thou yet againe,
               Force from some other Lord, his prise; to sooth the lusts that raigne
               In thy encroching appetite? it fits no Prince to be
               A Prince of ill, and gouerne vs; or leade our progenie
               By rape to ruine. O base Greekes, deseruing infamie,
               And ils eternall: Greekish girls, not Greekes ye are: Come, flie
               Home with our ships; leaue this man here, to perish with his preys,
               And trie if we helpt him, or not: he wrong'd a man that weys
               Farre more then he himselfe in worth: he forc't from Thetis sonne,
               And keepes his prise still: nor think I, that mightie man hath wonne
               The stile of wrathfull worthily; he's soft, he's too remisse,
               Or else Atrides, his had bene, thy last of iniuries.
            
            
               Thus he the peoples Pastor chid; but straight stood vp to himVlysses to Thersites.
               
               Diuine Vlysses; who with lookes, exceeding graue, and grim,
               This bitter checke gaue: Ceasse, vaine foole, to vent thy railing vaine
               On kings thus, though it serue thee well: nor thinke thou canst restraine,
               With that thy railing facultie, their wils in least degree,
               For not a worse, of all this hoast, came with our king then thee,
               
                  To Troys great siege: then do not take, into that mouth of thine,
               The names of kings; much lesse reuile, the dignities that shine
               In their supreme states; wresting thus, this motion for our home
               To sooth thy cowardise; since our selues, yet know not what will come
               Of these designments: if it be, our good, to stay, or go:
               Nor is it that thou standst on; thou, reuil'st our Generall so,
               Onely, because he hath so much, not giuen by such as thou,
               But our Heroes. Therefore this, thy rude veine, makes me vow,
               (Which shall be curiously obseru'd) if euer I shall heare
               This madnesse from thy mouth againe, let not Vlysses beare
               This head, nor be the father cald, of yong Telemachus;
               
               If to thy nakednesse, I take, and strip thee not, and thus
               Whip thee to fleete from Councell; send, with sharpe stripes, weeping hence,
               This glory thou affectst to raile. This said, his insolence
               He setl'd with his scepter; strooke, his backe and shoulders so,
               That bloody wales rose; he shrunke round; and from his eyes did flow
               Moist teares, and looking filthily, he sate, feard, smarted; dried
               His blubberd cheekes; and all the preasse, (though grieu'd to be denied,
               Their wisht retrait for home) yet laught, delightsomely, and spake
               Either to other: O ye Gods, how infinitely take
               
                  Vlysses vertues in our good? author of Counsels, great
               In ordering armies: how most well, this act became his heate
               To beate from Councell this rude foole? I thinke his sawcie spirit
               Hereafter will not let his tongue, abuse the soueraigne merit,
               Exempt from such base tongues as his. Thus spake the people: then
               The citie-razer, Ithacus, stood vp to speake againe,
               Holding his Scepter. Close to him, gray-eyd Minerua stood;
               And like a herald, silence causd, that all the Achiue brood
               (From first to last) might heare and know, the counsell: when (inclind
               To all their good) Vlysses said: Atrides, now I find,Vlysses to Agamem
                        •…
                     n and the people.
               
               These men would render thee the shame, of all men; nor would pay,
               Their owne vowes to thee, when they tooke, their free and honord way,
               From Argos hither; that till Troy, were by their braue hands rac't,
               They would not turne home; yet like babes, and widowes, now they hast
               To that base refuge. Tis a spite, to see men melted so
               In womanish changes. Though tis true, that if a man do go
               Onely a moneth to sea, and leaue, his wife farre off, and he
               Tortur'd with winters stormes, and tost, with a tumultuous sea,
               Growes heauy, and would home; vs then, to whom the thrice three yeare
               Hath fild his reuoluble orbe, since our arriuall here,
               I blame not, to wish home, much more: yet all this time to stay
               (Out of our iudgements) for our end; and now to take our way
               Without it, were absurd and vile. Sustaine then friends, abide,
               The time set to our obiect: trie, if Calchas prophecied
               True of the time or not. We know, ye all can witnesse well
               (Whom these late death-conferring-fates, haue faild to send to hell)
               That when in Aulis, all our fleet, assembl'd with a freight
               Of ils to Ilion, and her friends: beneath the faire growne height
               
                  A Platane bore, about a fount, whence christall water flow'd,
               And neare our holy altar, we, vpon the Gods bestow'd
               Accomplisht Hecatombs; and there, appear'd a huge portent,
               A Dragon with a bloody skale, horride to sight, and sent
               To light by great Olympius; which crawling from beneath
               The Altar, to the Platane climbd; and ruthlesse crasht to death
               A Sparrowes yong, in number eight, that in a top-bow lay
               Hid vnder leaues: the dam the ninth, that houerd euery way,
               Mourning her lou'd birth; till at length, the Serpent watching her,
               Her wing caught, and deuourd her too. This dragon, Iupiter
               
               (That brought him forth) turnd to a stone; andb made a powrefull meane
               To stirre our zeales vp, that admir'd, when of a fact so cleane
               Of all ill as our sacrifice, so fearefull an ostent
               Should be the issue. Calchas then, thus prophecied the euent;
               Why are ye dumbe strooke, faire-haird Greekes? wise Ioue is he hath showne
               This strange ostent to vs. Twas late, and passing lately done,
               But that grace it foregoes to vs, for suffering all the state
               Of his apparence, (being so slow) nor time shall end, nor fate.
               As these eight Sparrowes, and the dam, (that made the ninth) were eate
               By this sterne Serpent; so nine yeares, we are t'endure the heate
               Of rauenous warre, and in the tenth, take in this broad-waid towne.
            
            
               Thus he interpreted this signe; and all things haue their crowne
               As he interpreted, till now. The rest then, to succeed,
               Beleeue as certaine: stay we all, till that most glorious deed
               Of taking this rich towne, our hands, are honord with. This said,
               The Greekes gaue an vnmeasur'd shout; which backe the ships repaid
               With terrible ecchoes, in applause, of that perswasion
               Diuine Vlysses vsd; which yet, held no comparison
               With Nestors next speech, which was this: O shamefull thing! ye talkeNestor to the Greeks.
               
               Like children all, that know not warre. In what aires region walke
               Our oathes, and couenants? Now I see, the fit respects of men
               Are vanisht quite; our right hands giuen, our faiths, our counsels vaine;
               Our sacrifice with wine; all fled, in that prophaned flame
               We made to bind all: for thus still, we vaine perswasions frame,
               And striue to worke our end with words; not ioyning stratagemes
               And hands together; though thus long, the powre of our extremes
               Hath vrg'd vs to them. Atreus sonne? firme as at first howre stand:
               Make good thy purpose; talke no more, in counsels, but command
               In actiue field. Let two or three, that by themselues aduise,
               Faint in their crowning; they are such, as are not truly wise.
               They will for Argos, ere they know, if that which Ioue hath said
               Be false or true. I tell them all, that high Ioue bowd his head
               As first we went aboord our fleet, for signe we should confer
               These Troians, their due fate and death; almightie Iupiter,
               
               All that day darting forth his flames, in an vnmeasur'd light,
               On our right hands; let therefore none, once dreame of coward flight,
               Till (for his owne) some wife of Troy, he sleepes withall; the rape
               Of Hellen wreaking; and our sighes, enforc't for her escape.
               
                  If any yet dare dote on home, let his dishonor'd hast
               His blacke, and well-built barke but touch, that (as he first disgrac't
               His countries spirit) fate, and death, may first his spirit let go.
               But be thou wise (king) do not trust, thy selfe, but others. Know
               I will not vse an abiect word: see all thy men arraid
               In tribes and nations; that tribes, tribes; nations may nations aid:
               Which doing, thou shalt know, what chiefs, what souldiers play the men;
               And what the cowards: for they all, will fight in seuerall then,
               (Easie for note.) And then shalt thou, if thou destroist not Troy,
               Know if the prophecies defect, or men thou dost employ
               In their approu'd arts, want in warre: or lacke of that braue heate
               Fit for the ventrous spirits of Greece, was cause to thy defeate.
            
            
               To this the king of men replied; O father, all the sonnesAgamemnon to Nestor.
               
               Of Greece thou conquerst, in the strife, of consultations.
               I would to Ioue, Atheni
                        •…
                     , and Phoebus, I could make
               (Of all) but ten such Counsellers; then instantly would shake
               Kings Priams citie; by our hands, laid hold on, and laid wast.
               But Ioue hath orderd I should grieue, and to that end hath cast
               My life into debates, past end. My selfe, and Thetis sonne,
               (Like girles) in words fought for a girle, and I th'offence begunne:
               But if we euer talke as friends, Troys thus deferred fall
               Shall neuer vexe vs more one houre. Come then, to victles all,
               That strong Mars, all may bring to field; each man his lances steele
               See sharpned well; his shield well lin'd, his horses meated well,
               His chariot carefully made strong; that these affaires of death,
               We all day may hold fiercely out: no man must rest, or breath.
               The bosomes of our targatiers, must all be steept in sweate.
               The lanciers arme, must fall dissolu'd; our chariot horse with heate▪
               
               Must seeme to melt. But if I find, one souldier take the chase,
               Or stirre from fight, or fight not still, fixt in his enemies face;
               Or hid a shipboord: all the world, for force, nor price, shall saue
               His hated life; but fowles, and dogs, be his abhorred graue.
            
            
               He said, and such a murmure rose, as on a loftie shoreSimile.
               
               The waues make, when the Southwind comes, and tumbles them before
               Against a rocke, growne neare the strand, which diuersly beset
               Is neuer free; but here and there, with varied vprores beat.
            
            
               All rose then, rushing to the fleete, perfum'd their tents, and eate:
               Each offring to th'immortall Gods, and praying to scape th'heate
               Of wa
                     •…
                  e and death. The king of men, an Oxe of fiue yeares spring
               T'almightie Ioue slue: call'd the Peeres, first Nestor, then the king
               
                  Idomenaeus: after them, th'Aiaces, and the sonne
               Of Tydeus; Ithacus the sixth, in counsell ParagonDiomed.
               
               To Ioue himselfe. All these he bad, but cat-a-martiall-crie.
               Good Menelaus, since he saw, his brother busily
               Employd at that time, would not stand, on inuitation,
               
                  dBut of himselfe came. All about, the offring ouerthrowne
               Stood round, tooke salt-cakes, and the king, himselfe thus praid for all:
            
            
               O Ioue, most great, most glorious, that in that starrie hall,
               
                  Sit'st drawing darke clouds vp to aire: let not the Sunne go downe,
               Darknesse supplying it; till my hands, the Pallace, and the towne
               Of Priam ouerthrow, and burne; the armes on Hectors brest
               Diuiding; spoiling with my sword, thousands (in interest
               Of his bad quarrell) laid by him, in dust, and eating earth.
            
            
               He pray'd, Ioue heard him not, but made, more plentifull the birth
               Of his sad toiles; yet tooke his gifts. Prayres past, cakes on they threw:
               The Oxe then (to the altar drawne,) they kill'd, and from him drew
               His hide: then cut him vp; his thighes (in two hewne) dubd with fat,
               Prickt on the sweet-breads; and with wood, leauelesse, and kindl'd at
               Apposed fire, they burne the thighes; which done, the inwards slit,
               They broild on coales, and eate. The rest, in giggots cut, they spit,
               Roast cunningly, draw, sit, and feast: nought lackt to leaue alaid
               Each temperate appetite; which seru'd, Nestor began and said:
            
            
               
                  Atrides, most grac't king of men, now no more words allow,Nestor to Agamemnon.
               
               Nor more deferre the deed Ioue vowes. Let heralds summon n
                     •…
                  w
               The brasen-coted Greekes; and vs, range euerie where the host,
               To stirre a strong warre quickly vp. This speech no sillable lost;
               The high-voic't heralds, instantly, he charg'd to call to armes
               The curld-head Greeks; they call'd; the Greeks, straight answerd their alarmes.
               The Ioue-kept kings, about the king, all gatherd, with their aide
               Rang'd all in tribes and nations. With them the gray-eyd maide
               Great Aegis (Ioues bright shield) sustain'd, that can be neuer old;
               Neuer corrupted, fring'd about, with serpents forg'd of gold,
               As many as suffisde to make, an hundred fringes, worth
               A hunderd oxen, euerie snake, all sprawling, all set forth
               With wondrous spirit. Through the host, with this the Goddesse ranne
               In furie, casting round her eyes; and furnisht euerie man
               With strength; exciting all to armes, and fight incessant. None
               Now lik't their lou'd homes like the warres. And as a fire vpon
               A huge wood, on the heights of hils, that farre off hurles his light:
               So the diuine brasse shin'd on these, thus thrusting on for fight;
               Their splendor through the aire reacht heauen: and as about the flood
               Caister, in an Asian meade, flockes of the airie brood,
               (Cranes, Geese, or long-neckt Swans) here, there, proud of their pinions ffi
                     •…
                  ,
               And in their fals lay out such throats, that with their spiritfull crie
               The meddow shrikes againe: so here, these many nation'd men,
               Flow'd ouer the Scamandrian field; from tents, and ships; the din
               Was dreadfull, that the feete of men, and horse, beate out of earth.
               And in the florishing meade they stood, thicke as the odorous birth
               Of flowres, or leaues bred in the spring; or thicke as swarmes of flies
               Throng then to ship-coates; when each swarme, his erring wing applies
               To milke deawd on the milke maids pailes: all eagerly disposd,
               To giue to ruine th'Ilians. And as in rude heapes closd
               Though huge Goate-heards are at their food, the Goate-heards easly yet,
               Sort into sundry heards; so here, the Chiefes in battell set,
               Here tribes, here nations, ordring all. Amongst whom shin'd the king,
               With eyes, like lightning-louing Ioue; his forehead answering▪
               
               
                  In breast like Neptune; Mars in waste: and as a goodly Bull
               Most eminent of all a heard, most strong, most masterfull;
               So Agamemnon, Ioue that day, made ouerheighten clere,
               That heauen-bright armie; and preferd, to all th'Heroes there.
            
            
               Now tell me Muses, you that dwell, in heauenly roofes (for youInuocation.
               
               Are Goddesses; are present here, are wise, and all things know;
               We onely trust the voyce of fame, know nothing:) who they were
               That here were captains of the Greekes? Commanding Princes here,
               The multitude exceed my song; though fitted to my choice
               Ten tongues were, hardned pallats ten, a breast of brasse, a voyce
               Infract, and trumplike: that great worke, vnlesse the seed of Ioue
               
               (The deathlesse Muses) vndertake, maintaines a pitch aboue
               All mortall powers. The Princes then, and nauie that did bring
               Those so inenarrable troopes; and all their soyles, I sing.
            
            
               The Catalogue of the Grecian ships and Captaines.
               
               
                  
                     PEneleus, and Leitus, all that Boeotia bred,The Boeotian captaines.
                  
                  
                     Arcesilaus, Clonius, and Prothoaenor, led;
                  Th'inhabitants of Hyria, and stonie Aulida;
                  
                  
                     Schaene, Schole, the hilly Eteon, and holy Thespia;
                  
                  Of Graea, and great Mycalesse, that hath the ample plaine;
                  Of Harma, and Ilesius, and all that did remaine,The places in Boeotia.
                  
                  In Erith, and in Eleon; in Hylen, Peteona,
                  
                  In faire Ocalea, and the towne, well builded, Medeona;
                  
                  
                     Capas, Eutresis, Thisbe that, for Pigeons doth surpasse;
                  Of Coroneia, Harliart; that hath such store of grasse.
                  All those that in Platea dwelt, that Glissa did possesse;
                  And Hypothebs, whose wel-built wals, are rare and fellowlesse;
                  In rich Onchestus famous wood, to watrie Neptune vow'd;
                  And Arne, where the vine-trees are, with vigorous bunches bow'd:
                  With them that dwelt in Mydea, and Nissa most diuine.
                  All those whom vtmost Anthedon, did wealthily confine.
                  From all these coasts in generall, full fiftie saile were sent,The nauie of the Boeotians fiftie.
                  
                  And sixscore strong, Boeotian youths, in euerie burthen went.
                  But those who in Aspledon dwelt, and Mynian Orchomen;
                  
                  God Mars his sonnes did leade (Ascalaphus, and Ialmen.)Ascalaphus and Ialmenus, sonnes of Mars.
                  
                  Who in Azidon Astors house, did of Astioche come;
                  The bashfull Maide, as she went vp, into the higher roome,
                  The warre-god secretly comprest: in safe conduct of these,
                  Did thirtie hollow-bottom'd barkes, diuide the wauie seas.Their nauie 30.
                  
               
               
                  Braue Schedius and Epistrophus, the Phocean captaines were,The Phocensian captains Schedius and Epistrophus.
                  
                  
                     Naubolida, Iphitus sonnes, all-proofe gainst any feare;
                  With them the Cyparisians went, and bold Pythonians,
                  Men of religious Chrysas soyle, and fat Daulidians:
                  
                  
                     Panopaeans, Anemores, and fierce Hyampolists:
                  
                  And those that dwell where Cephisus, casts vp his silken mists.
                  
                     The men that faire 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      held, neare the Cephisian spring▪
                  
                  All which did fortie sable barkes, to that designement bring.
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         40.
                  
                  About th'entoyld Phocensian fleete, had these their saile assignde:
                  And neare to the sinister wing, the arm'd Boeotians shinde.
               
               
                  
                     Aiax the lesse, Oileus sonne, the Locrians led to warre,Aiax, Oielus, captaines of the 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                  
                  Not like to Aiax Telamon, but lesser man by farre.
                  Little he was, and euer wore, a breastplate made of linne;
                  But for the manage of his lance, he generall praise did winne.
                  The dwellers of Caliarus, of Bessa, Opoen;
                     The towns of the 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                  
                  The youths of Cynus, Scarphis, and, Augias, louely men;
                  Of Tarphis, and of Thronius, neare flood Boagrius fall;
                  Twise twentie martiall barkes of these, lesse Aiax saild withall.Their 
                           〈◊〉
                         40.
                  
               
               
                  Who neare Euboeas blessed soile, their habitations had,
                  Strength-breathing Abants, who their seats, in sweet Euboea made:Euboeans and their townes.
                  
                  The Astiaeans rich in grapes, the men of Chalcida;
                  
                  The Cerinths, bordring on the sea, of rich Eretria;
                  
                  Of Dyons highly-seated towne; Charistus, and of Styre;
                  
                  All these the Duke Alphenor led, a flame of Mars his fire;Alphenor their Commander.
                  
                  Surnam'd Chalcodontiades, the mightie Abants guide;
                  Swift men of foot, whose broad-set backes, their trailing haire did hide,
                  Well seene in fight, and soone could pierce, with farre extended darts
                  The breast plates of their enemies, and reach their dearest hearts.Their fleet 40.
                  
                  Fortie blacke men of warre did saile, in this Alphenors charge.
               
               
                  The souldiers that in Athens dwelt, a citie builded large,The Athenians.
                  
                  The people of Eristhius, whom Ioue-sprung Pallas fed:
                  And plentious-feeding Tellus brought, out of her flowrie bed:
                  Him, Pallas plac't in her rich Fane, and euerie ended yeare,
                  Of Buls and Lambes, th'Athenian youths, please him with offrings there.
                  Mightie Menestheus, Peteus sonne, had their deuided care:Menesth
                           •…
                        us their Ch
                           •…
                        ife.
                  
                  For horsemen and for targatiers, none could with him compare:
                  Nor put them into better place, to hurt or to defend:
                  But Nestor (for he elder was) with him did sole contend:
                  With him came fiftie sable saile. And out of Salamine
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         50.
                  
                  Great Aiax brought twelue saile, that with, th'Athenians did combine.
               
               
                  Who did in fruitfull Argos dwell; or strong Hyrintha keepe:The Salamines ioined with thē. Their leader Aiax Telamonius. Ships 12.
                  
                  
                     Hermion, or in Asinen, whose bosome is so deepe;
                  
                     Traezena, Elion, Epida re, where Bacchus crownes his head;
                  
                     Egina, and Mazetas soyle, did follow Diomed.
                     The 
                           〈◊〉
                         Diomed their captaine with 
                           〈◊〉
                         and Eurialus.
                  
                  And Sthenelus, the deare lou'd sonne, of famous Capaneus:
                  
                  Together with Eurialus, heire of Mecistaeus,
                  
                  The king of Talaeonides; past whom, in deeds of warre,
                  The famous souldier Diomed, of all was held by farre;
                  Fourescore blacke ships did follow these. The men faire Mycene held:Their fleet 80. saile.
                  
               
               
                  The wealthy Corinth, Cleon that, for beautious sight exceld:The 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        ▪ Their townes.▪
                     
                  
                  
                     A
                           •…
                        aethiraeas louely seate, and in Ornias plaine,
                  And Sicyona, where at first, did king Adrastus raigne:
                  High seated Gonoessas towers, and Hyperisius;
                  
                  That dwelt in fruitfull Pellenen, and in diuine Aegius:
                  
                  
                     With all the sea-side borderers, and wide Helices friends;
                  To Agamemnon euerie towne, her natiue birth commends,Agamemnon captaine.
                  
                  In double fiftie sable barks: with him a world of menShips 100.
                  
                  Most strong and full of valure went: and he in triumph then
                  Put on his most resplendent armes, since he did ouershine
                  The whole heroique host of Greece, in power of that designe.
               
               
                  Who did in 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      rule, th'vnmeasur'd concaue hold:The Laced
                           •…
                        monians and their townes.
                  
                  High Phares, Spartas, Messes towers, for doues so much extold;
                  
                     Bryseias and Augias grounds; strong Laa, Oetylon;
                  
                  
                     Amyclas, Helos harbor-towne, that Neptune beats vpon:
                  All these did Menelaus leade, (his brother that in criesMenelaus captaine.
                  
                  Of warre was famous) sixtie ships, conuaid these enemies,Ships 60.
                  
                  To Troy in chiefe; because their king, was chiefly iniur'd there,
                  In Hellens rape; and did his best, to make them buy it deare.
               
               
                  Who dwelt in Pylos sandie soyle, and Arene the faire;The Pylians and their townes.
                  
                  In Thryon, neare Alphaeus flood, and Aepy full of aire:
                  In Cyparisseus, Amphygen, and little P
                           •…
                        eleon;
                  
                  The towne where all the Iliots dwelt, and famous Doreon;
                  
                  Where all the Muses (opposite, in strife of Poesie,
                  To ancient Thamyris of Thrace) did vse him cruelly;Thamyris depriued of sight and Poesie by the Muses.
                  
                  He coming from Eurytus court, the wise Oechalian king:
                  Because he proudly durst affirme, he could more sweetly sing,
                  Then that Pyerean race of Ioue; who (angrie with his vant)
                  Bereft his eye-sight, and his song, that did the eare enchant;
                  And of his skill to touch his Harpe, disfurnished his hand:
                  All these in ninetie hollow keeles, graue Nestor did command.Nestor captaine. Ships 90.
                  
               
               
                  The richly blest inhabitants of the Arcadian landThe Arcadians and their towns.
                  
                  Below Cyllenes mount, that by, Epyrus tombe did stand;
                  Where dwell the bold neare-fighting men; who did in Phaeneus liue:
                  And Orchomen, where flockes of sheepe, the shepheards clustering driue:
                  In Rypé and in Stratié, the faire Mantinean towne;
                  And strong Enispe, that for height, is euer weather-blowne;
                  
                     Tegea, and in Stimphalus; Parrhasia strongly wall'd;
                  All these Alcaeus sonne, to field (king Agapenor) call'd;Agapenor their leader.
                  
                  In sixtie barks he brought them on, and euerie barke well mand,Ships 60.
                  
                  With fierce Arcadians, skild to vse, the vtmost of a band.
                  King Agamemnon on these men, did well-built ships bestow,
                  To passe the gulfie purple sea, that did no sea rites know.
               
               
                  They who in Hermin, Buphrasis, and Elis did remaine,The Epians and their townes.
                  
                  What Olens Cliffes, Alisius, and Myrsin did containe;
                  Were led to warre by twise two Dukes, and each ten ships did bring,Sphips 40.
                  
                  Which many venterous Epyans, did serue for burthening.
               
               
                  Beneath Alphimacus his charge, and valiant Talphius,
                  
                  Sonne of Euritus Actor, one; the other Cteatus;
                     Captaines Alphimachus, Talphius, Diores Polixenus.
                  
                  
                     Diores Amarincides, the other did imploy;
                  The fourth diuine Polixenus, Agasthenis his ioy:
                  The king of faire Angeiades, who from Dulichius came,Dulichians.
                  
                  And from Euchinaus sweet Iles, which hold their holy frame
                  
                     By ample Elis region, Meges Phelides led:
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                  
                  Whom Duke Phyleus, Ioues belou'd, begat, and whilome fled
                  To large Dulychius for the wrath, that fir'd his fathers breast.
                  Twise twentie ships with Ebon sailes, were in his charge addrest.Ships 40.
                  
               
               
                  The war-like men of Cephale, and those of Ithaca,
                     The 
                           〈◊〉
                         and their towns.
                  
                  Wooddy Nerytus, and the men, of wet Crocilia:
                  
                  Sharpe Aegilipha, Samos Ile, Zacynthus, sea-enclosd;
                  
                     Epyrus, and the men that hold, the Continent opposd;
                  All these did wise Vlysses leade, in counsell Peere to Ioue:
                     Vlysses captaine. Ships. 12.
                  
                  Twelue ships he brought, which in their course, vermilion sternes did moue.
               
               
                  
                     Thoas, Andremons wel-spoke sonne, did guide th'Etolians well;The Aetolians their captaines and townes.
                  
                  Those that in Pleuron, Olenon, and strong Pylene dwell:
                  Great Calcis that by sea-side stands, and stony Calydon;
                  
                  For now no more of Oeneus sonnes, suruiu'd; they all were gone:Thoas captaine.
                  
                  No more his royall selfe did liue, no more his noble sonne,
                  The golden Meleager; now, their glasses all were run.
                  All things were left to him in charge, the Aetolians Chiefe he was,
                  And fortie ships to Troian warres, the seas with him did passe.Ships. 40.
                  
               
               
                  The royall souldier Idomen, did leade the Cretans stout:The Cretans▪ their townes and Captaines.
                  
                  The men of Gnossus, and the towne, Cortima, wall'd about.
                  Of Lictus and Myletus towres, of white Lycastus state,
                  Of Phestus and of Rhistias, the cities fortunate:
                  And all, the rest inhabiting, the hundred townes of Crete;
                     Idomeneus.
                  
                  Whom warre-like Idomen did leade, copartner in the fleete,A hundred cities in Crete.
                  
                  With kil-man Merion; eightie ships, with them did Troy inuade.Ships 80.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Tlepolemus Heraclides, right strong and bigly made,
                  Brought nine tall ships of warre from Rhodes, which hautie Rhodians mand,
                  Who dwelt in three disseuer'd parts, of that most pleasant land;
                  Which Lyndus and Ialissus were, and bright Camyrus, cald:
                  
                     Tlepolemus commanded these, in battell vnappald:Tlepolemus Cō
                        mander of the Rhodians.
                  
                  Whom faire Astioche brought forth, by force of Hercules;
                  
                  Led out of Ephyr with his hand, from riuer Sellees;
                     Ships 9.
                  
                  When many townes of princely youths, he leueld with the ground.Townes.
                  
                  
                     Tlepolem (in his fathers house, for building much renownd,
                  Brought vp to head-strong state of youth) his mothers brother slue,
                  The flowre of armes, Lycymnius, that somewhat aged grew:
                  Then straight he gathred him a fleete, assembling bands of men,
                  And fled by sea, to shun the threats, that were denounced then,
                  By other sonnes and nephewes of, th'Alciden fortitude.
                  He in his exile came to Rhodes, driuen in with tempests rude:
                  The Rhodians were distinct in tribes, and great with Ioue did stand,
                  The king of men and Gods, who gaue, much treasure to their land.
               
               
                  
                     Nireus, out of Symas hauen, three wel-built barkes did bring;The Sym
                           •…
                        ns.
                  
                  
                     Nireus faire Aglaias sonne, and Charopes the king:Nireus their Chiefe, 
                           〈◊〉
                         of all the Greekes but 
                           〈◊〉
                        . Ships 3.
                  
                  
                     Nireus was the fairest man, that to faire Ilion came,
                  Of all the Greekes, saue Peleus sonne; who past for generall frame.
                  But weake this was, not fit for warre, and therefore few did guide.
               
               
                  Who did in Cassus, Nisyrus, and Crapathus abide,
                  
                     In Co, Euripilus his towne, and in Calydnas soyles,The 
                           〈◊〉
                         and other Ilanders.
                  
                  
                     Phydippus and bold Antiphus, did guide to Troian toyles;
                  The sonnes of crowned Thessalus, deriu'd from Hercules,
                     Their Chiefe Phydippus and Antiphus.
                  
                  Who went with thirtie hollow ships, well ordred to the seas.
                  Now will I sing the sackfull troopes, Pelasgian Argos held,Ships 30.
                  
                  That in deepe Alus, Alopé, and soft Trechina dweld;The Pelasgians Thessal. Myrmidons.
                  
                  In Pthya and in Hellade, where liue the louely dames,
                  The Myrmidons, Helenians, and Achiues, robd of Fames:
                  All which the great Aeacides, in fiftie ships did leade.Achilles their Captaine.
                  
                  For, these forgat warres horride voice, because they lackt their head,Ships 50.
                  
                  That would haue brought them brauely foorth; but now at fleete did lie,
                  That wind-like vser of his feet, faire Thetis progenie;
                  Wroth for bright-cheekt Bryseis losse; whom from Lyrnessus spoiles,
                  (His owne exploit) he brought away, as trophee of his toiles,
                  When that town
                        •…
                      was depopulate; he sunke the Theban towres;
                  
                     Myneta, and Epistrophus, he sent to Plutoes bowres,
                  Who came of king Euenus race, great Helepiades:
                  
                  Yet now heidely liues enrag'd, but soone must leaue his ease.
               
               
                  Of those that dwelt in Phylace, and flowrie Pyrrason
                     Philacei, and their townes.
                  
                  The wood of Ceres, and the soyle, that sheepe are fed vpon,
                  
                     Iten and Antron, built by sea, and 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      full of grasse,
                  
                     Protesilaus while he liu'd, the worthie captaine was:Protesilaus captaine.
                  
                  Whom now the sable earth detaines: his teare-torne faced spouse
                  He wofull left in Philace, and his halfe finisht house:
                  A fatall Dardane first his life, of all the Greekes, bereft,
                  As he was leaping from his ship; yet were his men vnleft
                  Without a Chiefe; for though they wisht, to haue no other man,
                  But good Protesilay their guide; Podarces yet began
                  To gouerne them, Iphitis sonne, the sonne of Philacus,
                  
                  Most rich in sheepe, and brother to, short-liu'd Protesilaus:
                  
                  Of yonger birth, lesse, and lesse strong; yet seru'd he to direct
                  The companies, that still did more, their ancient Duke affect.
                  Twise twentie Iettie sailes with him, the swelling streame did take.Ships. 40.
                  
               
               
                  But those that did in Pheres dwell, at the Baebreian lake,The Phereians and their towns.
                  
                  In Baebe, and in Glaphir
                           •…
                        , Iaolcus builded faire:
                  In thrise sixe ships to Pergamus: did through the seas repaire,
                  With old Admetes tender sonne, Eumelus, whom he bred,Eumelus captaine.
                  
                  Of Alcest Pelius fairest child, of all his femall seed.Ships 11.
                  
               
               
                  The souldiers that before the siege, Methones vales did hold:The Methonians and their borderers.
                  
                  
                     Thaumaciae, flowrie Melibae, and Olison the cold,
                  Duke Philoctetes gouerned, in darts of finest sleight:Their chiefe, Philoctetes, left maimed at 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                  
                  Seuen vessels in his charge conuaid, their honorable freight;
                  By fiftie rowers in a barke, most expext in the bow:
                  But he in sacred Lemnos lay, brought miserably low,
                  By torment of an vlcer growne, with Hydras poyson'd bloud:
                  Whose sting was such, Greece left him there, in most impatient moode:Medon Oyleus base sonne, captaine in Philoct. place.
                  
                  Yet thought they on him at his ship, and chusde to leade his men,
                  
                     Medon, Oyleus bastard sonne, brought forth to him by R
                           •…
                        en.
                  
                  
                     From Thricce, bleake Ithomens cliffes, and haplesse Oechaly:
                     The Thriccians, 
                           〈◊〉
                        , and 
                           〈◊〉
                        , whose captaines were 
                           〈◊〉
                         and Machaon.
                  
                  
                     Eurites citie rul'd by him, in wilfull tyranny,
                  In charge of Esculapius sonnes, physition highly praisd:
                  
                     Machaon, Podalirius, were thirtie vessels raisd:
               
               
                  Who neare Hiperias fountaine dwelt, and in Ormenius:
                     Ships 30.
                  
                  The snowy tops of Titannus, and in Asterius:
                     The Ormenians, with their borderers.
                  
                  
                     Euemons sonne Euripilus, did leade into the field:
                  Whose townes did fortie blacke-saild ships, to that encounter yeeld.Their captaine Euripilus.
                  
               
               
                  Who Gyrton, and Argissa held, Orthen and Elons seate,Ships 40.
                  
                  And chalkie Oloossine, were led by Polypete;
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         with their borderers.
                  
                  The issue of Perithous, the sonne of Iupiter.
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         their chiefe, and 
                           〈◊〉
                        , Ships 40.
                  
                  Him the Athenian Theseus friend, Hypodamy did beare;
                  When he the bristled sauages: did giue Ramnusia,
                  
                  And draue them out of Pelius, as farre as Ethica.
                  
                  He came not single, but with him, Leonteus, Corons sonne,
                  An arme of Mars; and Corons life, Ceneus seed begunne.
                  Twise twentie ships, attended these. Cuneus next did bring,The Cyphians, Enians, Perabians.
                  
                  From Cyphus, twentie saile and two, the Enians following;
                  And fierce Peraebi, that about, Dodones frozen mold,
                  Did plant their houses, and the men, that did the medowes hold,Their chiefe Guneus.
                  
                  Which Titoresius deckes with flowers, and his sweet current leades,Ships 22.
                  
                  Into the bright Peneius, that hath the siluer heads.
                  Yet with his admirable streame, doth not his waues commixe;
                  But glides aloft on it like oyle: fortis the floud of Stix,
                  By which th'immortall Gods do sweare. Teuthredons honor'd birth
                  
                     Prothous led the Magnets forth, who neare the shadie earth,The Magnets. Prothous their chiefe.
                  
                  Of Pelius, and Peneion, dwelt; fortie reuengefull saile
                  Did follow him; these were the Dukes, and Princes of auaile,
                  That came from Greece: but now the man, that ouershin'd them all;Ships 40.
                  
                  Sing Muse: and their most famous Steeds, to my recitall call,
                  That both th' Atrides followed; faire Pheretiedes,
                  
                  The brauest mares, did bring by much; Eumelius manag'd these:Eumelius had the best mares of the armie.
                  
                  Swift of their feete as birds of wings; both of one haire did shine,
                  Both of an age, both of a height, as measur'd by a line:
                  Whom siluer-bow'd Apollo bred, in the Pierean meade;
                  Both slicke and daintie, yet were both, in warre of wondrous dread.
               
               
                  Great Aiax Telamon for strength, past all the Peeres of warre,Aiax Telamonius the strongest Greeke next Achill
                           •…
                        .
                  
                  While vext Achilles was away: but he surpast him farre.
                  The horse that bore that faultlesse man, were likewise past compare:
                  Yet lay he at the crookt-stern'd ships, and furie was his fare,Achilles the best horse.
                  
                  For Atreus sonnes vngracious deed: his men yet pleasd their hearts,
                  With throwing of the holed stone; with hurling of their darts,
                  And shooting fairely on the shore. Their horse at chariots fed,
                  On greatest parsly, and on sedge, that in the fens is bred.
                  His Princes tents their chariots held, that richly couerd were.
                  His Princes, amorous of their Chiefe, walkt storming here and there,
                  About the host, and scorn'd to fight: their breaths, as they did passe,
                  Before them flew, as if a fire, fed on the trembling grasse.
                  
                     Earth vnder-gron'd their high raisd feet, as when offended Ioue,
                  
                  In Arime, Tiphocus, with ratling thunder droue,
                  Beneath the earth: in Arime, men say the graue is still,
                  Where thunder tomb'd Typhoeus, and is a monstrous hill.
                  And as that thunder made earth grone, so gron'd it as they past,
                  They trode with such hard-set-downe steps, and so exceeding fast.
               
               
                  To Troy the rainbow-girded dame, right heauie newes relates,Iris to the Troians, from Ioue.
                  
                  From Ioue (as all to Councell drew, in Priams Pallace gates)
                  Resembling Priams sonne in voice, Polytes swift of feet:
                  In trust whereof (as Sentinell, to see when from the fleet,
                  The Grecians sallied) he was set, vpon the loftie brow
                  Of aged Esietes tombe, and this did Iris show;
               
               
                  O Priam thou art alwaies pleasd, with indiscreet aduise:Iris to Priam.
                  
                  And fram'st thy life to times of peace, when such a warre doth rise
                  As threats ineuitable spoyle; I neuer did behold
                  Such and so mightie troupes of men, who trample on the mold,
                  In number like Autumnus leaues, or like the marine sand:
                  All ready round about the walles, to vse a ruining hand.
                  
                     Hector? I therefore charge thee most, this charge to vndertake:
                  A multitude remaine in Troy, will fight for Priams sake,
                  Of other lands and languages; let euerie leader then
                  Bring forth, well arm'd into the field, his seuerall bands of men.
               
               
                  Strong Hector knew, a deitie, gaue charge to this assay:
                  Dismist the Councell straight; like waues, clusters to armes do sway:
                  The ports are all wide open set: out rusht the troopes in swarmes,
                  Both horse and foote, the citie rung, with suddaine cryed alarmes.
               
               
                  A Columne stands without the towne, that high his head doth raise,
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         tumulus
                  
                  A little distant, in a plaine, trod downe with diuers waies:
                  Which men do Batieia call, but the immortals name
                  
                     Myrinnes famous sepulcher, the wondrous actiue dame.
                  Here were th' Auxiliarie bands, that came in Troyes defence,
                  Distinguisht vnder seuerall guides, of speciall excellence.
               
               
                  The Duke of all the Troian power, great helme-deckt Hector was:Hector Generall of the Troians.
                  
                  Which stood of many mightie men, well skild in darts of brasse:
                  
                     Aeneas of commixed seed (a goddesse with a man,The catalogue of other captaines.
                  
                  
                     Anchises, with the Queene of loue:) the troopes Dardanian,Dardans, and Aeneas their captain
                           •…
                        .
                  
                  Led to the field; his louely Sire, in Idas lower shade,
                  Begat him of sweet Cypridis; he solely was not made
                  Chiefe leader of the Dardan powers: Antenors valiant sonnes,
                  
                     Archilochus, and Acamas, were ioyn'd companions.Archiloc
                           •…
                        s. Acamas.
                  
               
               
                  Who in Zelia dwelt, beneath, the sacred foote of Ide,
                  
                  That drinke of blacke Aesepus streame, and wealth made full of pride;
                  (The Aphnij) Lycaons sonne, whom Phoebus gaue his bow,The Aphnij. 
                     Pandarus their leader.
                  
                  (Prince Pandarus) did leade to field. Who Adrestinus owe,
                  (Apesus citie, Pitai, and mount Tereies)
                  
                     Adrestus, and stout Amphius led; who did their Sire displease,Adrestians. 
                     Their Chiefe Adrestus and Amphius.
                  
                  (Merops Percosius) that exceld, all Troy in heauenly skill,
                  Of futures-searching prophesie: for much against his will,
                  
                     His sonnes were agents in those armes: whom since they disobeyd;
                  The Fates, in letting slip their threds, their hastie valures staid.
               
               
                  Who in Percotes, Practius; Arisbe did abide,Percosians, S
                           •…
                        
                        stians, Abidens, 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        ▪ led by Asius.
                  
                  Who Sestus and Abidus bred, Hyrtacides did guide:
                  Prince Asius Hyrtacides, that through great Selees force,
                  Brought from Arisba to that fight, the great and fierie horse.
               
               
                  
                     Pyleus, and Hypothous, the stout Pelasgians led,The Pelasgians. 
                     Their chiefe, 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        ▪ and 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                  
                  Of them Larissas fruitfull soyle, before had nourished:
                  These were Pelasgian Pithus sonnes, sonne of Teutamidas.
                  
               
               The Thracian guides were Pyrous, and valiant Acamas.
                  The Thracians.
               
               
                  Of all that the impetuous flood, of Hellespont enclosd,Their chiefe Pyrous & 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                  
                  
                     Euphemus, the Ciconian troopes, in his command disposd;Euphemus Capt. of the Ciconians.
                  
                  Who from Trezenius Ceades, right nobly did descend.
               
               
                  
                     Pyrechmes did the Peons rule, that crooked bowes do bend.Pyrechm
                           •…
                        s Commander of the 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                  
                  From Axius out of Amidon, he had them in command:
                  From Axius, whose most beautious streame, still 
                        〈◊〉
                      the land.
               
               
                  
                     Pylemen with the well arm'd heart, the Paphlagonians led,Pylemē captain of the Paphlagonians.
                  
                  From Enes, where the race of mules, fit for the plough is bred:
                  The men that broad Cytorus bounds, and Sesamus enfold▪
                  
                  About Parthenius loftie floud, in houses much extold;
                  From Cromna and Aegialus, the men that armes did beare,
                  And Eurithymus situate high, Pylemens soldiers were.
               
               
                  
                     Epistrophus and Dius did, the Halizonians guide,
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , their captaine Epistrophus and Dius.
                  
                  Far-fetcht from Alybe, where first, the siluer mines were tride.
               
               
                  
                     Chronius, and Augur Eunomus, the Mysians did command,
                  Who could not with his auguries, the strength of death withstand:The Mysians. Eunomus and C
                           •…
                        ronius.
                  
                  But suffred it beneath the stroke, of great Aeacides,
                  
                  In Xanthus; where he made more soules, diue to the Stygian seas.
               
               
                  
                     Phorcys and faire Ascanius, the Phrygians brought to warre;The 
                           〈◊〉
                        . Their Chiefes Phorcis and 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        ▪
                     
                  
                  Well train'd for battell, and were come, out of Ascania farre.
                  With Methles, and with Antiphus (Pylemens sonnes) did fight,
                  The men of Mezon, whom the fenne, Gygaea brought to light.
               
               
                  And those Maeonians that beneath, the mountaine Tmolus sprong;The 
                           〈◊〉
                        . Antiphus and Methles captaines.
                  
                  The rude vnletterd Caribae, that barbarous were of tongue,
                  Did vnder Naustes colours march, and young Amphimachus,
                  
                  (Nomyons famous sonnes) to whom, the mountaine Phthirorus,
                     The 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        ▪ and Milesians led by Amphimacus and Naustes.
                  
                  That with the famous wood is crown'd; Miletus, Micales,
                  
                  That hath so many loftie markes, for men that loue the seas;
                  The crooked armes Meander bow'd, with his so snakie flood,
                  Resign'd for conduct the choice youth, of all their martiall brood▪
                  
                  The foole Amphimachus, to field, brought gold to be his wracke;
                  Proude-gi
                        •…
                     lelike that doth euer beare, her dowre vpon her backe;
                  Which wise Achilles markt; slue him, and tooke his gold in strife,
                  At Xanthus floud; so little death, did feare his golden life.The Lycians whose Commanders were Sarpe don & 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                  
                  
                     Sarpedon led the Lycians, and Glaucus vnreprou'd,
                  From Lycia and the gulfie flood, of Xanthus farre remou'd.
               
            
            
               COMMENT ARIVS.
               
                  a 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. Sicut examina prodeunt apum frequentium, &c. In thu Simile,
                  
                  Virgil (vsing the like in imitation) is preferd to Homer; with what reason I pray you see. Their ends are different: Homer intending to expresse the infinite multitude of souldiers euerie where dispersing; Virgil, the diligence of builders. Virgils Simile is this. 1. Aeneid.
               
               
                  Qualis apes aestate noua, per florea rura
                  Exercet sub sole labor; cum gentis adultos
                  Educunt foetus; aut cum liquentia mella
                  Stipant; & dulci distendunt Nectare cellas;
                  Aut onera accipiunt venientum; aut agmine facto;
                  Ignauum fucos pecus à praesepibus arcent:
                  Feruet opus; redolent thymo fragrantia mella.
               
               Now compare this with Homers, but in my translation; and iudge if to both their ends, there be any such betternesse in Virgils: but that the reuerence of the scholler, due to the maister (euen in these his maligners) might well haue containd their lame censures of the Poeticall furie; from these vnmannerlie and hatefull comparisons. Especially, since Virgil hath nothing of his owne, but onely elocution; his inuention, matter, and forme, being all Homers: which laid by a man; that which he addeth, is onelie the worke of a woman, to netifie and polish. Nor do I, alas, but the formost ranke of the most ancient and best learned that euer were, come to the field for Homer; hiding all other Poets vnder his ensigne: hate not me then, but them; to whom, before my booke I referre you. But much the rather I insist on the sormer Simile; for the word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , cateruatim, or confertim, which is noted by Spondanus to containe all the 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , reddition, or application of the comparison; and is nothing so. For though it be all the reddition Homer expresseth; yet he intends two speciall parts in the application more; which he leaues to his iudicial readers vnderstanding, as he doth in all his other Similes: since a man may peruially (or as he passeth) discerne all that is to be vnderstood. And here, besides the throngs of souldiers, exprest in the swarmes of Bees; he intimates the infinite number in those throngs or companies, issuing from fleete so ceaslesly, that there appeared almost no end of their issue: and thirdly, the euerie where dispersing themselues. But Spondanus would excuse Homer, for expressing no more of his application; with affirming it impossible; that the thing compared, and the comparison, should answer in all parts; and therefore alledges the vulgar vnderstanding of a Simile, which is as grosse as it is vulgar; that a similitude must vno pede semper claudicare. His reason for it as absurd as the rest: which is this, si ea inter se omnino respōderent, falleret illud axioma, nullum simile est idem; as though the generall application of the compared, and the comparison, would make them any thing more the same, or all one; more then the swarmes of Bees, and the throng of souldiers are allone, or the same; for answering most aptly. But that a Simile must needs halt of one foote still; showeth how lame vulgar tradition is, especially in her censure of Poesie. For who at first sight, will not conceiue it absurd to make a Simile; which ser
                     •…
                  es to the illustration and ornament of a Poeme; lame of a foote, and idle? The incredible violence suffered by Homer in all the rest of his most inimitable Similes, being exprest in his place, will abundantly proue the stupiditie of this tradition: and how iniuriously short his interpreters must needs come of him, in his streight and deepe places; when in his open and faire passages, they halt and hang backe so.
               
                  b 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   &c. hunc quidem clarū
                   (or illustrem) fecit Deus; as it is by all translated; wherein I note the strange abuse (as I apprehend it) of the word

                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   beginning here, & continuing wheresoeuer it is found in these Iliads. It is by the transition of Z into 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   in deriuation, according to the Doricke: for which cause our Interpreters will needs haue Homer intend 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   which is clarus or illustris, when he himselfe saith, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   which is a compound of 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   which is valde, and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   and signifies, quem valde aemulamur, or valde aemulandus, according to Scap. But because 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   is most authentically expounded, impetus mentis ad cultum diuinum, that exposition I follow in this place, and expound 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  hunc quidem magnum impulsum ad cultum diuinum fecit Deus; because he turned so sodainly and miraculously the Dragon to a stone. To make it 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and say, clarum, or illustrem fecit Deus; qui ostendit, or ostenderat, (which followes in the verse) and saith thus much in our tongue: God that shewed this, made it cleare; is verie little more, then God that shewed this, shewed it. One way it obserues the word (betwixt which, and the other, you see what great difference) and is faire, 
                     •…
                  ll, graue; the other alters the originall, and is vglie, emptie, idle.
               
                  c 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c, Spontanens autem ei venit, voce bonus Menelaus; and some say bello strenuus Menelaus: which is farre estranged from the mind of our Homer, 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   signifying vociferatio, or clamor, though some will haue it pugna, ex consequenti; because fights are often made with clamor. But in bello strenuus, (vnlesse it be ironically taken) is here straind beyond sufferance, & is to be expounded vociferatione bonus Menelaus: which agreeth with that part of his character in the next booke, that telleth his maner of vtterance or voice: which is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  valde stridulè, or arguto cum stridore; 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   being commonly and most properlie taken in the worse part, and signifieth shrillae, or noisefullie, squeaking: howsoeuer in the vulgar conuersion it is in that place most grosselie abused. To the consideration whereof, being of much importance, I referre you in his place. And in the meane time shew you, that in this first and next verse, Homer (speaking scoptically) breakes open the fountaine of his ridiculous humor following: neuer by anie interpreter vnderstood, or touched at, being yet the most ingenious conceited person that any man can shew in any heroicall Poeme, or in any Comicke Poet. And that you may something perceiue him before you reade to him in his seuer all places: I will, as I can, in haste, giue you him here together, as Homer at all parts presents him: viz. simple, wel-meaning, standing still affectedlie on telling truth, small, and shrill voiced (not sweet, or eloquent, as some most against the haire would haue him) short spoken, after his countrie the Laconicall manner: yet speaking thicke and fast, industrious in the field, and willing to be emploied. And (being mollis Bellator himselfe) set still to call to euerie hard seruice, the hardiest. Euen by the wit of Aiax, plaid vpon, about whom he would still be diligent: and what he wanted of the martiall furie and facultie himselfe, that he would be bold to supplie out of Aiax: Aiax and he, to any for blowes: Antilochus and he for wit: (Antilochus old Nestors (onne, a most ingenious, valiant, and excellentlie formed person.)
               Sometimes valiant, or daring, (as what coward is not) sometimes falling vpon sentence, and good matter in his speeches (as what meanest capacitie doth not?) Nor vseth our most inimitable Imitator of nature, this crosse and deformed mixture of his parts, more to colour and auoid too broad a taxation of so eminent a person; then to follow the true life of nature, being often, or alwaies, exprest so disparent in her creatures. And therefore the decorum that some poore Criticks haue stood vpon; to make fooles alwaies foolish, cowards at all times cowardly, &c. is farre from the variant order of nature, whose principles being contrary, her productions must needes containe

the like opposition.
               But now to the first; 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. Spontaneus autem ei venit, &c. about which, a passing great peece of worke is pickt out by our greatest Philosophers, touching the vnbidden coming of Menelaus to supper or Counsell, which some commend; others condemne in him: but the reason why he staid not the inuitement, rendered immediatly by Homer, none of thē will vnderstand, viz. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. sciebat enim in animo quantum frater laborabat: of which verse his interpreters crie out for the expunction, onely because it was neuer entered in their apprehension; which I more then admire (for the easinesse of it) so freely offering it selfe to their entertainment; and yet vsing the hoofe of Pegasus, onely with a touch breaking open (as abouesaid) the fountaine of his humor. For thus I expound it, (laying all againe together, to make it plaine enough for you,) Agamemn
                        •…
                     n inuiting all the chiefe Commanders to supper, left out his brother; but he, seeing how much his brother was troubled about the dreame, and busied, would not stand vpon inuitement, but came of himselfe. And this being spoken Scopticé, or by way of irrision, argueth what manner of man he made of him. Ineptus enim (as it is affirmed in Plutarch, 1. Symp. and second question) fuit Menelaus, & locum dedit prouerbio, qui ad consilium dandum accessisset, non 
                        〈◊〉
                     : And to this place he had reference, because a Councell of warre was to be held at this supper. And here (I say) Homer opened the veine of his simplicitie, not so much in his going vnbidden to supper, and Counsell, as in the reason for it ironically rendered; that he knew his brother was busie, &c. And yet that addition, without which the very sence of our Poet is not safe, our interpreters would haue raced.
               The end of the second Booke.
            
         
         
            
            THE THIRD BOOKE OF HOMERS ILIADS.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  
                     PAris (betwixt the Hoasts) to single fight
                  (Of all the Greekes) dares the most hardie knight:
                  King Menelaus, doth accept his braue,
                  Conditioning that he againe should haue
                  Faire Helena, with all she brought to Troy,
                  If he subdu'd; else Paris should enioy
                  Her, and her wealth, in peace. Conquest doth grant
                  Her deare wreath to the Grecian combattant;
                  But Venus, to her champions life doth yeeld
                  Safe rescue, and conueyes him from the field,
                  Into his chamber; and for Hellen sends;
                  Whom much, her louers foule disgrace offends;
                  Yet Venus, for him still makes good her charmes,
                  And ends the second combat in his armes.
               
            
            
               Another Argument.
               
                  
                     Gamma, the single fight doth sing
                  Twixt Paris, and the Spartan king.
               
            
            
               
                  WHen euery least Commanders will, best souldiers had obaide,
               And both the hosts were rang'd for fight, the Troians would haue fraid
               The Greeks with noises; crying out, in coming rudely on:
               At all parts like the Cranes that fill, with harsh confusion,The 
                        〈◊〉
                      compared to Cranes.
               
               Of brutish clanges, all the aire: and in ridiculous warre,
               (Eschuing the vnsufferd stormes, shot from the winters starre)
               Visite the Ocean; and conferre, the Pygmei souldiers death.The silent assalt of the Greekes.
               
               The Greeks charg'd silent, and like men, bestow'd their thriftie breath
               In strength of far-resounding blowes; still entertaining care
               Of eithers rescue, when their strength, did their engagements dare.
               And as vpon a hils steepe tops, the Southwind powres a cloud
               To shepheards thanklesse; but by theeues, that loue the night, allowd;
               A darknesse letting downe, that blinds, a stones cast off men eyes:
               Such darknesse from the Greeks swift feet, (made all of dust) did rise.
               But ere sterne conflict mixt both strengths, faire Paris stept before
               The Troian host; athwart his backe, a Panthers hide he wore,
               A crooked bow, and sword, and shooke, two brazen-headed darts;
               With which (well arm'd) his tongue prouok't, the best of Grecian hearts
               To stand with him in single fight. Whom, when the man wrong'd most
               Of all the Greekes, so gloriously, saw stalke before the host;
               
                  As when a Lion is reioyc't (with hunger halfe forlorne)
               That finds some sweet prey; (as a Hart, whose grace lies in his horne,
               Or Syluane Goate) which he deuours, though neuer so pursu'd
               With dogs and men; so Spartas king, exulted, when he view'd
               The faire-fac'd Paris so exposde, to his so thirsted wreake,
               Whereof his good cause made him sure. The Grecian front did breake,
               And forth he rusht, at all parts arm'd: leapt from his chariot,
               And royally prepar'd for charge. Which seene, cold terror shot
               The heart of Paris, who retir'd, as headlong from the king,Paris flieth at sight of Menelaus.
               
               As in him, he had shund his death: and as a hilly spring,
               Presents a serpent to a man, full vnderneath his feete,Simile.
               
               Her blew necke (swolne with poison) raisd, and her sting out, to greet
               His heedlesse entrie: sodainely, his walke he altereth;
               Starts backe amaz'd, is shooke with feare, and lookes as pale as death:
               So Menelaus, Paris scar'd: so that diuine fac't foe,
               Shrunke in his beauties. Which beheld, by Hector, he let go
               This bitter checke at him. Accurst, made but in beauties skorne;Hector to Paris.
               
               Impostor, womans man! O heauen, that thou hadst neare bene borne,
               Or (being so manlesse) neuer liu'd, to beare mans noblest state,
               The nuptiall honor; which I wish, because it were a fate
               Much better for thee, then this shame; this spectacle doth make
               A man a monster: Harke how lowd, the Greekes laugh, who did take
               Thy faire forme, for a continent, of parts as faire; a rape
               Thou mad'st of Nature, like their Queene. No soule; an emptie shape
               Takes vp thy being: yet, how spight, to euerie shade of good,
               Fils it with ill? for as thou art, thou couldst collect a brood
               Of others like thee: and farre hence, fetch ill enough to vs;
               Euen to thy father: all these friends; make those foes mocke them thus,
               In thee: for whose ridiculous sake, so seriously they lay,
               All Greece, and Fate vpon their necks: O wretch! not dare to stay
               Weake Menelaus? But twas well: for in him, thou hadst tried
               What strength, lost beautie can infuse; and with the more griefe died,
               To feele thou robdst a worthier man; to wrong a souldiers right.
               Your Ha
                     •…
                  ps sweettouch, curld lockes, fine shape, and gifts so exquisite,
               Giuen thee by Venus, would haue done, your fine Dames little good,
               When bloud and dust had ruffled them; and had as little stood
               Thy selfe in stead; but what thy care, of all these in thee flies,
               We should inflict on thee our selues: infectious cowardise
               (In thee) hath terrified our host; for which, thou well deseru'st
               A coate of Tomb-stone, not of steele: in which, for forme thou seru'st.
            
            
               To this thus Paris spake, (for forme, that might inhabit heauen)Paris to Hector.
               
               
                  Hector? Because thy sharpe reproofe, is out of iustice giuen,
               I take it well: but though thy heart (inu
                     •…
                  'd to these affrights
               Cuts through them, as an axe through Oke; that, more vsd, more excites
               The workmans facultie: whose art, can make the edge go farre;
               Yet I (lesse practisd, then thy selfe, in these extremes of warre)
               May well be pardond, though lesse bold; in these, your worth exceeds;
               In others, mine: Nor is my mind, of lesse force to the deeds
               
                  Requir'd in warre; because my forme, more flowes in gifts of peace.
               Reproach not therefore the kind gifts, of golden Cyprides;
               
               All heau'ns gifts haue their worthie price; as little to b
                     •…
                   scorn'd,
               As to be wonne with strength, wealth, state; with which, to be ador
                     •…
                  'd,
               Some man would change, state, wealth, or strength. But if your 
                     •…
                  artiall heart
               Wish me to make my challenge good, and hold it such a part
               Of shame to giue it ouer thus; cause all 
                     •…
                  he rest to rest;
               And twixt both hosts, let Spartas king, and me performe our best,
               For Hell
                        •…
                     n, and the wealth she brought: and he that ouercomes,
               Or proues superiour any way, in all your equall doomes,
               Let him enioy her vtmost wealth, keepe her, or take her home;
               The rest strike leagues of endlesse date, and heartie friends become;
               You dwelling safe in gleby Troy, the Greekes retire their force,
               T'Achaia, that breeds fairest Dames: and Argos, fairest horse.
            
            
               He said, and his amendsfull words, did Hector highly please;
               Who rusht betwixt the fighting hoasts, and made the Troians cease,
               By holding vp, in midst, his lance: the Grecians noted not
               The signall he for parle vsde, but at him fiercely shot;
               Hurld stones, and still were leuelling darts. At last, the king of men
               (Great Agamemnon) cried alowd: Argiues? for shame containe:Agamemn on restraines the fight against Hector.
               
               Youths of Achaia? shoot no more; the faire-helm'd-Hector showes
               As he desir'd to treate with vs. This said, all ceast from blowes;
               And Hector spake to both the hosts: Troians? and hardie Greekes?Hector to the Greekes and Troians.
               
               Heare now, what he that stird these warres, for their cessation seekes:
               He bids vs all, and you disarme, that he alone may fight
               With Menelaus, for vs all; for Hellen and her right,
               With all the dowre she brought to Troy; and he that wins the day,
               Or is, in all the art of armes, superiour any way;
               The Queene, and all her sorts of wealth, let him at will enioy;
               The rest strike truce; and let loue seale, firme leagues twixt Greece and Troy.
            
            
               The Gre
                     •…
                  ke host wondred at this Braue: silence flew euery where;
               At last, spake Spartas warlike king: Now also giue me eare,Menelaus 
                        •…
                     o both the armies.
               
               Whom griefe giues most cause of replie; I now haue hope to free
               The Greekes and Troians of all ils, they haue sustaind for me
               And Alexander, that was cause, I stretcht my sple
                     •…
                  e so farre.
               Of both then, which is nearest fate, let his death end the warre:
               The rest immediatly retire, and greet all homes in peace.
               Go then (to blesse your champion, and giue his powers successe)
               Fetch for the Earth, and for the Sunne, (the Gods on whom ye call)
               Two lambes, a blacke one and a white: a femall, and a male;
               And we, another for our selues, will fetch, and kill to Ioue;
               
               To signe which rites, bring 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   force; because we well approue,
               His sonnes perfidious, enuious, (and out of practisd bane
               To faith, when she beleeues in them) Ioues high truce may prophane,
               All yong mens hearts, are still vnstaid: but in those wel-weigh'd deeds
               An old man will consent to passe, things past, and what succeeds
               He lookes into; that he may know, 
                     •…
                  ow best to make his way
               Through both the fortunes of a fact: and will the worst obay.
            
            
               
                  (This granted,) A delightfull hope, both Greekes and Troians fed,
               Of long'd▪for rest, from those long toyles, their tedious warre had bred.
               Their horses then in ranke they set, drawne from their chariots round;
               Descend themselues, tooke off their armes, and plac't them on the ground,
               Neare one another; for the space, twixt both the hosts w
                     •…
                  s small.
               
                  Hector two heralds sent to Troy, that they from thence might callHector sendeth for Priam.
               
               King Priam; and to bring the lambes, to rate the truce they swore.
               But Agamemnon to the fleet, Talthibius sent before,
               To fetch their lambe; who nothing slackt, the royall charge was giuen.
            
            
               
                  a 
                  Iris the raine-bow then came downe, Ambassadres
                     •…
                  e from heauen,Iris to H
                        •…
                     llen.
               
               To white-arm'd Hellen; she assum'd, at euery part, the grace
               Of Hellens last loues sisters shape; who had the highest place
               In Hellens loue; and had to name, Laodice; most faire
               Of all the daughters Priam had: and made the nuptiall paire,
               With Helicaon; royall sproute, of old Antenors seed;
               She found Queene Hellena at home, at worke about a weed,
               Wou'n for her selfe: it shin'd like fite; was rich, and full of sise;
               The worke of both sides being alike, in which she did comprise
               The many labors, warlike Troy, and brasse-arm'd Greece endur'd▪
               
               For her faire sake, by cruell Mars, and his sterne friends procur'd.
               
                  Iris came in in ioyfull haste, and said: O come with me,
               (Lou'd Nymph) and an admired sight, o
                     •…
                   Greekes and Troians see;
               Who first on one another brought, a warre so full of teares,
               (Euen thirstie of contentious warre) now euerie man forbeares,
               And friendly by each other sits, each leaning on his shield;
               Their long and shining lances pitcht, fast by them in the field.
               
                  Paris, and Spartas king alone, must take vp all the strife;
               And he that conquers, onely call, faire Hellena his wife.
            
            
               Thus spake the thousand colour'd Dame: and to her mind commends
               The ioy to see her first espousd, her natiue tow'rs, and friends;
                     
                        •…
                     ellens 
                        〈◊〉
                      to see her first husband & friends.
               
               Which stir'd a sweet desire in her, to serue the which, she hi'd:
               Shadowed her graces with white veiles, and (though she tooke a pride
               To set her thoughts at gaze, and see, in her cleare beauties flood
               What choice of glorie swum to her, yet tender womanhood)
               Season'd with teares, her ioyes to see, more ioyes the more offence:
               And that perfection could not flow, from earthly excellence.
            
            
               Thus went she forth, and tooke with her, her women most of name,
               
                  Aethra, Pitth
                        •…
                     us louely birth: and Clymene, whom fame
               Hath, for her faire eyes, memorisd. They reacht the Scaean towrs,
               Where Priam sat to see the fight, with all his Counsellours,
               
                  Panthous, Lampus, Cl
                        •…
                     tius, and stout Hycetaon,
               
               
                  Thim
                        •…
                     tes, wise Antenor, and profound Vealeg
                        •…
                     n:
               
               All graue old men, and souldiers, they had bene, but for age
               Now 
                     〈◊〉
                   the warres; yet Counsellors, they were exceeding sage.Old men, and their weake 
                        〈◊〉
                     , most 
                        〈◊〉
                      compared to Grashoppers and their 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               And, as in well-growne woods, on trees, cold spinie Grashoppers
               Sit chirping, and send voices out, that scarce can pierce our eares,
            
            
               
                  b For softnesse, and their weake faint sounds: So (talking on the towre)
               These Seniors of the people sate: who when they 
                     •…
                  aw the powre
               
                  Of beauty, in the Queene ascend; even those cold-spirited Peeres;
               Those wise, and almost witherd men, found this heate in their yeeres;Hellens beautie moves even 
                        •…
                     he oldest.
               
               That they were forc't (though whispering▪) to say; what man can blame
               The Greeekes and Trojans to indure, for so admir'd a Dame,
               So many miseries, and so long? In her sweet countenance shine
               Lookes like the Goddesses: and yet (though never so divine)
               Before we boast, uniustly still, of her enforced prise,
               And iustly suffer for her sake, with all our progenies,
               Labour and ruine, let her goe: the profit of our land,
               Must passe the beauty. Thus, though these could beare so fit a hand
               On their affections; yet when all their gravest powers were usde,
               They could not chuse but welcome her, and rather they accusde
               The gods then beauty; for thus spake the most fam'd King of Troy;Priam cals Hellen to informe him of the Greek Princes.
               
               Come, loved daughter, sit by me, and take the worthy ioy
               Of thy first husbands sight; old friends, and Princes neare allyed:
               And name me some of these brave Greekes, so manly beautified.
               Come: doe not thinke I lay the warres, endur'd by us, on thee,
               The gods have sent them, and the teares, in which they swumme to me,
               Sit then, and name this goodly Greeke, so tall, and broadly spred,
               Who then the rest, that stand by him, is higher by the head;
               The bravest man I ever saw, and most maiesticall;
               His onely presence makes me thinke him King amongst them all.
            
            
               The fairest of her sexe replyed; Most reverend fath'r in law:Hellen to Priam
               
               Most lov'd, most fear'd; would some ill death had seisd me, when I saw
               The first meane, why I wrong'd you thus▪ that I had never lost
               The sight of these my ancient friends; of him that lov'd me most,
               Of my sole daughter, brothers both; with all those kindely mates,
               Of one soyle, one age borne with me, though under different fates,
               But these boones envious starres deny; the memory of these,
               In sorrow pines those beauties now, that then did too much please;
               Nor satisfie they your demand, to which I thus reply:
               That's Agamemnon, (Atreus sonne) the great in 
                     〈◊〉
                  ;
               A King, whom double royaltie doth crowne, being great and good;
               And one that was my brother in law, when I contain'd my bloud,
               And was more worthy; if at all, I might be sa
                     •…
                  d to be,
               My Being, being lost so soone, in all that honour'd me?
            
            
               The good old King admir'd, and said: O 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   blessed sonne!
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Borne under joyfull destinies, that hast the Empire wonne
               Of such a world of Grecian youths, as I discover here;
               I once marcht into Phrygia, that many vines doth beare,
               Where many Phrygians 
                     •…
                   beheld, well skild in use of horse,
               That of the two men, like two gods, were the commanded force,
               (Otroeus, and great Migdonus) who on Sangarius sands,
               Set downe their tents, with whom my selfe (for my 
                     〈◊〉
                   bands)
               Was numbred as a man in chiefe▪ the cause of warre 
                     〈◊〉
                   then,
               Th' Amazon dames, that in their facts, affected to be men.
               In all, there was a mighty powre, which yet did never rise,
               To equall these Achaian youths, that have the sable eyes,
               
                  Then (seeing Vlysses next) he said, Lov'd daughter, what is he,
               That lower then great Atreus sonne, seemes by the head to me?
               Yet in his shoulders, and big breast, presents a broader show,
               His armor lyes upon the earth: he up and downe doth go,
               To see his soulders keepe their rankes, and ready have their armes,
               If, in this truce, they should be tried by any false alarmes.
               Much like a well growne Bel-weather, or feltred Ram he shewes,
               That walkes before a wealthy flocke of faire white▪ fleeced Ewes.
            
            
               High Iove, and Ledas fairest seed, to Priam thus replies:
               This is the old Laertes sonne, Vlysses cald the wise;Vlysses d
                        •…
                     scribed
               
               Who, though unfruitfull Ithaca, was made his nursing seate,
               Yet knowes he every sort of sleight: and is in counsels great.
            
            
               The wise Antenor answerd her, tis true, renowned Dame;A
                        •…
                     tenor to Hellen by way of digression.
               
               For, some times past, wise It
                        •…
                     acus, to Troy a Legate came
               With Menelaus, for your cause: to whom I gave receit,
               As guests, and welcom'd to my house, with all the love I might.
               I learn'd the wisedomes of their soules, and humors of their bloud:
               For when the Troian Councell met, and these together stood,
               By height of his broad shoulders had Atrides eminence,
               Yet set, Vlysses did exceed, and bred more reverence.
               And when their counsels and their words, they wove in one, the speech
               Of Atreus sonne was passing loud, small, fast, yet did not reach
               To much; being naturally borne Laconicall: nor would
               His humour lyc for any thing, or was (like th'other) old.
               But when the prudent Ithacus, did to his counsels rise,
               He stood a little still, and fixt upon the earth his eyes;
               His scepter moving neither way, but held it formally,
               Like one that vainely doth affect. Of wrathfull qualitie,
               And franticke (rashly iudging him) you would have said he was,
               But when out of his ample breast, he gave his great voyce passe,
               And words that flew about our eares, like drifts of winters snow;Ulysses wisedome 
                        〈◊〉
                      illustrated by similitude.
               
               None thenceforth might contend with him, though nought admird for show.
            
            
               The third man, aged Priam markt, was Aiax Telam
                        •…
                     :
               
               Of whom he askt, What Lord is that so large of limme and bone,
               So raisd in height, that to his breast, I see there reacheth none?
            
            
               To him the Goddesse of her sexe, the large veild Hellen said;Ai
                        •…
                     x Telamon the Grecian bulwarke.
               
               That Lord is Aiax Telamon, a Bulwarke in their aide:
               On th'other side stands Idomen, in Crete of most command,
               And round about his royall sides, his Cretane Captaines stand.Id
                        •…
                     menus 
                        〈◊〉
                      of 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Oft hath the warlike Spartan King, given hospitable due
               To him within our Lacene court, and all his retinue.
               And now the other Achive Dukes, I generally discerne,
               All which I know, and all their names, could make thee quickly learne.
               Two Princes of the people yet, I no where can behold;
               
                  Castor, the skilfull Knight on horse, and Pollux uncontrold,Castor and Pollux brothers to Hellen.
               
               For all stand-fights, and force of hand; both at a burthen bred,
               My naturall brothers: either here, they have not followed,
               From lovely Sparta; or (arriv'd within the sea-borne fleet)
               
                  (In feare of infamie for me) in broad field shame to meet.
            
            
               Nor so; for holy Tellus wombe, inclosd those worthy men,The h
                        •…
                     ralds propare for the compact.
               
               In Sparta, their beloued soyle. The voicefull heralds then,
               The firme agreement of the Gods, through all the citie ring:
               Two lambs, and spirit-refreshing wine (the fruit of earth) they bring,
               Within a Goates-kin bottle closd; Ideus also brought
               A massie glittering boll, and cups, that all of gold were wrought:Ideus to Priamus.
               
               Which bearing to the king they cride; Sonne of Laomedon?
               
               Rise; for the wel-rode Peeres of Troy, and brasse-arm'd Greekes in one,
               Send to thee, to descend to field, that they firme vowes may make;
               For, Paris and the Spartan king, must fight for Hellens sake,
               With long arm'd lances; and the man, that proues victorious,
               The woman and the wealth she brought, shall follow to his house;
               The rest knit friendship, and firme leagues; we safe in Troy shall dwell;
               In Argos and Achaia they, that do in dames excell.
            
            
               He said, and Priams aged ioints, with chilled feare did shake;
               Yet instantly he bad his men, his chariot readie make.
               Which soone they did, and he ascends: he takes the reines, and guide,
               
                  Antenor cals; who instantly, mounts to his royall side;
               And through the Scaean ports, to field, the swift-foote horse they driue.
               And when at them of Troy and Greece, the aged Lords arriue,
               From horse, on Troyes well feeding soyle, twixt both the hosts they go.
               When straight vp rose the king of men, vp rose Vlysses to;
               The heralds in their richest cotes, repeate (as was the guise)
               The true vowes of the Gods; term'd theirs, since made before their eyes.
               Then in a cup of gold they mixe, the wine that each side brings;
               And next, powre water on the hands, of both the kings of kings.
               Which done, Atrides drew his knife, that euermore he put
               Within the large sheath of his sword: with which, away he cut
               The wooll from both fronts of the lambs, which (as a rite in vse
               Of execration to their heads, that brake the plighted truce)
               The heralds of both hosts did giue, the Peeres of both. And then
               With hands and voice aduanc't to heauen, thus prayd the 
                     •…
                  ing of men:
            
            
               O Ioue, that Ida dost protect, and hast the titles wonne,Agamemnon himselfe prayes.
               
               Most glorious, most inuincible; And thou all-seeing Sunne;
               All-hearing, all-recomforting; floods? earth? and powers beneath?
               That all the periuries of men, chastise euen after death;
               Be witnesse, and see perform'd, the heartie vowes we make;
               If Alexander shall the life, of Menelaus take,
               He shall from henceforth Hellena, with all her wealth retaine;
               And we will to our houshold Gods, hoyse saile, and home againe.
               If by my honourd brothers hand, be Alexander slaine,
               The Troians then, shall his forc't Queene, with all her wealth restore,
               And pay conuenient fine to vs, and ours for euermore.
               If Priam, and his sonnes denie, to pay this, thus agreed,
               When Alexander shall be slaine; for that perfidious deed,
               And for the fine, will I fight here, till dea
                     •…
                  ely they repay
               By death and ruine, the amends, that falshood keepes away.
            
            
               
                  This said, the throtes of both the lambs, cut with his royall knife;The c
                        •…
                     tract is 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               He laid them panting on the earth, till (quite depriu'd of life)
               The steele had robd them of their strength. Then golden cups they cround,
               With wine out of a cisterne drawne: which powr'd vpon the ground,
               They fell vpon their humble knees, to all the deities,
               And thus pray'd one of both the hosts, that might do sacrifice;
            
            
               O Iupiter, most high, most great, and all the deathlesse powers;Now one praies whose office was to do sacrifice.
               
               Who first shall dare to violate, the late sworne oaths of ours,
               So let the bloods and braines of them, and all they shall produce,
               Flow on the staind face of the earth; as now, this sacrediuice:
               And let their wiues with bastardi
                     •…
                  e, brand all their future race.
               Thus praid they: but with wisht effects, their prayrs Ioue did not grace.
               When Priam said; Lords of both hoasts? I can no longer stay,Priam to both hosts.
               
               To see my lou'd sonne trie his life; and so must take my way
               To winde-exposed Ilion. Ioue yet and heauens high States,
               Know onely, which of these must now, pay tribute to the Fates.
            
            
               Thus putting in his coach the lambs, he mounts, and reines his horse;Pri
                        •…
                      and Antenor return
                        •…
                      to Troy.
               
               
                  Antenor to him; and to Troy, both take their speedie course.
            
            
               Then Hector (Priams Martiall sonne) stept forth, and met the ground,
               (With wise Vlysses) where the blowes, of combat must resound.He
                        •…
                     or and Vlysses measure the ground for the combat.
               
               Which done, into a helme they put, two lots, to let them know,
               Which of the combattants should first, his brasse-pil'd iaueline throw.
               When, all the people standing by, with hands held vp to heauen,
               Pray'd Ioue, the conquest might not be, by force or fortune giuen;
               But that the man, who was in right, the author of most wrong,
               Might feele his iustice; and no more, these tedious warres prolong;
               But sinking to the house of death, leaue them (as long before)
               Linkt fast in leagues of amitie, that might dissolue no more.
            
            
               Then Hector shooke the helme that held, the equall doomes of chance;Hector shakes the hel
                        •…
                     e, and Par
                        •…
                      draws the lot to 
                        〈◊〉
                      first.
               
               Look't backe, and drew; and Paris first, had lot to hu
                     •…
                  le his lance.
            
            
               The souldiers all sat downe enrank't, each by his armes and horse,
               That then lay downe, and cool'd their hoofes. And now th'allotted course
               Bids faire-haird H
                        •…
                     lens husband arme: who first makes fast his greaues,He armes.
               
               With siluer buckles to his legs: then on his breast receiues
               The curets that Lycaon wore, (his brother) but made fit
               For his faire bodie: next, his sword, he tooke, and fastned it
               (All damaskt) vnderneath his arme: his shield then, graue and great,
               His shoulders wore: and on his head, his glorious helme he set;
               Topt with a plume of horses haire, that horribly did dance,
               And seem'd to threaten as he mou'd. At last he takes his lance,
               Exceeding big, and full of weight; which he▪ with ease could vse.
            
            
               In like sort, Spartas warlike king, himselfe with armes indues.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      arms
               
               Thus arm'd at either armie both, they both stood brauely in,
               Possessing both hosts with amaze: they came so chin to chin;
               And with such horrible aspects, each other did salute.
            
            
               A faire large field was made for them: where wraths (for hugenesse) mu
                     •…
                  e
               And mutuall, made them mutually, at either shake their darts,
               Before they threw: then Paris first, with his long iaueline parts;The co
                        •…
                     at.
               
               
                  It smote Atrides orbie Targe: but ranne not through the br
                     •…
                  
               
               For in it (arming well the shield) the head reflected 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
            
            
               Then did the second combattant, applie him to his speare:
               Which ere he threw, he thus besought, almightie Iupiter:
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      prayeth to 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
            
            
               O Ioue! vouchsafe me now reuenge, and that my enemie,
               (For doing wrong so vndeseru'd) may pay deseruedly
               The paines he forfeited; and let, these hands inflict those paines,
               By conquering, I, by conquering dead, him on whom life complaines:
               That any now, or any one, of all the brood of men
               To liue hereafter, may with feare, from all offence abstaine,
               (Much more from all such foule offence) to him that was his host,
               And entertain'd him, as the man, whom he affected most.
            
            
               This said, he shooke, and threw his lance; which strooke through Paris shield
               And with the strength he gaue to it, it made the curets yeeld;
               His coate of Maile, his breast and all: and draue his intrailes in,
               In that low region, where the guts, in three small parts begin:
               Yet he, in bowing of his breast, preuented sable death.
               This taint he follow'd with his sword, drawne from a siluer sheath:
               Which (lifting high) he strooke his helme, full where his plume did stand,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      sword breaketh.
               
               On which, it peece-meale brake, and fell, from his vnhappie hand.
               At which, he sighing stood, and star'd, vpon the ample skie,
               And said, O Ioue, there is no God, giuen more illiberallyMenelaus 
                        〈◊〉
                      Iupiter.
               
               To those that serue thee, then thy selfe; why haue I pray'd in vaine?
               I hop't my hand should haue reueng'd, the wrongs I still sustaine
               On him that did them; and still dares, their foule defence pursue;
               And now my lance hath mist his end, my sword in shiuers flew,
               And he scapes all. With this againe, he rusht vpon his guest,
               And caught him by the horse-haire plume, that dangl'd on his crest;
               With thought, to drag him to the Greekes; which he had surely done,
               And so (besides the victorie) had wondrous glorie wonne;
               (Because the needle-painted lace, with which his helme was tied
               Beneath his chin, and so about, his daintie throte implyed,
               Had strangl'd him:) but that in time, the Cyprian seed of Ioue,
               
               Did breake the string, with which was lin'd, that which the needle woue;
               And was the tough thong of a Steere, and so the victors palme
               Was (for so full a man at armes) onely an emptie helme.
               That then he swong about his head, and cast among his friends;
               Who scrambled, and took't vp with shou
                     •…
                  s. Againe then he intends,
               To force the life blood of his foe, and ranne on him amaine,
               With shaken iaueline; when the Queene, that louers loues, againeVenus rapture of Paris from Menelau
                        •…
                     .
               
               Attended; and now rauisht him, from that encounter quite,
               With ease, and wondrous sodainly; for she (a Goddesse) might.
               She hid him in a cloud of gold, and neuer made him knowne,This place Virgil 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Till in his chamber, (fresh and sweet) she gently set him downe;
               And went for Hellen, whom she found, in Scaeas vtmost height;
               To which, whole swarmes of citie Dames, had climb'd to see the sight.
            
            
               To giue her errand good successe; she tooke on her the shape,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      like 
                        〈◊〉
                      to 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Ofbeldame Graea, who was brought, by Hellen in her rape,
               
                  From Lacedaemon, and had trust, in all her secrets still;
               Being old, and had (of all her maids) the maine bent of her will;
               And spun for her, her finest wooll; like her, loues Empresse came,
               Puld Hellen by the heauenly veile, and softly said: Madame?
               My Lord cals for you, you must needs, make all your kind haste home;
               He's in your chamber, stayes, and longs; sits by your bed; pray come,
               Tis richly made, and sweet; but he, more sweet; and lookes so cleare,
               So fresh, and mouingly attir'd: that (seeing) you would sweare,
               He came not from the dustie fight, but from a courtly dance,
               Or would to dancing. This she made, a charme for dalliance;
               Whose vertue Hellen felt, and knew (by her so radiant eyes,
               White necke, and most enticing breasts) the deified disguise.
            
            
               At which amaz'd, she answerd her: vnhappie Deitie?Hellen chideth 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Why lou'st thou still in these deceipts, to wrap my phantasie?
               Or whether yet (of all the townes, giuen to their l
                     •…
                  st beside,
               In Phrygia, or Maeonia) com'st thou to be my guide?
               If there (of diuers languag'd men) thou hast (as here in▪ Troy)
               Some other friend, to be my shame? since here thy latest ioy,
               By Menelaus now subdu'd; by him, shall I be borne
               Home to his Court; and end my life, in triumphs of his scorne.
               And to this end, would thy deceits, my wanton life allure.
               Hence, go thy selfe to Priams sonne, and all the wayes abiure
               Of Gods, or Godlike minded Dames, nor euer turne againe
               Thy earth-affecting feet to heauen: but for his sake, sustaine
               Toiles here: guard, grace him endlesly: till he requite thy grace,
               By giuing thee my place with him: or take his seruants place,
               If all dishonourable wayes, your fauours seeke to serue
               His neuer-pleasd incontinence: I better will deserue,
               Then serue his do
                     •…
                  age now: what shame, were it for me to feed
               This lust in him? all honour'd Dames, would hate me for the deed;
               He leaues a womans loue so sham'd, and showes so base a mind;
               To feele, nor my shame, nor his owne; griefes of a greater kind
               Wound me, then such as can admit, such kind delights so soone.
            
            
               The Goddesse (angrie, that past shame, her meere will was not done)Venus terrifies Hellen.
               
               Replied: Incense me not you wretch, lest (once incenst) I leaue
               Thy curst life to as strange a hate, as yet it may receiue
               A loue from me; and lest I spread, through both hosts such despite,
               For those plagues they haue felt for thee, that both abiure thee quite.
               And (setting thee in midst of both) turne all their wraths on thee,
               And dart thee dead: that such a death, may wreake thy wrong of me.
            
            
               This strooke the faire Dame with such feare, it tooke her speech away;
               And (shadowed in her snowy veile) she durst not but obay:
               And yet (to shun the shame she fear'd) she vanisht vndescride
               Of all the Troian Ladies there; for Venus was her guide.
            
            
               Ar
                     •…
                  iu'd at home; her women both, fell to their worke in hast;
               When she that was of all her sexe, the most diuinely grac't,Hellen followeth Venus from the port.
               
               Ascended to a higher roome, though much against her will,
               Where louely Alexander was, being led by Venus still.
               
                  The laughter-louing Dame discern'd, her mou'd mind, by her grace:
               And (for her mirth sake) set a stoole, full before Paris face;
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      with Hellen.
               
               Where she would needs haue Hellen sit: who (though she durst not chuse
               But sit, yet) lookt away for all, the Goddesse powre could vse;
               And vsd her tongue too, and to chide, whom Venus sooth'd so much;
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      bitter reproofe of 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               And chid too, in this bitter kind; And was thy cowardise such,
               (So conquerd) to be seene aliue? O, would to God thy life
               Had perisht by his worthy hand, to whom I first was wife.
               Before this, thou wouldst glorifie, thy valour, and thy lance;
               And, past my first Loues, boast them farre: Go once more, and aduance
               Thy braues against his single power: this foile might fall by chance.
               Poore conquerd man; twas such a chance, as I would not aduise,
               Thy valour should prouoke againe: shun him thou most vnwise;
               Lest next, thy spirit sent to hell, thy bodie be his prise.
            
            
               He answerd; Pray thee woman ceasse, to chide and grieue me thus:
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Disgraces will not euer last; looke on their end; on vs
               Will other Gods, at other times, let fall the victors wreath,
               As on him Pallas put it now. Shall our loue sinke beneath
               The hate of fortune? In loues fire, let all hates vanish: Come,
               Loue neuer so inflam'd my heart; no not, when (bringing home
               Thy beauties so delicious prise) on Cranaes blest shore
               I long'd for, and enioyd thee first. With this, he went before
               She after, to the odorous bed. While these to pleasure yeeld,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •…
                     
                     keth for Paris through the 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
               
               Perplext Atrides, sauage-like, ran vp and downe the field,
               And euery thickest troope of Troy, and of their farre-cald aid,
               Searcht for his foe; who could not be, by any eye betraid;
               Nor out of friendship (out of doubt) did they conceale his sight;
               All hated him so like their deaths, and ow'd him such 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
            
            
               At last thus spake the king of men: Heare me, ye men of Troy,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to both the armi
                        •…
                     s.
               
               Ye Dardans and the rest, whose powers, you in their aides employ;
               The conquest on my brothers part, ye all discerne is cleare:
               Do you then Argiue Hellena, with all her treasure here
               Restore to vs, and pay the mulct, that by your vowes is due,
               Yeeld vs an honourd recompence: and all that should accrue,
               To our posterities, confirme; that when you render it,
               Our acts here may be memorisd. This all Greekes else thought fit.
            
            
               COMMENTARIVS.
               
                  a 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   &c. Iris autem Helene, &c. Elegantly, and most aptly (saith Spondanus) is Hellen called by Homer, to the spectacle of this single fight: as being the chiefe person in cause of all the action. The chiefe end of whose coming yet, e
                     •…
                  uiously and most vainly Scaligers Criticus taxeth. Which was her relation to Priam, of the persons he noted there: iesting (with his French wit) at this Greeke Father, & fount of all wit; for making Priam to seek now of their names and knowledges, when nine yeares together they had lien there before. A great peece of necessitie to make him therefore know them before, when there was no such vrgent occasion be
                     •…
                  ore, to bring Priam to note them? nor so calme a conuenience, in their ordered and quiet distinction? But let his criticisme in this be weighed with his other faults found in our

maister: as, for making lightning in winter before snow or raine; which the most ignorant vpland peasant could teach him out of his obseruations. For which yet, bi
                     •…
                   
                  Criticus hath the proiect impudence to taxe Homer. Most falsly repeating his words too: saying, Vbi ningit, when he saith, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. Parans, or struens, vel multum imbrem, immensámue grandinem, vel niuem: preparing, or going about those moist impressions in the aire, not in present act with them. From this immediatly and most rabidly he ranges to Vlysses reprehension, for killing the woers with his bow, in the Odysses. Then to his late vomite againe in the Iliads the verie next word, and enuieth Achilles horse for speaking, (because himselfe would haue all the tong) when, in sacred writ, Balaams Asse could haue taught him, the like hath bene heard of. Yet now to the Odysses againe with a breath, and challengeth Vlysses ship for suffering Neptune to turne it to a rocke. Here is strange laying out, for a maister so curiously methodicall. Not with what Graces, with what Muses, we may aske he was inspired: but with what Harpyes? what Furies? putting the putidum mendacium vpon Homer. Putidus, ineptus, frigidus, puerilis, (being termes fitter for a scold or a bawd, then a man softened by learning) he belcheth against him, whom all the world hath reuerenced, and admired, as the fountaine of all wit, wisdome, and learning. What touch is it to me then, to beare spots of deprauations, when my great maister is thus muddily dawb'd with it? But who euer saw true learning, wisdome, or wit, vouchsafe mansion in any proud, vaineglorious, and braggartly spirit, when their chiefe act and end is, to abandon and abhorre it? Language, reading, habite of speaking, or writing in other learning, I grant in this reuiler great and abundant: but in this Poesie, redundant, I affirme him, and rammish. To conclude, I will vse the same words of him, that he of Erasmus (in calce Epinomidos) which are these (as I conuert it): Great was his name, but had bene futurely greater, would himselfe haue bene lesse: where now, bold with the greatnesse of his wit, he hath vndertaken the more, with much lesse exactnesse; and so his confidence set on by the renowne of his name, hath driuen him headlong, &c.
               
                  b 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  Vocem suauem emittunt; saith the Interpreter (intending the Grashoppers, to whom he compareth the old Counsellors) but it is here to be expounded, vocem teneram, not suauem: (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   in this place signifying tener) for Grashoppers sing not sweetly, but harshly and faintly: wherein the weake and tender voices of the old Counsellors is to admiration exprest. The Simile Spondanus highly commends, as most apt and expressiue: but his application in one part doth abuse it, in the other right it: and that is, to make the old men resemble Grashoppers for their cold, and bloodlesse spininesse, Tython being for age turned to a Grashopper. But where they were graue and wise Counsellors, to make them garrul
                     •…
                  us, as Grashoppers are stridulous; that application holdeth not in these old men, though some old men are so. These being 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , boni, & periti concionatores; the word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   signifying frugi also, which is temperate or full of almoderation, and so farre from intimating any touch of garrulitie. Nor was the conceit of our Poet by Spondanus or any other, vnderstood in this Simile.
               
               
                  c 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  succinctè concionabatur Menelaus; he spake succinctly, or compendiously, say his interpreters; which is vtterly otherwise, in the voice 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , signifying velociter, properly, modo eorum qui currunt; he spake fast, or thicke.
               
                  d 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. few words yet, he vsed, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , sed valde acutè: they expound it; when it is valde stridulè, shrilly, smally, or alowd; 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   (as I haue noted

before) being properly taken in the worse part: and accordingly exp
                     •…
                  nded, maketh euen with his simple character at all parts, his vtterance being noisefull, small, or squeaking: an excellent pipe for a foole. Nor is the voice or manner of vtterance in a man, the least key that discouereth his wisedome or folly. And therefore w
                     •…
                  th the 
                     •…
                  
                  ting is that of Vlysses in the second booke: that he knew Pallas by her voice: 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , quoniam non garrulus, or loquax; being borne naturally Laconical, which agreeth not the lesse with his fast or thicke speaking: for a man may haue that kind of vtterance, and yet few words.
               
                  e 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : neque in verbis peccans, say the Commentors, as though a foole were perfectly spoken: when the word here hath another sence, and our Homer a farre other meaning, the words being thus to be expounded: neque mendax erat, he would not lie by any meanes; for that affectedly he stands vpon hereafter. But to make a foole non peccans verbis, will make a man nothing wonder at any peccancie or absurditie, in men of meere language.
               You see then, to how extreme a difference and contrarietie the word and sence lie subiect: and that without first finding the true figures of persons in this kind presented, it is impossible for the best linguist liuing to expresse an Author trulie, especially any Greeke author; the language being so differently significant: which not iudicially fitted with the exposition, that the place (and coherence with other places) requireth, what a motley, and confused man a translator may present? As now they do all, of Menelaus, who, wheresoeuer he is called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , is there vntrulie translated bellicosus; but cui Mars est charus, because he might loue the warre, and yet be no good warriour: as many loue many exertises at which they will neuer be good: and Homer gaue it to him for another of his peculiar Epithets, as a vainglorious affectation in him, rather then a solid affection.
               And here haste makes me giue end to these new Annotations, deferring the like in the next nine bookes for more breath and encouragement. Since time (that hath euer opprest me) will not otherwise let me come to the last twelue, in which the first free light of my Author, entred and emboldened me. Where so manie rich disoueries importune my poore expression, that I feare rather to betrai
                     •…
                   them to the world, the
                     •…
                   expresse them to their price. But how soeuer enuy and preiudice stand squirting their poison through the eyes of my Readers, this shall appeare to all competent apprehensions, I haue followed the Originall with authenticall expositions (according to the proper signification of the word in his place, though I differ therein vtterly from others:) I haue rendred all things of importance, with answerable life and height to my Authour, (though with some periprhrasis, without which no man can worthilie translate anie worthie Poet.) And since the translation it selfe, and my notes, (being impartially conferred) amplie approoue this, I will still be confident in the woorth of my paines, how idlely and vnworthily soeuer I be censured. And thus, to the last twelue Books (leauing other horrible errors in his other Interpreters vnmoued) with those free feet that entred me, I 
                     •…
                  aste, sure of nothing but my labour.
               The end of the third Booke.
            
         
         
            
            THE FOVRTH BOOKE OF HOMERS ILIADS.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  THe Gods in Counsell, at the last decree,
                  That famous Ilion, shall expugned be.
                  And, that their owne continued faults may proue,
                  The reasons that haue so incensed Ioue.
                  
                  
                     Minerua seekes with more offences done,
                  Against the lately iniur'd Atreus sonne,
                  (A ground that clearest would make sene their sinne)
                  To haue the Lycian Pandarus beginne.
                  He (gainst the Truce with sacred couenants bound)
                  Giues Menelaus, a dishonour'd wound,
                  
                     Machaon heales him. Agamemnon then,
                  To mortall warre incenseth all his men:
                  The battels ioyne, and in the heate of fight,
                  Cold death shuts many eyes in endlesse night.
               
            
            
               Another Argument.
               
                  In Delta, is the Gods Assise,
                  The Truce is broke, warres freshly rise.
               
            
            
               
                  WIthin the faire-pau'd Court of Ioue, he and the Gods conferd,
               About the sad euents of Troy; amongst whom ministerd,The Gods in Counsel at Ioues Court.
               
               Blest Hebe, Nectar. As they sate, and did Troyes towres behold;
               They drank, and pledg'd each other round, in full crownd cups of gold.Hebe fils Nectar
               
               The mirth, at whose feast, was begun, by great Saturnides,
               
               In vrging a begun dislike, amongst the Goddesses.
               But chiefly, in his solemne Queene, whose splene he was disposd
               To tempt yet further; knowing well, what anger it inclosd.
               And how wiues angers should be vsd. On which, (thus pleasd) he playd:
            
            
               Two Goddesses there are, that still, giue Menelaus ayd:
               And one that Paris loues. The two, that sit from vs so farre,Ioues mirth with his wife & daughter Pallas
               
               (Which Argiue Iuno is, and she, that rules in deeds of warre
               No doubt are pleasd, to see how well, the late-seene-fight did frame.
               And (yet vpon the aduerse part) the laughter-louing Dame,
               Made her powre good too, for her friend. For though he were so neare,
               The stroke of death, in th'others hopes, she tooke him from them cleare;
               The conquest yet, is questionlesse, the martiall Spartan kings;
               We must consult then, what euents, shall crowne these future things.
               If warres, and combats, we shall still, with euen successes strike;
               Or (as impartiall) friendship plant, on both parts. If ye like
               
                  The last, and that it will as well, delight, as meerely please
               Your happie Deities: still let stand, old Priams towne in peace;
               And let the Lacedaemon king, againe his Queene enioy.
            
            
               As Pallas and heauens Queene sat close, complotting ill to Troy;
               With silent murmures they receiu'd, this ill-lik't choice from Ioue;
               
               Gainst whom was Pallas much incenst, because the Queen
                     •…
                   of Loue,
               Could not without his leaue relieue, in that late point of death,
               The sonne of Priam, whom she loath'd; her wrath yet fought beneath
               Her supreme wisedome, and was curb'd: but Iuno needs must ease
               Her great heart, with her readie tongue, and said: What words are theseIuno angry with Iupiter.
               
               (Austere, and too much Saturns sonne?) why wouldst thou render still
               My labours idle? and the sweat, of my industrious will,
               Dishonor with so little power? My chariot horse are tir'd,
               With posting to and fro, for Greece: and bringing banes desir'd,
               To people-mustring Priamus, and his perfidious sonnes:
               Yet thou protectst, and ioynst with them, whom each iust Deitie shuns.
               Go on, but euer go resolu'd, all other Gods haue vow'd
               To crosse thy partiall course for Troy, in all that makes it proud.Iupiter to Iuno.
               
            
            
               At this, the cloud-compelling Ioue, a farre fetcht sight let flie:
               And said, Thou Furie, what offence, of such impietie,
               Hath Priam or his sonnes done thee? that with so high a hate
               Thou shouldst thus ceaslesly desire, to raze, and ruinate
               So well a builded towne as Troy? I thinke (hadst thou the powre)
               Thou wouldst the ports and farre-stretcht wals, flie ouer, and deuoure
               Old Priam, and his issue quicke: and make all Troy thy feast;
               And then at length I hope, thy wrath, and tired spleene would rest:
               To which, run on thy chariot, that nought be found in me,
               Of iust cause to our future iarres. In this yet strengthen thee,
               And fixe it in thy memorie fast; that, if I entertaine
               As peremptorie a desire, to leuell with the plaine,
               A citie, where thy loued liue; stand not betwixt my ire,
               And what it aimes at; but giue way, when thou hast thy desire,
               Which now I grant thee willingly, although against my will.
               For not beneath the ample Sunne, and heauens starre-bearing hill,Troy most loued of Iupiter, of all other cities.
               
               There is a towne of earthly men, so honour'd in my mind,
               As sacred Troy, nor of earths kings, as Priam and his kind,
               Who neuer let my altars lacke, rich feast of offrings slaine,
               And their sweet sauours: for which grace, I honor them againe.
            
            
               Drad Iuno, with the Cowes faire eyes, replyed; Three townes there areThree cities deare to Iuno.
               
               Of great and eminent respect, both in my loue and care,
               Mycena, with the brode high waies, and Argos rich in horse;
               And Sparta: all which three destroy, when thou enui'st their force;
               I will not aid them, nor maligne, thy free and soueraigne will:
               For if I should be enuious, and set against their ill,
               I know my enuie were in vaine, since thou art mightier farre:
               But we must giue each other leaue, and winke at eithers warre.Her deadly hate to Troy.
               
               I likewise, must haue powre to crowne, my workes with wished end;
               Because I am a Deitie, and did from thence descend,
               
                  Whence thou thy selfe, and th'elder borne, wise Saturne was our Sire;
               And thus there is a two-fold cause, that pleads for my desire;
               Being sister, and am cald thy wife: And more, since thy command
               Rules all Gods else; I claime therein, a like superiour hand.
               All wrath before then, now remit, and mutually combine
               In eithers Empire; I, thy rule, and thou illustrate mine.
               So will the other Gods agree: and we shall all be strong.
               And first, (for this late plot) with speed, let Pallas go among
               The Troians; and some one of them, entice to breake the truce,
               By offering in some treacherous wound, the honourd Greekes abuse.
            
            
               The Father both of men and Gods, agreed, and Pallas sent,
               With these wing'd words, to both the hosts; Make all haste, and inuentIupiter to Pallas
               
               Some meane, by which the men of Troy, against the truce agreed,
               May stirre the glorious Greekes to armes, with some inglorious deed.
            
            
               Thus charg'd he her with haste, that did, before, in hast abound;
               Who cast her selfe from all the heights, with which steepe heauen is crownd:Pallas fals from heauen like a Comet.
               
               And as Ioue, brandishing a starre (which men a Comet call)
               Hurls out his curled haire abrode, that from his brand exhals
               A thousand sparkes; to fleets at sea, and euerie mightie host,
               (Of all presages and ill haps, a signe mistrusted most:)
               So Pallas fell twixt both the Camps, and sodainly was lost;
               When through the breasts of all that saw, she strooke a strong amaze,
               With viewing, in her whole descent, her bright and ominous blaze.
               When straight, one to another turn'd, and said; Now thundring 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
               
               (Great Arbiter of peace, and armes) will either stablish loue
               Amongst our nations: or renue, such warre, as neuer was.
            
            
               Thus either armie did presage, when Pallas made her passe
               Amongst the multitude of Troy; who now put on the grace
               Of braue Laodocus; the flowre, of old Antenors race;
               And sought for Lycian Pandarus; a man, that being bred
               Out of a faithlesse familie, she thought, was fit to shed
               The blood of any innocent, and breake the couenant sworne.
               He was Lycaons sonne, whom Ioue, into a Wolfe did turne
               For sacrificing of a child; and yet in armes renownd,
               As one that was inculpable: him Pallas, standing, found,
               And round about him, his strong troopes, that bore the shadie shields.
               He brought them from Aesaepus flood, let through the Lycian fields:
               Whom, standing neare, she whispred thus: Lycaons warlike sonne?Pallas to Pandarus, perswading him to breaks the 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
               
               Shall I despaire at thy kind hands, to haue a fauour done?
               Nor dar'st thou let an arrow flie, vpon the Spartan king?
               It would be such a grace to Troy, and such a glorious thing,
               That euerie man would giue his gift; but Alexanders hand
               Would loade thee with them, if he could, discouer from his stand,
               His foes pride strooke downe with thy shaft; and he himselfe ascend
               The flaming heape of funerall: Come, shoote him (princely friend.)
               But first inuoke the God of light, that in thy land was borne,
               And is in archers art the best, that euer sheafe hath worne;
               To whom a hundred first ew'd lambes, vow thou in holy fire,
               
                  When safe to sacred Zelias towres, thy zealous steps retire.
            
            
               With this, the mad-gift-greedie man, Minerua did perswade;The description of 
                        〈◊〉
                      his bow.
               
               Who instantly drew forth a bow, most admirably made
               Of th'antler of a iumping Goate, bred in a steepe vp land;
               Which Archerlike (as long before, he tooke his hidden stand;
               The Euicke, skipping from a rocke) into the breast he smote;
               And headlong feld him from his cliffe. The forehead of the Gote,
               Held out a wondrous goodly palme, that sixteene branches brought:
               Of all which, (ioynd) an vsefull bow, a skilfull Bowyer wrought;
               (Which pickt and polisht,) both the ends, he hid with hornes of gold.
               And this bow (bent) he close laid downe, and bad his souldiers hold
               Their shields before him; lest the Greekes (discerning him) should rise
               In tumults, ere the Spartan king, could be his arrowes prise.
               Meane space, with all his care he chusd, and from his quiuer drew
               An arrow, fetherd best for flight; and yet, that neuer flew;
               Strong headed, and most apt to pierce; then tooke he vp his bow,
               And nockt his shaft; the ground whence all, their future griefe did grow.
               When (praying to his God the Sunne, that was in Lycia bred,
               And king of Archers; promising, that he the blood would shed
               Of full an hundred first fallen lambes, all offred to his name,
               When to Zelias sacred wals, from rescu'd Troy he came)
               He tooke his arrow by the nocke, and to his bended brest,Virgil vseth these verses.
               
               The Oxy sinew close he drew, euen till the pile did rest,
               Vpon the bosome of the bow: and as that sauage prise,Pandarus draught and shoote.
               
               His strength constraind into an Orb; (as if the wind did rise)
               The coming of it made a noise; the sinew forged string
               Did giue a mightie twang; and forth, the eager shaft did sing,
               (Affecting speedinesse of flight) amongst the Achiue throng:
               Nor were the blessed heauenly powres, vnmindfull of thy wrong,
               O Menelaus; but in chiefe, Ioues seed the Pillager,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      hurt.
               
               Stood close before, and slackt the force, the arrow did confer;
               With as much care, and little hurt, As doth a mother vse,Simile.
               
               And keepe off from her babe, when sleepe, doth through his powers diffuse
               His golden humor; and th'assaults, of rude and busie flies
               She still checks with her carefull hand: for so the shaft she plies,
               That on the buttons made of gold, which made his girdle fast,
               And where his curets double were, the fall of it she plac't.
               And thus much proofe she put it to: the buckle made of gold;
               The belt it fastned, brauely wrought; his curets double fold;
               And last, the charmed plate he wore, which helpt him more then all;
               And gainst all darts, and shafts bestowd, was to his life a wall.
               So (through all these) the vpper skin, the head did onely race,
               Yet foorth the blood flow'd, which did much, his royall person grace;
               And shew'd vpon his Iuorie skin, as doth a purple dye,
               Laid (by a Dame of Caira, or louely Maeony)
               On Iuorie; wrought in ornaments, to decke the cheeks of horse;
               Which in her mariage roome must lie; whose beauties haue such force,
               That they are wisht of many knights; but are such precious things,
               
                  That they are kept for horse that draw, the chariots of kings;
               Which horse (so deckt) the chariotere, esteemes a grace to him:
               Like these (in grace) the blood vpon, thy solid thighes did swim,
               O Menelaus, downe thy calues, and ankles to the ground;
               For nothing decks a souldier so, as doth an honour'd wound.
               Yet (fearing he had far'd much worse) the haire stood vp on end
               On Agame
                        •…
                     non, when he saw, so much blacke blood descend.
               And stifned with the like dismay, was Menelaus to:
               But (seeing th'arrowes stale without,) and that the head did go
               No further then it might be seene, he cald his spirits againe:
               Which Agamemnon marking not, (but thinking he was slaine)
               He grip't his brother by the hand, and sigh't as he would breake:
               Which sigh the whole host tooke from him, who thus at last did speake:
            
            
               O dearest brother, is't for this? That thy death must be wrought,Agamemnous complaint and 
                        •…
                     are of his brothers h
                        •…
                     rt.
               
               Wrought I this truce? For this hast thou, the single combat fought
               For all the armie of the Greekes? For this, hath Ilion sworne,
               And trod all faith beneath their feet? Yet all this hath not worne
               The right we challeng'd, out of force; this cannot render vaine
               Our stricken right hands; sacred wine; nor all our offrings slaine.
               For though Olympius be not quicke, in making good our ill,
               He will be sure, as he is slow; and sharplier proue his will.
               Their owne hands shall be ministers, of those plagues they despise:
               Which shall their wiues and children reach, and all their progenies.
               For both in mind, and soule, I know, that there shall come a day,
               When Ilion, Priam, all his powre, shall quite be worne away;
               When heauen-inhabiting Ioue shall shake, his fierie shield at all,
               For this one mischiefe. This I know, the world cannot recall.
               But, be all this; all my griefe still, for thee will be the same,
               (Deare brother:) if thy life must here, put out his royall flame;
               I shall to sandie Argos turne, with infamie, my face;
               And all the Greekes will call for home: old Priam and his race
               Will flame in glorie; Helena, vntoucht, be still their pray;
               And thy bones in our enemies earth, our cursed fates shall lay;
               Thy Sepulcher be troden downe; the pride of Troy desire,
               (Insulting on it:) Thus, ô thus, let Agamemno
                        •…
                     s ire,
               In all his acts, be expiate; as now he carries home
               His idle armie, emptie ships; and leaues here ouercome
               Good Menelaus. When this Braue, breakes in their hated breath;
               Then let the broade earth swallow me, and take me quicke to death.
            
            
               Nor shall this euer chance (said he,) and therefore be of cheare;Menelaus to Agamemnon.
               
               Lest all the armie (led by you,) your passions put in feare.
               The arrow fell in no such place, as death could enter at;
               My girdle, curets doubled here, and my most trusted plate,
               Obiected all twixt me and death; the shaft scarce piercing one.
               Good brother (said the king) I wish, it were no further gone;Agamemnon to Men
                        •…
                     laus.
               
               For then our best in medicines skild, shall ope and search the wound;
               Applying balmes to ease thy paines, and soone restore thee sound.
               This said, diuine Talthybius, he cald, and bad him haste
               
                  
                  Machaon (Aesculapius sonne, who most of men was grac't
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      for 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
               
               With Physicks soueraigne remedies) to come and lend his hand
               To Menelaus; shot by one, well skild in the command
               Of bow and arrowes; one of Troy, or of the Lycian aid;
               Who much hath glorified our foe, and vs as much dismaid.
            
            
               He heard, and hasted instantly; and cast his eyes about
               The thickest squadrons of the Greekes, to find Machaon out.
               He found him standing guarded well, with well-arm'd men of Thrace;
               With whom he quickly ioynd, and said; Man of Apollos race?Tal
                        •…
                     ybius to Mach
                        •…
                     on.
               
               Haste; for the king of men commands, to see a wound imprest,
               In Menelaus (great in armes) by one instructed best
               In th'art of archerie; of Troy, or of the Lycian bands,
               That them with much renowne adornes; vs with dishonor brands.
            
            
               
                  Machaon much was mou'd with this, who with the herald flew
               From troope to troope, alongst the host; and soone they came in view
               Of hurt Atrides; circled round, with all the Grecian kings;
               Who all gaue way; and straight he drawes, the shaft: which forth he bringsMachaon draws the arro
                        •…
                     .
               
               Without the forkes; the girdle then, plate, curets, off he pluckes,
               And viewes the wound; when first from it, the clotterd blood he sucks;
               Then medicines wondrously composd, the skilfull Leech applyed,
               Which louing Chyron taught his Sire; he from his Sire had tryed.
            
            
               While these were thus employd to ease, the Atrean martialist,
               The Troians arm'd, and charg'd the Greekes; the Greekes arme and resist.The Troians renew the figh
                        •…
                     .
               
               Then not asleepe, nor maz'd with feare, nor shifting off the blowes,
               You could behold the king of men; but in full speed he goes
               To set a glorious fight on foote: and he examples this,Agamemnon marshals his armi
                        •…
                     .
               
               With toyling (like the worst) on foote; who therefore did dismisse
               His brasse-arm'd chariot, and his steeds, with Ptolomaus sonne,
               (Sonne of Pyraides) their guide, the good Eu
                        •…
                     ymidon;
               
               Yet (said the king) attend with them, lest wearinesse should seise
               My lims, surcharg'd with ordering troopes, so thicke and vast as these.
            
            
               
                  Eurymidon then rein'd his horse, that trotted neighing by;
               The king a foot-man, and so scowres, the squadrons orderly.
            
            
               Those of his swiftly-mounted Greekes, that in their armes were fit,Agamemnon to the Greek
                        •…
                     s.
               
               Those he put on, with chearfull words, and bad them not remit
               The least sparke of their forward spirits, because the Troians durst
               Take these abhord aduantages; but let them do their wurst▪
               
               For they might be assur'd that Ioue, would patronise no lies;
               And that, who with the breach of truce, would hurt their enemies,
               With vultures should be torne themselues; that they should raze their towne:
               Their wiues, and children at their breasts, led vassals to their owne.
            
            
               But such as he beheld hang off, from that increasing fight;
               Such would he bitterly rebuke, and with disgrace excite;
               Base Argiues, blush ye not to stand, as made for Buts to darts?Agamemnon to the negligent souldiers.
               
               Why are ye thus discomfited, like Hinds that haue no harts?
               Who wearied with a long-run field, are instantly embost,
               Stand still, and in their beastly breasts, is all their courage lost:
               And so stand you strooke with amaze, nor dare to strike a stroke.
               
                  Would ye the foe should nearer yet, your dastard splenes prouoke?
               Euen where on Neptunes fomie shore, our nauies lie in sight?
               To see if Ioue will hold your hands, and teach ye how to fight?
            
            
               Thus he (commanding) rang'd the host; and (passing many a band)
               He came to the Cretensian troopes, where all did armed stand,
               About the martiall Idomen; who brauely stood before,
               In vantguard of his troopes, and matcht, for strength a sauage Bore.
               
                  Meriones (his chariotere) the Rereguard bringing on:
               Which seene to Atreus sonne, to him, it was a sight alone;
               And Idomens confirmed mind, with these kind words he seekes;
               O Idomen! I euer lou'd, thy selfe past all the Greekes;Agamemnon to Idomen.
               
               In warre, or any worke of peace; at table, euery where;
               For when the best of Greece besides, mixe euer, at our cheere,
               My good old ardent wine, with small; and our inferiour mates
               Drinke euen that mixt wine measur'd too; thou drinkst without those rates
               Our old wine, neate; and euermore, thy boll stands full like mine;
               To drinke, still when, and what thou wilt. Then rowse that heart of thine;
               And whatsoeuer heretofore, thou hast assum'd to be,
               This day be greater. To the king, in this sort, answerd he;
            
            
               
                  Atrides, what I euer seem'd, the same, at euerie part,Idomen to Agamemnon.
               
               This day shall shew me at the full; and I will fit thy hart.
               But thou shouldst rather cheare the rest, and tell them they in right
               Of all good warre, must offer blowes, and should begin the fight.
               (Since Troy first brake the holy truce) and not endure these braues,
               To take wrong first, and then be dar'd, to the reuenge it craues.
               Assuring them that Troy, in fate, must haue the worse at last;
               Since first, and gainst a truce, they hurt; where they should haue embrac't.
            
            
               This comfort, and aduice did fit, Atrides heart indeed,
               Who still through new raisd swarmes of men, held his laborious speed:
               And came where both th' Aiaces stood; whom like the last he found,
               Arm'd, caskt, and readie for the fight. Behind them, hid the ground,
               A cloud of foot, that seem'd to smoke. And as a Gotehea
                     •…
                  d spies,
               On some hils top, out of the Sea, a rainie vapour rise,How the troopes of Aiax stood.
               
               Driuen by the breath of Zephyrus, which (though farre off he rest)
               Comes on as blacke as pitch, and brings, a tempest in his breast;
               Whereat, he frighted, driues his heards, apace, into a den:
               So (darkning earth, with darts and shields) shew'd these with all their men.
            
            
               This sight, with like ioy fir'd the king, who thus let forth the flame,
               In crying out to both the Dukes: O you of equall name,Agamemnon to the Aiaces.
               
               I must not cheare; nay, I disclaime, all my command of you,
               Your selues command with such free minds, and make your souldiers shew,
               As you, nor I led, but themselues. O would our father Ioue,
               
               
                  Minerua, and the God of light, would all our bodies mou
                     •…
                  
               
               With such braue spirits as breathe in you: then Priams lofti
                     •…
                   towne
               Should soone be taken by our hands, for euer ouerthrowne.
            
            
               Then held he on to other troopes, and Nestor, next beheld,
               (The subtle Pylian Orator) range vp and downe the field,Nestors art i
                        •…
                      ordering his souldiers.
               
               Embattelling his men at armes, and stirring all to blowes;
               
                  Points euerie legion out his Chiefe, and euery Chiefe he showes
               The formes, and discipline of warre: yet his Commanders were
               All expert, and renowmed men: Great Pelagon was there;
               
                  Alastor: manly Chromius; and Hemon, worth a Throne;
               And Byas, that could armies leade: with these he first put on,
               His horse troopes, with their chariots: his foote (of which he chusde
               Many, the best and ablest men, and which he euer vsde,
               As rampire to his generall powre) he in the Rere disposd.
               The slouthfull, and the least of spirit, he in the midst inclosd;
               That such as wanted noble wils, base need might force to stand.
               His horse troopes (that the Vantgard had) he strictly did command
               To ride their horses temperatly; to keepe their rankes, and shun
               Confusion; lest their horsemanship, and courage made them run
               (Too much presum'd on) much too farre: and (charging so alone)
               Engage themselues, in th'enemies strength; where many fight with one.
               Who his owne chariot leaues to range; let him not freely go,
               But straight vnhorse him with a lance: for tis much better so.
               And with this discipline (said he) this forme, these minds, this trust;
               Our Ancestors haue, walles, and townes, laid leuell with the dust.
            
            
               Thus prompt, and long inur'd to armes, this old man did exhort;
               And this Atrides likewise tooke, in wondrous chearefull sort:
               And said, O Father! would to heauen, that as thy mind remainesAgamemnon to Nestor.
               
               In wonted vigor; so thy knees, could vndergo our paines.
               But age, that all men ouercomes, hath made his prise on thee;
               Yet still I wish, that some young man, growne old in mind, might be
               Put in proportion with thy yeares; and thy mind (young in age)
               Be fitly answerd with his youth; that still where conflicts rage,
               And young men vsd to thrust for fame, thy braue exampling hand,
               Might double our young Grecian spirits, and grace our whole Command.
            
            
               The old knight answer'd: I my selfe, could wish (O Atreus sonne)Nestor to Agamemnon.
               
               I were as young, as when I slue, braue Ereu
                        •…
                     halion;
               
               But Gods, at all times, giue not all, their gifts to mortall men.
               If then I had the strength of youth, I mist the Counsels then,
               That yeares now giue me; and now yeares, want that maine strength of youth;
               Yet still my mind retaines her strength, (as you now said the sooth)
               And would be, where that strength is vsd, affoording counsels sage,
               To stirre youths minds vp; tis the grace, and office of our age;
               Let yonger sinewes, Men sprong vp, whole ages after me,
               And such as haue strength, vse it; and, as strong in honour be.
            
            
               The king (all this while comforted) arriu'd next, where he found,
               Well-rode Menestheus (Peteus sonne) stand still, inuirond round,
               With his well-train'd Athenian troopes: and next to him he spide
               The wise Vlysses, deedlesse too, and all his bands beside,
               Of strong Cephalians; for as yet, th'alarme had not bene heard
               In all their quarters, Greece, and Troy, were then so newly stird,
               And then first mou'd (as they conceiu'd) and they so lookt about
               To see both hoasts giue proofe of that, they yet had cause to doubt.
            
            
               
                  Atrides (seeing them stand so still) and spend their eyes at gaze;
               
                  Began to chide; And why (said he) dissolu'd thus, in a maze,
               Thou sonne of Peteus, Ioue-nurst king; and thou in wicked sleight,Agamemnon to Vlysses and Menestheu
                        •…
                     .
               
               A cunning souldier, stand ye off? Expect ye that the fight
               Should be by other men begun? tis fit the formost band
               Should shew you there; you first should front, who first lifts vp his hand.
               First you can heare, when I inuite, the Princes to a feast,
               When first, most friendly, and at will, ye eate and drinke the best;
               Yet in the fight, most willingly, ten troopes ye can behold
               Take place before ye. Ithacus, at this his browes did fold,
               And said, How hath thy violent tongue, broke through thy set of teeth?Vlysses to Aga
                     
                        •…
                     emnon.
               
               To say that we are slacke in fight? and to the field of death
               Looke others should enforce our way? when we were busied then,
               (Euen when thou spak'st) against the foe, to cheate and leade our men.
               But thy eyes shall be witnesses (if it content thy will;
               And that (as thou pretendst) these cares, do so affect thee still)
               The father of Telemach
                        •…
                     
                   (whom I esteeme so deare,
               And to whom, as a Legacie, Ile leaue my deeds done here)
               Euen with the formost band of Troy, hath his encounter dar'd;
               And therefore are thy speeches vaine, and had bene better spar'd.
            
            
               He smiling, since he saw him mou'd, recald his words, and said;Agamemnon to Vlysses.
               
               Most generous L
                        •…
                     ertes sonne, most wise of all our aid;
               I neither do accuse thy worth, more then thy selfe may hold
               Fit (that inferiours thinke not much (being slacke) to be controld;)
               Nor take I on me thy command: for well I know thy mind
               Knowes how sweet gentle counsels are; and that thou standst enclind
               As I my selfe, for all our good. On then: if now we spake
               What hath displeasd, another time, we full amends will make:
               And Gods grant that thy vertue here, may proue so free, and braue,
               That my reproofes may still be vaine, and thy deseruings graue.
            
            
               Thus parted they, and forth he went, when he did leaning find
               Against his chariot, neare his horse, him with the mightie mind,
               Great Diomedes (Tydeus sonne) and Sthenelus, the seed
               Of Capaneius; whom the king, seeing likewise out of deed,
               Thus cried he out on Diomed: O melin what a feareAgamemnon chideth Diomed.
               
               The wise great warriour, Tydeus sonne, stands gazing euerie where,
               For others to begin the fight? It was not Tydeus vse
               To be so danted; whom his spirit, would euermore produce,
               Before the formost of his friends, in these affaires of fright,
               As they report that haue beheld, him labour in a fight.
               For me, I neuer knew the man, nor in his presence came:
               But excellent aboue the rest, he was in generall fame.
               And one renowm'd exploit of his, I am assur'd is true,The historie of Tydeus.
               
               He came to the Mycenian Court, without armes, and did sue,
               At Godlike Polinices hands, to haue some worthie aid,
               To their designes, that gainst the wals, of sacred Thebes were laid.
               He was great Polinices guest, and nobly entertaind:
               And of the kind Mycenian state, what he requested gaind,
               In meere consent: but when they should, the same in act approue,
               
                  (By some sinister prodigies, held out to them by Io
                        •…
                     e,)
               They were discourag'd; thence he went, and safely had his passe
               Backe to Aesopus flood, renowm'd, for Bulrushes and grasse;
               Yet, once more, their Ambassadour, the Grecian Pe
                     •…
                  res addresse,
               Lord Tydeus to Eteocles: to whom being giuen accesse,
               He found him feasting with a crew, of Cadmians in his hall;
               Amongst whom, though an enemie, and onely one to all;
               To all yet, he his challenge made, at euerie Martiall feate;
               And easly foild all, since with him, Miner
                        •…
                     a was so great.
               The ranke-rode Cadmians (much incenst, with their so foule disgrace)
               Lodg'd ambuscados for their foe, in some well chosen place,
               By which he was to make returne. Twise fiue and twentie men,
               And two of them, great captaines too, the ambush did containe.
               The names of those two men of rule, were M
                        •…
                     on, H
                        •…
                     mons sonne,
               And Lycophontes, Keepe-field cald, the heire of Autophon,
               
               By all men honord like the Gods: yet these and all their friends,
               Were sent to hell by Tydeus hand, and had vntimely ends.
               He trusting to the aid of Gods, reueald by Augurie;
               Obeying which, one Chiefe he sau'd, and did his life apply,
               To be the heauie messenger, of all the others deaths;
               And that sad message (with his life) to Maeon he bequeaths;
               So braue a knight was Tydeus: of whom a sonne is sprong,
               Inferiour farre, in martiall deeds, though higher in his tongue.
            
            
               All this, Tydides silent heard, aw'd by the reuerend king;
               Which stung hote Sthenelus with wrath, who thus put forth his sting:
            
            
               
                  Atrides? when thou know'st the truth, speake what thy knowledge is,
               And do not lie so; for I know, and I will bragge in this;Sthenelus rough speech to Agamemnon.
               
               That we are farre more able men, then both our fathers were;
               We tooke the seuen-fold ported Thebes, when yet we had not there
               So great helpe as our fathers had; and fought beneath a wall,
               Sacred to Mars, by helpe of Ioue; and trusting to the fall
               Of happie signes from other Gods, by whom we tooke the towne
               Vntoucht; our fathers perishing there, by sollies of their owne:
               And therefore neuer more compare, our fathers worth with ours.
            
            
               
                  Tydides frownd at this, and said; Suppresse thine angers pow'rs,
               (Good friend) and heare why I refrain'd: thou seest I am not mou'dDiomed rebuk
                        •…
                     s Sthene
                        •…
                     s.
               
               Against our Generall, since he did, but what his place behou'd,
               Admonishing all Greekes to fight: for if Troy proue our prise,
               The honor, and the ioy is his. If here our ruine lies,
               The shame and griefe for that, as mu
                     •…
                  h, is his in greatest kinds.
               As he then his charge, weigh we ours: which is our dantlesse minds.
            
            
               Thus from his chariot (amply arm'd) he iumpt downe to the ground:
               The armor of the angrie king, so horribly did sound,
               It might haue made his brauest foe, let feare, take downe his braues.
               And as when with the West-wind flawes, the sea thrusts vp her waues,Simile.
               
               One after other, thicke, and high, vpon the groning shores;
               First, in her selfe, lowd (but opposd, with banks and Rocks) she 
                     •…
                  ores,
               And (all her backe in bristles set) spits euerie way her some;
               
                  So (after Diomed) instantly, the field was ouercome
               With thicke impressions of the Greekes; and all the noise that grewThe silence of the Greeke fight.
               
               (Ordring and chearing vp their men) from onely leaders flew.
               The rest went silently away, you could not heare a voice,
               Nor would haue thought, in all their breasts, they had one in their choice;
               Their silence vttering their awe, of them, that them contrould;
               Which made ech man keep bright his arms, march, fight still where he should.
               The Troians (like a sort of Ewes, pend in a rich mans fold,The Troians cō
                     pared to Ew
                        •…
                     s.
               
               Close at his dore, till all be milkt; and neuer baaing hold,
               Hearing the bleating of their lambs) did all their wide host fill,
               With showts and clamors; nor obseru'd, one voice, one baaing still;
               But shew'd mixt tongs from many a land; of men, cald to their aid:
               Rude Mars, had th'ordring of their spirits: of Greeks, the learned Maid.Mars for the Troians, Pallas for the Greekes.
               
               But Terror follow'd both the hosts, and flight; and furious Strife,
               The sister, and the mate of Mars, that spoile of humane life;Discord the sist
                        •…
                     r of Mar
                        •…
                     .
               
               And neuer is her rage at rest; at first she is but small,
               Yet after, (but a little fed) she growes so vast, and tall,Virgil the same of 
                        •…
                     ame.
               
               That while her feet moue here in earth, her forhead is in heauen.
               And this was she, that made euen then, both hosts so deadly giuen.
               Through euery troope she stalkt, and stird, rough sighes vp as she went:
               But when in one field, both the foes, her furie did content;
               And both came vnder reach of darts, then darts, and shields opposd
               To darts and shields, strength answerd strength; then swords and targets closd
               With swords and targets; both with pikes; and then did tumult rise
               Vp to her height; then conquerors boasts, mixt with the conquerds cries,
               Earth flow'd with blood. And as from hils, raine waters, headlong fall,
               That all waies, eate huge Ruts, which, met, in one bed, fill a vall
               With such a confluence of streames; that on the mountaine grounds
               Farre off, in frighted shepheards eares, the bustling noise rebounds:
               So grew their conflicts; and so shew'd, their scuffling to the eare;
               With flight, and clamor, still commixt, and all effects of feare.
            
            
               And first renowm'd Antilochus, slew (fighting in the faceAntiloc
                        •…
                     us slue 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Of all Achaias formost bands, with an vndanted grace)
               
                  Echepolus Thalysiades: he was an armed man;
               Whom, on his haire-plum'd helmets crest, the dart first smote; then ran
               Into his forehead, and there stucke; the steele pile making way
               Quite through his skull; a hastie night, shut vp his latest day.
               His fall was like a fight-rac't towre; like which, lying their dispred,
               King Elephenor, (who was sonne to Chalcodon, and led
               The valiant Abants) couetous; that he might first possesse
               His armes, laid hands vpon his feet; hal'd him from the preasse
               Of darts, and Iauelins hurld at him. The action of the kingElephenor drawing of the body of Echepolus is slaine by Agenor.
               
               When (great in heart) Agenor saw, he made his Iaueline sing
               To th'others labor; and along, as he the trunke did wrest,
               His side (at which he bore his shield, in bowing of his breast)
               Lay naked, and receiu'd the lance; that made him lose his hold,
               And life together; which in hope, of that he lost, he sold.
               But for his sake the fight grew fierce; the Troians and their foe,
               
                  Like wolues, on one another rusht; and ma
                     •…
                   for man it goes.
            
            
               The next of name, that seru'd his fate; great Aiax Telamo
                        •…
                     ,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      slaies Si
                     
                        •…
                     .
               
               Preferd so sadly; he was heire, to old Anthemion,
               
               And deckt with all the flowre of youth: the fruit of which yet fled,
               Before the honourd nuptiall torch, could light him to his bed;
               His name was Symoisius; For, some few yeares before,
               His mother walking downe the hill, of Ida, by the shore
               Of Syluer Symois, to see, her parents 
                     •…
                  locks; with them,
               She (feeling sodainely the paines, of child-birth) by the streame
               Of that bright riuer brought him forth; and so (of Symois)
               They cald him Symoisius. Sweet was that birth of his
               To his kind parents; and his growth, did all their care employ;
               And yet those rites of pietie, that should haue bene his ioy,
               To pay their honourd yeares againe, in as affectionate sort,
               He could not graciously performe, his sweet life was so short:
               Cut off with mightie Aiax lance. For, as his spirit put on,
               He strooke him at his breasts right pappe, quite through his shoulder bone;
               And in the dust of earth he fell, that was the fruitfull soyle
               Of his friends hopes; but where he sow'd, he buried all his toyle.
               And as a Poplar shot aloft, set by a riuer side,Simile.
               
               In moist edge of a mightiefenne, his head in curls implide;
               But all his bodie plaine and smooth: to which a Wheel-wright puts
               The sharpe edge of his shining axe, and his soft timber cuts
               From his innatiue roote; in hope, to hew out of his bole
               The Fell'ffs, or out-parts of a wheele, that compasse in the whole;
               To serue some goodly chariot; but (being bigge and sad,
               And to be hal'd home through the bogs) the vsefull hope he had
               Sticks there; and there the goodly plant, lies withring out his grace:
               So lay, by Ioue-bred Aiax hand, Anthemions forward race.
               Nor could through that vast fen of toiles, be drawne to serue the ends
               Intended by his bodies pow'rs, nor cheare his aged friends.
            
            
               But now the gay-arm'd Antiphus (a sonne of Priam) threwAntiphus one of Priams sonnes.
               
               His lance at Aiax through the preasse, which went by him, and flew
               On Leucus, wise Vlysses friend; his groine it smote, as faine
               He would haue drawne into his spoile, the ca
                     •…
                  kasse of the slaine;
               By which he fell, and that by him; it vext Vlysses heart;
               Who thrust into the face of fight, well arm'd at euerie part,
               Came close, and lookt about to find, an obiect worth his lance;
               Which when the Troians saw him shake, and he so neare aduance,
               All shrunke; he threw, and forth it shin'd: nor fell, but where it feld:
               His friends griefe gaue it angrie powre, and deadly way it heldD
                        •…
                     mocoon Priās base sonne 
                        •…
                     lain by 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Vpon Democoon, who was sprung, of Priams wanton force;
               Came from Abydus, and was made, the maister of his horse.
               Through both his temples strooke the dart, the wood of one side shewd,
               The pile out of the other lookt, and so the earth he strewd,
               With much sound of his weightie armes. Then backe the formost went,
               Euen Hector yeelded; then the Greekes, gaue worthie clamors vent,
               Effecting then their first dumbe powers; some drew the dead and spoild;
               
                  Some followed; that in open flight, Troy might confesse it foild.
               
                  Apollo (angrie at the sight) from top of Ilion cride,Apollo excites the Troians.
               
               Turne head, ye well-rode Peeres of Troy, feed not the Grecians pride;
               They are not charm'd against your points, of steele, nor Iron fram'd;
               Nor fights the faire-haird Thetis sonne, but sits at fleet inflam'd.
            
            
               So spake the dreadfull God from Troy. The Greekes, Ioues noblest seed,
               Encourag'd to keepe on the chace: and where fit spirit did need,Pall
                        •…
                      encourageth the Greeks.
               
               She gaue it, marching in the midst; Then flew the fatall howre
               Backe on Diores, in returne, of Ilions sun-burnd powre;
               
                  Diores Amarincides, whose right legs ankle bone,Diores.
               
               And both the sinewes, with a sharpe, and handfull charging stone,
               
                  Pirus Imbrasides did breake, that led the Thracian bands,Piros.
               
               And came from Aenos; downe he fell, and vp he held his hands
               To his lou'd friends; his spirit wingd, to flie out of his breast;
               With which not satisfied, againe, Imbrasides addrest
               His Iaueline at him, and so ript, his nauill, that the wound,
               (As endlesly it shut his eyes) so (opend) on the ground,
               It powr'd his entrailes. As his foe, went then suffisd away,
               
                  Thoas Aetolius threw a dart, that did his pile conuay
               Aboue his nipple, through his lungs; when (quitting his sterne part)
               He closd with him; and from his breast, first drawing out his dart,Piros 
                        •…
                     aine by Thoas.
               
               His sword flew in, and by the midst, it wip't his bellie out;
               So tooke his life, but left his armes; his friends so flockt about,
               And thrust forth lances of such length, before their slaughterd king,
               Which though their foe were big and strong, and often brake the ring,
               Forg'd of their lances; yet (enforc't) he left th'affected prise;
               The Thracian, and Epeian Dukes, laid close with closed eyes,
               By either other, drownd in dust; and round about the plaine
               All hid with slaughterd carkasses; yet still did hotely raigne
               The martiall planet; whose effects, had any eye beheld,
               Free, and vnwounded (and were led, by Pallas through the field
               To keepe of Iauelins, and suggest, the least fault could be found)
               He could not reprehend the fight, so many strew'd the ground.
            
            The end of the fourth Booke.
         
         
            
            THE FIFTH BOOKE OF HOMERS ILIADS.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  KIng Diomed (by Pallas spirit inspir'd,
                  With will and powre) is for his acts admir'd:
                  Meere men, and men deriu'd from Deities,
                  And Deities themselues, he terrifies;
                  Addes wounds to terrors: his inflamed lance
                  Drawes blood from Mars, and Venus: In a trance
                  He casts Aeneas, with a weightie stone;
                  
                     Apollo quickens him, and gets him gone:
                  Mars is recur'd by Paeon; but by Ioue
                  
                  Rebuk't, for authoring breach of humane loue.
               
            
            
               Another Argument.
               
                  In Epsilon, heauens blood is shed,
                  By sacred rage of Diomed.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  THen Pallas breath'd in Tydeus sonne: to render whom supreamePallas inspires and glorifies Diomed.
               
               To all the Greekes, at all his parts, she cast a hoter beame,
               On his high mind; his body fild, with much superiour might,
               And made his compleate armor cast, a farre more complete light.
               From his bright helme and shield, did burne, a most vnwearied fire:This simile lik
                        •…
                     
                     wise Virgil Iearus of him.
               
               Like rich Autumnus golden lampe, whose brightnesse men admire,
               Past all the other host of starres, when with his chearefull face,
               Fresh washt in loftie Ocean waues, he doth the skies enchase.
            
            
               To let whose glorie lose no sight, still Pallas made him turne,
               Where tumult most exprest his powre, and where the fight did burne.Dares Priest of Mulciber, or Vulcan.
               
            
            
               An honest and a wealthie man, inhabited in Troy;
               
                  Dares the Priest of Mulciber, who two sons did enioy,
               
                  Idaeus, and bold Phegeus, well seene in euerie fight:
               These (singl'd from their troopes, and horst) assaild Mineruas knight,Ideus and Phegeus both against Diom
                        •…
                     d.
               
               Who rang'd from fight to fight, on foote; all hasting mutuall charge,
               (And now drawne neare) first Phegeus threw, a iaueline swift and large:
               Whose head the kings left shoulder tooke, but did no harme at all:
               Then rusht he out a lance at him, that had no idle fall;
               But in his breast stucke twixt the paps, and strooke him from his horse.Phegeus slaine, Ideus 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Which sterne sight, when Idaeus saw (distrustfull of his force
               To saue his slaughterd brothers spoile) it made him headlong leape
               From his faire chariot, and leaue all: yet had not scap't the heape
               Of heauie funerall, if the God, great president of fire,
               Had not (in sodaine clouds of smoke, and pittie of his Sire,
               
                  To leaue him vtterly vnheird) giuen safe passe to his feet.
               He gone, Tydides sent the horse, and chariot to the fleet.
            
            
               The Troians seeing Dares sonnes, one slaine, the other fled,
               Were strooke amaz'd; the blew-eyd maide (to grace her Diomed
               
               In giuing free way to his power) made this so ruthfull sact,
               A fit aduantage to remoue, the warre-God out of act,
               Who rag'd so on the Ilion side; she grip't his hand and said,
               
                  Mars, Mars, thou ruinor of men, that in the dust hast laidPallas to Mars.
               
               So many cities, and with blood, thy Godhead dost disteine;
               Now shall we ceasse to shew our breasts, as passionate as men,
               And leaue the mixture of our hands? resigning Ioue his right
               (As rector of the Gods) to giue, the glorie of the fight,
               Where he affecteth? lest he force, what we should freely yeeld?
               He held it fit, and went with her, from the tumultuous field,
               Who set him in an hearby seate, on brode Scamanders shore.Mars leaues the field, and Troy flies.
               
               He gone, all Troy was gone with him, the Greekes draue all before,
               And euerie Leader slue a man; but first the king of men
               Deseru'd the honor of his name, and led the slaughter then,Agamemnon 
                        〈◊〉
                      Odius.
               
               And slue a Leader; one more huge, then any man he led;
               Great Odius, Duke of Halizons; quite from his chariots head
               He strooke him with a lance to earth, as first he flight addrest;
               It tooke his forward-turned backe, and lookt out of his breast;
               His huge trunke sounded, and his armes, did eccho the resound.
            
            
               
                  Idomenaeus to the death, did noble Phaestus wound,Idomenaeus slaies Phaestus.
               
               The sonne of Maeon Borus, that, from cloddie Terna came;
               Who (taking chariot) tooke his wound, and tumbl'd with the same
               From his attempted seate; the lance, through his right shoulder strooke,
               And horrid darknesse strooke through him: the spoile his souldiers tooke.
            
            
               
                  Atrides-Menelaus slue (as he before him fled)Menelaus slaies Scamandrius.
               
               
                  Scamandrius, sonne of Strophius, that was a huntsman bred;
               A skilfull huntsman, for his skill, Dianas selfe did teach;
               And made him able with his dart, infallibly to reach
               All sorts of subtlest sauages, which many a wooddie hill
               Bred for him; and he much preseru'd, and all to shew his skill.
               Yet, not the dart-delighting Queene, taught him to shun this dart;
               Nor all his hitting so farre off, (the mastrie of his art:)
               His backe receiu'd it, and he fell, vpon his breast withall:
               His bodies ruine, and his armes, so sounded in his fall,
               That his affrighted horse flew off, and left him, like his life.
            
            
               
                  Meriones 
                  
                     •…
                  lue Phereclus, whom she that nere was wife,Meriones 
                        •…
                     lue Phereclus an excellent Architect.
               
               Yet Goddesse of good housewiues, held, in excellent respect,
               For knowing all the wittie things, that grace an Architect;
               And hauing pow'r to giue it all, the cunning vse of hand;
               
                  Harmonides his sire built ships, and made him vnderstand,
               (With all the practise it requir'd) the frame of all that skill;
               He built all Alexanders ships, that au
                     •…
                  hord all the ill
               Of all the Troians and his owne, because he did not know
               The Oracles, aduising Troy (for feare of ouerthrow)
               
                  To meddle with no sea affaire, but liue by tilling land;
               This man Meriones surprisd, and draue his deadly hand
               Through his right hip; the lances head, ran through the region
               About the bladder, vnderneath, th'in-muscles, and the bone;
               He (sighing) bow'd his knees to death, and sacrific'd to earth.
            
            
               
                  Phylides staid Pedaeus flight; Antenors bastard birth:Pedaeus slain by Phylides.
               
               Whom vertuous Theano his wife (to please her husband) kept
               As tenderly as those she lou'd. Phylides neare him stept,
               And in the fountaine of the nerues, did drench his feruent lance,
               At his heads backe-part; and so farre, the sharpe head did aduance,
               It cleft the Organe of his speech; and th'Iron (cold as death)
               He tooke betwixt his grinning teeth, and gaue the aire his breath.Eurypilus slai
                        •…
                     s Hypsenor.
               
            
            
               
                  Eurypilus the much renowm'd, and great Euemons sonne,
               Diuine Hypsenor slue, begot, by stout Dolopion,
               
               And consecrate Scamanders Priest; he had a Gods regard,
               Amongst the people: his hard flight, the Grecian followed hard;
               Rusht in so close, that with his sword, he on his shoulder laid
               A blow, that his armes brawne cut off; nor there his vigor staid,
               But draue downe, and from off his wrist, it hewd his holy hand,
               That gusht out blood, and downe it dropt, vpon the blushing sand;
               Death, with his purple finger shut, and violent fate, his eyes.
            
            
               Thus fought these, but distinguisht well; Tydides so implies
               His furie, that you could not know, whose side had interestDiomed compared to a torrent.
               
               In his free labours, Greece or Troy. But as a flood increast
               By violent and sodaine showres, let downe from hils, like hils
               Melted in furie; swels, and fomes, and so he ouerfils
               His naturall channell; that besides, both hedge and bridge resignes
               To his rough confluence, farre spread: and lustie flourishing vines
               Drownd in his outrage. Tydeus sonne, so ouer-ran the field,
               Strew'd such as flourisht in his way: and made whole squadrons yeeld.
            
            
               When Pandarus, Lycaons sonne, beheld his ruining hand,
               With such resistlesse insolence, make lanes through euerie band:
               He bent his gold-tipt bow of horne, and shot him rushing in,Pandarus wounds Diomed
               
               At his right shoulder; where his armes, were hollow; foorth did spin
               The blood, and downe his curets ranne; then Pandarus cried out,
               Ranke riding Troians, Now rush in: Now, now, I make no doubt,
               Our brauest foe is markt for death, he cannot long sustaine
               My violent shaft, if Ioues faire Sonne, did worthily constraine
               My foot from Lycia: thus he brau'd, and yet his violent sha
                     •…
                  t
               Strooke short with all his violence, Tydides life was saft;
               Who yet withdrew himselfe, behind, his chariot and steeds,
               And cald to Sthenelus; Come friend, my wounded shoulder needs
               Thy hand to ease it of this shaft. He hasted from his seate
               Before the coach, and drew the shaft: the purple wound did sweate,
               And drowne his shirt of male in blood, and as it bled he praid:
            
            
               Heare me, of Ioue Aegiochus, thou most vnconquerd maid,Diomeds prayer to Pall
                        •…
                     .
               
               If euer in the cruell field, thou hast assistfull stood,
               Or to my father, or my selfe, now loue, and do me good;
               
                  Giue him into my lances reach, that thus hath giuen a wound,
               To him thou guardst; preuenting me, and brags that neuer more,
               I shall behold the chearefull Sunne: thus did the king implore.
               The Goddesse heard, came neare, and tooke, the wearinesse of fight
               From all his nerues and lineaments, and made them fresh and light,Pallas encour ageth Diomed.
               
               And said; Be bold, ô Diomed, in euerie combat shine,
               The great shield-shaker Tydeus strength (that knight, that Sire of thine)
               By my infusion breaths in thee. And from thy knowing mind,
               I haue remou'd those erring mists, that made it lately blind,
               That thou maist difference Gods from men: and therefore vse thy skill,
               Against the tempting Deities, if any haue a will
               To trie if thou presum'st of that, as thine, that flowes from them;
               And so assum'st aboue thy right. Where thou discern'st a beame
               Of any other heauenly power, then she that rules in loue,
               That cals thee to the change of blowes; resist not, but remoue;
               But if that Goddesse be so bold (since she first stird this warre)
               Assault and marke her from the rest, with some infamous scarre.
            
            
               The blew-eyd Goddesse vanished, and he was seene againe
               Amongst the foremost; who before, though he were prompt and faine
               To fight against the Troians powers; now, on his spirits were cald,
               With thrise the vigor, Lion-like, that hath bene lately gald,Diomed made thrise so strong as before by Pall
                        •…
                     .
               
               By some bold sheapheard in a field, where his curld flockes were laid;
               Who tooke him as he leapt the fold; not slaine yet, but appaid,
               With greater spirit; comes againe, and then the shepheard hides,
               (The rather for the desolate place) and in his Coate abides;
               His flockes left guardlesse; which amaz'd, shake and shrinke vp in heapes;
               He (ruthlesse) freely takes his prey; and out againe he leapes:
               So sprightly, fierce, victorious, the great Heroe flew
               Vpon the Troians; and at once, he two Commanders slew;
               
                  Hyppenor and Astynous, in one, his lance he fixt,Hyppenor and Astynous slaine by Diomed.
               
               Full at the nipple of his breast: the other smote betwixt
               The necke and shoulder with his sword; which was so well laid on,
               It swept his arme and shoulder off. These left, he rusht vpon
               
                  Abbas, and Polyeidus, of old Eurydamas
               
               The haplesse sonnes; who could by dreames, tell what would come to passe:
               Yet, when his sonnes set forth to Troy, the old man could not read
               By their dreames, what would chance to them, for both were stricken dead
               By great Tydides: after these, he takes into his rage
               
                  Xanthus, and Thoon, Phenops sonnes, borne to him in his age;
               The good old man, euen pin'd with yeares, and had not one sonne more
               To heire his goods: yet Diomed, tooke both, and left him store
               Of teares and sorowes in their steeds; since he could neuer see
               His sonnes leaue those hote warres aliue: so, this the end must be
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Of all his labours; what he heapt, to make his issue great,
               Authoritie heird, and with her seed, fild his forgotten seate.
               Then snatcht he vp two Priamists, that in one chariot stood;Simile of a Lyon otherwise applied then before.
               
               
                  Echemon, and faire Chromius; as feeding in a wood
               Oxen or steeres are; one of which, a Lyon leapes vpon,
               
                  Teares downe, and wrings in two his necke: so sternely Tydeus sonne
               Threw from their chariot both these hopes, of old Dardanides:
               
               Then tooke their armes, and sent their horse, to those that ride the seas.
            
            
               
                  Aeneas (seeing the troopes thus tost) brake through the heate of 
                     •…
                  ight,
               And all the whizzing of the darts, to find the Lycian knight
               
                  Lycaons sonne: whom hauing found, he thus bespake the Peere:
            
            
               O Pandarus, where's now thy bow? thy deathfull arrowes where?
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to Pandarus.
               
               In which no one in all our host, but giues the palme to thee;
               Nor in the Sun-lou'd Lycian greenes, that breed our Archerie,
               Liues any that exceeds thy selfe. Come lift thy hands to Ioue,
               
               And send an arrow at this man (if but a man he proue,
               That winnes such God-like victories; and now affects our host
               With so much sorrow: since so much, of our best blood is lost
               By his high valour;) I haue feare, some God in him doth threat,
               Incenst for want of sacrifice; the wrath of God is great.
            
            
               
                  Lycaons famous sonne replyde; Great Counsellor of Troy,Pandarus i
                        •…
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               This man so excellent in armes, I thinke is Tydeus ioy;
               I know him by his fierie shield, by his bright three plum'd caske,
               And by his horse; nor can I say, if or some God doth maske
               In his apparance; or he be (whom I nam'd) Tydeus sonne:
               But without God, the things he does (for certaine) are not done;
               Some great Immortall, that conueyes, his shoulders in a clowd,
               Goes by, and puts by euerie dart, at his bold breast bestowd;
               Or lets it take with little hurt▪ for I my selfe let flie
               A shaft that shot him through his armes, but had as good gone by:
               Yet, which I gloriously affirm'd, had driuen him downe to hell.
               Some God is angrie, and with me; for farre hence, where I dwell,
               My horse and Chariots idle stand; with which some other way
               I might repaire this shamefull misse: eleuen faire chariots stay
               In old Lycaons Court; new made, new trimd, to haue bene gone;
               Curtaind and Arrast vnder-foote, two horse to euery one,
               That eate white Barly and blacke Otes, and do no good at all:
               And these Lycaon, (that well knew, how these affaires would fall)
               Charg'd (when I set downe this designe) I should command with here;
               And gaue me many lessons more, all which much better were
               Then any I tooke forth my selfe. The reason I laid downe,
               Was, but the sparing of my horse; since in a sieged towne,
               I thought our horse-meate would be scant; when they were vsd to haue
               Their mangers full; so I left them, and like a lackey slaue
               Am come to Ilion, confident, in nothing but my bow,
               That nothing profits me; two shafts, I vainly did bestow
               At two great Princes; but of both, my arrowes neither slew;
               Nor this, nor Atreus yonger sonne: a little blood I drew,
               That seru'd but to incense them more. In an vnhappie starre,
               I therefore from my Armorie, haue drawne those tooles of warre:
               That day, when for great Hectors sake, to amiable Troy
               I came to leade the Troian bands. But if I euer ioy
               (In safe returne) my Countries sight; my wiues, my lofty towres;
               
                  Let any stranger take this head, if to the firie powres,
               This bow, these shafts, in peeces burst (by these hands) be not throwne;
               Idle companions that they are, to me and my renowne.
            
            
               
                  Aeneas said, Vse no such words; for, any other wayAeneas to Pandarus.
               
               Then this, they shall not now be vsd: we first will both assay
               This man with horse and chariot. Come then, ascend to me,
               That thou maist trie our Troian horse, how skild in field they be;
               And in pursuing those that flie, or flying, being pursude,
               How excellent they are of foote: and these (if Ioue conclude)
               The scape of Tydeus againe, and grace him with our flight)
               Shall serue to bring vs safely off. Come, Ile be first shall fight:
               Take thou these faire reines and this scourge; or (if thou wilt) fight thou,
               And leaue the horses care to me. He answered, I will now
               Descend to fight; keepe thou the reines, and guide thy selfe thy horse;
               Who with their wonted manager, will better wield the forcePandarus fights and Aeneas guideth the chariot.
               
               Of the impulsiue chariot, if we be driuen to flie,
               Then with a stranger; vnder whom, they will be much more shye,
               And (fearing my voice, wishing thine) grow restie, nor go on,
               To beare vs off; but leaue engag'd, for mightie Tydeus sonne,
               Themselues and vs; Then be thy part, thy one hou'd horses guide;
               Ile make the fight: and with a dart, receiue his vtmost pride.
            
            
               With this the gorgious chariot, both (thus prepar'd) ascend,
               And make full way at Diomed; which noted by his friend;
               Mine owne most loued Mind (said he) two mightie men of warreS
                        •…
                     henelus to Diomed.
               
               I see come with a purposd charge; one's he that hits so farre
               With bow and shaft, Lycaons sonne: the other fames the brood
               Of great Anchises, and the Queene, that rules in Amorous blood;
               (Aeneas excellent in armes) come vp and vse your steeds,
               And looke not warre so in the face, lest that desire that feeds
               Thy great mind be the bane of it. This did with anger sting
               The blood of Diomed, to see, his friend that chid the king
               Before the fight, and then preferd, his ablesse, and his mind,
               To all his ancestors in fight, now come so farre behind:Diomed now finds time to make Sthenelus see better his late rebuke of mem
                        •…
                     on.
               
               Whom thus he answerd; Vrge no flight, you cannot please me so;
               Nor is it honest in my mind, to feare a coming foe;
               Or make a flight good, though with fight; my powers are yet entire,
               And scorne the help-tire of a horse; I will not blow the fire
               Of their ho
                     •…
                  e valours with my flight; but cast vpon the blaze
               This body borne vpon my knees: I entertaine amaze?
               
                  Minerua will not see that shame: and since they haue begun,
               They shall not both elect their ends; and he that scapes shall runne;
               Or stay and take the others fate: and this I leaue for thee;
               If amply wise Athenia, giue both their liues to me,
               Reine our horse to their chariot hard, and haue a speciall heed
               To seise vpon Aeneas steeds; that we may change their breed,
               And make a Grecian race of them, that haue bene long of Troy;
               For, these are bred of those braue beasts, which for the louely Boy,
               That waits now on the cup of Ioue, Ioue, that farre-seeing God.
               
                  Gaue Tros the king in recompence: the best that euer trod
               The sounding Center, vnderneath, the Morning and the Sunne.
               
                  Anchises stole the breed of them; for where their Sires did runne,
               He closely put his Mares to them, and neuer made it knowne
               To him that heird them, who was then, the king Laomedon.
               
               Sixe horses had he of that race, of which himselfe kept foure,
               And gaue the other two his sonne; and these are they that scoure
               The field so brauely towards vs, expert in charge and flight:
               If these we haue the power to take, our prize is exquisite,
               And our renowne will farre exceed. While these were talking thus,
               The fir'd horse brought th' assailants neare: and thus spake Pandarus;
                  Pandarus to Diomed.
               
            
            
               Most suffering-minded Tydeus sonne, that hast of warre the art:
               My shaft that strooke thee, slue thee not, I now will proue a dart:
               This said, he shooke, and then he threw, a lance, aloft and large,
               That in Tydides curets stucke, quite driuing through his targe;
               Then braid he out so wild a voice, that all the field might heare;
               Now haue I reacht thy root of life, and by thy death shall beare
               Our praises chiefe prize from the field: Tydides, vndismaid,
               Replide; Thou err'st, I am not toucht: but more charge will be laid
               To both your liues before you part: at least the life of one
               Shall satiate the throate of Mars; this said, his lance was gone:
               
                  Minerua led it to his face, which at his eye ranne in,
               And as he stoopt, strooke through his iawes, his tongs roote, and his chinne.Diomed slaies Pandarus.
               
               Downe from the chariot he fell, his gay armes shin'd and rung,
               The swift horse trembled, and his soule, for euer charm'd his tongue.
            
            
               
                  Aeneas with his shield and lance, leapt swiftly to his friend,
               Affraid the Greekes would force his trunke; and that he did defend,
               Bold as a Lyon of his strength: he hid him with his shield,
               Shooke round his lance, and horribly, did threaten all the field
               With death, if any durst make in; Tydides raisd a stone,
               With his one hand, of wondrous weight, and powr'd it mainly on
               The hip of Anchisiades, wherein the ioynt doth moueAeneas being sonne to Anchises.
               
               The thigh, tis cald the huckle bone, which all in sherds it droue;
               Brake both the nerues, and with the edge, cut all the flesh away:
               It staggerd him vpon his knees, and made th' Heroe stay
               His strooke-blind temples on his hand, his elbow on the earth;
               And there this Prince of men had died, if she that gaue him birth,
               (Kist by Anchises on the greene, where his faire oxen fed,
               
                  Ioues louing daughter) instantly, had not about him spred
               Her soft embraces, and conuaid, within her heauenly vaile,Venus takes off Aeneas being wounded.
               
               (Vsd as a rampier gainst all darts, that did so hote assaile)
               Her deare-lou'd issue from the field: Then Sthenelus in hast,
               (Remembring what his friend aduisd) from forth the preasse made fast
               His owne horse to their chariot, and presently laid hand,
               Vpon the louely-coated horse, Aeneas did command;The horse of Aeneas made prise.
               
               Which bringing (to the wondring Greekes) he did their guard commend
               To his belou'd Deiphylus, who was his inward friend,
               And (of his equals) one to whom, he had most honor showne▪
               
               
                  That he might see them safe at fleete: then stept he to his owne,
               With which he chearefully made in, to Tydeus mightie race;
               He (madde with his great enemies rape) was hote in desperate chase
               Of her that made it; with his lance (arm'd lesse with steele then spight)
               Well knowing her no Deitie, that had to do in fight;
               
                  Minerua his great patronesse, nor she that raceth townes,
               
                  Bellona; but a Goddesse weake, and foe to mens renownes;
               Her (through a world of fight) pursude, at last he ouer-tooke,
               And (thrusting vp his ruthlesse lance) her heauenly veile he strooke,
               (That euen the Graces wrought themselues, at her diuine command)Diomed wounds Venus.
               
               Quite through, and hurt the tender backe, of her delicious hand:
               The rude point piercing through her palme; forth flow'd th'immortall blood,
               (Blood, such as flowes in blessed Gods, that eate no humane food,
               Nor drinke of our inflaming wine, and therefore bloodlesse are,
               And cald immortals:) out she cried, and could no longer beare
               Her lou'd sonne, whom she cast from her; and in a sable clowdVenus for anguish throweth away Aeneas, whom Apollo receiues.
               
               
                  Phoebus (receiuing) hid him close, from all the Grecian crowd;
               Lest some of them should find his death. Away flew Venus then,
               And after her cried Diomed; Away thou spoile of men,
               Though sprung from all-preseruing Ioue; These hote encounters leaue:Diomed to Venus.
               
               Is't not enough that sillie Dames, thy sorceries should deceiue,
               Vnlesse thou thrust into the warre, and rob a souldiers right?
               I thinke, a few of these assaults, will make thee feare the fight,
               Where euer thou shalt heare it nam'd. She sighing, went her way
               Extremely grieu'd, and with her griefes, her beauties did decay;
               And blacke her Iuorie bodie grew. Then from a dewy mist,Iris rescues Venus.
               
               Brake swift-foot Iris to her aide, from all the darts that hist,
               At her quicke rapture; and to Mars, they tooke their plaintife course,
               And found him on the fights left hand; by him his speedie horse,
               And huge lance, lying in a fogge: the Queene of all things faire,Venus to Mars.
               
               Her loued brother on her knees, besought with instant prayre,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
               
               His golden-ribband bound-man'd horse, to lend her vp to heauen,
               For she was much grieu'd with a wound, a mortall man had giuen;
               
                  Tydides: that gainst Ioue himselfe, durst now aduance his arme.
            
            
               He granted, and his chariot (perplext with her late harme)Mars lends his horse to Venus.
               
               She mounted, and her wagonnesse, was she that paints the aire;
               The horse she reind, and with a scourge, importun'd their repaire,
               That of themselues out-flew the wind, and quickly they ascend
               Olympus, high seate of the Gods; th'horse knew their iournies end,
               Stood still, and from their chariot, the windie footed Dame
               Dissolu'd, and gaue them heauenly food; and to Dione came
               Her wounded daughter; bent her knees; she kindly bad her stand;
               With sweet embraces helpt her vp; strok't her with her soft hand;
               Call'd kindly by her name; and askt, what God hath bene so rude,Dione mother of Venus, to Venus.
               
               (Sweet daughter) to chastise thee thus? as if thou wert pursude,
               Euen to the act of some light sinne, and deprehended so?
               For otherwise, each close escape, is in the Great let go.
            
            
               She answerd; Haughtie Tydeus sonne, hath bene so insolent;Ven
                        •…
                     s to Dione.
               
               
                  Since he, whom most my heart esteemes, of all my lou'd descent,
               I rescu'd from his bloodie hand: now battell is not giuen,
               To any Troians by the Greekes; but by the Greekes to heauen.
            
            
               She answerd, Daughter, thinke not much, though much it grieue th
                     •…
                  
                  ▪ 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  Dio
                        •…
                      to 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               The patience, whereof many Gods, examples may produce,
               In many bitter ils receiu'd; as well that men sustaine
               By their inflictions; as by men, repaid to them again
                     •…
                  .
            
            
               
                  Mars sufferd much more then thy selfe, by Ephialtes powre,Mars bound in chaines by O
                        •…
                     us and Ephial
                        •…
                     .
               
               And Otus, Aloeus sonnes, who in a brazen towre,
               (And in inextricable chaines) cast that warre-greedie God;
               Where twise sixe months and one he liu'd, and there the period
               Of his sad life perhaps had closd, if his kind step-dames eye,
               Faire Erebaea had not seene, who told it Mercurie;
               
               And he by stealth enfranchisd him, though he could scarce enioy
               The benefite of franchisment, the chaines did so destroy
               His vitall forces with their weight. So Iuno sufferd more,
               When with a three-forkt arrowes head, Ampbytrios sonne did gore
               Her right breast, past all hope of cure. Pluto sustaind no lesse
               By that selfe man; and by a shaft, of equall bitternesse,
               Shot through his shoulder at hell gates; and there (amongst the dead,
               Were he not deathlesse) he had died: but vp to heauen he fled
               (Extremely tortur'd) for recure, which instantly he wonne
               At Paeons hand, with soueraigne Balme; and this did Ioues great sonne.Paeon Phisit
                        •…
                      to the Gods.
               
            
            
               Vnblest, great-high-deed-daring man, that car'd not doing ill;
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
               
               That with his bow durst wound the Gods; but by Mineruas will,
               Thy wound, the foolish Diomed, was so prophane to giue;
               Not knowing he that fights with heauen, hath neuer long to liue;
               And for this deed, he neuer shall, haue child about his knee
               To call him father, coming home. Besides, heare this from me,
               (Strength-trusting man) though thou be strong, and art in strength a towre;
               Take heed a stronger meet thee not, and that a womans powre
               Containes not that superiour strength; and lest that woman be
               
                  Adrastus daughter, and thy wife, the wise Aegiale,
               
               When (from this houre not farre) she wakes, euen sighing with desire
               To kindle our reuenge on thee, with her enamouring fire,
               In choosing her some fresh young friend, and so drowne all thy fame,
               Wonne here in warre, in her Court-peace, and in an opener shame.
            
            
               This said, with both her hands she cleansd, the tender backe and palme
               Of all the sacred blood they lost; and neuer vsing Balme,
               The paine ceast, and the wound was cur'd, of this kind Queene of loue.
            
            
               
                  Iuno and Pallas seeing this, assaid to anger Ioue,
               
               And quit his late made-mirth with them, about the louing Dame,
               With some sharpeiest, in like sort built, vpon her present shame.
               Grey-eyd Athenia began, and askt the Thunderer,Pallas to Iou
                        •…
                     .
               
               If (nothing mouing him to wrath) she boldly might preferre
               What she conceiu'd, to his conceipt: and (staying no reply)
               She bade him view the Cyprian fruite, he lou'd so tenderly,
               Whom she though hurt, and by this meanes, intending to suborne
               
                  Some other Ladie of the Greekes (whom louely veiles adorne)
               To gratifie some other friend, of her much-loued Troy,
               As she embrac't and stird her blood, to the Venerean ioy,Scoptic
                        •…
                     .
               
               The golden claspe those Grecian Dames, vpon their girdles weare,
               Tooke hold of her delicious hand, and hurt it, she had feare.
            
            
               The Thunderer smil'd, and cald to him, loues golden Arbitresse,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to Venus.
               
               And told her, those rough workes of warre, were not for her accesse:
               She should be making mariages, embracings, kisses, charmes;
               Sterne Mars and Pallas had the charge, of those affaires in armes.
            
            
               While these thus talkt, Tydides rage, still thirsted to atchieue
               His prise vpon Anchises sonne; though well he did perceiue
               The Sunne himselfe protected him: but his desires (inflam'd
               With that great Troian Princes blood, and armes so highly fam'd)
               Not that great God did reuerence. Thrise rusht he rudely on;
               And thrise betwixt his darts and death, the Sunnes bright target shone:
               But when vpon the fourth assault (much like a spirit) he flew,
               The far-off-working Deitie, exceeding wrathfull grew,
               And askt him: What? Not yeeld to Gods? thy equals learne to know:Apollo to Diomed.
               
               The race of Gods is farre aboue, men creeping here below.
            
            
               This draue him to some small retreite; he would not tempt more neare
               The wrath of him that strooke so farre; whose powre had now set cleareApollo beares Aeneas to Troy.
               
               
                  Aeneas from the stormie field, within the holy place
               Of Pergamus; where, to the hope, of his so soueraigne grace
               A goodly Temple was aduanc't; in whose large inmost part
               He left him, and to his supply, enclin'd his mothers heart
               (Latona) and the dart-pleasd Queene, who cur'd, and made him strong.
            
            
               The siluer-bow'd-faire God, then threw, in the tumultuous throng,
               An Image, that in stature, looke, and armes he did createThe Image of Aeneas.
               
               Like Venus sonne; for which the Greekes, and Troians made debate,
               Laid lowd strokes on their Ox-hide shields, and bucklers easly borne:
               Which error Phoebus pleasd to vrge, on Mars himselfe in scorne:
            
            
               
                  Mars, Mars, (said he) thou plague of men, smeard with the dust and bloodApollo to Mars.
               
               Of humanes, and their ruin'd wals; yet thinks thy God-head good,
               To fright this Furie from the field? who next will fight with Ioue.
               
               First, in a bold approch he hurt, the moist palme of thy Loue:
               And next (as if he did affect, to haue a Deities powre)
               He held out his assault on me. This said, the loftie towre
               Of Pergamus he made his seate, and Mars did now excite
               The Troian forces, in the forme, of him that led to fight
               The Thracian troopes; swift Acamas. O Priams sonnes (said he)
               How long, the slaughter of your men, can ye sustaine to see?Mars like Acamas to the sons of Priam.
               
               Euen till they braue ye at your gates? Ye suffer beaten downe
               
                  Aeneas, great Anchises sonne; whose prowesse we renowne
               As much as Hectors: fetch him off, from this contentious prease.
            
            
               With this, the strength and spirits of all, his courage did increase;
               And yet Sarpedon seconds him, with this particular tauntSarpedon reproues Hector.
               
               Of noble Hector; Hector? where, is thy vnthanfull vaunt,
               And that huge strength on which it built? that thou, and thy allies,
               
                  With all thy brothers (without aid of vs or our supplies,
               And troubling not a citizen) the Citie safe would hold:
               In all which, friends, and brothers helps, I see not, nor am told
               Of any one of their exploits; but (all held in dismay
               Of Diomed; like a sort of dogs, that at a Lion bay,
               And entertaine no spirit to pinch;) we (your assistants here)
               Fight for the towne, as you helpt vs: and I (an aiding Peere,
               No Citizen, euen out of care, that doth become a man,
               For men and childrens liberties) adde all the aide I can:
               Not out of my particular cause; far hence my profit growes:
               For far hence Asian Lycia lies, where gulfie Xanthus flowes:
               And where my lou'd wife, infant sonne, and treasure nothing scant,
               I left behind me, which I see, those men would haue, that want:
               And therefore they that haue, would keepe; yet I (as I would lose
               Their sure fruition) cheere my troupes, and with their liues propose
               Mine owne life, both to generall fight, and to particular cope,
               With this great souldier: though (I say) I entertaine no hope
               To haue such gettings as the Greeks, nor feare to lose like Troy:
               Yet thou (euen Hector) deedlesse standst, and car'st not to employ
               Thy towne-borne friends; to bid them stand, to fight and saue their wiues:
               Lest as a Fowler casts his nets, vpon the silly liues
               Of birds of all sorts; so the foe, your walls and houses hales,
               (One with another) on all heads: or such as scape their fals,
               Be made the prey and prize of them, (as willing ouerthrowne)
               That hope not for you, with their force: and so this braue-built towne
               Will proue a Chaos: that deserues, in thee so hote a care
               As should consume thy dayes and nights, to hearten and prepare
               Th'assistant Princes: pray their minds, to beare their far-brought toiles,
               To giue them worth, with worthy fight; in victories and foiles
               Still to be equall; and thy selfe (exampling them in all)
               Need no reproofes nor spurs: all this, in thy free choice should fall.
            
            
               This stung great Hectors heart: and yet, as euery generous mind
               Should silent beare a iust reproofe, and shew what good they find
               In worthy counsels, by their ends, put into present deeds:
               Not stomacke, nor be vainly sham'd: so Hectors spirit proceeds:
               And from his Chariot (wholly arm'd) he iumpt vpon the sand:
               On foote, so toiling through the hoast; a dart in either hand,
               And all hands turn'd against the Greeks; the Greeks despisde their worst,
               And (thickning their instructed powres) expected all they durst.
            
            
               Then with the feet of horse and foote, the dust in clouds did rise.
               And as in sacred floores of barnes, vpon corne-winowers flies
               The chaffe, driuen with an opposite wind, when yellow Ceres dites;Simile 
                        〈◊〉
                      the husband man, expressing 
                        •…
                     
                     bly.
               
               Which all the Diters feet, legs, armes, their heads and shoulders whites:
               So lookt the Grecians gray with dust, that strooke the solide heauen,
               Raisd from returning chariots, and troupes together driuen.
               Each side stood to their labours firme: fierce Mars flew through the aire,
               And gatherd darknesse from the fight: and with his best affaire,
               Obeyd the pleasure of the Sunne, that weares the golden sword,
               
                  Who bad him raise the spirits of Troy, when Pallas ceast t'afford
               Her helping office, to the Greeks; and then his owne hands wrought;Apollo brings Aeneas from his Temple to field cured.
               
               Which (from his Phanes rich chancell, cur'd) the true Aeneas brought,
               And plac't him by his Peeres in field; who did (with ioy) admire,
               To see him both aliue and safe, and all his powers entire:
               Yet stood not sifting, how it chanc't: another sort of taske,
               Then stirring th'idle siue of newes, did all their forces aske:
               Inflam'd by Phaebus, harmfull Mars, and Eris, eagrer farre:
               The Greekes had none to hearten them; their hearts rose with the warre;
               But chiefly Diomed, Ithacus, and both th'Aiaces vsde
               Stirring examples, and good words: their owne fames had infusde
               Spirit enough into their blouds, to make them neither feare
               The Troians force, nor Fate it selfe; but still expecting were
               When most was done, what would be more; their ground they stil made good;
               And (in their silence, and set powers) like faire still clouds they stood:Simile.
               
               With which, Ioue crownes the tops of hils, in any quiet day,
               When Boreas and the ruder winds (that vse to driue away
               Aires duskie vapors, being loose, in many a whistling gale)
               Are pleasingly bound vp and calme, and not a breath exhale;
               So firmely stood the Greeks, nor fled, for all the Ilions ayd.
            
            
               
                  Atrides yet coasts through the troupes, confirming men so stayd:
               O friends (said he) hold vp your minds; strength is but strength of will;
               Reuerence each others good in fight, and shame at things done ill:
               Where souldiers shew an honest shame, and loue of honour liues,
               That ranks men with the first in fight; death fewer liueries giues
               Then life; or then where Fames neglect, makes cow-herds fight at length:
               Flight neither doth the bodie grace, nor shewes the mind hath strength.
               He said; and swiftly through the troupes, a mortall Lance did send,
               That reft a standard-bearers life, renownd Aeneas friend;
               
                  Deicoon Pergasides, whom all the Troians lou'd,Pergasides slain by Agamemnon.
               
               As he were one of Priams sonnes; his mind was so approu'd
               In alwayes fighting with the first: the Lance his target tooke,
               Which could not interrupt the blow, that through it cleerly strooke,
               And in his bellies rimme was sheath'd, beneath his girdle-stead;
               He sounded falling; and his armes, with him resounded, dead.
            
            
               Then fell two Princes of the Greeks, by great Aeneas ire,Orsilochus and Crethon slain by Aeneas.
               
               
                  Diocleus sonnes (Orsilochus, and Crethon) whose kind Sire
               In brauely-builded Phaera dwelt; rich, and of sacred bloud;
               He was descended lineally, from great Alphaus floud,
               That broadly flowes through Pylos fields: Alphaeus did begetThe pedigree of Orsilochus.
               
               
                  Orsilochus; who in the rule, of many men was set:
               And that Orsilochus begat, the rich Diocleus:
               
               
                  Diocleus sire to Crethon was, and this Orsilochus:
               
               Both these, arriu'd at mans estate, with both th'Atrides went,
               To honor them in th'Ilton warres; and both were one way sent;
               To death as well as Troy; for death, hid both in one blacke houre.
               As two yong Lions (with their dam, sustaind but to deuoure)Simile.
               
               Bred on the tops of some steepe hill, and in the gloomie deepe
               
                  Of an inaccessible wood, rush out, and prey on sheepe,
               Steeres, Oxen; and destroy mens stals, so long that they come short,
               And by the Owners steele are slaine: in such vnhappie sort,
               Fell these beneath Aeneas powre. When Menelaus view'd
               (Like two tall fir-trees) these two fall; their timelesse fals he rew'd;
               And to the first fight, where they lay, a vengefull force he tooke;
               His armes beat backe the Sunne in flames; a dreadfull Lance he shooke:
               
                  Mars put the furie in his mind, that by Aeneas hands,
               (Who was to make the slaughter good) he might haue strewd the sands.Antilochus voluntary care of Menelaus, and their charge of Aeneas.
               
               
                  Antilochus (old Nestors sonne) obseruing he was bent
               To vrge a combat of such ods; and knowing the euent,
               Being ill on his part, all their paines (alone sustaind for him)
               Er'd from their end, made after hard, and tooke them in the trim
               Of an encounter; both, their hands, and darts aduanc't, and shooke,
               And both pitcht, in full stand of charge; when suddenly the looke
               Of Anchisiades tooke note, of Nestors valiant sonne,
               In full charge too; which two to one, made Venus issue shunne
               The hote aduenture, though he were, a souldier well approu'd.
               Then drew they off their slaughterd friends; who giuen to their belou'd,
               They turnd where fight shewd deadliest hate; and there mixt with the dead
               
                  Pylemen, that the targatiers of Paphlagonia led,
               A man like Mars; and with him fell, good Mydon that did guide
               His chariot; Atymnus sonne. The Prince Pylemen diedMenelaus slayes Pylemen.
               
               By Menelaus; Nestors ioy, slue Mydon; one before,
               The other in the chariot: Atrides lance did gore
               
                  Pylemens shoulder, in the blade: Antilochus did force
               A mightie stone vp from the earth, and (as he turnd his horse)Antilochus slayes Myden.
               
               Strooke Mydons elbow in the midst: the reines of Iuorie
               Fell from his hands into the dust: Antilochus let flie,
               His sword withall, and (rushing in) a blow so deadly layd
               Vpon his temples, that he gron'd; tumbl'd to earth, and stayd
               A mightie while preposterously (because the dust was deepe)
               Vpon his necke and shoulders there, euen till his foe tooke keepe
               Of his prisde horse, and made them stirre; and then he prostrate fell:
               His horse Antilochus tooke home. When Hector had heard tell,Hectors manner of assault.
               
               (Amongst the vprore) of their deaths, he laid out all his voice,
               And ran vpon the Greeks: behind, came many men of choice;
               Before him marcht great Mars himselfe, matcht with his femall mate,
               The drad Bellona: she brought on (to fight for mutuall Fate)
               A tumult that was wilde, and mad: he shooke a horrid Lance,
               And, now led Hector, and anon, behind would make the chance.
            
            
               This sight, when great Tydides saw, his haire stood vp on end:
               And him, whom all the skill and powre, of armes did late attend,
               Now like a man in counsell poore, that (trauelling) goes amisse,Simile.
               
               And (hauing past a boundlesse plaine) not knowing where he is,
               Comes on the sodaine, where he sees, a riuer rough, and raues
               With his owne billowes rauished, into the king of waues;
               Murmurs with fome, and frights him backe: so he, amazd, retirde,
               
                  And thus would make good his amaze; O friends, we all admirde
               Great Hector, as one of himselfe, well-darting, bold in warre;
               When some God guards him still from death, and makes him dare so farre;
               Now Mars himselfe (formd like a man), is present in his rage:
               And therefore, whatsoeuer cause, importunes you to wage
               Warre with these Troians; neuer striue, but gently take your rod;
               Lest in your bosomes, for a man, ye euer find a God.
            
            
               As Greece retirde, the power of Troy, did much more forward prease;
               And Hector, two braue men of warre, sent to the fields of peace;Hector slaughters Menesthes and Anchialus. Aiax slayes Amphius Selag
                        •…
                     .
               
               
                  Menesthes, and Anchialus; one chariot bare them both:
               Their fals made Aiax Telamon, ruthfull of heart, and wroth;
               Who lightned out a lance, that smote, Amphius Selages,
               
               That dwelt in Paedos; rich in lands, and did huge goods possesse:
               But Fate, to Priam and his sonnes, conducted his supply:
               The Iauelin on his girdle strooke, and pierced mortally
               His bellies lower part; he fell; his armes had lookes so trim,
               That Aiax needs would proue their spoile; the Troians powrd on him
               Whole stormes of Lances, large, and sharpe: of which, a number stucke
               In his rough shield; yet from the slaine, he did his Iauelin plucke:
               But could not from his shoulders force, the armes he did affect;
               The Troians, with such drifts of Darts, the body did protect:
               And wisely Telamonius fear'd, their valorous defence;
               So many, and so strong of hand, stood in, with such expence,
               Of deadly prowesse; who repeld (though big, strong, bold he were)
               The famous Aiax; and their friend, did from his rapture beare.
            
            
               Thus this place, fild with strength of fight, in th'armies other prease,
               
                  Tlepolemus, a tall big man, the sonne of Hercules,
               
               A cruell destinie inspir'd, with strong desire to proue
               Encounter with Sarpedons strength, the sonne of Cloudy Ioue;
               
               Who, coming on, to that sterne end, had chosen him his foe:
               Thus Ioues great Nephew, and his sonne, 'gainst one another go:Ioues son Sarpedon, and Tlepodemus his nephew son to Hercules, draw to encounter. Tlepodemus to Sarpedon.
               
               
                  Tlepolemus (to make his end, more worth the will of Fate)
               Began, as if he had her powre; and shewd the mortall state
               Of too much confidence in man, with this superfluous Braue;
               
                  Sarpedon, what necessitie, or needlesse humor draue
               Thy forme, to these warres? which in heart, I know thou doest adhorre;
               A man not seene in deeds of armes, a Lycian counsellor;
               They lie that call thee sonne to Ioue, since Ioue bred none so late;
               The men of elder times were they, that his high powre begat,
               Such men, as had Herculean force; my father Hercules
               
               Was Ioues true issue; he was bold; his deeds did well expresse
               They sprung out of a Lions heart: he whilome came to Troy,
               (For horse that Iupiter gaue Tros, for Ganimed his boy)
               With sixe ships onely and few men, and tore the Citie downe,
               Left all her broad wayes desolate, and made the horse his owne:
               For thee, thy mind is ill disposde, thy bodies powers are poore,
               And therefore are thy troopes so weake: the souldier euermore
               Followes the temper of his chiefe; and thou pull'st downe a side.
               
                  But say, thou art the sonne of Ioue; and hast thy meanes supplide,
               With forces fitting his descent: the powers, that I compell,
               Shall throw thee hence; and make thy head, run ope the ga
                     •…
                  es of b
                     •…
                  ll.
            
            
               
                  Ioues Lycian issue answerd him, Tlepolemus, tis true;Sarpedon to 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Thy father, holy Ilion, in that sort ouerthrew;
               Th'iniustice of the king was cause, that where thy father had
               Vsde good deseruings to his state, he quitted him with bad.
               
                  Hesyone, the ioy and grace, of king Laomedon,
               
               Thy father rescude from a whale; and gaue to Telamon
               
               In honourd Nuptials; Telamon, from whom your strongest Greeke
               Boasts to haue issude; and this grace, might well expect the like:
               Yet he gaue taunts for thanks, and kept, against his oath, his horse;
               And therefore both thy fathers strength, and iustice might enforce
               The wreake he tooke on Troy: but this, and thy cause differ farre;
               Sonnes seldome heire their fathers worths; thou canst not make his warre:
               What thou assum'st from him, is mine, to be on thee imposde.
            
            
               With this, he threw an ashen dart; and then Tlepolemus losde
               Another from his glorious hand: Both at one instant flew;
               Both strooke, both wounded; from his necke, Sarpedons Iauelin drewSarpedon slaugh ters 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               The life-bloud of Tlepolemus; full in the midst it fell:
               And what he threatned, th'other gaue; that darknesse, and that hell.
               
                  Sarpedons left thigh tooke the Lance; it pierc't the solide bone;
                     
                        •…
                     imselfe sore hurt by T
                        •…
                     epolemus.
               
               And with his raging head, ranne through; but Ioue preseru'd his sonne.
               The dart yet vext him bitterly, which should haue bene puld out;
               But none considerd then so much; so thicke came on the rout,
               And fild each hand so full of cause, to plie his owne defence;
               Twas held enough (both falne) that both, were nobly caried thence.
            
            
               
                  Vlysses knew the euents of both, and tooke it much to hart,
               That his friends enemie should scape; and in a twofold part
               His thoughts contended; if he should, pursue Sarpedons life,
               Or take his friends wreake on his men. Fate did conclude this strife;
               By whom twas otherwise decreed, then that Vlysses steeleVlysses 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Should end Sarpedon. In this doubt, Minerua tooke the wheele
               From fickle Chance; and made his mind, resolue to right his friend
               With that bloud he could surest draw. Then did Reuenge extend
               Her full powre on the multitude; Then did he neuer misse;
               
                  Alastor, Halius, Chromius, Noemon, Pritanis,
               
               
                  Alcander, and a number more, he slue, and more had slaine,
               If Hector had not vnderstood; whose powre made in amaine,
               And strooke feare through the Grecian troupes; but to Sarpedon gaue
               Hope of full rescue; who thus cried, O Hector! helpe and saueSarpedon to Hector.
               
               My body from the spoile of Greece; that to your loued towne,
               My friends may see me borne; and then, let earth possesse her owne,
               In this soyle, for whose sake I left, my countries; for no day
               Shall euer shew me that againe; nor to my wife display
               (And yong hope of my Name) the ioy, of my much thirsted sight:
               All which, I left for Troy; for them, let Troy then do this right.
            
            
               To all this Hector giues no word: but greedily he striues,
               
                  With all speed to repell the Greekes, and shed in floods their liues,
               And left Sarpedon: but what face, soeuer he put on
               Of following the common cause; he left this Prince alone
               For his particular grudge; because, so late, he was so plaine
               In his reproofe before the host, and that did he retaine;
               How euer, for example sake, he would not shew it then;
               And for his shame to, since twas iust. But good Sarpedons men
               Venturd themselues, and forc't him off, and set him vnderneath
               The goodly Beech of Iupiter, where now they did vnsheath
               The Ashen lance: strong Pelagon, his friend, most lou'd, most true,
               Enforc't it from his maimed thigh: with which his spirit flew,Sarpedon in a trance.
               
               And darknesse ouer-flew his eyes, yet with a gentle gale
               That round about the dying Prince, coole Boreas did exhale,
               He was reuiu'd, recomforted; that else had grieu'd and dyed.
            
            
               All this time, flight draue to the fleet, the Argiues, who applyed
               No weapon gainst the proud pursuite, nor euer turnd a head;
               They knew so well that Mars pursude, and dreadfull Hector led.
               Then who was first, who last, whose liues, the Iron Mars did seise,
               And Priams Hector? Helenus, surnam'd Oenopides,
               
               Good 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , and Orestes, skild, in managing of horse;
               Bold Oenomaus, and a man, renownd for martiall force,
               
                  Trechus, the great Aetolian Chiefe; Oresbius, that did weare
               The gawdy Myter; studied wealth, extremely, and dwelt neare
               Th' Athlantique lake Cephisides, in Hyla; by whose seate,
               The good men of Boeotia dwelt. This slaughter grew so great,
               It flew to heauen: Saturnia, discernd it, and cried out
               To Pallas; O vnworthy sight? to see a field so fought,
               And breake our words to Spartas king, that Ilion should be rac'
                     •…
                  ,
               And he returne reueng'd? when thus, we see his Greekes disgrac't
               And beare the harmfull rage of Mars? Come, let vs vse our care
               That we dishonor not our powers. Minerua was as yare
               As she, at the despight of Troy. Her golden-bridl'd steeds,
               Then Saturns daughter brought abrode; and Hebe, she proceeds
               T'addresse her chariot; instantly, she giues it either wheele,
               Beam'd with eight Spokes of sounding brasse, the Axle-tree was steele;
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      chariot.
               
               The Felffes, incorruptible gold; their vpper bands, of brasse;
               Their matter most vnuallued; their worke of wondrous grace.
               The Naues in which the Spokes were driuen, were all with siluer bound;
               The chariots seate, two hoopes of gold, and siluer, strengthned round;
               Edg'd with a gold and siluer fringe; the beame that lookt before,
               Was massie siluer; on whose top, geres all of gold it wore,
               And golden Poitrils. I
                        •…
                     no mounts, and her ho
                     •…
                  e horses rein'd,
               That thirsted for contention, and still of peace complaind.
            
            
               
                  Minerua wrapt her in the robe, that curiously she woue
               With glorious colours, as she sate, on th'Azure floore of Ioue;
                  Pallas armed.
               
               And wore the armes that he puts on, bent to the tearefull field:
               About her brode-spred shoulders hung, his huge and horrid shield,Aegis (Io
                        •…
                     es 
                        •…
                     ield) described
               
               Fring'd round with euer-fighting Snakes; through it, was drawne to life
               
                  The miseries, and deaths of fight; in it frownd bloodie Strife;
               
               In it shin'd sacred Fortitude; in it fell Pursuit flew;
               In it the monster Gorgons head, in which (held out to view)
               Were all the dire ostents of Ioue; on her big head she plac't
               His foure-plum'd glittering caske of gold, so admirably vast,
               It would a hundred garrisons, of souldiers comprehend.
               Then to her shining chariot, her vigorous feet ascend:
               And in her violent hand she takes, his graue, huge, solid lance,
               With which the conquests of her wrath, she vseth to aduance,
               And ouerturne whole fields of men; to shew she was the seed
               Of him that thunders. Then heauens Queene (to vrge her horses speed)The thr
                        •…
                     e How
                        •…
                     s Guardians of heauen gates.
               
               Takes vp the scourge, and forth they flie; the ample gates of heauen
               Rung, and flew open of themselues; the charge whereof is giuen
               (With all Olympus, and the skie) to the distinguisht Howres,
               That cleare, or hide it all in clowds; or powre it downe in showres.
               This way their scourge-obeying horse, made haste, and soone they wonne
               The top of all the topfull heauens, where aged Saturns sonne
               Sate seuerd from the other Gods; then staid the white-arm'd Queene
               Her steeds; and askt of Ioue, if Mars, did not incense his spleene
               With his foule deeds; in ruining, so many, and so great
               In the Command and grace of Greece, and in so rude a heate.
               At which (she said) Apollo laught, and Venus; who still sue
               To that mad God for violence, that neuer iustice knew;
               For whose impietie she askt, if with his wished loue
               Her selfe might free the field of him? He bade her rather moue
               
                  Athenia to the charge she sought, who vsd of old to be
               The bane of Mars; and had as well, the gift of spoile as he.
            
            
               This grace she slackt not, but her horse, scourg'd, that in nature flew
               Betwixt the cope of starres and earth: And how farre at a view
               A man into the purple Sea, may from a hill descrie:
               
                  
                     How farre 
                           •…
                         heauenly 
                           〈◊〉
                         took at one reach or stroke in galloping or running; wherein Homers 
                           •…
                        ind is farre from being exprest in his Inter pretors, al taking it for how far Deities were borne from the earth: when instātly they came downe to earth: 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , &c. tantum vno saltu conficiunt, vel, tantū sub
                        •…
                     ulum progrediuntur deorum altizoni e qui, &c. vno, be ing vnderstood, and the horses swiftnes highly exprest. The sence otherwise is senslesse, and contradictorie.
                   So farre a high-neighing horse of heauen, at euerie iumpe would flie.
            
            
               Arriu'd at Troy, where broke in cutls, the two-floods mixe their force,
               (Scamander, and bright Simois) Saturnia staid her horse;
               Tooke them from chariot; and a clowd, of mightie depth diffusd
               About them; and the verdant bankes, of Symois produc'd
               (In nature) what they
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      ilus is the originall word, which Sea 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , 
                        〈◊〉
                      learnedly, asking how the horse came by it on those bankes, when the text tels him 
                        〈◊〉
                      produced it: being willing to expresse by 
                        〈◊〉
                      the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of that 
                        〈◊〉
                     . If not, I hope the D
                        •…
                     ities 
                        〈◊〉
                      euer command it. eate in heauen. Then both the Goddesses
               Marcht like a paire of timorous Doues, in hasting their accesse,
               To th' Argiue succour. Being arriu'd, where both the most, and best
               Were heapt together, (shewing all, like Lyons at a feast
               Of new slaine carkasses; or Bores, beyond encounter strong.)
               There found they Diomed; and there, midst all th'admiring throng,
               
                  Saturnia put on Stentors shape; that had a brazen voice,
               And spake as lowd as fiftie men; like whom she made a noise,
               And chid the Argiues; O ye Greekes, in name, and outward rite,
               But Princes onely; not in act: what scandall? what despight
               Vse ye to honor? all the time, the great Aeacides
               
               Was conuersant in armes; your foes, durst not a foote addr
                     •…
                  sse
               Without their ports; so much they feard, his lance that all controld;
               
                  And now they out-ray to your fleete. This did with shame make bold
               The generall spirit and powre of Greece; when (with particular note
               Of their disgrace) Athenia, made Tydeus issue hote.
               She found him at his chariot, refreshing of his wound
               Inflicted by slaine Pandarus; his sweat did so abound,
               It much annoid him, vnderneath, the brode belt of his shield;
               With which, and tired with his toile, his soule could hardly yeeld
               His bodie motion. With his hand, he lifted vp the belt,
               And wip't away that clotterd blood, the feruent wound did melt.
               
                  Minerua leand against his horse, and neare their withers laid
               Her sacred hand; then spake to him; Beleeue me Diomed,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to Di
                        •…
                     
                     med.
               
               
                  Tydeus exampl'd not himselfe, in thee his sonne; not Great,
               But yet he was a souldier; a man of so much heate,
               That in his Ambassie for Thebes, when I forbad his mind
               To be too ventrous; and when Feasts, his heart might haue declind
               (With which they welcom'd him) he made, a challenge to the best,
               And foild the best; I gaue him aide, because the rust of rest
               (That would haue seisd another mind) he sufferd not; but vsd
               The triall I made like a man; and their soft feasts refusd:
               Yet when I set thee on, thou faint'st; I guard thee, charge, exhort,
               That (I abetting thee) thou shouldst, be to the Greekes a Fort,
               And a dismay to Ilion; yet thou obey'st in nought:
               Affraid, or slouthfull, or else both: henceforth, renounce all thoughtDiomed to Pal
                     
                        •…
                     .
               
               That euer thou wert Tydeus sonne. He answerd her; I know
               Thou art Ioues daughter, and for that, in all iust dutie owe
               Thy speeches reuerence: yet affirme, ingenuously, that feare
               Doth neither hold me spiritlesse, nor sloth. I onely beare
               Thy charge in zealous memorie, that I should neuer warre
               With any blessed Deitie, vnlesse (exceeding farre
               The limits of her rule) the Queene, that gouerns Chamber sport
               Should preasse to field; and her, thy will, enioynd my lance to hurt:
               But he whose powre hath right in armes, I knew in person here
               (Besides the Cyprian Deitie) and therefore did forbeare;
               And here haue gatherd in retreit, these other Greekes you see
               With note and reuerence of your charge. My dearest mind (said she)
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      againe.
               
               What then was fit is chang'd: Tis true, Mars hath iust rule in warre,
               But iust warre; otherwise he raues, not fights; he's alterd farre;What 
                        〈◊〉
                      w
                        •…
                     rre is.
               
               He vow'd to Iuno and my selfe, that his aide should be vsd
               Against the Troians, whom it guards; and therein he abusd
               His rule in armes, infring'd his word, and made his warre vniust:
               He is inconstant, impious, mad: Resolue then; firmly trust
               My aide of thee against his worst, or any Deitie:
               Adde scourge to thy free horse, charge home: he fights perfidiously.
            
            
               This said; as that braue king, her knight, with his horse-guiding friend,
               Were set before the chariot, (for signe he should descend,
               That she might serue for wagonnesse) she pluckt the waggoner backe,
               And vp into his seate she mounts: the Beechen tree did cracke
               Beneath the burthen; and good cause, it bore so huge a thing:
               
                  A Goddesse so repleate with powre, and such a puissant king.
            
            
               She snatcht the scourge vp and the reines, and shut her heauenly looke
               In hels vast helme, from Mars his eyes: and full careere she tooke
               At him, who then had newly slaine, the mightie Periphas,
               
               Renown'd sonne to Ochesius; and farre the strongest was
               Of all th'Aetolians; to whose spoile, the bloodie God was run:
               But when this man-plague saw th'approch, of God-like Tydeus sonne;
               He let his mightie Periphas lie, and in full charge he ranThe comb
                        •…
                      of Mars and 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               At Diomed; and he at him; both neare; the God began,
               And (thirstie of his blood) he throwes, abrazen lance, that beares
               Full on the breast of Diomed, aboue the reines and geres;
               But Pallas tooke it on her hand, and strooke the eager lance
               Beneath the chariot: then the knight, of Pallas doth aduance,
               And cast a Iaueline off, at Mars; Minerua sent it on;Mars 
                        〈◊〉
                      by 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               That (where his arming girdle girt) his bellie graz'd vpon,
               Iust at the rim, and rancht the flesh: the lance againe he got,
               But left the wound; that stung him so, he laid out such a throat,
               As if nine or ten thousand men, had bray'd out all their breaths
               In one confusion; hauing felt, as many sodaine deaths.
               The rore made both the hosts amaz'd. Vp flew the God to heauen;
               And with him, was through all the aire, as blacke a tincture driuen
               (To Diomeds eyes) as when the earth, halfe chok't with smoking heate
               Of gloomie clouds, that stifle men; and pitchie tempests threat,
               Vsherd with horrid gusts of wind: with such blacke vapors plum'd,
               
                  Mars flew t'Olympus, and brode heauen; and there his place resum'd.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Sadly he went and sate by Ioue, shew'd his immortall blood,
               That from a mortall-man-made-wound, powrd such an impious flood;
               And (weeping) powr'd out these complaints: O Father, stormst thou notMars to Iupite
                        •…
                     .
               
               To see vs take these wrongs from men? extreme griefes we haue got
               Euen by our owne deepe counsels held, for gratifying them;
               And thou (our Councels President) conclud'st in this extreme
               Of fighting euer; being ruld, by one that thou hast bred;
               One neuer well, but doing ill; a girle so full of head,
               That, though all other Gods obey, her mad moods must command
               By thy indulgence; nor by word, nor any touch of hand
               Correcting her; thy reason is, she is a sparke of thee,
               And therefore she may kindle rage, in men, gainst Gods; and she
               May make men hurt Gods; and those Gods, that are (besides) thy seed.
               First in the palms height Cyprides; then runs the impious deed
               On my hurt person: and could life, giue way to death in me;
               Or had my feete not fetcht me off; heaps of mortalitie
               Had kept me consort. Iupiter, with a contracted brow,
               Thus answerd Mars: Thou many minds, inconstant changling thou;Iupiter to Mars
               
               Sit not complaining thus by me; whom most of all the Gods
               (Inhabiting the starrie hill) I hate: no periods
               Being set to thy contentions, brawles, fights, and pitching fields;
               Iust of thy mother Iunos moods; stiffe-neckt, and neuer yeelds,
               Though I correct her still, and chide; nor can forbeare offence,
               
                  Though to her sonne; this wound I know, tasts of her insolence;
               But I will proue more naturall, thou shalt be cur'd, because
               Thou com'st of me: but hadst thou bene, so crosse to sacred lawes,
               Being borne to any other God; thou hadst bene throwne from heauen
               Long since, as low as Tartarus, beneath the Giants driuen.
            
            
               This said, he gaue his wound in charge, to P
                        •…
                     on, who applied
               Such soueraigne medicines, that as soone, the paine was qualified,
               And he recur'd; as nourishing milke, when runnet is put in,
               Runs all in heapes of tough thicke curd, though in his nature thin:
               Euen so soone, his wounds parted sides, ran close in his recure;
               For he (all deathlesse) could not long, the parts of death endure.
               Then Hebe bath'd, and put on him, fresh garments, and he sateHebe attires Mars.
               
               Exulting by his Sire againe, in top of all his state;
               So (hauing from the spoiles of men, made his desir'd remoue)
               
                  Iuno and Pallas reascend, the starrie Court of Ioue.
               
            
            The end of the fifth Booke.
         
         
            
            THE SIXTH BOOKE OF HOMERS ILIADS.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  THe Gods now leauing an indifferent field,
                  The Greekes preuaile, the slaughterd Troi
                        •…
                     ns yeeld;
                  
                     Hector (by Hellenus aduice) retires
                  In haste to Troy; and Hecuba, desires
                  To pray Minerua, to remoue from fight
                  The so
                        •…
                     ne of Tydeus, her affected knight;
                  And vow to her (for fauour of such price)
                  Twelue Oxen should be S
                        •…
                     aine in sacrifice.
                  In meane space, Glaucus and Tydides 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     ;
                  And either other, with remembrance greet
                  Of old loue twixt their fathers; which enclines
                  Their hearts to fri
                        •…
                     ndship; who change armes for signes
                  Of a continu'd loue for eithers life.
                  
                     Hector, in his returne, meets with his wife;
                  And taking, in his armed armes, his sonne,
                  He prophecies the fall of Ilion.
               
            
            
               Another Argument.
               
                  In Zeta, Hector Prophecies;
                  Prayes for his sonne: wils sacrifice.
               
            
            
               
                  THe stern fight freed of al the Gods; conquest, with doubtful wings
               Flew on their lances; euerie way, the restlesse field she flings,
               Betwixt the floods of Symois, and Xanthus, that confin'd
               All their affaires at Ilion, and round about them shin'd.
            
            
               The first that weigh'd downe all the field, of one particular side,
               Was Aiax, sonne of Telamon: who like a bulwarke plide
               The Greekes protection, and of Troy, the knottie orders brake:
               Held out a light to all the rest, and shew'd them how to make
               Way to their conquest: he did wound, the strongest man of Thrace,
               The tallest, and the biggest set, (Eussorian Acamas:)
               His lance fell on his caskes plum'd top, in stooping; the fell head
               Draue through his forehead to his iawes; his eyes Night shadowed.
            
            
               
                  Tydides slue Teuthranides, Axilus, that did dwell
               In faire Arisbas well-built towres, he had of wealth a Well,Tydides, 
                        〈◊〉
                      Diomed (being son to Tyd
                        •…
                     .)
               
               And yet was kind and bountifull: he would a traueller pray
               To be his guest; his friendly house, stood in the brode high way;
               In which, he all sorts nobly vsd: yet none of them would stand,
               Twixt him and death; but both himselfe, and he that had command
               Of his faire horse, Calisius, fell liuelesse on the ground.
               
                  Euryalus; Opheltius, and Dresus dead did wound;
               
                  Nor ended there his fierie course, which he againe begins,
               And ran to it succesfully, vpon a paire of twins,
               
                  Aesepus, and bold Pedasus, whom good Bucolion,
               
               (That first cald father, though base borne, renowm'd Laomedon)
               On Nais Abarbaraea got; a Nymph that (as she fed
               Her curled flocks) Bucolion woo'd, and mixt in loue and bed.
               Both these were spoild of armes, and life, by Mecistiades.
               
            
            
               Then Polypaetes, for sterne death, Astialus did seise:
               
                  Vlysses slue Percosius: Teucer, Aretaon:
               
               
                  Antilochus (old Nestors ioy) Ablerus: the great sonne
               Of Atreus, and king of men, Elatus; whose abode
               He held at vpper Pedasus, where Satnius riuer flow'd.
               The great Heroe Leitus, staid Philacus in flight,
               From further life: Eurypilus, Melanthius reft of light.
            
            
               The brother to the king of men, Adrestus tooke aliue;
               Whose horse, (affrighted with the flight) their driuer now did driue,
               Amongst the low-growne Tam
                     •…
                  cke trees; and at an arme of one
               The chariot in the draught-tree brake; the horse brake loose, and ron
               The same way other flyers fled; contending all to towne:
               Himselfe close at the chariot wheele, vpon his face was throwne,
               And there lay flat, roll'd vp in dust: Atrides inwards draue;
               And (holding at his breast his lance) Adrestus sought to saue
               His head, by losing of his feet, and trusting to his knees:
               On which, the same parts of the king, he hugs, and offers fees
               Of worthie value for his life; and thus pleades their receipt:
               Take me aliue, O Atreus sonne, and take a worthie weight
               Of brasse, elaborate iron, and gold: a heape of precious thingsThis Virgils imita
                        •…
                     es.
               
               Are in my fathers riches hid; which (when your seruant brings
               Newes of my safetie to his eares) he largely will diuide
               With your rare bounties: Atreus sonne, thought this the better side,
               And meant to take it; being about, to send him safe to fleete:
               Which when (farre off) his brother saw, he wing'd his royall feet,
               And came in threatning, crying out; O soft heart? whats the causeAgamemno
                        •…
                      to Men
                        •…
                     laus.
               
               Thou spar'st these men thus? haue not they, obseru'd these gentle lawes
               Of mild humanitie to thee, with mightie argument,
               Why thou shouldst deale thus? In thy house? and with all president
               Of honord guest rites entertaind? not one of them shall flie
               A bitter end for it, from heauen; and much lesse (dotingly)
               Scape our reuengefull fingers; all, euen th'infant in the wombe
               Shall tast of what they merited, and haue no other tombe,
               Then razed Ilion; nor their race, haue more fruite, then the dust.
               This iust cause turnd his brothers mind, who violently thrust
               The prisoner from him; in whose guts, the king of men imprest
               His ashen lance; which (pitching downe, his foote vpon the brest,
               Of him that vpwards fell) he drew; then Nestor spake to all:
            
            
               O friends and household men of Mars, let not your pursuit fallKestor to the Greekes.
               
               With those ye fell, for present spoile; nor (like the king of men)
               Let any scape vnfeld: but on, dispatch them all; and then
               
                  Ye shall haue time enough to spoile. This made so strong their chace,
               That all the Troians had bene housd, and neuer turnd a face,
               Had not the Priamist Helenus (an Augure most of name)Hellenus to Hector and Aeneas
               
               Will'd Hector, and Aeneas thus: Hector? Anchises fame?
               Since on your shoulders, with good cause, the weightie burthen lies
               Of Troy and Lycia, (being both, of noblest faculties,
               For counsell, strength of hand, and apt, to take chance at her best,
               In euery turne she makes) stand fast, and suffer not the rest
               (By any way searcht out for scape) to come within the ports:
               Lest (fled into their wiues kind armes) they there be made the sports
               Of the pursuing enemie: exhort and force your bands
               To turne their faces: and while we, employ our ventur'd hands
               (Though in a hard condition) to make the other stay:
               
                  Hector, go thou to Ilion, and our Queene mother pray,
               To take the richest robe she hath; the same that's chiefly deare
               To her Court fancie: with which Iemme, (assembling more to her,
               Of Troys chiefe Matrones) let all go, (for feare of all our fates)
               To Pallas temple: take the key, vnlocke the leauie gates;
               Enter, and reach the highest towre, where her Palladium stands,
               And on it put the precious veile, with pure, and reuerend hands:
               And vow to her (besides the gift) a sacrificing stroke
               Of twelue fat Heifers of a yeare, that neuer felt the yoke:
               (Most answering to her maiden state) if she will pittie vs;
               Our towne, our wiues, our yongest ioyes: and (him that plagues them thus)
               Take from the conflict; Diomed, that Furie in a fight;
               That true sonne of great Tydeus; that cunning Lord of Flight:
               Whom I esteeme the strongest Greeke: for we haue neuer fled
               
                  Achilles (that is Prince of men, and whom a Goddesse bred)
               Like him; his furie flies so high, and all mens wraths commands.
            
            
               
                  Hector intends his brothers will; but first through all his bands,
               He made quicke way, encouraging, and all (to feare) affraide:
               All turnd their heads and made Greece turne. Slaughter stood still dismaid,
               On their parts; for they thought some God, falne from the vault of starres,
               Was rusht into the Ilions aide, they made such dreadfull warres.
            
            
               Thus Hector, toyling in the waues, and thrusting backe the floodHector to the Troians.
               
               Of his ebb'd forces: thus takes leaue: So, so, now runs your blood
               In his right current; Forwards now, Troians? and farre cald friends?
               Awhile hold out, till for successe, to this your braue amends,
               I haste to Ilion, and procure, our Counsellours, and wiues
               To pray, and offer Hecatombs, for their states in our liues.
            
            
               Then faire-helm'd Hector turnd to Troy, and (as he trode the field)How Hector left the field.
               
               The blacke Buls hide, that at his backe, he wore about his shield,
               (In the extreme circumference) was with his gate so rockt,
               That (being large) it (both at once) his necke and ankles knockt.
            
            
               And now betwixt the hosts were met, Hippolochus braue sonneThe encounter of Diomed and Glaucus.
               
               
                  Glaucus, who (in his verie looke) hope of some wonder wonne:
               And little Tydeus mightie heire: who seeing such a man
               Offer the field; (for vsuall blowes) with wondrous words began.
            
            
               
                  What art thou (strongst of mortall men) that putst so farre before?Diomed to Glauc
                        •…
                     .
               
               Whom these fights neuer shew'd mine eyes? they haue bene euermore
               Sonnes of vnhappie parents borne, that came within the length
               Of this Minerua-guided lance, and durst close with the strength
               That she inspires in me. If heauen, be thy diuine abode,
               And thou a Deitie; thus inform'd, no more, with any God
               Will I change lances: the strong sonne, of Drias did not liue
               Long after such a conflict dar'd, who godlesly did driue
               
                  Nisaeus Nurses through the hill, made sacred to his name,
               And cald Niss
                        •…
                     ius: with a goade, he puncht each furious dame,
               And made them euery one cast downe, their greene and leauie speares.
               This, t'homicide Lycurgus did; and those vngodly feares,
               He put the Froes in, seisd their God. Euen Bacchus he did driue
               From his Nisseius; who was faine (with huge exclaimes) to diue
               Into the Ocean: Thetis there, in her bright bosome tooke
               The flying Deitie; who so feard, Lycurgus threats, he shooke:
               For which, the freely-liuing Gods, so highly were incenst,
               That Saturns great sonne strooke him blind, and with his life dispenc't
               But small time after: all because, th'immortals lou'd him not:
               Nor lou'd him, since he striu'd with them: and his end hath begot
               Feare in my powres to fight with heauen: but if the fruits of earth
               Nourish thy bodie, and thy life, be of our humane birth,
               Come neare, that thou maist soone arriue, on that life-bounding shore,
               To which I see thee hoise such saile. Why dost thou so explore,Glaucu
                        •…
                      his wor thie answer to Diomed: and his 
                        •…
                     edegree drawne euen from Sysip
                        •…
                     us.
               
               (Said Glaucus) of what race I am? when like the race of leaues
               The race of man is, that deserues, no question; nor receiues
               My being any other breath: The wind in Autumne strowes
               The earth with old leaues; then the Spring, the woods with new endowes:
               And so death scatters men on earth: so life puts out againe
               Mans leauie issue: but my race, if (like the course of men)
               Thou seekst in more particular termes: tis this; (to many knowne)
            
            
               In midst of Argos, nurse of horse, there stands a walled towne
               Ephyré, where the Mansion house, of Sysiphus did stand;The historie of Bellerophon.
               
               Of Sysiphus Aeolides, most wise of all the land:
               
                  Glaucus was sonne to him, and he, begat Bellerophon,
               
               Whose bodie heauen endued with strength, and put a beautie on,
               Exceeding louely: Pr
                        •…
                     tus yet, his cause of loue did hate,
               And banisht him the towne: he might; he ruld the Argiue state:
               The vertue of the one, Iou
                        •…
                     
                   plac't, beneath the others powre.
               His exile grew, since he denied, to be the Paramour
               Of faire Ant
                        •…
                     ta, Pr
                        •…
                     tus wife; who felt a raging fire
               Of secret loue to him: but he, whom wisedome did inspire
               As well as prudence (one of them, aduising him to shunne
               The danger of a Princesse loue: the other, not to runne
               Within the danger of the Gods: the act being simply ill)
               Still entertaining thoughts diuine, subdu'd the earthly still.
               She (rul'd by neither of his wits) preferd her lust to both;
               And (false to Pr
                        •…
                     tus) would seeme true, with this abhorr'd vntroth;
               
                  
                  Praetus? or die thy selfe (said she) or let Bellerophon die;Bellereph
                        •…
                     ntis literae
                        •…
                     . Ad. Eras. 
                        •…
                     hu long speech many Critickes tax
                        •…
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      vntim
                        •…
                     
                     ly, being (as they take 
                        〈◊〉
                     ) in the hea
                        •…
                      of fight. Hier Vidas (a late obseruer) be ing
                        •…
                      eagrest against Homer, whose ignorance in this, I cannot but note, and proue to you: for (besides the authority & office of a Poet, to vary and quicken hi
                        •…
                      Poem with these episods, somtimes beyond the leasure of their actions) the Critick notes not how far his forerunner preue
                        •…
                     ts his worst as far: and sets downe his spe
                        •…
                     ch, at the sodain & strāge turning of the Troian field, set on a litle before by Hector: and that so fiercely, it made an admi ring stand amōg the Grecians, & therein gaue fit time for these great captaines to vtter their admirations: the whole field in that part being to stand like their Commanders. And then how full of decorum this gallant shew and speech was to sound vnderstandings, I leaue onely to such, and let our Criticks go c
                        •…
                     uill.
               
               He vrg'd dishonour to thy bed: which since I did denie,
               He thought his violence should grant, and sought thy shame by force,
               The king, incenst with her report, resolu'd vpon her course;
               But doubted, how it should be runne: he shund his death direct;
               (Holding a way so neare, not safe) and plotted the effect,
               By sending him with letters seald (that, opened, touch his life)
               To Rheuns king of Lycia, and father to his wife.
               He went, and happily he went: the Gods walkt all his way.
               And being arriu'd in Lycia, where Xanthus doth display
               The siluer ensignes of his waues: the king of that brode land
               Receiu'd him, with a wondrous free, and honourable hand.
               Nine daies he feasted him, and kild, an Oxe in euery day,
               In thankfull sacrifice to heauen, for his faire guest; whose stay,
               With rosie fingers, brought the world, the tenth wel-welcomd morne:
               And then the king did moue to see, the letters he had borne
               From his lou'd sonne in law; which seene, he wrought thus their conten's.
               
                  Chym
                        •…
                     ra the inuincible, he sent him to conuince:
               Sprung from no man, but meere diuine; a Lyons shape before,
               Behind, a dragons, in the midst, a Gotes shagg'd forme she bore;
               And flames of deadly feruencie, flew from her breath and eyes:
               Yet her he slue, his confidence, in sacred prodigies
               Renderd him victor. Then he gaue, his second conquest way,
               Ag
                     •…
                  inst the famous Solymi, when (he himselfe would say
               Reporting it) he enterd on, a passing vigorous fight.
               His third huge labour he approu'd, against a womans spight
               That fild a field of Amazons: be ouercame them all.
               Then set they on him slie Deceipt, when Force had such a fall;
               An ambush of the strongest men, that spacious Lycia bred,
               Was lodg'd for him; whom he lodg'd sure: they neuer raisd a head.
            
            
               His deeds thus shewing him deriu'd, from some Celestiall race,
               The king detaind, and made amends, with doing him the grace
               Of his faire daughters Princely gift; and with her (for a dowre)
               Gaue halfe his kingdome; and to this, the Lycians on did powre
               More then was giuen to any king: a goodly planted field,
               In some parts, thicke of groues, and woods: the rest, rich crops did yeeld.
               This field, the Lycians futurely (of future wandrings there
               And other errors of their Prince, in the vnhappie Rere
               Of his sad life) the Err
                     •…
                  nt cald: the Princesse brought him forth
               Three children (whose ends grieu'd him more, the more they were of worth)
               
                  Isander, and Hippolochus, and faire Laodomy:
               
               With whom, euen Iupiter himselfe, left heauen it selfe, to lie;
               And had by her the man at armes, Sarpedon, cald diuine.
               The Gods th
                     •…
                  n left him (lest a man should in their glories shine)S
                        •…
                     rpedons birth
               
               And set against him, for his sonne, Isandrus, (in a strife,
               Against the valiant Solymi) Mars reft of light and life,
               
                  Laodamia (being enuied, of all the Goddesses)
               The golden-bridle-handling Queene, the maiden Patronesse,
               
                  Slue with an arrow: and for this, he wandred euermore
               Alone through his Aleian field; and fed vpon the core
               Of his sad bosome: flying all, the loth'd consorts of men.
               Yet had he one suruiu'd to him, of those three childeren;
               
                  Hippolochus, the root of me: who sent me here, with charge,
               That I should alwaies beare me well, and my deserts enlarge
               Beyond the vulgar: lest I sham'd, my race, that farre exceld
               All that Ephyras famous towres, or ample Lycia held.
               This is my stocke, and this am I. This cheard Tydides heart,
               Who pitcht his speare downe; leand, and talkt, in this affectionate part.
            
            
               Certesse (in thy great Ancetor, and in mine owne) thou artDiomed
                        •…
                      answer to 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               A guest of mine, right ancient; king Oeneus twentie daies
               Detaind, with feasts, Bellerophon, whom all the world did praise:
               Betwixt whom, mutuall gifts were giuen: my Grandsi
                     •…
                  e gaue to thine,
               A girdle of Phoenician worke, impurpl'd wondrous fine:
               Thine gaue a two-neckt Iugge of gold, which though I vse not here,
               Yet still it is my gemme at home. But if our fathers were
               Familiar; or each other knew, I know not: since my sire
               Left me a child, at siege of Thebes: where he left his lifes fire.
               But let vs proue our Grandsires sonnes, and be each others guests:
               To Lycia when I come, do thou, receiue thy friend with feasts:
               Peloponnesus, with the like, shall thy wisht presence greet;
               Meane space, shun we each other here, though in the preasse we meet:
               There are enow of Troy beside, and men enough renownd,
               To right my powres, whom euer heauen, sh
                     •…
                  ll let my lance confound:
               So are there of the Greeks for thee: kill who thou canst: and now
               For signe of amitie twixt vs, and that all these may know
               We glorie in th'hospitious rites, our Grandsires did commend,
               Change we our armes before them all. From horse then Both descend,
               Ioyne hands, giue faith, and take; and then, did Iupiter 
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                        
                           •…
                        entem 
                           •…
                        demit Iup. the text hath it: whic
                        •…
                      
                     
                        •…
                     nely I alter of all 
                        •…
                     o mers originall, since Plutarch against the Stoicks, excuses this supposed f
                        •…
                     lly in Gl
                        •…
                     ucus. Spond. likewise enc
                        •…
                     uvaging my alterations, which I vse for the lou
                        •…
                     d and simple Nobility of the free exchange in Glaucus, contrarie to others that for the supposed f
                        •…
                     lly in Gl
                        •…
                     us, turnd his change into a Pro
                        •…
                     erb. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , goldē o
                        •…
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . Pri
                        •…
                      Court. elate
               The mind of Glaucus: who to shew, his reuerence to the state
               Of vertue in his grandsires heart, and gratulate beside
               The offer of so great a friend: exchang'd (in that good pride)
               Curets of gold for those of brasse, that did on Diomed shine:
               One of a hundred Oxens price, the other but of nine.
            
            
               By this, had Hector reacht the ports, of Scaea, and the tow'rs:
               About him flockt the wiues of Troy, the children, paramours,
               Enquiring how their husbands did, their fathers, brothers, loues.
            
            
               He stood not then to answer them, but said; It now behoues
               Ye should go all 
                     •…
                  'implore the aide, of heauen, in a distresse
               Of great effect, and imminent. Then hasted he accesse,
               To Priams goodly builded Court; which round about was runne
               With walking porches, galleries, to keepe off raine and Sunne;
               Within, of one side, on a rew, of sundrie colourd stones,
               Fiftie faire lodgings were built out, for Priams fiftie sonnes:
               And for as faire sort of their wiues; and in the opposite view
               Twelue lodgings of like stone, like height, were likewise built arew;
               Where, with their faire and vertuous wiues, twelue Princes, sons in law,
               
                  To honourable Priam, lay: And here met Hecub
                        •…
                     
                  
               
               (The louing mother) her great sonne, and with her, needs must be
               The fairest of her femall race, the bright Laodice.
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to Hector.
               
               The Queene grip't hard her Hectors hand, and said; O worthiest sonne,
               Why leau'st thou field? is't not because, the cursed nation
               Afflict our countrimen and friends? they are their mones that moue
               Thy mind to come and lift thy hands (in his high towre) to Ioue:
               
               But stay a little, that my selfe, may fetch our sweetest wine,
               To offer first to Iupiter: then that these ioynts of thine
               May be refresht: for (wo is me) how thou art toyld and spent!
               Thou for our cities generall state: thou, for our friends farre sent,
               Must now the preasse of fight endure: now solitude to call
               Vpon the name of Iupiter: thou onely for vs all.
               But wine will something comfort thee: for to a man dismaid,
               With carefull spirits; or too much, with labour ouerlaid,
               Wine brings much rescue, strengthning much, the bodie and the mind.
            
            
               The great Helme-mouer thus receiu'd, the authresse of his kind;Hector to 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               My royall mother, bring no wine, lest rather it impaire,
               Then helpe my strength; and make my mind, forgetfull of th'affaire
               Committed to it. And (to poure, it out in sacrifice)
               I feare, with vnwasht hands to serue, the pure-liu'd Deities;
               Nor is it lawfull, thus imbrew'd, with blood, and dust; to proue
               The will of heauen: or offer vowes, to clowd-compelling Ioue.
               
               I onely come to vse your paines (assembling other Dames,
               Matrons, and women honourd most, with high and vertuous names)
               With wine and odors; and a robe, most ample, most of price;
               And which is dearest in your loue, to offer sacrifice,
               In Pallas temple: and to put, the precious robe ye beare,
               On her Palladium; vowing all, twelue Oxen of a yeare,
               Whose necks were neuer wrung with yoke; shall pay her Grace their liues,
               If she will pittie our sieg'd towne; pittie our selues, our wiues;
               Pittie our children; and remoue, from sacred Ilion,
               The dreadfull souldier Diomed; and when your selues are gone
               About this worke, my selfe will go, to call into the field,
               (If he will heare me) Hellens loue; whom would the earth would yeeld,
               And headlong take into her gulfe, euen quicke before mine eye
                     •…
                  
                  ▪
               
               For then my heart, I hope, would cast, her lode of miseries;
               Borne for the plague he hath bene borne, and bred to the deface
               (By great Olympius) of Troy, our Sire, and all our race.
            
            
               This said, g
                     •…
                  aue Hecuba went home, and sent her maids abou
                     •…
                  ,
               To bid the Matrones: she her selfe, descended, and searcht out
               (Within a place that breath'd perfumes) the richest robe she had:
               Which lay with many rich ones more, most curiously made,
               By women of Sydonia; which Paris brought from thence,
               Sailing the brode Sea, when he made, that voyage of offence,
               In which he brought home Hellena. That robe, transferd so farre,
               (That was the vndermost) she tooke; it glitterd like a starre;
               And with it, went she to the Fane, with many Ladies more:
               
                  Amongst whom, faire cheekt Thean
                        •…
                     , vnlockt the folded dore;
               Chaste Theano, Antenors wife, and of Cisseus race,
               Sister to Hecuba, both borne, to that great king of Thrace.
               Her, th▪Ilions made Mineruas Priest; and her they followed all,
               Vp to the Temples highest towre; where, on their knees they fall▪
               
               Lift vp their hands, and fill the Fane, with Ladies pitious cries.
               Then louely Theano tooke the veile, and with it she impliesTheano Mineruas Priest, and Antenors wife, prayes to Palla
                        •…
                     
                  
               
               The great Palladium, praying thus; Goddesse of most renowne?
               In all the heauen of Goddesses? great guardian of our towne?
               Reuerend Miner
                        •…
                     a? breake the lance, of Diomed; ceasse his grace;
               Giue him to fall in shamefull flight, headlong, and on his face,
               Before our ports of Ilion; that instantly we may,
               Twelue vnyok't Oxen of a yeare, in this thy Temple slay
               To thy sole honor; take their bloods, and banish our offence;
               Accept Troyes zeale; her wiues, and saue, our infants innocence.
            
            
               She praid, but Pallas would not grant. Meane space was Hector come
               Where Alexanders lodgings were; that many a goodly roome
               Had, built in them by Architects, of Troys most curious sort;
               And were no lodgings, but a house; nor no house, but a Court;
               Or had all these containd in them; and all within a towre,
               Next Hectors lodgings and the kings. The lou'd of heauens chiefe powre,
               (Hector) here entred. In his hand, a goodly lance he bore,
               Ten cubits long; the brasen head, went shining in before;
               Helpt with a burnisht ring of gold; he found his brother then
               Amongst the women; yet prepar'd, to go amongst the men.
               For in their chamber he was set, trimming his armes, his shield,
               His curets, and was trying how, his crooked bow would yeeld
               To his streight armes; amongst her maids, was set the Argiue Queene,
               Commanding them in choisest workes. When Hectors eye had seene
               His brother thus accompanied; and that he could not beare
               The verie touching of his armes, but where the women were;
               And when the time so needed men: right cunningly he chid,
               That he might do it bitterly; his cowardise he hid
               (That simply made him so retir'd) beneath an anger faind,
               In him, by Hector; for the hate, the citizens sustaindHector dissembles the cowardise he finds in Par
                        •…
                     , t
                        •…
                     rning it, as if he chid him for his anger at the Tro
                     
                        •…
                     ns for hating him being conquered by Menelaus: when it is for his effeminacie: which is all paraphr asticall in my translation.
               
               Against him, for the foile he tooke, in their cause; and againe,
               For all their generall foiles in his. So Hector seemes to plaine
               Of his wrath to them, for their hate, and not his cowardise;
               As that were it that shelterd him, in his effeminacies;
               And kept him in that dangerous time, from their fit aid in fight:
               For which he chid thus; Wretched man? so timelesse is thy spight,
               That tis not honest; and their hate, is iust, gainst which it bends:
               Warre burns about the towne for thee; for thee our flaughterd friends
               Besiege Troy with their carkasses, on whose heapes our high wals
               Are ouerlookt by enemies: the sad sounds of their fals
               Without, are eccho'd with the cries, of wines, and babes within;
               And all for thee: and yet for them, thy honor cannot win
               Head of thine anger: thou shouldst need, no spirit to stirre vp thine,
               
                  But thine should set the rest on fire; and with a rage diuine
               Chastise impartially the best, that impiously forbeares:
               Come forth, lest thy faire towers and Troy, be burnd about thine eares.
            
            
               
                  Paris acknowledg'd (as before) all iust that Hector spake;
               Allowing iustice, though it were, for his iniustice sake:
               And wh ere his brother put a wrath, vpon him, by his art;
               He takes it (for his honors sake,) as sprung out of his hart:
               And rather would haue anger seeme, his fault, then cowardise:
               And thus he answerd: Since with right, you ioynd checke with aduise,Paris 
                        〈◊〉
                      H
                        •…
                     ctor.
               
               And I heare you; giue equall eare; It is not any spleene
               Against the Towne (as you conceiue) that makes me so vnseene;
               But sorrow for it: which to ease, and by discourse digest,
               (Within my selfe) I liue so close: and yet, since men might wrest
               My sad retreat, like you; my wife, (with her aduice) inclinde
               This my addression to the field; which was mine owne free minde,
               As well as th'instance of her words: for though the foyle were mine,
               Conquest brings forth her wreaths by turnes: stay then this hast of thine,
               But till I ar me; and I am made, a consort for thee streight;
               Or go, Ile ouertake thy haste. Hellen stood at receipt,
               And tooke vp all great Hectors powers, t'attend her heauie words;Hellens ruthfull complaint to Hector.
               
               By which had Paris no reply; this vent her griefe affords:
            
            
               Brother, (if I may call you so, that had bene better borne
               A dog, then such a horride Dame, as all men curse and scorne;
               A mischiefe mak
                     •…
                  r, a man-plague) O would to God the day
               That first gaue light to me, had bene, a whirlwind in my way,
               And borne me to some desert hill, or hid me in the rage
               Of earths most far-resounding seas; ere I should thus engage
               The deare liues of so many friends: yet since the Gods hau
                     •…
                   beene
               Helplesse foreseers of my plagues, they might haue likewise seene,
               That he they put in yoke with me, to beare out their award,
               Had bene a man of much more spirit; and, or had noblier dar'd
               To shield mine honour with his deed; or with his mind had knowne
               Much better the vpbraids of men; that so he might haue showne
               (More like a man) some sence of griefe, for both my shame and his:
               But he is senslesse, nor conceiues, what any manhood is;
               Nor now, nor euer after will: and therefore hangs, I feare,
               A plague aboue him. But come neare; good brother, rest you here,
               Who (of the world of men) stands charg'd, with most vnrest for me,
               (Vile wretch) and for my Louers wrong; on whom a destinie
               So bitter is imposde by Ioue, that all succeeding times
               Will put (to our vn-ended shames) in all mens mouthes our crimes.
            
            
               He answerd: Hellen, do not seeke, to make me sit with thee:Hector to Hellen.
               
               I must not stay, though well I know, thy honourd loue of me:
               My mind cals forth to aid our friends, in whom my absence breeds
               Longings to see me: for whose sakes, importune thou, to deeds,
               This man by all meanes, that your care, may make his owne make hast,
               And meete me in the open towne, that all may see at last,
               He minds his louer: I my selfe, will now go home▪ and see
               
                  My houshold, my deare wife, and sonne, that little hope of me.
               For (sister) tis without my skill, if I shall euer more
               Returne and see them; or to earth, her right in me restore:
               The Gods may stoupe me by the Greekes. This said, he went to see
               The vertuous Princesse, his true wife, white arm'd Andromache.
               
               She (with her infant sonne, and maide) was climb'd the towre, about
               The sight of him that sought for her, weeping and crying out.
               
                  Hector, not finding her at home, was going forth; retir'd;
               Stood in the gate: her woman cald; and curiously enquir'd,
               Where she was gone; bad tell him true, if she were gone to see
               His sisters, or his brothers wiues? or whether she should be
               At Temple with the other Dames, t'implore Mineruas ruth.
            
            
               Her woman answerd; since he askt, and vrg'd so much the truth;
               The truth was, she was neither gone, to see his brothers wiues,
               His sisters, nor t'implore the ruth, of Pallas on their liues;
               But (she aduertisde of the bane, Troy sufferd; and how vast
               Conquest had made her selfe, for Greece) like one distraught, made hast
               To ample Ilion, with her sonne, and Nurse; and all the way
               Mournd, and dissolu'd in teares for him. Then Hector made no stay;
               But trod her path, and through the streets (magnificently built)
               All the great Citie past, and came, where (seeing how bloud was spilt)
               
                  Andromache might see him come; who made as he would passe
               The ports without saluting her, not knowing where she was:
               She, with his sight, made breathlesse hast, to meet him: she, whose grace
               Brought him, withall, so great a dowre; she that of all the race
               Of king Action, onely liu'd: Action, whose house stood
               Beneath the mountaine Placius, enuirond with the wood
               Of Theban Hippoplace, being Court, to the Cilician land:
               She ran to Hector, and with her (tender of heart and hand)
               Her sonne, borne in his Nurses armes: when like a heauenly signe,
               Compact of many golden starres, the princely child did shine;
               Whom Hector cald Scamandrius; but whom the towne did name
               
                  Astianax; because his sire, did onely prop the same.
               
                  Hector (though griefe bereft his speech, yet) smil'd vpon his ioy:
               
                  Andromache cride out, mixt hands, and to the strength of Troy,
               Thus wept forth her affection: O noblest in desire;A
                        •…
                     dromaches passion to Hector
               
               Thy mind, inflam'd with others good, will set thy selfe on fire:
               Nor pitiest thou thy sonne, nor wife, who must thy widdow be,
               If now thou issue: all the field, will onely run on thee.
               Better my shoulders vnderwent, the earth, then thy decease;
               For then would earth beare ioyes no mo
                     •…
                  e: then comes the blacke increase
               Of griefes (like Greeks on Ilion): Alas, what one suruiues
               To be my refuge? one blacke day, bereft seuen brothers liues,
               By sterne Achilles; by his hand, my father breath'd his last:Thebes a most 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      of Ci
                     
                        •…
                     .
               
               His high-wald rich Cilician Thebes, sackt by him, and laid wast;
               The royall bodie yet he left, vnspoild: Religion charm'd
               That act of spoile; and all in fire, he burnd him compleat arm'd;
               Built ouer him a royall tombe: and to the monument
               
                  He left of him; Th'Oreades (that are the high descent
               Of Aegis-bearing Iupiter) another of their owne
               Did adde to it, and set it round, with Elms; by which is showne
               (In theirs) the barrennesse of death: yet might it serue beside
               To shelter the sad Monument, from all the ruffinous pride
               Of stormes and tempests, vsde to hurt, things of that noble kind:
               The short life yet, my mother liu'd, he sau'd; and seru'd his mind
               With all the riches of the Realme; which not enough esteemd,
               He kept her prisoner; whom small time, but much more wealth redeemd:
               And she in syluane Hyppoplace, Cilicia rul'd againe;
               But soone was ouer-rul'd by death: Dianas chast disdaine
               Gaue her a Lance, and tooke her life; yet all these gone from me,
               Thou amply renderst all; thy life, makes still my father be;
               My mother; brothers: and besides, thou art my husband too;
               Most lou'd, most worthy. Pitie then (deare loue) and do not go;
               For thou gone, all these go againe: pitie our common ioy,
               Lest (of a fathers patronage, the bulwarke of all Troy)
               Thou leau'st him a poore widdowes charge; stay, stay then, in this Towre,
               And call vp to the wilde Fig-tree, all thy retired powre:
               For there the wall is easiest scal'd, and fittest for surprise;
               And there, th'Aiaces, Idomen, th'Atrides, Diomed, thrise
               Haue both suruaid, and made attempt; I know not, if induc'd
               By some wise Augure; or the fact, was naturally infusd
               Into their wits, or courages. To this, great Hector said;Hector to 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Be well assur'd wife, all these things, in my kind cares are waid:
               But what a shame, and feare it is, to thinke how Troy would scorne
               (Both in her husbands and her wiues, whom long-traind gownes adorne)
               That I should cowardly flie off? The spirit I first did breath,
               Did neuer teach me that; much lesse, since the contempt of death
               Was settl'd in me; and my mind, knew what a Worthy was;
               Whose office is, to leade in fight, and giue no danger passe
               Without improuement. In this fire, must Hectors triall shine;
               Here must his country, father, friends, be (in him) made diuine.
               And such a stormy day shall come, in mind and soule I know,
               When sacred Troy shall shed her towres, for teares of ouerthrow;
               When Priam, all his birth and powre, shall in those teares be drownd.
               But neither. Troyes posteritie, so much my soule doth wound:
               
                  Priam, nor Hecuba her selfe, nor all my brothers woes
               (Who though so many, and so good, must all be food for foes)
               As thy sad state; when some rude Greeke, shall leade thee weeping hence;
               These free dayes clouded; and a night, of captiue violence
               Loding thy temples: out of which, thine eyes must neuer see;The n
                        •…
                     mes of two fountaines: of which, one in Thessaly, the other 
                        〈◊〉
                      Argos: or according to 
                        〈◊〉
                     , in 
                        〈◊〉
                      or 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               But spin the Greeke wiues, webs of taske; and their Fetch-water be,
               To Argos, from Messeides, or cleare Hyperias spring:
               Which (howsoeuer thou abhorst) Fate's such a shrewish thing,
               She will be mistris: whose curst hands, when they shall crush out cries
               From thy oppressions, (being beheld, by oth
                     •…
                  r enemies)
               Thus they will nourish thy extremes: This dame was Hectors wife,
               
                  A man, that at the warres of Troy, did breath the worthiest life
               Of all their armie. This againe, will rub thy fruitfull wounds,
               To misse the man, that to thy bands, could giue such narrow bounds:
               But that day shall not wound mine eyes; the solide heape of night
               Shall interpose, and stop mine eares, against thy plaints, and plight.
            
            
               This said, he reacht to take his sonne: who (of his armes afraid;
               And then the horse-haire plume, with which, he was so ouerlaid,
               Nodded so horribly) he clingd, backe to his nurse, and cride.
               Laughter affected his great Sire; who doft, and laid aside
               His fearfull Helme; that on the earth, cast round about it, light;
               Then tooke and kist his louing sonne; and (ballancing his weight
               In dancing him) these louing vowes, to liuing Ioue he vsde,
               And all the other bench of Gods: O you that haue infusdeHectors prayer for his sonne.
               
               Soule to this Infant; now set downe, this blessing on his starre:
               Let his renowne be cleare as mine; equall his strength in warre;
               And make his reigne so strong in Troy, that yeares to come may yeeld
               His facts this fame; (when rich in spoiles, he leaues the conquerd field
               Sowne with his slaughters.) These high deeds, exceed his fathers worth:
               And let this eccho'd praise supply, the comforts to come forth
               Of his kind mother, with my life. This said; th'Heroicke Sire
               Gaue him his mother; whose faire eyes, fresh streames of loues salt fire,
               Billow'd on her soft cheekes, to heare, the last of Hectors speech;
               In which his vowes comprisde the summe, of all he did beseech
               In her wisht comfort. So she tooke, into her odorous brest,
               Her husbands gift; who (mou'd to see, her heart so much opprest)
               He dried her teares; and thus desir'd: Afflict me not (deare wife)
               With these vaine griefes; He doth not liue, that can disioyne my life
               And this firme bosome; but my Fate; and Fate, whose wings can flie?
               Noble, ignoble, Fate controuls: once borne, the best must die:
               Go home, and set thy houswifrie, on these extremes of thought;
               And driue warre from them with thy maids; keepe them from doing nought:
               These will be nothing: leaue the cares, of warre, to men, and mee;
               In whom (of all the Ilion race) they take their high'st degree.
            
            
               On went his helme; his Princesse home, halfe cold with kindly feares;
               When euery feare, turnd backe her lookes; and euery looke shed teares.
               Fo-slaughtering Hectors house, soone reacht, her many women there
               Wept all to see her: in his life, great Hectors funerals were;
               Neuer lookt any eye of theirs, to see their Lord safe home,
               Scap't from the gripes and powers of Greece. And now was Paris come
               From his high towres; who made no stay, when once he had put onParis ouertakes Hector.
               
               His richest armour; but flew forth: the flints he trod vponHis simile: high and expressiue: which Virgil almost word for word hath transla
                        •…
                     ed, 12. Aen.
               
               Sparkled with luster of his armes; his long-ebd spirits, now flowd
               The higher, for their lower ebbe. And as a faire Steed, proud
               With ful-giuen mangers; long tied vp, and now (his head-stall broke)
               He breakes from stable, runnes the field, and with an ample stroke
               Measures the center; neighs, and lifts, aloft his wanton head:
               About his shoulders, shakes his Crest; and where he hath bene fed,
               Or in some calme floud washt; or (stung, with his high plight) he flies
               
                  Amongst his femals; strength put forth; his beautie beautifies.
               And like Lifes mirror, beares his gate: so Paris from the towre
               Of loftie Pergamus came forth; he shewd a Sun-like powre
               In cariage of his goodly parts, addrest now to the strife;
               And found his noble brother neere, the place he left his wife;
               Him (thus respected) he salutes; Right worthy, I haue feareParis to Hector.
               
               That your so serious haste to field, my stay hath made forbeare;
               And that I come not, as you wish. He answerd, Honourd man,Hector to Paris.
               
               Be confident; for not my selfe, nor any others can
               Reproue in thee, the worke of fight; at least, not any such,
               As is an equall iudge of things: for thou hast strength as much
               As serues to execute a mind, very important: But
               Thy strength too readily flies off: enough will is not put
               To thy abilitie. My heart, is in my minds strife, sad,
               When Troy (out of her much distresse, she and her friends haue had
               By thy procurement) doth depraue, thy noblesse in mine eares:
               But come, hereafter we shall calme, these hard conceits of theirs,
               When (from their ports the foe expulst) high Ioue to them hath giuen
               Wisht peace; and vs free sacrifice, to all the powers of heauen.
            
            The end of the sixth Booke.
         
         
            
            THE SEVENTH BOOK OF HOMERS ILIADS.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  
                     HEctor, by Hellenus aduice doth seeke
                  Aduenturous combat on the boldest Greeke.
                  Nine Greeks stand vp, Acceptants euery one,
                  But lot selects strong Aiax Telamon.
                  
                  Both, with high honor, stand th'important fight,
                  Till Heralds part them by approched night.
                  Lastly, they graue the dead: the Greeks erect
                  A mightie wall, their Nauie to protect;
                  Which angers Neptune. Ioue, by haplesse signes,
                  In depth of night, succeeding woes diuines.
               
            
            
               Another Argument.
               
                  In Eta, Priams strongest sonne
                  Combats with Aiax T
                           •…
                        lamon.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  THis said; braue Hector through the ports, with Troyes bane-bringing Knight,
               Made issue to th'insatiate field, resolu'd to feruent fight.These next foure book
                        •…
                     s haue not my last hand: 
                        〈◊〉
                      because the rest (for a time) will be sufficient to em
                        •…
                     oy y
                        •…
                     ur censures, suspend them of these: spare not the other.
               
               And as the weather-wielder sends, to Sea-men prosperous gales,
               When with their sallow-polisht Oares, long lifted from their fals,
               Their wearied armes, dissolu'd with 
                     •…
                  yle, can scarce strike one stroke more;
               Like those sweet winds appear'd these Lords, to Troians tir'd before.
               Then fell they to the works of death: by Paris valour fell
               King A
                        •…
                     eithous haplesse sonne, that did in Arna dwell,
               (Menestbius) whose renown'd Si
                     •…
                  e, a Club did euer beare,
               And of Philomedusa gat (that had her eyes so cleare)
               This slaughterd issue: Hectors dart, strooke Eioneus dead;
               Beneath his good steele caske, it pierc't, aboue his gorget stead.
               
                  Glaucus (Hyppolochus his sonne) that led the Lycian crew,
               
                  Iphinous-Dexiades, with sodaine Iauelin slew,
               As he was mounting to his horse: his shoulders tooke the speare;
               And ere he sate, in tumbling downe, his powres dissolued were.
            
            
               When gray-eyd Pallas had perceiu'd, the Greekes so fall in fight;Pall
                        •…
                      to the Grecian ayd: Apollo to the Troian.
               
               From high Olympus top she stoopt, and did on Ilion light.
               
                  Apollo (to encounter her) to Pergamus did flie;
               From whence he (looking to the field) wisht Troians victorie.Apollo to Pall
                        •…
                     
                  
               
               At Ioues broad Beech these godheads met; and first Ioues sonne obiects;
               Why, burning in contention thus, do thy extreme affects
               Conduct thee from our peacefull hill? is it to ouersway
               
                  The doubtfull victorie of fight, and giue the Greeks the day?
               Thou neuer pitiest perishing Troy: yet now let me perswade,
               That this day no more mortall wounds, may either side inuade.
               Hereafter, till the end of Troy, they shall apply the fight,
               Since your immortall wils resolue, to ouerturne it quite.
            
            
               
                  Pallas replide, It likes me well; for this came I from heauen:Pallas to Apollo.
               
               But to make either army ceasse, what order shall be giuen?
               He said, We will direct the spirit, that burnes in Hectors brest,His reply.
               
               To challenge any Greeke to wounds, with single powers imprest;
               Which Greeks (admiring) will accept; and make some one stand out,
               So stout a challenge to receiue, with a defence as stout:
               It is confirmd; and Hellenus (King Priams loued seed)Hellen
                        •…
                      Priams sonne, and a Prophet, to Hector.
               
               By Augurie, discernd th'euent, that these two powres decreed.
               And (greeting Hector) askt him this: Wilt thou be once aduisde?
               I am thy brother, and thy life, with mine is euenly prisde;
               Command the rest of Troy and Greece, to ceasse this publicke fight;
               And what Greeke beares the greatest mind, to single strokes excite:
               I promise thee that yet thy soule, shall not descend to fates;
               So heard I thy suruiuall cast, by the celestiall States.
               
                  Hector, with glad allowance gaue, his brothers counsell eare;
               And (fronting both the hoasts) aduanc't, iust in the midst, his speare.
               The Troians instantly surceasse; the Greeks Atrides staid:
               The God that beares the siluer Bow, and warres triumphant Maide,The combat prepared.
               
               On Ioues Beech, like two Vultures sat, pleasd to behold both parts,
               Flow in, to heare; so sternly arm'd, with huge shields, helmes and darts.
               And such fresh horror as you see, driuen through the wrinkled waues
               B
                     •…
                   rising Zephyre, vnder whom, the sea growes blacke, and raues:Simile.
               
               Such did the hastie gathering troupes, of both hoasts make, to heare;
               Whose tumult settl'd, twixt them both, thus spake the challenger:
            
            
               Heare Troians, and ye well arm'd Greeks, what my strong mind (diffusde
               T
                     •…
                  rough all my spirits) commands me speake; Saturnius hath not vsde
               His promist fauour for our truce, but (studying both our ils)
               Will neuer ceasse till Mars, by you, his rauenous stomacke fils,
               With ruin'd Troy; or we consume, your mightie Sea-borne fleet.
               Sin
                     •…
                  e then, the Generall Peeres of Greece, in reach of one voice meete;
               Am
                     •…
                  ngst you all, whose breast includes, the most impulsiue mind,Hector to both hoasts.
               
               Let him stand forth as combatrant, by all the rest designde.
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   whom thus I call high Ioue, to witnesse of our strife;
               I
                     •…
                   he, with home-thrust iron can reach, th'exposure of my life,
               (Spoiling my armes) let him at will, conuey them to his tent;
               But let my body be returnd; that Troys two-sext descent
               May waste it in the funerall Pile: if I can slaughter him,
               (Apollo honoring me so much) Ile spoile his conquerd lim,
               And beare his armes to Ilion, where in Apollos shrine
               Ile hang them, as my trophies due: his body Ile resigne
               To be disposed by his friends, in flamie funerals,
               And honourd with erected tombe, where Hellespontus fals
               Into Egaeum; and doth reach, euen to your nauall rode;
               
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  That when our beings, in the earth, shall hide their period;
               Suruiuers, sailing the blacke sea, may thus his name renew:
               This is his monument, whose bloud, long since, did fates embrew;
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      per 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Whom, passing farre in fortitude, illustrate Hector slew.
               This shall posteritie report, and my fame neuer die.
            
            
               This said, dumbe silence seiz'd them all; they shamed to denie,
               And fear'd to vndertake. At last, did Menelaus speake,
               Checkt their remisnesse, and so sigh'd, as if his heart would breake;Menela
                        •…
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
               
               Aye me, but onely threatning Greeks, not worthy Grecian names:
               This more and more, not to be borne, makes grow our huge defames,
                     
                        〈1 line〉
                      
                     
                        〈1 line〉
                      Phryges: saith 
                        〈◊〉
                      imitator.
               
               If Hectors honorable proofe, be entertaind by none;
               But you are earth and water all, which (symboliz'd in one)
               Haue fram'd your faint vnfirie spirits: ye sit without your harts,
               Grosly inglorious: but my selfe, will vse acceptiue darts,
               And arme against him; though you thinke, I arme gainst too much ods:
               But conquests garlands hang aloft, amongst th'immortall gods.
            
            
               He arm'd, and gladly would haue fought: but (Menelaus) then,
               By Hectors farre more strength, thy soule, had fled th'abodes of men;
               Had not the kings of Greece stood vp, and thy attempt restraind;
               And euen the king of men himselfe, that in such compasse raign'd;
               Who tooke him by the bold right hand, and sternly pluckt him backe:Agamemnon wiser then his brother.
               
               Mad brother, tis no worke for thee, thou seekst thy wilfull wracke:
               Containe though it despite thee much; nor for this strife engage
               Thy person with a man more strong, and whom all feare t'enrage:
               Yea whom Aeacides himselfe, in men-renowning warre,
               Makes doubt t'encounter: whose huge strength, surpasseth thine by farre;
               Sit thou then by thy regiment; some other Greeke will rise
               (Though he be dreadlesse, and no warre, will his desires suffice,
               That makes this challenge to our strength) our valours to auow:
               To whom, if he can scape with life, he will be glad to bow.
            
            
               This drew his brother from his will, who yeelded, knowing it true,
               And his glad souldiers tooke his armes: when Nestor did pursueNestor to the Greeks.
               
               The same reproofe he set on foote; and thus supplide his turne:
               What huge indignitie is this! how will our country mourne!
               Old Peleus that good king will weepe: that worthy counsellor,
               That trumpet of the Myrmidons, who much did aske me for
               All men of name that went to Troy: with ioy he did enquire
               Their valour and their towardnesse: and I made him admire.
               But that ye all feare Hector now, if his graue eares shall heare,
               How will he lift his hands to heauen, and pray that death may beare
               His grieued soule into the deepe! O would to heauens great King,O si 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      mihi Iupiter annos, Qualis eram, &c.
               
               
                  Minerua and the God of light, that now my youthfull spring
               Did flourish in my willing veines, as when at Phaeas towres,
               About the streames of Iardanu
                        •…
                     , my gather'd Pylean powres,
               And dart-employed Arcadians fought, neere raging Celadon:
               
               Amongst whom, first of all stood forth, great Ereuthalion,
               
               Who th'armes of Arcithous wore (braue Are
                        •…
                     hous)
               And (since he still fought with a club) sirnam'd Clauigerus;
               
               
                  All men, and faire-girt Ladies both, for honour cald him so:
               He fought not with a keepe-off speare, or with a farre shot bow;
               But with a massie club of iron, he brake through armed bands:
               And yet Lycurgus was his death, but not with force of hands;
               With sleight (encountring in a lane, where his club wanted sway)
               He thrust him through his spacious waste, who fell, and vpwards lay;
               In death not bowing his face to earth: his armes he did despoile;
               Which iron, Mars bestowd on him: and those, in Mars his toile,
               
                  Lycurgus euer after wore; but when he aged grew,
               Enforc't to keepe his peacefull house, their vse he did renew,
               On mightie Ereuthalions lims; his souldier, loued well;
               And with these Armes he challeng'd all, that did in Armes excell:
               All shooke and stood dismaid, none durst, his aduerse champion make;
               Yet this same forward mind of mine, of choice, would vndertake
               To fight with all his confidence; though yongest enemie
               Of all the armie we conduct; yet I fought with him, I;
               
                  Minerua made me so renownd; and that most tall strong Peere
               I slue; his big bulke lay on earth, extended here and there,
               As it were couetous to spread, the center euery where.
               O that my youth were now as fresh, and all my powers as sound;
               Soone should bold Hector be impugn'd: yet you that most are crownd
               With fortitude, of all our hoast; euen you, me thinkes are slow,
               Not free, and set on fire with lust, t'encounter such a foe.
            
            
               With this, nine royall Princes rose; Atrides for the first;Nine Princ
                        •…
                      stand vp to answer Hector.
               
               Then Diomed: th'Aiaces then, that did th'encounter thirst:
               King Idomen and his consorts; Mars-like Meriones;
               
               
                  Euemons sonne, Euripilus; and Andremonides;
               
               Whom all the Grecians Thoas cald; sprong of Andremons bloud;
               And wise Vlysses; euery one, proposd, for combat stood.
            
            
               Againe Gerenius Nestor spake; Let lots be drawne by all,
               His hand shall helpe the wel-armd Greeks, on whom the lot doth fall;Lots 
                        〈◊〉
                      by Nestor for the 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               And to his wish shall he be helpt, if he escape with life,
               The harmfull danger-breathing fit, of this aduentrous strife.
            
            
               Each markt his lot, and cast it in, to Agamemnons caske;
               The souldiers praid, held vp their hands, and this of Ioue did aske,
               (With eyes aduanc't to heauen): O Ioue, so leade the Heralds hand,
               That Aiax or great Tydeus sonne, may our wisht champion stand:
               Or else the King himselfe, that rules, the rich Mycenian land.
            
            
               This said, old Nestor mixt the lots: the foremost lot suruaid,
               With Aiax Telamon was sign'd; as all the souldiers praid;
               One of the Heralds drew it forth, who brought and shewd it round,
               Beginning at the right hand first, to all the most renownd:
               None knowing it; euery man denide: but when he forth did passe,
               To him which markt and cast it in, which famous Aiax was,
               He stretcht his hand, and into it, the Herald put the lot,
               Who (viewing it) th'inscription knew; the Duke denied not,
               But ioyfully acknowledg'd it, and threw it at his feet;
               And said, (O friends) the lot is mine, which to my soule is sweet;The 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to Ai
                        •…
                     .
               
               
                  For now I hope my fame shall rise, in noble Hectors fall.
               But whilst I arme my selfe, do you, on great Saturnius call;He to the Greeks
               
               But silently, or to your selues, that not a Troian heare:
               Or openly (if you thinke good) since none aliue we feare;
               None with a will, if I will not, can my bold powers affright,
               At least for plaine fierce swinge of strength, or want of skill in fight:
               For I will well proue that my birth, and breed in Salamine,
               Was not all consecrate to meate, or meere effects of wine.
            
            
               This said, the wel-giuen souldiers prayed: vp went to heauen their eyne;
               O Ioue, that Ida doest protect, most happie, most diuine;
               Send victorie to Aiax side; fame; grace, his goodly lim:
               Or (if thy loue, blesse Hectors life, and thou hast care of him)
               Bestow on both, like power, like fame. This said, in bright armes shone
               The good strong Aiax: who, when all, his warre attire was on,
               Marcht like the hugely figur'd Mars, when angry Iupiter,
                  Aiax armed, & his dreadful maner of approch to the combat.
               
               With strength, on people proud of strength, sends him forth to inferre
               Wreakfull contention; and comes on, with presence full of feare;
               So th'Achiue rampire, Telamon, did twixt the hoasts appeare▪
               
               Smil'd; yet of terrible aspect; on earth with ample pace,
               He boldly stalkt, and shooke aloft, his dart, with deadly grace.
               It did the Grecians good to see; but heart quakes shooke the ioynts
               Of all the Troians; Hectors selfe, felt thoughts, with horrid points,
               Tempt his bold bosome: but he now, must make no counterflight;
               Nor (with his honour) now refuse, that had prouokt the fight.The shield of Aiax, like a tower.
               
               
                  Aiax came neare; and like a towre, his shield his bosome bard;
               The right side brasse, and seuen Oxe hides, within it quilted hard:
               Old Tychius the best currier, that did in Hyla dwell,Tychius the currier.
               
               Did frame it for exceeding proofe, and wrought it wondrous well.Hinc illud: Dominu
                        •…
                      clypei septemplicis Aiax.
               
               With this stood he to Hector close, and with this Braue began:
               Now Hector thou shalt clearly know, thus meeting man to man,
               What other leaders arme our hoast, besides great Thetis sonne:
               Who, with his hardie Lions heart, hath armies ouerrunne.
               But he lies at our crookt-sternd fleet, a Riuall with our King
               In height of spirit; yet to Troy, he many knights did bring,
               Coequall with Aeacides; all able to sustaine
               All thy bold challenge can import: begin then, words are vaine.
            
            
               The Helme-grac't Hector answerd him; Renowned Telamon,
                  Hector to Aiax,
               
               Prince of the souldiers came from Greece; assay not me like one,
               Yong and immartiall, with great words, as to an Amazon dame;
               I haue the habit of all fights; and know the bloudie frame
               Of euery slaughter: I well know, the ready right hand charge;
               I know the left, and euery sway, of my securefull targe;
               I triumph in the crueltie, of fixed combat fight,
               And manage horse to all designes; I thinke then with good right,
               I may be confident as farre, as this my challenge goes,
               Without being taxed with a vaunt, borne out with emptie showes.
               But (being a souldier so renownd) I will not worke on thee,
               With least aduantage of that skill, I know doth strengthen me;
               
                  And so with priuitie of sleight, winne that for which I striue:
               But at thy best (euen open strength) if my endeuours thriue.
            
            
               Thus sent he his long Iauelin forth; it strooke his foes huge shield,The combat.
               
               Neere to the vpper skirt of brasse, which was the eighth it held.
               Sixe folds th'vntamed dart strooke through, and in the seuenth tough hide
               The point was checkt: then Aiax threw: his angry Lance did glide
               Quite through his bright orbicular targe, his curace, shirt of maile;
               And did his manly stomacks mouth, with dangerous taint assaile:
               But in the bowing of himselfe, blacke death too short did strike;
               Then both to plucke their Iauelins forth, encountred Lion-like;
               Whose bloudie violence is increast, by that raw food they eate:
               Or Bores, whose strength, wilde nourishment, doth make so wondrous great.
               Againe Priamides did wound, in midst, his shield of brasse,
               Yet pierc't not through the vpper plate, the head reflected was:
               But Aiax (following his Lance) smote through his target quite,
               And stayd bold Hector rushing in; the Lance held way outright,
               And hurt his necke; out gusht the bloud: yet Hector ceast not so,
               But in his strong hand tooke a Flint (as he did backwards go)Saxis pugnant.
               
               Blacke, sharpe and big, layd in the field: the seuenfold targe it smit,
               Full on the bosse; and round about, the brasse did ring with it.
               But Aiax a farre greater stone, lift vp, and (wreathing round,
               With all his bodie layd to it) he sent it forth to wound,
               And gaue vnmeasur'd force to it; the round stone broke withinHector strooks on his knees.
               
               His rundled target: his lou'd knees, to languish did begin;
               And he leand, stretcht out on his shield; but Phoebus raisd him streight.
               Then had they layd on wounds with swords, in vse of closer fight;
               Vnlesse the Heralds (messengers, of Gods and godlike men)
               The one of Troy, the other Greece; had held betwixt them then
               Imperiall scepters: when the one (Idaeus, graue and wise)
               Said to them; Now no more my sonnes: the Soueraigne of the skies
               Doth loue you both; both souldiers are, all witnesse with good right:
               But now night layes her mace on earth; tis good t'obey the night.
            
            
               
                  Idaeus? (Telamon replide,) To Hector speake, not me:Aiax to Id
                        •…
                     .
               
               He that cald all our Achiue Peeres, to station fight, twas he;
               If he first ceasse, I gladly yeeld: great Hector then began:
            
            
               
                  Aiax, since Ioue to thy big forme, made thee so strong a man,Hector to Aiax.
               
               And gaue thee skill to vse thy strength; so much, that for thy speare,
               Thou art most excellent of Greece, now let vs fight forbeare:
               Hereafter we shall warre againe, till Ioue our Herald be,
               And grace with conquest, which he will; heauen yeelds to night, and we.
               Go thou and comfort all thy Fleet; all friends and men of thine,
               As I in Troy my fauourers; who in the Fane diuineHector giues Aiax a sword: Aiax, Hector a girdle. Both which gifts were afterward cause of both their deaths.
               
               Haue offerd Orisons for me; and come, let vs impart
               Some ensignes of our strife, to shew, each others suppled hart;
               That men of Troy and Greece may say, Thus their high quarrell ends:
               Those that encountring, were such foes, are now (being separate) friends.
               He gaue a sword, whose handle was, with siluer studs through driuen,
               Scabard and all, with hangers rich: By Telamon was giuen
               
                  A faire well glossed purple waste. Thus Hector went to Troy,
               And after him a multitude, fild with his safeties ioy;
               Despairing he could euer scape, the puissant fortitude
               And vnimpeached Aiax hands. The Greeks like ioy renude,
               For their reputed victorie, and brought him to the King;
               Who to the great Saturnides, preferd an offering:Sacrifice for victorie. Virgil imit.
               
               An Oxe that fed on fiue faire springs; they fleyd and quartred him,
               And then (in peeces cut) on spits, they rosted euery lim:
               Which neatly drest, they drew it off: worke done, they fell to feast:Conuiuium à sacrificio.
               
               All had enough; but Telamon, the King fed past the rest,Nector to the Greeks.
               
               With good large peeces of the chine. Thus, thirst and hunger staid,
               
                  Nestor (whose counsels late were best) vowes new, and first he said:
               
                  Atrides, and my other Lords, a sort of Greeks are dead,
               Whose blacke bloud neare Scamanders streame, inhumane Mars hath shed:
               Their soules to hell descended are: it fits thee then our king,
               To make our souldiers ceasse from warre; and by the dayes first spring
               Let vs our selues, assembled all, the bodies beare to fire,
               With Mules and Oxen neare our fleet; that when we home retire,
               Each man may carrie, to the sonnes, of fathers slaughterd here,
               Their honourd bones: one tombe for all, foreuer let vs reare;
               Circling the pile without the field: at which we will erect
               Wals, and a raueling, that may safe, our fleet and vs protect.
               And in them let vs fashion gates, solid and bard about,
               Through which our horse and chariots, may well get in and out.
               Without all, let vs dig a dike; so deepe it may auaile
               Our forces gainst the charge of horse, and foote, that come t'assaile:
               And thus th'attempts, that I see swell, in Troys proud heart, shall faile.
            
            
               The Kings do his aduice approue: so Troy doth Court conuent,
               At Priams gate, in th'Ilion tower, fearfull and turbulent.Antenors counsell to the Tro▪ ians.
               
               Amongst all, wise Antenor spake: Troians and Dardan friends,
               And Peeres assistants, giue good eare, to what my care commends
               To your consents, for all our good: resolue, let vs restore
               The Argiue Hellen, with her wealth, to him she had before:
               We now defend but broken faiths. If therefore ye refuse,
               No good euent can I expect, of all the warres we vse.
            
            
               He ceast, and Alexander spake, husband to th'Argiue Queene;Paris replies.
               
               
                  Antenor, to mine eares thy words, harsh and vngracious beene:
               Thou canst vse better if thou wilt: but if these truly fit
               Thy serious thoughts; the Gods, with age, haue reft thy grauer wit:
               To war-like Troians I will speake; I clearly do denie
               To yeeld my wife: but all her wealth, Ile render willingly,
               What euer I from Argos brought; and vow to make it more;
               Which I haue readie in my house, if peace I may r
                     •…
                  store.
            
            
               
                  Priam, sirnam'd Dardanides (godlike in counsels graue)Priam to the Troians.
               
               In his sonnes fauour well aduisde, this resolution gaue;
               My royall friends of euery state, there is sufficient done,
               For this late counsell we haue cald, in th'offer of my sonne;
               Now then let all take needfull food; then let the watch be set,
               
                  And euerie court of guard held strong: so when the morne doth wet
               The high raisd battlements of Troy, Idaeus shall be sent
               To th'Argiue fleet, and Atreus sonnes, t'vnfold my sonnes intent,
               From whose fact our contention springs: and (if they will) obtaine
               Respit from heate of fight, till fire, consume our souldiers slaine:
               And after, our most fatall warre, let vs importune still,
               Till Ioue the conquest haue disposd, to his vnconquer'd will.
            
            
               All heard, and did obey the king, and (in their quarters all,
               That were to set the watch that night) did to their suppers fall.Idaeus to the Grecian flee
                        •…
                     .
               
               
                  Idaeus in the morning went, and th'Achiue Peeres did find
               In counsell at Atrides ship: his audience was assignd:
               And in the midst of all the kings, the vocall Herald said:Idaeus to the Greekes.
               
            
            
               
                  Atrides? my renowned king, and other kings his aid,
               Propose by me, in their commands, the offers Paris makes,
               (From whose ioy all our woes proceed) he Princely vndertakes
               That all the wealth he brought from Greece (would he had died before)
               He will (with other added wealth) for your amends restore:
               But famous Menelaus wife, he still meanes to enioy,
               Though he be vrg'd the contrarie, by all the Peeres of Troy.
               And this besides, I haue in charge, that if it please you all;
               They wish both sides may ceasse from warre, that rites of funerall
               May on their bodies be performd, that in the fields lie slaine:
               And after to the will of Fate, renue the fight againe.
            
            
               All silence held at first: at last, Tydides made reply;Diomed do Idaeus
               
               Let no man take the wealth, or Dame; for now a childs weake eye
               May see the imminent blacke end, of Priams Emperie.
            
            
               This sentence quicke, and briefly giuen, the Greeks did all admire:
               Then said the King; Herald, thou hear'st, in him, the voice entireAgvmemnon to Idaeus,
               
               Of all our Peeres, to answer thee, for that of Priams sonne:
               But, for our burning of the dead, by all meanes I am wonne
               To satisfie thy king therein, without the slendrest gaine
               Made of their spoiled carkasses; but freely (being slaine)
               They shall be all consumd with fire: to witnesse which, I cite
               High thundring Ioue, that is the king, of Iunos beds delight.
            
            
               With this, he held his scepter vp, to all the skie thron'd powres:
               And graue Idaeus did returne, to sacred Ilions towres,
               Where Ilians, and Dardanians, did still their counsels plie,
               Expecting his returne: he came, and told his Legacie.
               All, whirlewind like, assembled then: some, bodies to transport,
               Some to hew trees: On th'other part, the Argiues did exhort
               Their souldiers to the same affaires: then did the new fir'd Sunne
               Smite the brode fields, ascending heauen, aud th'Ocean smooth did runne:
               When Greece and Troy mixt in such peace, you scarce could either know:
               Then washt they off their blood and dust, and did warme teares bestow
               Vpon the slaughterd, and in Carres, conueid them from the field:
               
                  Priam commanded none should mourne, but in still silence yeeld
               Their honord carkasses to fire, and onely grieue in heart.
               All burnd: to Troy, Troyes friends retire: to fleet, the Grecian part:
               
                  Yet doubtfull night obscur'd the earth, the day did not appeare:
               When round about the funerall pile, the Grecians gatherd were;
               The pile they circled with a tombe, and by it raisd a wall,
               High towres to guard the fleet and them: and in the midst of all
               They built strong gates, through which the horse, and chariots passage had:
               Without the rampire a brode dike, long and profound they made,
               On which they Pallesados pitcht; and thus the Grecians wrought.
               Their huge workes in so little time, were to perfection brought,
               That all Gods, by the Lightner set, the frame thereof admir'd;
               Mongst whom, the earthquake-making God, this of their King enquir'd:
               Father of Gods, will any man, of all earths grassie sphere,Neptune to I
                        •…
                     iter.
               
               Aske any of the Gods consents, to any actions there,
               If thou wilt see the shag-haird Greekes, with headstrong labours frame
               So huge a worke, and not to vs, due offrings first enflame?
               As farre as white Auroras dewes, are sprinkled through the aire,
               Fame will renowne the hands of Greece, for this diuine affaire:
               Men will forget the sacred worke, the Sunne and I did raise,
               For king Laomedon (bright Troy) and this will beare the praise.
            
            
               
                  Ioue was extremely mou'd with him, and said: What words are these,Ioue to Neptune.
               
               Thou mightie shaker of the earth, thou Lord of all the seas?
               Some other God, of farre lesse powre, might hold conceipts dismaid,
               With this rare Grecian stratageme, and thou rest well apaid;The fortification that inthe twelft Booke is razed.
               
               For it will glorifie thy name, as farre as light extends:
               Since, when these Greekes shall see againe, their natiue soile and friends,
               (The bulwarke battred) thou maist quite, deuoure it with thy waues,
               And couer (with thy fruitlesse sands) this fatall shore of graues:
               That what their fierie industries, haue so diuinely wrought,
               In raising it: in razing it, thy powre will proue it nought.
            
            
               Thus spake the Gods among themselues: set was the feruent Sunne;
               And now the great worke of the Greeks, was absolutely done.
               Then slue they Oxen in their tents, and strength with food reuiu'd;
               When out of Lemnos a great fleete, of odorous wine arriu'd,A fleete of wine of a thousand tun sent by Euneus king of Lē
                     nos Iasons son.
               
               Sent by Euneus, Iasons sonne, borne of Hypsiphile.
               
               The fleete containd a thousand tunne: which must transported be
               To Atreus sons, as he gaue charge; whose merchandize it was.
               The Greeks bought wine for shining steele, and some for sounding brasse;
               Some for Oxe hides; for Oxen some, and some for prisoners.
               A sumptuous banquet was prepar'd, and all that night the Peeres,
               And faire-haird Greeks consum'd in feast: so Troians and their aide.
               And all the night Ioue thunderd lowd: pale feare all thoughts dismaide.
               While they were gluttonous in earth, Ioue wrought their banes in heauen:
               They pourd full cups vpon the ground; and were to offrings driuen,
               In stead of quaffings: and to drinke, none durst attempt, before
               In solemne sacrifice they did, almightie Ioue adore.
               Then to their rests they all repaird: bold zeale their feare bereau'd:
               And sodaine sleepes refreshing gift, securely they receiu'd.
            
            The end of the seuenth booke.
         
         
            
            THE EIGHTH BOOKE OF HOMERS ILIADS.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  VVHen Ioue to all the Gods had giuen command,
                  That none, to either host, should helpfull stand;
                  To Ida he descends: and sees from thence
                  
                     Iuno and Pallas haste the Greeks defence:
                  Whose purpose, his command by Iris giuen,
                  Doth interuent; then came the silent Euen;
                  When Hector chargde fires should consume the night.
                  Lest Greeks in darkenesse tooke suspected flight.
               
            
            
               Another Argument.
               
                  In Theta gods a Counsell haue,
                  Troyes conquest, glorious Hectors Braue.
               
            
            
               
                  THe chearfull Ladie of the light, deckt in her saffron robe,Periphrasis of the Morning.
               
               Disperst her beames through euery part, of this enflowred globe,
               When thundring Ioue a Court of Gods, assembled by his will,
               In top of all the topfull heights, that crowne th'Olympian hill.
            
            
               He spake, and all the Gods gaue eare: Heare how I stand inclind:Ioue to the bench of Deities.
               
               That God nor Goddesse may attempt, t'infringe my soueraigne mind:
               But all giue suffrage; that with speed, I may these discords end.
               What God soeuer I shall find, indeuour to defend
               Or Troy or Greece, with wounds to heauen, he (sham'd) shall reascend;
               Or (taking him with his offence) Ile cast him downe as deepe
               As Tartarus (the brood of night) where Barathrum doth steepe
                     Virgil maketh this likewise his place, adding, Bis patet in prae ceps, tantum tendit
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      sub vmbras, &c. Homers golden chaine.
                  
               
               Torment in his profoundest sinks; where is the floore of brasse,
               And gates of iron: the place, for depth, as farre doth hell surpasse,
               As heauen (for height) exceeds the earth; then shall he know from thence,
               How much my power past all the Gods, hath soueraigne eminence.
               Indanger it the whiles and see: let downe our golden chaine;
               And, at it, let all Deities, their vtmost strengths constraine,
               To draw me to the earth from heauen: you neuer shall preuaile,
               Though with your most contention, ye dare my state assaile:
               But when my will shall be disposd, to draw you all to me;
               Euen with the earth it selfe, and seas, ye shall enforced be.
               Then will I to Olympus top, our vertuous engine bind,
               And by it euerie thing shall hang, by my command inclind:
               So much I am supreme to Gods; to men supreme as much.
               The Gods sat silent, and admir'd; his dreadfull speech was such.
            
            
               
                  At last, his blue-eyd daughter spake: O great Saturnides,
               
               O Father, ô heauens highest King; well know we the excessePallas to Ioue.
               
               Of thy great power, compar'd with all: yet the bold Greekes estate
               We needs must mourne, since they must fall, beneath fo hard a fate:
               For if thy graue command enioyne, we will abstaine from fight:
               But to afford them such aduice, as may relieue their plight,
               We will (with thy consent) be bold; that all may not sustaine
               The fearefull burthen of thy wrath, and with their shames be slaine.
               He smil'd, and said; Be confident, thou art belou'd of me:
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to Pallas.
               
               I speake not this with serious thoughts, but will be kind to thee.
            
            
               This said, his brasse hou'd winged horse, he did to chariot bind,Ioues horse.
               
               Whose crests were fring'd with manes of gold, and golden garments shin'd
               On his rich shoulders; in his hand, he tooke a golden scourge,
               Diuinely fashiond, and with blowes, their willing speed did vrge,
               Mid way betwixt the earth and heauen; to Ida then he came,Ioue descends to Ida.
               
               Abounding in delicious springs, and nurse of beasts vntame;
               Where (on the mountaine Gargarus) men did a Fane erect
               To his high name, and altars sweet; and there his horse he checkt;
               Dissolu'd them from his chariot, and in a cloud of ieate
               He couerd them, and on the top, tooke his triumphant seate;
               Beholding Priams famous towne, and all the Fleet of Greece,Ioues prospect. Both hosts arme.
               
               The Greeks tooke breakfast speedily, and arm'd at euerie peece:
               So Troians; who though fewer farre, yet all to fight tooke armes:
               Dire need enforc't them, to auert, their wiues and childrens harmes.
               All gates flew open, all the host, did issue, foote and horse,
               In mightie tumult: straite one place, adioynd each aduerse force:The fight.
               
               Then shields with shields met, darts with darts, strength against strength opposd:
               The bosse-pik't targets were thrust on, and thunderd as they closd
               In mightie tumult; grone for grone, and breath for breath did breath:
               Of men then slaine and to be slaine; earth flowd with fruits of death.
               While the faire mornings beautie held, and day increast in height;
               Their Iauelins mutually made death, transport an equall freight:
               But when the hote Meridian point, bright Phoebus did ascend,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      victoria The Meridian libra Iouis Aurea. Virg. tran
                     
                        •…
                     ulit Macrobius 5.
               
               Then Ioue his golden Ballances, did equally extend:
               And of long-rest-conferring death, put in two bitter fates
               For Troy and Greece he held the midst: the day of finall dates
               Fell on the Greeks: the Greeks hard lots, sunke to the flowrie ground.
               The Troians leapt as high as heauen, then did the claps resound,
               Of his fierce thunder; lightning leapt, amongst each Grecian troope:Ioues thunder amongst the Grecians.
               
               The sight amaz'd them; pallid feare, made boldest stomacks stoope.
               Then Idomen durst not abide; Atrides went his way,
               And both th'Aiaces: Nestor yet, against his will did stay
               (That graue Protector of the Greekes): for Paris with a dart
               Enrag'd one of his chariot horse; he smote the vpper part
               Of all his skull, euen where the haire, that made his foretop, sprung:
               The hurt was deadly, and the paine, so sore the courser stung,
               (Pierc't to the braine) he stampt and plung'd: one on another beares:
               Entangled round about the beame; then Nestor cut the geres
               
                  With his new drawne authentique sword; meane while the firie horse
               Of Hector brake into the preasse, with their bold rulers force:
               Then good old Nestor had bene slaine, had Diomed not espied;Dio
                        •…
                     ed to 
                        •…
                     
                     ses.
               
               Who to Vlysses, as he fled, importunately cried;
               Thou, that in counsels dost abound, O Laertiades,
               
               Why flyest thou? why thus cowardlike, shunst thou the honourd prease?
               Take heed thy backe take not a dart: stay, let vs both intend
               To driue this cruell enemie, from our deare aged friend.
            
            
               He spake: but warie Ithacus, would find no patient eare:Vlysses flies and Diomed alon
                        •…
                      steps to the rescue of Nestor.
               
               But fled forth right, euen to the fleet: yet though he single were,
               Braue Diomed mixt amongst the fight, and stood before the steeds
               Of old Neleides, whose estate, thus kingly he areeds:
            
            
               O father, with these youths in fight, thou art vnequall plac't,
               Thy willing sinewes are vnknit, graue age pursues thee fast,
               And thy vnruly horse are slow; my chariot therefore vse,
               And trie how readie Troian horse, can flie him that pursues;
               Pursue the flier, and euery way, performe the varied fight:
               I forc't them from Anchises sonne, well skild in cause of flight.
               Then let my Squire leade hence thy horse: mine thou shalt guard, whilst I
               (By thee aduanc't) assay the fight; that Hectors selfe may trie
               If my lance dote with the defects, that faile best minds in age,
               Or find the palsey in my hands, that doth thy life engage.
            
            
               This, noble Nestor did accept; and Diomeds two friends,
               
                  Eurymedon, that valour loues; and Sthenelus, ascends,
               Old Nestors coach: of Diomeds horse, Nestor the charge sustains
               And Tydeus sonne tooke place of fight; Neleides held the rains,
               And scourg'd the horse, who swiftly ran, direct in Hectors face,Diomed charges Hector.
               
               Whom fierce Tydides brauely charg'd: but, he turnd from the chace,
               His iaueline Eniopeus smit, mightie Thebaeus sonne,
               And was great Hectors chariotere; it through his breast did runne,
               Neare to his pappe; he fell to earth, backe flew his frighted horse;
               His strength and soule were both dissolu'd: Hector had deepe remorse
               Of his mishap: yet left he him, and for another sought;
               Nor long his steeds did want a guide: for straight good fortune brought
               Bold Archeptolemus, whose life, did from Iphytis spring;
               He made him take the reines and mount: then soules were set on wing:
               Then high exploits were vndergone, then Troians in their wals
               Had bene infolded like meeke Lambs, had Ioue winkt at their fals;
               Who hurld his horrid thunder forth, and made pale lightnings flie
               Into the earth, before the horse, that Nestor did applie.
               A dreadfull flash burnt through the aire, that sauourd sulphure-like,
               Which downe before the chariot, the dazled horse did strike:
               The faire reines fell from Nestors hand; who did (in feare) intreate
               Renownd Tydides, into flight, to turne his furies heate.Nestor to Diomed.
               
               For knowest thou not, said he, our aide, is not supplide from Ioue?
               
               This day he will giue fame to Troy, which when it fits his loue
               We shall enioy; let no man tempt, his vnresisted will,
               Though he exceed in gifts of strength: for he exceeds him still.
            
            
               
                  Father (replied the king) t'is true: but both my heart and souleDiomed to Nestor.
               
               Are most extremely grieu'd to thinke, how Hector will controule
               My valour with his vants in Troy: that I was terror-sicke
               With his approch: which when he boasts, let earth deuoure me quicke.
            
            
               Ah warlike Tydeus sonne (said he,) what needlesse words are these?Nestor to Diomed.
               
               Though Hector should report thee faint, and amorous of thy ease,
               The Troians nor the Troian wiues, would neuer giue him trust,
               Whose youthfull husbands thy free hand, hath smotherd so in dust.
            
            
               This said, he turn'd his one-hou'd horse, to flight, and troope did take;
               When Hector and his men with showts, did greedie pursute make,
               And pour'd on darts, that made aire sigh: then Hector did exclame;
               O Tydeus sonne, the kings of Greece, do most renowne thy nameHectors braue to Diomed.
               
               With highest place, feasts, and full cups; who now will do thee shame:
               Thou shalt be like a woman vsd, and they will say; Depart
               Immartiall minion, since to stand, Hector, thou hadst no hart:
               Nor canst thou scale our turrets tops, nor leade the wiues to fleet
               Of valiant men; that wifelike fear'st, my aduerse charge to meet.
            
            
               This, two waies mou'd him; still to flie, or turne his horse and fight:
               Thrise thrust he forward to assault; and euery time the fright
               Of Ioues fell thunder draue him backe: which he proposd for signe
               (To shew the change of victorie) Troians should victors shine.
               Then Hector comforted his men; All my aduentrous friends,Hector to his friends.
               
               Be men, and of your famous strength, thinke of the honourd ends.
               I know, beneuolent Iupiter, did by his becke professe
               Conquest, and high renowne to me; and to the Greeks distresse.
               O fooles, to raise such silly forts, not worth the least account,
               Nor able to resist our force; with ease our horse may mount,
               Quite ouer all their hollow dike: but when their fleet I reach,
               Let Memorie to all the world, a famous bonfire teach:
               For, I will all their ships inflame; with whose infestiue smoke
               (Feare-shrunke and hidden neare their keels) the conquerd Greeks shall choke.
            
            
               Then cherisht he his famous horse: O Xanthus, now, said he,The names of Hectors horse.
               
               And thou Podargus: Aethon to, and Lampus, deare to me;
               Make me some worthy recompence, for so much choice of meate,
               Giuen you by faire Andromache; bread of the purest wheate;
               And with it (for your drinke) mixt wine, to make ye wished cheare,Vinum equis.
               
               Still seruing you before my selfe (her husband young and deare:)
               Pursue and vse your swiftest speed, that we may take for prise
               The shield of old Neleides, which Fame lifts to the skies;Nestors shield al of gold.
               
               Euen to the handles, telling it, to be of massie gold:
               And from the shoulders let vs take, of Diomed the bold,
               The royall curace Vulcan wrought, with art so exquisite.
               These if we make our sacred spoile, I doubt not, but this Night,
               Euen to their nauie to enforce, the Greekes vnturned flight.
            
            
               This Iuno tooke in high disdaine; and made Olympus shake,
               As she but stird within her throne; and thus to Neptune spake;
            
            
               O Neptune, what a spite is this? thou God so huge in power,I
                        •…
                     no to Neptune.
               
               Afflicts it not thy honor'd heart, to see rude spoile deuoure
               
                  These Greekes that haue in Helice, and Aege, offred thee
               So many and such wealthie gifts, let them the victors be;
               If we that are the aids of Greece, would beate home these of Troy,
               And hinder brode-eyd Ioues prowd will, it would abate his ioy.Neptune to Iuno
               
            
            
               He (angrie) told her, she was rash, and he would not be one,
               Of all the rest, should striue with Ioue, whose power was matcht by none.
               Whiles they conferd thus, all the space, the trench containd before,
               (From that part of the fort that flankt, the nauie-anchoring shore)
               Was fild with horse and targateirs, who there for refuge came,
               By Mars-swift Hectors power engagde; Ioue gaue his strength the fame:
               And he with spoilefull fire had burnt, the fleet: if Iunos grace
               Had not inspirde the king himselfe, to run from place to place,
               And stirre vp euerie souldiers powre, to some illustrous deed;Agamemnons 
                        •…
                     bor in ranging his armie.
               
               First visiting their leaders tents, his ample purple weed
               He wore, to shew all who he was; and did his station take
               At wise Vlysses sable barkes, that did the battell make
               Of all the fleet: from whence his speech, might with more ease be driuen
               To Aiax and Achilles ships; to whose chiefe charge were giuen
               The Vantguard and the Rereguard both: both for their force of hand,
               And trustie bosomes. There arriu'd, thus vrg'd he to withstandAgamem nons exprobration of the Greeks.
               
               Th'insulting Troians: O what shame, ye emptie hearted Lords,
               Is this to your admired formes? where are your glorious words?
               In Lemnos vaunting you the best, of all the Grecian host?
               We are the strongest men (ye said) we will command the most:
               Eating most flesh of high hornd beeues, and drinking cups full crownd:
               And euerie man a hundred foes, two hundred will confound:
               Now all our strength, dar'd to our worst, one Hector cannot tame,
               Who presently with horrid fire, will all our fleet inflame.Apostrophe ad Iouem.
               
               O Father Ioue, hath euer yet, thy most vnsuffred hand
               Afflicted, with such spoile of soules, the king of any land?
               And taken so much fame from him? when I did neuer faile
               (Since vnder most vnhappie starres, this fleet was vnder saile)
               Thy glorious altars, I protest; but aboue all the Gods,
               Haue burnt fat thighs of beeues to thee; and praid to race th'abodes
               Of rape-defending Ilions: yet grant (almightie Ioue)
               One fauour, that we may at least, with life from hence remoue:
               Not vnder such inglorious hands, the hands of death imploy,
               And where Troy should be stoopt by Greece, let Greece fall vnder Troy.
            
            
               To this euen weeping king, did Ioue, remorsefull audience giue,
               And shooke great heauen to him, for signe, his men and he should liue:
               Then quickly cast he off his hawke, the Eagle prince of aire,Ioue casts off his Eagle on the Greeks right hand, that trust a 
                        •…
                     inde cafe.
               
               That perfects his vnspotted vowes; who seisd in her repaire
               A sucking hinde calfe; which she trust, in her enforciue seeres,
               And by Ioues altar let it fall, amongst th'amazed peeres,
               Where the religious Achiue kings, with sacrifice did please
               The authour of all Oracles, diuine Saturnides.
               
            
            
               Now when they knew the bird of Ioue, they turnd couragious head:
               When none (though many kings put on) could make his vaunt, he led
               
                  
                  Tydides to renewd assault: or issued first the dike,Dio
                        •…
                     d.
               
               Or first did fight: but farre the first, stone dead his lance did strike
               Arm'd Agelaus; by descent, surnam'd Phradmonides;
               
               He turn'd his readie horse to flight; and Diomeds lance did seise
               His backe betwixt his shoulder blades, and lookt out at his brest;
               He fell, and his armes rang his fall. Th'Atrides next addrest
               Themselues to fight; th'Aiaces next, with vehement strength endude:
               
                  Idomeneus and his friend, stout Merion, next pursude:
               And after these Euripilus, Euemons honord 
                     •…
                  ace:
               The ninth, with backward wreathed bow, had little Teucer place;
               He still fought vnder Aiax shield; who sometimes held it by,Teucer seruing vnder Aiax 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               And then he lookt his obiect out, and let his arrow flie:
               And whomsoeuer in the preasse, he wounded, him he slue;
               Then vnder Aiax seuen-fold shield, he presently withdrew.
               He far'd like an vnhappie child, that doth to mother run
               For succour, when he knowes full well, he some shrewd turne hath done.
               What Troians then were to their deaths, by Teucers shafts imprest?
               Haplesse Orsylochus was first; Ormenus, Ophelest,
               
               
                  Detor, and hardie Cronius, and Lycophon diuine;
               And Amopaon, that did spring, from Polyemons line,
               And Menalippus: all on heapes, he tumbled to the ground.
               The king reioyc't to see his shafts, the Phrygian ranks confound:
               Who straight came neare, and spake to him; O Teucer louely man,Agamemnon to Teucer.
               
               Strike still so sure, and be a grace, to euerie Grecian;
               And to thy father Telamon, who tooke thee kindly home,
               (Although not by his wife, his sonne) and gaue thee foster roome,
               Euen from thy childhood; then to him, though far from hence remou'd,
               Make good fame reach; and to thy selfe, I vow what shall be prou'd:
               If he that dreadfull Egis beares, and Pallas grant to me
               Th'expugnance of wel-builded Troy, I first will honour thee,
               Next to my selfe with some rich gift, and put it in thy hand:
               A three-foot vessell, that for grace, in sacred Fanes doth stand:
               Or two horse and a chariot, or else a louely Dame,
               That may ascend on bed with thee, and amplifie thy name.
            
            
               
                  Teucer right nobly answerd him: Why (most illustrate king)Teucer to Agamemnon.
               
               I being thus forward of my selfe, dost thou adioyne a sting?
               Without which, all the power I haue, I ceasse not to imploy:
               For, from the place where we repulst, the Troians towards Troy,
               I all the purple field haue strew'd, with one or other slaine:
               Eight shafts I shot, with long steele heads, of which not one in vaine;
               All were in youthfull bodies fixt, well skild in warres constraint:
               Yet this wild dog, with all my aime, I haue no power to taint.
               This said, another arrow forth, from his stiffe string he sent,
               At Hector, whom he long'd to wound; but still amisse it went:
               His shaft smit faire Gorgythion, of Priams princely race,
               Who in Aepina was brought forth (a famous towne in Thrace)
               By Castianira; that, for forme, was like celestiall breed.
               And as a crimson Poppie flower, surcharged with his seed,
               
                  And vernall humors falling thicke, declines his heauie brow;
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      est.
               
               So, of one side, his helmets weight, his fainting head did bow:
               Yet Teucer would another shaft, at Hectors life dispose;
               So faine, he such a marke would hit: but still besides it goes;
               
                  Apollo did auert the shaft: but Hectors charioteere
               Bold Archeptolemus he smit, as he was rushing neere
               To make the fight: to earth he fell, his swift horse backe did flie,
               And there, were both his strength and soule, exilde eternally.
               Huge griefe, for Hectors slaughterd friend, pincht-in his mightie mind:
               Yet was he forc't to leaue him there, and his void place resignd
               To his sad brother, that was by; Cebriones: whose eare
               Receiuing Hectors charge, he straight, the weightie reines did beare;
               And Hector, from his shining coach (with horrid voice) leapt on,H
                        •…
                     ctor with a stone at Teucer.
               
               To wreake his friend on Teucers hand; and vp he tooke a stone,
               With which he at the Archer ran; who, from his quiuer, drew
               A sharpe-pild shaft, and nockt it sure: but, in great Hector flew,
               With such fell speed, that in his draught, he his right shoulder strooke,
               Where twixt his necke and breast, the ioynt, his natiue closure tooke:
               The wound was wondrous full of death, his string in sunder flees;
               His nummed hand fell strengthlesse downe, and he vpon his knees.
               
                  Aiax neglected not to aid, his brother thus deprest;
               But came and saft him with his shield; and two more friends addrest
               To be his aide, tooke him to fleet; Mecistius, Echius son,
               And gay Alastor: Teucer sigh'd, for all his seruice done.
            
            
               Then did Olympius, with fresh strength, the Troian powers reuiue;
               Who to their trenches once againe, the troubled Greekes did driue.
               
                  Hector brought terror with his strength, and euer fought before:
               As when some highly stomackt hound, that hunts a syluan Bore,
               Or kingly Lion, loues the hanch, and pincheth oft behind,
               Bold of his feet, and still obserues, the game, to turne inclind,
               Not vtterly dissolu'd in flight: so Hector did pursue;
               And whosoeuer was the last, he euer did subdue.
               They fled, but when they had their dike, and Pallesados past,
               (A number of them put to sword) at ships they staid at last:
               Then mutuall exhortations flew, then all with hands and eyes,
               Aduanc't to all the Gods, their plagues, wrung from them open cries.
               
                  Hector with his fowre rich-man'd horse, assaulting alwaies rode;Hectors terrible aspect.
               
               The eyes of Gorgon burnt in him, and warres vermilion God.
               The Goddesse that all Goddesses (for snowie armes) out shin'd,
               Thus spake to Pallas; to the Greeks, with gracious ruth inclin'd.
            
            
               O Pallas, what a griefe is this? is all our succour pastIuno to Pallas.
               
               To these our perishing Grecian friends? at least withheld at last?
               Eu
                     •…
                  n now, when one mans violence, must make them perish all,
               Insatisfaction of a Fate, so full of funerall?
               
                  Hector Priamides now raues, no more to be indur'd;
               That hath alreadie on the Greeks, so many harmes inur'd.
            
            
               The Azure Goddesse answerd her; This man had surely found
               His fortiude and life dissolu'd, euen on his fathers ground,
               
                  By Grecian valour; if my Sire, infested with ill moods,
               Did not so dote on these of Troy, too ielous of their bloods:
               And euer, an vniust repulse, stands to my willing powres;
               Little remembring what I did, in all the desperate howres
               Of his affected Hercules: I euer rescued him,
               In labours of Euristheus, vntoucht in life or lim:
               When he (heauen knowes) with drowned eyes, lookt vp for helpe to heauen:
               Which euer at command of Ioue, was by my supppliance giuen.
               But had my wisdome reacht so farre, to know of this euent,
               When to the solid-ported depths, of hell his sonne was sent,
               To hale out hatefull Plutoes dog, from darksome Erebus,
               
               He had not scap't the streames of Styx, so deepe and dangerous:
               Yet Ioue hates me, and shews his loue, in doing Thetis will,
               That kist his knees, and strok't his chin; praid, and importun'd still,
               That he would honour with his aid, her cittie-razing sonne,
               Displeasd Achilles: and for him, our friends are thus vndone.
               But time shall come againe, when he (to do his friends some aid)
               Will call me his Glaucopides; his sweet and blew-eyd maid.
               Then harnesse thou thy horse for me, that his bright Pallace ga
                     •…
                  es
               I soone may enter, arming me, to order these debates:
               And I will trie if Priams sonne, will still maintaine his cheare,
               When in the crimson paths of warre, I dreadfully appeare;
               For some prowd Troian shall be sure, to nourish dogs and soules,
               And paue the shore with fat, and flesh, depriu'd of liues and soules.
            
            
               
                  Iuno prepar'd her horse, whose manes, Ribands of gold enlac't:
               
                  Pallas her partie coloured robe; on her bright shoulders cast,Pallas armes.
               
               Diuinely wrought with her owne hands, in th'entrie of her Sire:
               Then put she, on her ample breast, her vnder-arming tire,
               And on it her celestiall armes: the chariot streight she takes,
               With her huge heauie violent lance, with which she slaughter makes
               Of armies, fatall to her wrath: Saturnia whipt her horse,Iuno her waggonnesse.
               
               And heauen gates, guarded by the Howres, op't by their proper force:
               Through which they flew. Whom when Ioue saw (set neare th'Idalian spring)
               Highly displeasd: he Iris cald, that hath the golden wings,
               And said; Flie Iris, turne them backe, let them not come at me:Ioue to Iris.
               
               Our meetings (seuerally disposd) will nothing gracious be.
               Beneath their o'rethrowne chariot, Ile shiuer their prowd steeds:
               Hu
                     •…
                  le downe themselues, their wagon breake, and for their stubborne deeds,
               In ten whole yeares they shall not heale, the wounds I will impresse
               With horrid thunder; that my maid, may know, when to addresse
               Armes against her father. For my wife, she doth not so offend,
               T'is but her vse to interrupt, what euer I intend.
               
                  Iris, with this, left Idas hils, and vp t'Olympus flew,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      is to heauen.
               
               Met (neare heauen gates) the Goddesses, and thus their haste with-drew.
            
            
               What course intend you? why are you, wrapt with your fancies storme?
               
                  Ioue likes not ye should aid the Greeks, but threats, and will performe,
               To crush in peeces your swift horse, beneath their glorious yokes,
               Hurle downe your selues, your chariot breake: and those impoysoned strokes
               
                  His wounding thunder shall imprint, in your celestiall parts,
               In ten full Springs ye shall not cure: that she that tames proud hearts
               (Thy selfe, Minerua) may be taught, to know for what, and when,
               Thou doest against thy father fight; for sometimes childeren
               May with discretion plant themselues, against their fathers wils;
               But not where humors onely rule, in works beyond their skils,
               For, Iuno, she offends him not, nor vexeth him so much;
               For, t'is her vse to crosse his will, her impudence is such.
                     
                        •…
                     ile facit quod semper facit.
               
               The habite of offence in this, she onely doth contract,
               And so grieues or incenseth lesse, though nere the lesse her fact:
               But thou most grieu'st him (dogged Dame) whom he rebukes in time,
               Lest silence should peruert thy will, and pride too highly clime
               In thy bold bosome (desperate girle) if seriously thou dare
               Lift thy vnwieldie lance gainst Ioue, as thy pretences are.
            
            
               She left them, and Saturnia said, Ay me thou seed of Ioue,
                  Iuno to Pall
                        •…
                     .
               
               By my aduice we will no more, vnfit contention moue
               With Iupiter for mortall men; of whom, let this man die,
               And that man liue, who euer he, pursues with destinie:
               And let him (plotting all euents) dispose of either host,
               As he thinks fittest for them both, and may become vs most.
            
            
               Thus turnd she backe, and to the Howres, her rich man'd horse resign'd
               Who them t'immortall mangers bound; the chariot they inclin'd
               Beneath the Christall walls of heauen, and they in golden thrones
               Consorted other Deities, repleate with passions.
               
                  Ioue, in his bright-wheeld chariot, his firie horse now beats,
               Vp to Olympus; and aspir'd, the Gods eternall seats.
               Great Neptune loosd his horse; his Carre, vpon the Altar plac't,
               And heauenly-linnen Couerings, did round about it cast.
               The farre-seer vsd his throne of gold: the vast Olympus shooke
               Beneath his feete, his wife, and maid, apart their places tooke;
               Nor any word afforded him: he knew their thoughts, and said;
                     
                        •…
                     oue to Inn
                        •…
                      and Pallas.
               
               Why do you thus torment your selues? you need not sit dismaid
               With the long labours you haue vsd, in your victorious fight,
               Destroying Troians: gainst whose liues, you heape such high despight.Scopticé.
               
               Ye should haue held your glorious course; for be assur'd, as farre
               As all my powres (by all meanes vrg'd) could haue sustaind the warre:
               Not all the host of Deities, should haue retir'd my hand,
               From vowd inflictions on the Greeks: much lesse, you two withstand.
               But you before you saw the fight, much lesse the slaughter there,
               Had all your goodly lineaments, possest with shaking feare;
               And neuer had your chariot borne, their charge to heauen againe:
               But thunder should haue smit you both, had you one Troian slaine.
            
            
               Both Goddesses let fall their chins, vpon their Iuorie breasts,
               Set next to Ioue; contriuing still, afflicted Troyes vnrests:
               
                  Pallas for anger could not speake, Saturnia, contrarie,
               Could not for anger hold her peace, but made this bold replie;
            
            
               Not-to-be-suffred Iupiter, what needst thou still enforce
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to Iupiter.
               
               Thy matchlesse power? we know it well: But we must yeeld remorse
               
                  To them that yeeld vs sacrifice: nor needst thou thus deride
               Our kind obedience, nor our griefes, but beare our powers applide
               To iust protection of the Greeks; that anger tombe not all
               In Troyes foule gulfe of periurie, and let them stand, should fall.
            
            
               Greeue not (said Ioue) at all done yet: for if thy faire eyes please,I
                        •…
                     piter to I
                        •…
                     no.
               
               This next red morning they shall see, the great Saturnides
               
               Bring more destruction to the Greekes: and Hector shall not cease,
               Till he haue rowsed from the Fleet, swift-foot Aeacides:
               
               In that day, when before their ships, for his Patroclus slaine,
               The Greekes in great distresse shall fight; for so the Fates ordaine.
               I weigh not thy displeased spleene; though to th'extremest bounds
               Of earth and seas it carrie thee; where endlesse night confounds
               
                  Iapet, and my deiected Sire; who sit so farre beneath,
               They neuer see the flying Sunne, nor heare the winds that breath,
               Neare to profoundest Tartarus: nor thither if thou went,
               Would I take pittie of thy moods, since none more impudent.
            
            
               To this, she nothing did replie: and now Sols glorious light
               Fell to the sea, and to the land, drew vp the drowsie night:
               The Troians grieu'd at Phoebus fall, which all the Greeks desir'd:The Night.
               
               And sable night (so often wisht) to earths firme throne aspir'd.
            
            
               
                  Hector (intending to consult) neare to the gulfie flood
               Farre from the Fleet; led to a place, pure, and exempt from blood,
               The Troians forces: from their horse, all lighted, and did heare
               Th'Oration Ioue-lou'd Hector made; who held a goodly speare,
               Eleuen full cubits long; the head, was brasse, and did reflect
               A wanton light before him still; it round about was deckt
               With strong hoops of new burnisht gold. On this he leand, and said:
            
            
               Heare me, my worthie friends of Troy, and you our honord aid;
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to his friends.
               
               A little since, I had conceipt, we should haue made retreate,
               By light of the inflamed fleet, with all the Greeks escheate;
               But darknesse hath preuented vs; and safte, with speciall grace,
               These Achiues, and their shore-hal'd fleet. Let vs then render place,
               To sacred Night; our suppers dress
                     •…
                  ; and from our chariot free
               Our faire-man'd horse, and meate them well: then let there conuoid be,
               From forth the citie presently, Oxen, and well fed sheepe;
               Sweet wine, and bread; and fell much wood, that all night we may keepeVina parant animos.
               
               Plentie of fires, euen till the light, bring forth the louely morne;
               And let their brightnesse glase the skies, that night may not suborne
               The Greeks escape, if they, for flight, the seas brode backe would take;
               At least they may not part with ease; but as retreit they make,
               Each man may beare a wound with him, to cure when he comes home,
               Made with a shaft or sharpned speare; and others feare to come,
               With charge of lamentable warre, gainst souldiers bred in Troy.
               Then let our Heralds, through the towne, their offices imploy,
               To warne the youth, yet short of warre; and time-white fathers, past;
               That in our god-built towres they see, strong courts of guard be plac't,
               About the wals; and let our Dames, yet flourishing in yeares,
               That (hauing beauties to keepe pure) are most inclin'd to feares
               
                  (Since darknesse in distressefull times, more dreadfull is then light)
               Make loftie fires in euery house: and thus, the dangerous night,
               Held with strong watch; if th'enemie, haue ambuscadoes laid
               Neare to our wals (and therefore seeme, in flight the more dismaid,
               Intending a surprise, while we, are all without the towne)
               They euery way shall be impugn'd, to euery mans renowne.
               Performe all this braue Troian friends: what now I haue to say,
               Is all exprest; the chearfull morne, shall other things display;
               It is my glorie (putting trust, in Ioue, and other Gods)
               That I shall now expulse these dogs, fates sent to our abodes;
               Who bring ostents of destinie, and blacke their threatning fleet.
               But this night let vs hold strong guards: to morrow we will meet,
               (With fierce-made warre) before their ships; and Ile make knowne to all,
               If strong Tydides, from their ships, can driue me to their wall,
               Or I can pierce him with my sword; and force his bloudy spoile;
               The wished morne shall shew his powre, if he can shun his foile,
               I running on him with my Lance; I thinke when day ascends,
               He shall lie wounded with the first, and by him many friends.
               O that I were as sure to liue, immortall, and sustaine
               No frailties, with increasing yeares, but euermore remaine
               Ador'd like Pallas, or the Sunne; as all doubts die in me,
               That heauens next light shall be the last, the Greekes shall euer see.
            
            
               This speech all Troians did applaud; who from their traces losde
               Their sweating horse; which seuerally with headstals they reposde,
               And fastned by their chariots; when others brought from towne,
               Fat sheepe and oxen, instantly; bread, wine; and hewed downe
               Huge store of wood: the winds transferd, into the friendly skie,
               Their suppers sauour; to the which, they sate delightfully,
               And spent all night in open field; fires round about them shinde;
               As when about the siluer Moone, when aire is free from winde,
               And stars shine cleare; to whose sweete beames, high prospects, and the browsIgne. Trolanorū 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      similes.
               
               Of all steepe hils and pinnacles, thrust vp themselues for showes;
               And euen the lowly vallies ioy, to glitter in their sight,
               When the vnmeasur'd firmament, bursts to disclose her light,
               And all the signes in heauen are seene, that glad the shepheards hart;
               So many fires disclosde their beames, made by the Troian part,
               Before the face of Ilion; and her bright turrets show'd.
               A thousand courts of guard kept fires: and euery guard allow'd
               Fiftie stout men, by whom their horse, eate oates and hard white corne,
               And all did wilfully expect, the siluer-throned morne.
            
            The end of the eighth Booke.
         
         
            
            THE NINTH BOOKE OF HOMERS ILIADS.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  TO Agamemnon (vrging hopelesse flight)
                  Stand Diomed, and Nestor opposite:
                  By Nestors counsell, Legats are dismist,
                  To Thetis sonne, who still denies t'assist.
               
            
            
               Another Argument.
               
                  
                     Iota sings the Ambassie,
                  And great Achilles sterne replie.
               
            
            
               
                  SO held the Troians sleeplesse guard; the Greeks to flight were giuen:
               The feeble consort of cold feare (strangely infusde from heauen)
               Griefe, not to be endur'd, did wound, all Greeks of greatest worth.
               And as two laterall-sited winds (the West wind and the North)
               Meete at the Thracian seas blacke breast; ioyne in a sodaine blore;
               Tumble together the darke waues, and powre vpon the shore
               A mightie deale of froth and weed, with which men manure ground:
               So Ioue and Troy did driue the Greeks, and all their minds confound:
               But Agamemnon most of all, was tortur'd at his heart,
               Who to the voicefull Heralds went, and bad them cite, apart,
               Each Grecian leader seuerally, not openly proclaime;
               In which he labourd with the first: and all together came.
               They sadly sate; the king arose, and pour'd out teares as fast
               As from a loftie rocke, a spring, doth his blacke waters cast.
               And deeply 
                     •…
                  ghing, thus bespake, the Achiues; O my friends,Agamemnon to the Greeks.
               
               Princes and leaders of the Greeks; heauens aduerse king extends
               His wrath, with too much detriment, to my so iust designe;
               Since he hath often promist me, and bound it with the signe
               Of his bent forehead, that this Troy, our vengefull hands should race,
               And safe returne: yet now ingag'd, he plagues vs with disgrace;
               When all our trust to him hath drawne, so much bloud from our friends.
               My glorie, nor my brothers wreake, were the proposed ends,
               For which he drew you to these toiles; but your whole countries shame,
               Which had bene huge, to beare the rape, of so diuine a Dame,
               Made in despite of our reuenge: and yet not that had mou'd
               Our powres to these designes, if Io
                        •…
                     e, had not our drifts approu'd;
               Which since we see he did for bloud; tis desperate fight in vs
               To striue with him; then let vs flie: tis flight he vrgeth thus.
            
            
               
                  Long time still silence held them all; at last did Diomed rise:
               
                  Atrides, I am first must crosse, thy indiscreet aduise,Diomed to Agamemnon: and takes fit time to answer his wrōg done by Agamemnon in the fourth booke.
               
               As may become me, being a king, in this our martiall court.
               Be not displeasd then: for thy selfe, didst broadly misreport
               In open field my fortitude, and cald me faint and weake;
               Yet I was silent, knowing the time; loth any rites to breake,
               That appertaind thy publicke rule: yet all the Greekes knew well
               (Of euery age) thou didst me wrong. As thou then didst refell
               My valour first of all the hoast, as of a man dismaid:
               So now, with fit occasion giuen, I first blame thee afraid.
               Inconstant Saturnes son hath giuen, inconstant spirits to thee;
               And with a scepter ouer all, an eminent degree:
               But with a scepters soueraigne grace, the chiefe powre, Fortitude,
               (To bridle thee) he thought not best, thy breast should be endude.
               Vnhappie king, think'st thou the Greeks, are such a silly sort,
               And so excessiue impotent, as thy weake words import?
               If thy mind moue thee to be gone; the way is open, go:
               Mycenian ships enow ride neare, that brought thee to this wo;
               The rest of Greece will stay, nor stirre, till Troy be ouercome,
               With full euersion; or if not, but (doters of their home)
               Will put on wings to flie with thee; my selfe and Sthenelus
               
               Will fight, till (trusting fauouring Ioue) we bring home Troy with vs.
            
            
               This, all applauded, and admir'd, the spirit of Diomed;
                  Nestor approues Diomeds counsell, and goes further.
               
               When Nestor (rising from the rest) his speech thus seconded:
            
            
               
                  Tydides, thou art (questionlesse) our strongest Greeke, in warre,
               And grauest in thy counsels too, of all that equall are
               In place with thee, and stand on strength; Nor is there any one
               Can blame, or contradict thy speech: And yet thou hast not gone
               So farre, but we must further go; th'art yong, and well mightst be
               My yongest sonne, though still I yeeld, thy words had high degree
               Of wisedome in them to our king; since well they did become
               Their right in question, and refute, inglorious going home;
               But I (well knowne thy senior far) will speake, and handle all
               Yet to propose: which none shall checke; no not our Generall.
               A hater of societie, vniust, and wilde is he,
               That loues intestine warre; being stuft, with manlesse crueltie:
               And therefore in perswading peace, and home-flight, we the lesse
               May blame our Generall; as one lothe, to wrap in more distresse
               His loued souldiers: but because, they brauely are resolu'd
               To cast liues after toyles, before, they part in shame inuolu'd;
               Prouide we for our honourd stay; obey blacke night, and fall
               Now to our suppers; then appoint, our guards without the wall,
               And in the bottome of the dike; which guards I wish may stand
               Of our braue youth. And (Atreus son) since thou art in command
               Before our other Kings; be first, in thy commands effect:
               It well becomes thee; since tis both, what all thy Peeres expect;
               And in the royall right of things, is no impaire to thee;
               Nor shall it stand with lesse then right, that they inuited be
               
                  To supper by thee; all thy tents, are amply stor'd with wine,
               Brought dayly in Greeke ships from Thrace; and to this grace of thineVinum Thraciū
                  
               
               All necessaries thou hast fit, and store of men to wait;
               And many meeting there; thou maist, heare euery mans conceit,
               And take the best: it much concernes, all Greekes to vse aduise
               Of grauest nature; since, so neare, our ships, our enemies
               Haue lighted such a sort of fires: with which, what man is ioyd?
               Looke, how all beare themselues this night, so liue, or be destroyd.
            
            
               All heard, and followd his aduice: there was appointed then
               Seuen Captaines of the watch, who forth, did march with all their men.Se
                        •…
                     en Captaines of the watch, and their names.
               
               The first was famous Thrasymed, aduicefull Nestors sonne;
               
                  Ascalaphus and Ialmen, and mightie Merion;
               
               
                  Alphareus and Deipyrus, and louely Lycomed;
               
               Old Creons ioy: These seuen bold Lords, an hundred souldiers led
               In euery seuerd company; and euery man his pike:
               Some placed on the rampires top, and some amidst the dike:
               All fires made, and their suppers tooke: Atrides to his tent
               Inuited all the Peeres of Greece; and food sufficient
               Apposde before them; and the Peeres, apposde their hands to it.
               Hunger and thirst being quickly quencht, to counsell still they sit.
               And first spake Nestor, who they thought, of late, aduisde so well,
               A father graue, and rightly wise, who thus his tale did tell.
            
            
               Most high Atrides, since in thee, I haue intent to end,Nestor to 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               From thee will I begin my speech, to whom Ioue doth commend
               The Empire of so many men, and puts into thy hand
               A Scepter, and establisht 
                     •…
                  awes, that thou mayst well command
               And counsell all men vnder thee. It therefore doth behoue
               Thy selfe to speake most, since of all, thy speeches most will moue;
               And yet to heare as well as speake: and then performe as well
               A free iust counsell; in thee still, must sticke, what others tell.
               For me; what in my iudgement stands, the most conuenient
               I will aduise; and am assur'd, aduice more competent
               Shall not be giuen: the generall proofe, that hath before bene made
               Of what I speake, confirmes me still; and now may well perswade,
               Because I could not then, yet ought, when thou (most royall King)
               Euen from the tent, Achilles loue, didst violently bring,
               Against my counsell, vrging thee, by all meanes to relent:
               But you (obeying your high mind) would venture the euent,
               Dishonoring our ablest Greeke, a man th'immortals grace:
               Againe, yet let's deliberate, to make him now embrace
               Affection to our generall good, and bring his force to field:
               Both which, kind words and pleasing gifts, must make his vertues yeeld.
            
            
               O father (answered the King) my wrongs thou tell'st me right;Agam
                        •…
                     non to Ne
                        •…
                     or.
               
               Mine owne offence, mine owne tongue grants; one man must stand in fight
               For our whole armie; him I wrongd, him Ioue loues from his hart:
               He shewes it in thus honoring him; who liuing thus apart,
               Proues vs but number: for his want, makes all our weaknesse seene:
               Yet after my confest offence, soothing my humorours spleene,
               
                  Ile sweeten his affects againe, with presents infinite,
               Which (to approue my firme intent) Ile openly recite;Gifts offered to Achilles.
               
               Seuen sacred Tripods free from fire, ten talents of fine gold,
               Twentie bright caldrons, twelue yong horse, well shap't and well controld,
               And victors too, for they haue wonne, the price at many a race:
               That man should not be poore, that had, but what their winged pace
               Hath added to my treasury; nor feele sweet golds defect.
               Seuen Lesbian Ladies he shall haue, that were the most select,
               And in their needles rarely skild: whom (when he tooke the towne
               Of famous Lesbos) I did chuse; who wonne the chiefe renowne,
               For beautie from their whole faire sexe; amongst whom Ile resigne
               Faire Brysis; and I deeply sweare (for any fact of mine
               That may discourage her receit) she is vntoucht, and rests
               As he resign'd her. To these gifts (if Ioue to our requests
               Vouchsafe performance, and affoord, the worke for which we waite;
               Of winning Troy) with brasse and gold, he shall his nauie freight;
               And (entring when we be at spoile) that princely hand of his
               Shall chuse him twentie Troian Dames, excepting Tyndaris,
               
               The fairest Pergamus infolds: and if we make retreat
               To Argos (cald of all the world, the Nauill, or chiefe seat)
               He shall become my sonne in law, and I will honour him
               Euen as Orestes, my sole sonne, that doth in honours swim.
               Three daughters in my wel-built court, vnmarried are, and faire;
               
                  Laodice, Chrysothemis, that hath the golden haire,
               And Iphianassa: of all three, the worthiest let him take
               All ioynturelesse, to Peleus Court: I will her ioyncture make;
               And that so great, as neuer yet, did any maide preferre;
               Seuen cities right magnificent, I will bestow on her:
               Enope, and Cardamile; Hyra for herbes renownd;
               The faire Aepaea, Pedasus, that doth with grapes abound:
               Antaea, girded with greene meades: Phera, surnam'd Diuine;
               All whose bright turrets, on the seas, in sandie Pylos shine:
               Th'inhabitants in flockes and heards, are wondrous confluent;
               Who like a God will honour him, and him with gifts present;
               And to his throne will contribute, what tribute he will rate;
               All this I gladly will performe, to pacifie his hate:
               Let him be milde and tractable: tis for the God of ghosts
               To be vnrul'd, implacable, and seeke the bloud of hoasts;
               Whom therefore men do much abhorre: then let him yeeld to me;
               I am his greater, being a King, and more in yeares then he.
            
            
               Braue King (said Nestor) these rich gifts, must make him needs relent:Nestor makes choice of Ambassadors to Achilles.
               
               Chuse then fit legates instantly, to greete him at his Tent;
               But stay, admit my choice of them; and let them strait be gone:
               
                  Ioue-loued Phoenix shall be chiefe; then Aiax Telamon,
               
               And Prince Vlyssès; and on them, let these two heralds wait,
               Graue Odius and Euribates. Come Lords, take water strait,
               Make pure your hands; and with sweet words, appease Achilles mind;
               Which we will pray, the king of Gods, may gently make inclin'd.
            
            
               
                  All lik't his speech, and on their hands, the Heralds water shed:
               The youths, crownd cups of sacred wine, to all distributed:
               But, hauing sacrific'd and drunke, to euerie mans content,
               (With many notes by Nestor giuen) the Legats forwards went:
               With courtship in fit gestures vsd, he did prepare them well,
               But most Vlysses; for his grace, did not so much excell:
               Such 
                     •…
                  ites beseeme Ambassadors: and Nestor vrged these,
               That their most honours might reflect, enrag'd Aeacides.
               
               They went along the shore, and praid, the God that earth doth bind
               In brackish chaines, they might not faile, but bow his mightie mind.
            
            
               The quarter of the Myrmidons, they reacht, and found him set
               Delighted with his solemne harpe, which curiously was fretAchilles at his Ha
                        •…
                     pe.
               
               With workes conceited, through the verge: the bawdricke that embrac't
               His loftie necke, was siluer twist: this (when his hand laid waste
               
                  Actions citie) he did chuse, as his especiall prise,A
                        •…
                     illes loue of Musicke.
               
               And (louing sacred musicke well) made it his exercise:
               To it he sung the glorious deeds, of great Heroes dead,Himselfe sings the deeds of Heroes.
               
               And his true mind, that practise faild, sweet contemplation fed.
               With him alone, and opposite; all silent sat his friend,
               Attentiue, and beholding him, who now his song did end.
               Th'Ambassadors did forwards preasse, renown'd Vlysses led,
               And stood in view: their sodaine sight, his admiration bred;
               Who with his harpe and all arose: so did Menetius sonne
               When he beheld them: their receipt, Achilles thus begun.
            
            
               Health to my Lords: right welcome men, assure your selues you be;Achilles gentle receit of Vlysses, A
                        •…
                     ax, &c.
               
               Though some necessitie I know, doth make you visite me,
               Incenst with iust cause gainst the Greeks. This said, a seuerall seate
               With purple cushions he set forth, and did their ease intreate:
               And said, Now friend, our greatest bolle, with wine vnmixt, and neate,
               Appose these Lords; and of the depth, let euerie man make proofe:
               These are my best-esteemed friends, and vnderneath my roofe.
            
            
               
                  Patroclus did his deare friends will: and he that did desirePrincipes ips
                        •…
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      munera obeunt, vt alibi.
               
               To cheare the Lords (come faint from fight) set on a blasing fire
               A great brasse pot, and into it, a chine of mu
                     •…
                  ton put,
               And fat Goates flesh: Automedon, held, while he peeces cut
               To rost and boile, right cunningly: then of a well fed swine,
               A huge fat shoulder he cuts out, and spits it wondrous fine;
               His good friend made a goodly fire: of which the force once past,
               He laid the spit low, neare the coales, to make it browne at last:
               Then sprinkled it with sacred salt, and tooke it from the rackes:
               This rosted and on dresser set, his friend Patroclus takes
               Bread in faire baskets; which set on, Achilles brought the meate;
               And to diuinest Ithacus, tooke his opposed seate
               Vpon the bench: then did he will, his friend to sacrifice;Sacrifice before meate.
               
               Who cast sweet incense in the fire, to all the Deities.
               Thus fell they to their readie food: hunger and thirst allaid,
               
                  Aiax to Phenix made a signe, as if too long they staid,
               Before they told their Legacie. Vlysses saw him winke,
               
                  And (filling the great boule with wine) did to Achilles drinke.
            
            
               Health to Achilles; but our plights, stand not in need of meate,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Who late supt at Atrides tent, though for thy loue we eate
               Of many things, whereof a part, would make a compleat feast:
               Nor can we ioy in these kind rites, that haue our hearts opprest
               (O Prince) with feare of vtter spoile: tis made a question now
               If we can saue our fleet or not, vnlesse thy selfe endow
               Thy powers with wonted fortitude: now Troy and her consorts,
               Bold of thy want, haue pitcht their tents, close to our fleet and forts;
               And made a firmament of fires; and now no more they say
               Will they be prison'd in their wals, but force their violent way
               Euen to our ships; and Io
                        •…
                     e himselfe, hath with his lightnings showd
               Their bold adu
                     •…
                  ntures happie signes; and Hector growes so prowd
               Of his huge strength, borne out by Ioue, that fearfully he raues;
               Presuming neither men nor Gods, can interrupt his braues.
               Wilde rage inuades him, and he prayes, that soone the sacred morne
               Would light his furie; boasting then, our streamers shall be torne,
               And all our nauall ornaments, fall by his conquering stroke;
               Our ships shall burne, and we our selues, lie stifl'd in the smoke.
               And I am seriously affraid, heauen will performe his threats;
               And that tis fatall to vs all, farre from our natiue seates
               To perish in victorious Troy: but rise, though it be late,
               D
                     •…
                  liuer the afflicted Greeks, from Troyes tumultuous hate.
               It will hereafter be thy griefe, when no strength can suffise
               To remedie th'effected threats, of our calamities;
               Consider these affaires in time, while thou maist vse thy powre,
               And haue the grace to turne, from Greece, fates vnrecouered houre.
               O friend? thou knowest, thy royall Sire, forewarnd what should be done,
               That day he sent thee from his Court, to honour Atreus sonne:
               My sonne (said he) the victory, let Ioue and Pallas vse
               At their high pleasures; but do thou, no honor'd meanes refuse
               That may aduance her; in fit bounds, containe thy mightie mind;
               Nor let the knowledge of thy strength, be factiously inclind,
               Contriuing mischiefes; be to fame, and generall good profest;
               The more will all sorts honour thee; Benignitie is best.
               Thus charg'd thy sire, which thou forgetst: yet now those thoughts appease
               That torture thy great spirit with wrath: which if thou wilt surcease,
               The King will merit it with gifts; (and if thou wilt giue eare)
               Ile tell how much he offers thee, yet thou sitst angrie here.
               Seuen Tripods that no fire must touch; twise ten pans fit for flame:
               Ten talents of fine gold; twelue horse, that euer ouercame,
               And brought huge prises from the field, with swiftnes of their feete:
               That man should beare no poore account, nor want golds quickning sweete,
               That had but what he won with them: seuen worthiest Lesbian Dames,
               Renown'd for skill in houfwifrie, and beare the soueraigne fames,
               For beautie, from their generall sexe; which at thy ouerthrow
               Of wel-built Lesbos he did chuse; and these he will bestow;
               And with these, her he tooke from thee, whom (by his state since then)
               
                  He sweares he toucht not, as faire Dames, vse to be toucht by men.
               All these are readie for thee now: and if at length we take,
               By helpes of Gods, this wealthie towne, thy ships shall burthen make
               Of gold and brasse at thy desires, when we the spoile diuide:
               And twentie beautious Troian Dames, thou shalt select beside,
               (Next Hellen) the most beautifull; and (when return'd we be
               To Argos) be his sonne in law: for he will honour thee
               Like his Oresles, his sole sonne, maintaind in height of blisse:
               Three daughters beautifie his Court, the faire Chrysothemis,
               
               
                  Laodice, and Iphianesse; of all, the fairest take
               To Peleus thy graue fathers Court, and neuer ioynture make:
               He will the iointure make himselfe, so great, as neuer Sire
               Gaue to his daughters nuptials: seuen cities left entire;
               
                  Cardamile, and Enope, and Hyra full of flowers;
               
                  Anthaea, for sweet meadowes praisd; and Phera, deckt with towers;
               The bright Epea; Pedassus, that doth God Bacchus please,
               All on the the Sandie Pylos soyle, are seated neare the seas:
               Th'inhabitants, in droues and flocks, exceeding wealthie be,
               Who like a God with worthie gifts, will gladly honour thee;
               And tribute of esp
                     •…
                  iall rate, to thy high scepter pay:
               All this he freely will performe, thy anger to allay.
               But if thy hate to him be more, then his gifts may represse,
               Yet pittie all the other Greeks, in such extreme distresse;
               Who with religion honour thee: and to their desperate ill,
               Thou shalt triumphant glorie bring; and Hector thou maist kill,
               When pride makes him encounter thee: fild with a banefull sprite,
               Who vaunts, our whole-fleet brought not one, equall to him in fight.
            
            
               Swift-foot Aeacides replide: Diuine Laertes sonne,Achilles answers Vlysses Oration.
               
               T'is requisite I should be short, and shew what place hath wonne
               Thy serious speech: affirming nought, but what you shall approue
               Establisht in my settled heart; that in the rest I moue
               No murmure nor exception: for like hell mouth I loath,
               Who holds not in his words and thoughts, one indistinguisht troth.
               What fits the freenesse of my mind, my speech shall make displaid;
               Not Atreus sonne, nor all the Gr
                     •…
                  eks, shall winne me to their aid:
               Their suite is wretchedly enforc't, to free their owne despaires;
               And my life neuer shall be hir'd, with thanklesse desperate praires:
               For neuer had I benefite, that euer foild the foe;
               Euen share hath he that keepes his tent, and he to field doth go;
               With equall honour cowards die, and men most valiant:
               The muc
                     •…
                   performer, and the man, that can of no
                     •…
                  hing vant.
               No ouerplus I euer found, when with my minds most strife,
               To do them good, to dangerous fight, I haue exposd my life.
               But euen as to vnfeatherd birds, the carefull dam brings meate,
               Which when she hath bestow'd, her selft, hath nothing left to eat:
               So when my broken sleepes haue drawne, the nights t'extremest length;
               And ended many bloodie daies, with still-employed strength,
               To guard their weaknesse: and preserue, their wiues contents infract;
               
                  I haue bene robd before their eyes; twelue cities I haue sackt,
               Assaild by sea; eleuen by land, while this siege held at Troy:
               And of all these, what was most deare, and most might crowne the ioy
               Of Agamemnon, he enioyd; who here behind remaind:
               Which when he tooke, a few he gaue, and many things retaind:
               Other, to Optimates and Kings, he gaue, who hold them fast;
               Yet mine he forceth; onely I, sit with my losse disgrac't.
               But so he gaine a louely Dame, to be his beds delight,
               It is enough; for what cause else, do Greeks and Troians fight?
               Why brought he hither such an hoast? was it not for a Dame?
               For faire-hair'd Hellen? and doth loue, alone the hearts inflame
               Of the Atrides to their wiues, of all the men that moue?
               Euery discreet and honest mind, cares for his priuate loue,
               As much as they: as I my selfe, lou'd Brysis as my life,
               Although my captiue; and had will, to take her for my wife:
               Whom, since he forc't, preuenting me; in vaine he shall prolong
               Hopes to appease me, that know well, the deepnesse of my wrong.
               But good Vlysses, with thy selfe, and all you other Kings,
               Let him take stomacke to repell, Troyes firie threatenings:
               Much hath he done without my helpe; built him a goodly fort,
               Cut a dike by it, pitcht with pales, broad, and of deepe import:
               And cannot all these helpes represse, this kil-man Hectors fright?
               When I was arm'd amongst the Greekes, he would not offer fight
               Without the shadow of his wals; but to the Scaean ports,
               Or to the holy Beech of Ioue, come backt, with his consorts;
               Where once he stood my charge alone, and hardly made retreat;
               And to make new proofe of our powers, the doubt is not so great.
               To morrow then with sacrifice, perform'd t'imperiall Ioue
               
               And all the Gods, Ile lanch my fleet, and all my men remoue;
               Which (if thou wilt vse so thy sight, or think'st it worth respect)
               In forehead of the morne thine eyes, shall see with sailes erect
               Amidst the fishie Hellespont, helpt with laborious oares:
               And if the sea-god send free saile, the fruitfull Pthian shores
               Within three dayes we shall attaine; where I haue store of prise,
               Left, when with preiudice I came, to these indignities;
               There haue I gold as well as here, and store of ruddie brasse,
               Dames slender, elegantly girt, and steele as bright as glasse;
               These will I take as I retire, as shares I firmly saue;
               Though Agamemnon be so base, to take the gifts he gaue.
               Tell him all this, and openly; I on your honors charge,
               That others may take shame to heare, his lusts command so large:
               And if there yet remaine a man, he hopeth to deceiue,
               (Being dide in endlesse impudence) that man may learne to leaue
               His trust and Empire: but alas, though like a wolfe he be,
               Shamelesse and rude; he durst not take, my prise, and looke on me.
               I neuer will partake his works, nor counsels, as before;
               He once deceiu'd, and iniur'd me, and he shall neuer more
               Tie my affections with his words; enough is the increase
               
                  Of one successe in his deceits; which let him ioy in peace,
               And beare it to a wretched end; wise Io
                        •…
                     e hath reft his braine,
               To bring him plagues; and these his gifts, I (as my foes) disdaine:
               Euen in the numnesse of calme death, I will reuengefull be,
               Though ten or twentie times so much, he would bestow on me:
               All he hath here, or any where; or Orchomen containes,
               To which men bring their wealth for strength; or all the store remaines
               In circuite of Aegyptian Thebes, where much hid treasure lies,
               Whose wals containe an hundred ports, of so admir'd a size,
               Two hundred souldiers may, afront, with horse and chariots passe.
               No
                     •…
                  , would 
                     •…
                  e amplifie all this, like sand, or dust, or grasse;
               Should he reclaime me, till his wreake, payd me for all the paines,
               That with his contumely burnd, like poison in my veines.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      and 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
               
               Nor shall his daughter be my wife, although she might contend
               With golden Ven
                        •…
                     s for her forme; or if she did transcend
               Blew-eyd Min
                        •…
                     a for her works: let him a Greeke select
               Fit for her, and a greater King. For if the Gods protect
               My safetie to my fathers court, he shall chuse me a wife.
               Many faire Achiue Princesses, of vnimpeached life,
               In Helle and in Pthia liue, whose Sires do cities hold,
               Of whom I can haue whom I will. And more, an hundred 
                     •…
                  old,
               My true mind in my countrie likes, to take a lawfull wife,
               Then in another nation; and there delight my life
               With those goods that my father got, much rather then die here.
               Not all the wealth of wel-built Troy, possest when peace was there:
               All that Apoll
                        •…
                     s marble Fane, in stonie Pythos holds,
               I value equall with the life, that my free breast infolds.
               Sheepe, Oxen, Tripods, crest-deckt horse, though lost, may come againe:
               But when the white guard of our teeth, no longer can containe
               Our humane soule, away it flies; and once gone, neuer more
               To her fraile mansion any man, can her lost powres restore.
               And therefore since my mother-queene (fam'd for her siluer feet)
               Told me two fates about my death, in my direction meet:
               The one, that if I here remaine, t'assist our victorie,
               My safe returne shall neuer liue, my fame shall neuer die:
               If my returne obtaine successe, much of my fame decayes,
               But death shall linger his approach, and I liue many dayes.
               This being reueal'd, twere foolish pride, t'abridge my life for praise.
               Then with my selfe, I will aduise, others to hoise their saile;
               For, gainst the height of Ilion, you neuer shall preuaile:
               
                  Ioue with his hand protecteth it, and makes the souldiers bold.
               This tell the King in euery part: for so graue Legates should;
               That they may better counsels vse, to saue their fleet and friends
               By their owne valours; since this course, drown'd in my anger ends.
               
                  Phoenix may in my tent repose; and, in the mo
                     •…
                  e, stere course
               For Pthia, if he thinke it good; if not, Ile vse no force.
            
            
               All wondred at his sterne reply; and Ph
                        •…
                     nix full of feares,
               His words would be more weake then iust, supplide their wants with teares.
            
            
               
                  If thy returne incline thee thus, (Peleus renowned ioy)
               And thou wilt let our ships be burnd, with harmfull fire of Troy,Phoenix Oration to A
                        •…
                     hilles.
               
               Since thou art angrie, O my sonne; how shall I after be
               Alone in these extremes of death, relinquished by thee?
               I, whom thy royall father sent, as orderer of thy force,
               When to Atrides from his Court, he left thee, for this course;
               Yet young, and when in skill of armes, thou didst not so abound;
               Nor hadst the habite of discourse, that makes men so renownd:
               In all which, I was set by him, t'instruct thee as my sonne,
               That thou mightst speake when speech was fit, and do, when deeds were done;
               Not sit as dumbe, for want of words; idle, for skill to moue:
               I would not then be left by thee; deare sonne, begot in loue;
               No not if God would promise me, to raze the prints of time
               Caru'd in my bosome, and my browes; and grace me with the prime
               Of manly youth, as when at first, I left sweet Helles shore
               Deckt with faire Dames, and fled the grudge, my angrie father bore;
               Who was the faire Amyntor cald, surnam'd Ormenides:
                  Mor
                        •…
                     m 
                        〈◊〉
                      obseruat, qu
                        •…
                      de prateritis libe
                        •…
                     
                     ter solent meminisse.
               
               And for a faire-haird harlots sake, that his affects could please,
               Contemnd my mother his true wife; who ceaslesse vrged me
               To vse his harlot Clytia, and still would claspe my knee
               To do her will; that so my Site, might turne his loue to hate
               Of that lewde Dame; conuerting it, to comfort her esta
                     •…
                  .
               At last, I was content to proue, to do my mother good,
               And reconcile my fathers loue; who straight suspitious stood,
               Pursuing me with many a curse, and to the Furies praide
               No Dame might loue, nor bring me seed: the Deities obayd
               That gouerne hell: infernall Ioue, and sterne Persephone.
               
               Then durst I in no longer date, with my sterne fatherbe:
               Yet did my friends, and neare allies: enclose me with desires
               Not to depart: kild sheepe, bores, beeues; rost them at solemne fires:
               And from my fathers tuns we drunke, exceeding store of wine.
               Nine ni
                     •…
                  hts they guarded me by turns; their fires did ceaslesse shine,
               One in the porch of his strong hall, and in the portall one,
               Before my chamber: but when day, beneath the tenth night shone,
               I brake my chambers thick-fram'd dores, and through the hals guard past,
               Vnseene of any man or maide. Through Greece, then rich, and vast,
               I fled to Pthia, nurse of sheepe: and came to Peleus Court,
               Who entertaind me heartily, and in as gracious sort
               As any Sire his onely sonne; borne when his strength is spent,
               And blest with great possessions, to leaue to his descent.
               He made me rich, and to my charge, did much command commend:
               I dwelt in th'vt most region, rich Pthia doth extend;
               And gouernd the Dolopians; and made thee what thou a
                     •…
                  ,
               O thou that like the Gods art fram'd: since (dearest to my heart)
               I vsde thee so, thou lou'dst none else; nor any where wouldst eate,
               Till I had crownd my knee with theee, and karu'd thee tenderst meate,
               And giuen thee wine so much, for loue, that in thy infancie
               (Which still discretion must protect, and a continuall eye)
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               My bosome louingly sustain'd; the wine thine could not beare:
               Then, now my strength needs thine as much, be mine to thee as deare;
               Much haue I sufferd for thy loue, much labour'd, wished much;
               Thinking since I must haue no heire, (the Gods decrees are such)
               I would adopt thy selfe my heire: to thee my heart did giue
               What any Sire could giue his sonne; in thee I hop't to liue:
               O mitigate thy mightie spirits: it fits not one that moues
               The hearts of all, to liue vnmou'd, and succour hates, for loues:
               The Gods themselues are flexible, whose vertues, honors, powers,
               Are more then thine: yet they will bend, their breasts as we bend ours.
               Perfumes, benigne deuotions, sauors of offrings burnd,
               And holy rites, the engines are, with which their hearts are turnd,
               By men that pray to them; whose faith, their sinnes haue falsified:
               For, prayers are daughters of great Ioue; lame, wrinkled, ruddie eyd,Prayers, how necessary and helpful: if shund or neglected, how wreakefull.
               
               And euer following iniury; who (strong and sound of feet)
               Flies through the world, afflicting men: beleeuing prayers, yet
               (To all that loue that seed of Ioue) the certaine blessing getIoues daughters, and cald Lit
                        •…
                     .
               
               To haue Ioue heare, and helpe them too: but if he shall refuse,
               And stand inflexible to them, they flie to Ioue, and vse
               Their powres against him; that the wrongs, he doth to them, may fall
               On his owne head, and pay those paines, whose cure he failes to call.
            
            
               Then great Achille
                        •…
                     
                   honour thou, this sacred seed of Ioue,
               
               And yeeld to them; since other men, of greatest minds they moue:
               If Agamemnon would not giue, the selfe same gifts he vowes,
               But offer other afterwards; and in his stil-bent browes
               Entombe his honour and his word; I would not thus exhort
               (With wrath appeasde) thy aide to Greece, though plagu'd in heauiest sort:
               But, much he presently will giue; and after, yeeld the rest:
               T'assure which, he hath sent to thee, the men thou louest best,
               And most renownd of all the hoast, that they might soften thee:
               Then let not both their paines and prayers, lost and despised be.
               Before which, none could reprehend, the tumult of thy heart:
               But now to rest inexpiate, were much too rude a part.
               Of ancient worthies we haue heard, when they were more displeasde,
               (To their high fames) with gifts and prayers, they haue bene still appeasde.
               For instance, I remember well, a fact perform'd of old,
               Which to you all my friends Ile tell: The Curets warres did holdAnother narration, de bello Aetolico.
               
               With the well-fought Etolians; where mutuall liues had end
               About the citie Calidon; th'Etolians did defend
               Their flourishing countrie; which to spoile, the Curets did contend.
               
                  Diana with the golden throne (with Oeneus much incenc't,
               Since with his plenteous lands first fruits, she was not reuerenc't;
               Yet other Gods, with Hecatombes, had feasts; and she alone,
               (Great Ioues bright daughter) left vnseru'd; or by obliuion,
               Or vndue knowledge of her dues) much hurt in heart she swore:
               And she enrag'd, excited much: she sent a syluan Bore
               From their greene groues, with wounding tuskes, who vsually did spoileAper Calidonius
               
               King Oeneus fields: his loftie woods, layd prostrate on the soile;
               
                  Rent by the roots, trees fresh, adornd, with fragrant apple flow'rs:
               Which Meleager (Oeneus sonne) slue with assembled pow'rs
               Of hunters, and of fiercest hounds; from many cities brought:
               For, such he was, that with few liues, his death could not be bought;
               Heapes of dead humanes, by his rage, the funerall piles applide:
               Yet (slaine at last) the Goddesse stird, about his head, and hide
               A wondrous tumult; and a warre, betwixt the Curets wrought
               And braue Aetolians: all the while, fierce Meleager fought,
               Ill far'd the Curets: neare the wals, none durst aduance his crest
               Though they were many: but when wrath, inflam'd his hautie brest,
               (Which oft the firme mind of the wise, with passion doth infest)
               Since twixt his mother Queene and him, arose a deadly strife;
               He left the Court, and priuately, liu'd with his lawfull wife:
               Faire Cleopatra, femall birth, of bright Marpissas paine,
               And of Idaeus; who, of all, terrestriall men, did raigne
               (At that time) king of fortitude; and, for Marpissas sake,
               Gainst wanton Phoebus, king o
                     •…
                   flames, his bow in hand did take,
               Since he had rauisht her, his ioy; whom her friends, after, gaue
               The surname of Alcyone; because they could not saue
               Their daughter from Alcyones Fate: in Cleopatr as armes
               Lay Meleager, feeding on, his anger for the harmes
               His mother praid might fall on him; who, for her brother slaine
               By Meleager, grieu'd, and praid, the Gods to wreake her paine,
               With all the horror could be pour'd, vpon her furious birth:
               Still knockt she, with her impious hands, the many-feeding earth,
               To vrge sterne Pluto and his Queene, t'incline their vengefull eares;
               Fell on her knees, and all her breast, dewd with her fierie teares
               To make them massacre her sonne; whose wrath enrag'd her thus.
               
                  Erynnis (wandring through the aire) heard, out of Erebus,
               
               Pray'rs, fit for her vnpleased mind; yet Meleager lay,
               Obscurd in furie; then the bruit, of the tumultuous 
                     •…
                  ray,
               Rung through the turrets as they scal'd; then came the Aetolian Pee
                     •…
                  es,
               To Meleager with low suits, to rise and free their feares:
               Then sent they the chiefe Priests of Gods, with offered gifts t'attone
               His differing fu
                     •…
                  ie; bad him ch
                     •…
                  , in sweet-soild Calidon,
               
               Of the most fat and yeeldie soile, what with an hundred steares,
               Might in a hundred dayes be plowde; halfe, that rich vintage beares,
               And halfe of naked earth to plow: yet yeelded not his ire.
               Then to his loftie chamber dore, ascends his royall Sire
               With ruthfull plaints: shooke the strong barres; then came his sisters cries,
               His mother then, and all intreate: yet still more stiffe he lies:
               His friends, most reuerend, most esteem'd; yet none impression tooke,
               Till the high turrets where he lay, and his strong chamber shooke
               With the inuading enemie: who now forc't dreadfull way
               Along the cittie: then his wife (in pittifull dismay)
               Besought him weeping: telling him, the miseries sustaind
               By all the citizens, whose towne, the enemie had gaind;
               Men slaughterd, children bondslaues made; sweet Ladies forc't with l
                     •…
                  st:
               
                  Fires climing towres, and turning them, to heapes of fruitlesse dust.
               These dangers softned his steele heart: vp the stout Prince arose,
               Indude his bodie with rich armes, and freed th'Aetolians woes:
               His smotherd anger giuing aire, which gifts did not asswage,
               But his owne perill. And because, he did not dis-ingage
               Their liues for gifts, their gifts he lost. But for my sake (deare friend)
               Be not thou bent to see our plights, to these extremes descend,
               Ere thou assist vs; be not so, by thy ill angell, turnd
               From thine owne honor: it were shame, to see our nauie burnd,
               And then come with thy timelesse aide. For offerd presents come,
               And all the Greeks will honour thee, as of celestiall roome.
               But if without these gifts thou fight, forc't by thy priuate woe,
               Thou wilt be nothing so renown'd, though thou repell the foe▪
               
            
            
               
                  Achilles answerd the last part, of this oration, thus:Achilles to Phoenix.
               
               
                  Phoenix, renown'd and reuerend; the honors vrgde on vs
               We need not; Ioue doth honor me, and to my safetie sees,
               And will whiles I retaine a spirit, or can command my knees.
               Then do not thou, with teares and woes, impassion my affects,
               Becoming gracious to my foe: nor fits it the respects
               Of thy vowd loue, to honor him, that hath dishonord me;
               Lest such loose kindnesse lose his heart, that yet is firme to thee.
               It were thy praise to hurt, with me, the hurter of my state;
               Since halfe my honor and my Realme, thou maist participate.
               Let these Lords then returne th'euent; and do thou here repose;
               And when darke sleepe breakes with the day; our counsels shall disclose
               The course of our returne or stay. This said, he with his eye
               Made to his friend, a couert signe, to hasten instantly
               A good soft bed, that the old Prince, soone as the Peeres were gone,
               Might take his rest; when souldier-like, braue Aiax Telamon
               
               Spake to Vlysses, as with thought; Achilles was not worth
               The high direction of his speech; that stood so sternly forth,
               Vnmou'd with th'Orators: and spake, not to appease
               
                  Pelides wrath, but to depart: his arguments were these:
            
            
               High-issued Laertiades? let vs insist no moreAi
                        •…
                     x souldierlike speech and fashion.
               
               On his perswasion; I perceiue, the world wo
                     •…
                  d end before
               Our speeches end, in this affaire: we must with vtmost haste
               Returne his answer, though but bad: the Peeres are else-where plac't,
               And will not rise till we returne; great Thetis sonne hath stor'd
               Prowd wrath within him, as his wealth, and will not be implor'd;
               Rude that he is; nor his friends loue, respects, do what they can:
               Wherein past all, we honourd him. O vnremorsefull man!
               Another for his brother slaine, another for his sonne,
               Accepts of satisfaction: and he the deed hath done
               Liues in belou'd societie, long after his amends;
               To which, his foes high heart for gifts, with patience condescends:
               But thee a wild and cruell spirit, the Gods for plague haue giuen,
               And for one girle; of whose fai
                     •…
                  e sexe, we come to offer seauen,
               The most exempt for excellence, and many a better prise.
               
                  Then put a sweet mind in thy breast, respect thy owne allies,
               Though others make thee not remisse: a multitude we are,
               Sprung of thy royall familie, and our supremest ca
                     •…
                  e
               Is to be most familiar, and hold most lou
                     •…
                   with thee,
               Of all the Greeks, how great an host, soeuer here there be.
            
            
               He answerd; Noble Telamon, Prince of our souldiers here:Achilles t
                        •…
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
               
               Out of thy heart I know thou speakst, and as thou holdst me deare:
               But still as often as I thinke, how rudely I was vsd,
               And like a stranger for all rites, fit for our good, refusd:
               My heart doth swell against the man, that durst be so profane
               To violate his sacred place: not for my priuate bane;
               But since wrackt vertues generall lawes, he shamelesse did infringe:
               For whose sake I will loose the reines, and giue mine anger swinge,
               Without my wisedomes least impeach. He is a foole, and base,
               That pitties vice-plagu'd minds, when paine, not loue of right giues place.
               And therefore tell your king, my Lords, my iust wrath will not care
               For all his cares: before my tents, and nauie charged are
               By warlike Hector; making way, through flockes of Grecian liues,
               Enlightned by their nauall fire: but when his rage arriues
               About my tent, and sable barke, I doubt not but to shield
               Them and my selfe: and make him flie, the there-strong bounded field.
            
            
               This said, each one but kist the cup, and to the ships retir'd,
               
                  Vlysses first. Patroclus then, the men and maids requi
                     •…
                  'd
               To make graue Phoenix bed with speed, and see he nothing lacks:
               They straite obeyd, and thereon laid, the subtile fruite of flax,
               And warme sheep-fels for couering: and there the old man slept,
               Attending till the golden Morne, her vsuall station kept.
               
                  Achilles lay in th'inner roome, of his tent richly wrought;
               And that faire Ladie by his side, that he from Lesbos brought,
               Bright Diomeda, Phorbas seed: Patroclus did embrace
               The beautious Iphis, giuen to him, when his bold friend did race
               The loftie Syrus, that was kept, in Enyeius hold.
            
            
               Now at the tent of Atreus sonne, each man with cups of goldAgamemnon to Vlysses.
               
               Receiu'd th'Ambassadors returnd; all clusterd neare to know
               What newes they brought: which first the king, would haue Vlysses show.
               Say most praise-worthie Ithacus; the Grecians great renowne,
               Will he defend vs? or not yet, will his prowd stomacke downe?
            
            
               
                  Vlysses made replie; Not yet, will he appeased be,Vlysses to Ag
                        •…
                     
                     memnon.
               
               But growes more wrathfull, prizing light, thy offerd gifts and thee;
               And wils thee to consult with vs, and take some other course
               To saue our armie and our fleete: and sayes, with all his force,
               The morne shall light him on his way, to Pthias wished soile:
               For neuer shall high-seated Troy, be sackt with all our toile:
               
                  loue holds his hand twixt vs and it: the souldiers gather heart.
               Thus he replies: which Aiax here, can equally impart,
               And both these Heralds: Phoenix stayes, for so was his desire
               To go with him, if he thought good; if not, he might retire.
               All wondred he should be so sterne: at last bold Diomed spake:
            
            
               
                  Would God, Atrides, thy request, were yet to vndertake;Diomed to Aga
                        •…
                     non.
               
               And all thy gifts vnofferd him, he's proud enough beside:
               But this ambassage thou hast sent, will make him burst with pride.
               But let vs suffer him to stay, or go at his desire:
               Fight when his stomacke serues him best; or when Ioue shall inspire:
               Meane while our watch being strongly held, let vs a little rest
               After our food: strength liues by both; and vertue is their guest.
               Then, when the rosie-fingerd Morne, holds out her siluer light,
               Bring forth thy host, encourage all; and be thou first in fight.
            
            
               The kings admir'd the fortitude, that so diuinely mou'd
               The skilfull horseman Diomed; and his aduice approu'd:
               Then with their nightly sacrifice, each toooke his seuerall tent;
               Where all receiu'd the soueraigne gifts, soft Somnus did present.
            
            The end of the ninth Booke.
         
         
            
            THE TENTH BOOKE OF HOMERS ILIADS.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  
                     TH'Atrides watching, wake the other Peeres:
                  And (in the Fort, consulting of their feares)
                  Two kings they send, most stout, and honord most,
                  For royall skowts, into the Troian host:
                  Who meeting Dolon (Hectors bribed Spie)
                  Take him; and learne, how all the Quarters lie.
                  He told them, in the Thracian regiment
                  Of rich king Rhesus, and his royall Tent;
                  Striuing for safetie; but they end his strife,
                  And rid poore Dolon, of a dangerous life.
                  Then with digressiue wyles, they 
                        〈◊〉
                      their force
                  On Rhesus life, and take his sno
                        •…
                     e horse.
               
            
            
               Another Argument.
               
                  
                     Kappa the Night exploits applies;
                  
                     Rhesus and Dolons tragedies.
               
            
            
               
                  THe other Princes at their ships, soft fingerd sleepe did bind,
               But not the Generall; Somnus silkes, bound not his laboring mind,Aga
                        •…
                     nons cares.
               
               That turnd, and returnd, many thoughts. And as quicke lightnings flieThese are the li
                        •…
                     htnings before snow, &c. that Scalligers Criti
                        •…
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •…
                     
                     worthily 
                        〈◊〉
                     ; citing the place falsly, as in the 3. bookes annotations, &c
               
               From well-deckt-Iunos soueraigne, out of the thickned skie,
               Preparing some exceeding raine, or haile, the fruite of cold:
               Or downe-like Snow, that sodainly, makes all the fields looke old;
               Or opes the gulfie mouth of warre, with his ensulphur'd hand
               In dazling flashes, pour'd from clouds, on any punisht land:
               So from Atrides troubled heart, through his darke sorowes, flew
               Redoubled sighes: his intrailes shooke, as often as his view
               Admir'd the multitude of fires, that gilt the Phrygian shade,
               And heard the sounds of fifes, and shawmes, and tumults so
                     •…
                  ldiers made.
               But when he saw his fleet and host, kneele to his care and loue,
               He rent his haire vp by the roots, as sacrifice to Ioue:
               
               Burnt in his firie sighes, still breath'd, out of his royall heart;
               And first thought good, to Nestors care, his sorowes to impart:
               To trie if royall diligence, with his approu'd aduise,
               Might fashion counsels, to preuent, their threatned miseries.
            
            
               So vp he rose, attir'd himselfe, and to his strong feet tideAga
                        •…
                     nons habite rising in the night.
               
               Rich shoes, and cast vpon his backe, a ruddie Lions hide,
               So ample, it his ankles reacht: then tooke his royall speare.He wearing a Lio
                        •…
                     s hide.
               
            
            
               Like him was Menelaus pierc't, with an industrious feare,
               
                  Nor sat sweet slumber on his eyes; lest bitter Fates should quite
               The Greekes high fauours, that for him, resolu'd such endlesse fight.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      a 
                        •…
                     eopards.
               
               And first a freckled Panthers hide, hid his brode backe athwart:
               His head, his brasen helme did arme; his able hand his dart;
               Then made he all his haste to raise, his brothers head as rare,
               That he who most exceld in rule, might helpe t'effect his care.
               He found him at his ships crookt-sterne, adorning him with armes;
               Who ioyd to see his brothers spirits, awak't without alarmes:
               Well weighing th'importance of the time. And first the yonger spake:
            
            
               Why brother, are ye arming thus? is it to vndertakeMenelaus to Agamemnon.
               
               The sending of some ventrous Greeke, t'explore the foes intent?
               Alas I greatly feare, not one, will giue that worke consent,
               Exposd alone to all the feares, that flow in gloomie night:
               He that doth this, must know death well; in which ends euerie fright.
            
            
               Brother (said he) in these affaires, we both must vse aduice;Agamemnon to Menelaus.
               
               
                  Ioue is against vs, and accepts, great Hectors sacrifice;
               For I haue neuer seene, nor heard, in one day, and by one,
               So many high attempts well vrg'd, as Hectors power hath done
               Against the haplesse sons of Greece: being chiefly deare to Ioue;
               
               And without cause; being neither fruite, of any Godesse loue,
               Nor helpfull God: and yet I feare, the deepnesse of his hand
               Ere it be rac't out of our thoughts, will many yeares withstand.
               But brother, hie thee to thy ships, and Idomen disease
               With warklike Aiax: I will haste, to graue Neleides;
               
               Exhorting him to rise, and giue, the sacred watch command;
               For they will specially embrace, incitement at his hand;
               And now his sonne, their captaine is; and Idomens good friend
               Bold Merion; to whose discharge, we did that charge commend.
            
            
               Commandst thou then (his brother askt) that I shall tarrie h
                     •…
                  re
               Attending thy resolu'd approach, or else the message beare
               And quickly make returne to thee? He answerd: Rather stay,Directions for commmand in wars extremity.
               
               Lest otherwise we faile to meete: for many a different way
               Lies through our labyrinthian host; speake euer as you go;
               Command strong watch; from Sire to sonne, vrge all t'obserue the foe;
               Familiarly, and with their praise, exciting euerie eye;
               Not with vnseason'd violence, of prowd authoritie.
               We must our patience exercise, and worke, our selues with them,
               
                  Ioue in our births combin'd such care, to eithers Diadem.
            
            
               Thus he dismist him, knowing well, his charge before he went,
               Himselfe to Nestor, whom he found, in bed within his tent:N
                        •…
                     tors armes, and readinesse to vse them.
               
               By him, his damaske curets hung, his shield, a paire of darts;
               His shining caske, his arming waste: in these he led the hearts
               Of his apt souldiers to sharpe warre, not yeelding to his yeares.
               He quickly started from his bed, when to his watchfull eares
               Vntimely feet told some approach: he tooke his lance in hand,
               And spake to him; Ho, what art thou? that walk'st at midnight? stand;
               Is any wanting at the guards? or lack'st thou any Peere?
               Speake, come not silent towards me: say what intendst thou heare?
            
            
               
                  He answerd, O Neleides, graue honour of our host:
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to Nestor.
               
               T'is Agamemnon thou maist know, whom Ioue afflicteth most
               Of all the wretched men that liue; and will, whilst any breath
               Giues motion to my toiled lims, and beares me vp from death.
               I walke the round thus, since sweet sleepe, cannot inclose mine eyes,
               Nor shut those Organs care breaks ope, for our calamities.
               My feare is vehement for the Greeks: my heart (the fount of heate)
               With his extreme affects, made cold; without my breast doth beate;
               And therefore are my sinewes strooke, with trembling: euerie part
               Of what my friends may feele, hath act, in my dispersed heart.
               But if thou thinkst of any course, may to our good redound,
               (Since neither thou thy selfe canst sleepe) come, walke with me the round;
               In way whereof we may confer, and looke to euerie guard:
               Lest watching long, and wearinesse, with labouring so hard,
               D
                     •…
                  owne their oppressed memories, of what they haue in charge.
               The libertie we giue the foe, (alas) is ouer large;
               Their campe is almost mixt with ours; and we haue forth noispies,
               To learne their drifts; who may perchance, this night intend surprise.
            
            
               Graue Nestor answerd: Worthie king, let good hearts beare our ill:Nestor to Agamem
                        •…
                     n.
               
               
                  Ioue is not bound to perfect all, this busie Hectors will;
               But I am confidently giuen, his thoughts are much dismaid
               With feare, lest our distresse incite, Achilles to our aide:
               And therefore will not tempt his fate, nor ours with further pride.
               But I will gladly follow thee, and stirre vp more beside:
               
                  Tydides, famous for his lance; Vlysses, Telamon,
               
               And bold Phyleus valiant heire: or else if any one
               Would haste to call king Idomen, and Aiax, since their saile
               Lie so remou'd; with much good speed, it might our haste auaile.
               But (though he be our honord friend,) thy brother I will blame,
               Not fearing if I anger thee: it is his vtter shame
               He should commit all paines to thee, that should himselfe imploy,
               Past all our Princes, in the care, and cure of our annoy;
               And be so farre from needing spurres, to these his due respects,
               He should apply our spirits himselfe, with pray'rs, and vrg'd affects.
               Necessitie (a law to lawes, and not to be endur'd)
               Makes proofe of all his faculties; not sound, if not inur'd.
            
            
               Good father (said the king) sometimes, you know I haue desir'dAgamemnons excuse of hi
                        •…
                      brother.
               
               You would improue his negligence, too oft to ease retir'd:
               Nor is it for defect of spirit, or compasse of his braine,
               But with obseruing my estate, he thinks, he should abstaine
               Till I commanded, knowing my place: vnwilling to assume,
               For being my brother, any thing, might proue he did presume.
               But now he rose before me farre, and came, t'auoid delaies:
               And I haue sent him for the man, your selfe desir'd to raise:
               Come, we shall find them at the guards, we plac't before the fort:
               For thither my direction was, they should with speed resort.
            
            
               Why now (said Nestor) none will grudge, nor his iust rule withstand;
               Examples make excitements strong, and sweeten a command.
            
            
               
                  Thus put he on his arming trusse, faire shoes vpon his feet,
               About him a mandilion, that did with buttons meet,
               Of purple, large, and full of folds; curld with a warmefull nap;
               A garment that gainst cold in nights, did souldiers vse to wrap:
               Then tooke he his strong lance in hand; made sharpe with proued steele,
               And went along the Grecian fleet. First at Vlysses keele,
               He cald; to breake the silken fumes, that did his sences bind:
               The voice through th'Organs of his eares, straight rung about his mind.
               Forth came Vlysses, asking him; Why stirre ye thus so late?Vlysses to Agamemnon and Nestor.
               
               Sustaine we such enforciue cause? He answerd, Our estate
               Doth force this perturbation; vouchsafe it worthie friend,N
                        •…
                     or to Vlysses.
               
               And come, let vs excite one more, to counsell of some end
               To our extremes, by fight, or flight. He, backe, and tooke his shield,
               And both tooke course to Diomed; they found him laid in fieldThe manner of Diomeds loggi
                        •…
                     .
               
               Farre from his tent: his armour by; about him was dispread
               A ring of souldiers; euerie man, his shield beneath his head:
               His speare fixt by him as he slept, the great end in the ground:
               The point, that brisled the darke earth, cast a reflection round,
               Like pallid lightnings throwne from Ioue; thus this Heroe lay,
               And vnder him a big Oxe hide: his royall head had stay
               On Arras hangings, rolled vp: whereon he slept so fast,
               That Nestor stird him with his foote, and chid to see him castNestor chideth Diomed.
               
               In such deepe sleepe, in such deepe wo
                     •…
                  s: and askt him why he spent
               All night in sleepe, or did not heare, the Tr
                        •…
                     ans neare his tent?
               Their Campe drawne close vpon their dike, small space twixt foes and foes?
            
            
               He, starting vp, said, Strange old man, that neuer tak'st repos
                     •…
                  ;Diomed to Nestor.
               
               Thou art too patient of our toile; haue we not men more yong,
               To be imploid from king to king? thine age hath too much wrong.
            
            
               Said like a king, replied the Sire: for I haue sonnes renownd;Nestor to him. Note the life of these representations.
               
               And there are many other men, might go this toilesome round:
               But you must see, imperious Need, hath all at her command:
               Now on the eager razors edge, for life or death we stand.
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                     ▪ T
                        •…
                      went into a Prouerbe, vsed by T
                        •…
                     critus, in Dioscaris D
                        •…
                     caris of H
                        •…
                     mer.
               
               Then go (thou art the yonger man,) and if thou loue my ease,
               Call swift▪foot Aiax vp thy selfe, and young Phyleides.
               
            
            
               This said, he on his shoulders cast, a yellow Lions hide,
               Big, and reacht earth; then tooke his speare; and Nestors will applide:
               Raisd the Heroes, brought them both. All met, the round they went,
               And found not any captaine there, asleepe or negligent:
               But waking, and in armes, gaue eare, to euerie lowest sound.
               And as keene dogs, keepe sheepe in Cotes, or folds, of Hurdles bound:Simile.
               
               And grin at euerie breach of aire, enuious of all that moues:
               Still listning when the rauenous beast, stalks through the hilly groues▪
               
               Then men and dogs stand on their guards, and mightie tumults make,
               Sleepe wanting weight to close one winke: so did the Captaines wake,
               That kept the watch the whole sad night: all with intentiue eare
               Conuerted to the enemies tents, that they might timely heare
               If they were stirring to surprise: which Nestor ioyd to see.
            
            
               Why so (deare sons) maintaine your watch; sleepe not a winke (said he)
               
                  Rather then make your fames, the scorne, of Troian periurie.N
                        •…
                      
                     
                        •…
                     o the 
                        •…
                     ds.
               
            
            
               This said, he formost past the dike, the others seconded;
               Euen all the kings that had bene cald, to counsell, from the bed:
               And with them went Meriones, and Nestors famous sonne:
               For both were cald by all the kings, to consultation.
               Beyond the dike they chusde a place, neare as they could from blood;
               Where yet appear'd the fals of some, and whence (the crimson flood
               Of Grecian liues being pour'd on earth, by Hectors furious chace)
               He made retreate, when night repour'd, grim darknesse in his face.
               There sate they downe, and Nestor spake: O friends remaines not one,N
                        •…
                      
                     
                        •…
                     o the Gre
                        •…
                      Princes
               
               That will relie on his bold mind, and view the campe alone,
               Of the prowd Troians? to approue, if any stragling mate
               He can surprise neare th'vtmost tents; or learne the briefe estate
               Of their intentions for the time, and mixe like one of them
               With their outguards, expiscating, if the renown'd extreme,
               They force on vs, will serue their turnes; with glorie to retire,
               Or still encampe thus farre from Troy? This may he well enquire▪
               
               And make a braue retreate vntoucht; and this would win him fame
               Of all men canapied with heauen; and euerie man of name
               In all this host shall honor him, with an enriching meed;
               A blacke Ewe and her sucking Lambe, (rewards that now exceed
               All other best possessions, in all mens choice requests)
               And still be bidden by our kings, to kind and royall feasts.
            
            
               All reuerenc't one anothers worth; and none would silence breake,
               Lest worst should take best place of speech: at last did Diomed speake:Dio
                        •…
                      
                     
                        •…
                     o N
                        •…
                     
                     stor.
               
            
            
               
                  Nestor, thou ask'st if no man here, haue heart so well inclin'd
               To worke this stratageme on Troy: yes, I haue such a mind:
               Yet if some other Prince would ioyne; more probable will be
               The strengthned hope of our exploite▪ two may together see
               (One going before another still) slie danger euerie way;
               One spirit vpon another workes; and takes with firmer stay
               The benefit of all his powers: for though one knew his course,
               Yet might he well distrust himselfe; which th' other might enforce.
            
            
               This offer euerie man assum'd, all would with Diomed go:
               The two Aiaces, Merion, and Menelaus too:
               But Nestors sonne enforc't it much, and hardie Ithacus,
               
               Who had to euerie ventrous deed, a mind as venturous.
            
            
               Amongst all these, thus spake the king; Tydides, most belou'd▪
                  The gr
                        •…
                      
                     
                        •…
                     unsell of Agamem
                     
                        •…
                     on to Diomed.
               
               Chuse thy associate worthily; a man the most approu'd
               For vse and strength in these extremes. Many tho
                     •…
                   
                  
                     •…
                  st stand forth:
               But chuse not thou by height of place, but by regard of worth▪
               
               Lest with thy nice respect of right, to any m
                     •…
                  ns degr
                     •…
                  
                  ▪
               
               Thou wrongst thy venture, chusing one, least fit to ioyne with thee▪
               
               Although perhaps a greater king: this spake he with suspect,
               That Diomed (for honors sake) 
                     •…
                  is brother would select.
            
            
               Then said Tydides; Since thou giu'st, my iudgement leaue to chuse,
               How can it so much truth forget, Vlysses to refuse?Di
                        •…
                      c
                        •…
                      of Vlysses.
               
               That beares a mind so most exempt, and vigorous in th'effect▪
               
               
                  Of all high labors, and a man, Pallas doth most respect?
               We shall returne through burning fire, if I with him combine:
               He sets strength in so true a course, with counsels so diuine.
            
            
               
                  Vlysses loth to be esteemd, a louer of his praise,
               With such exceptions humbled him, as did him higher raise:Vlysses m
                        •…
                     destie in accepting.
               
               And said; Tydides praise me not, more then free truth will beare,
               Nor yet empaire me: they are Greeks, that giue iudiciall eare.
               But come, the morning hasts; the stars, are forward in their course,
               Two parts of night are past; the third, is left t'imploy our force.
               Now borrowed they, for haste, some armes: bold Thrasymedes lentThe expl
                        •…
                     rators armed.
               
               Aduentrous Diomed his sword, (his owne was at his tent)
               His shield, and helme, tough and well tann'd, without or plume or crest,
               And cald a murrion; archers heads, it vsed to inuest.
               
                  Meriones lent Ithacus, his quiuer and his bow;
               His helmet fashiond of a hide: the workman did bestow
               Much labour in it, quilting it, with bowstrings; and without,
               With snowie tuskes of white-mouthd Bores, twas armed round about
               Right cunningly: and in the midst, an arming cap was plac't,
               That with the fixt ends of the tuskes, his head might not be rac't.
               This (long since) by Autolycus, was brought from Eleon,
               When he laid waste Amyntors house, that was Ormenus sonne.
               In Scandia, to Cytherius, surnam'd Amphydamas,
               
               
                  Autolycus did giue this helme: he, when he feasted was
               By honord Molus, gaue it him, as present of a guest:
               
                  Molus to his sonne Merion, did make it his bequest.
               With this Vlysses arm'd his head; and thus they (both addrest)A
                        •…
                     gurium ex cant
                        •…
                      Arde
                        •…
                     .
               
               Tooke leaue of all the other kings: to them a glad ostent,
               (As they were entring on their way) Minerua did present,
               A Hernshaw consecrate to her; which they could ill discerne
               Through sable night: but by her clange, they knew it was a Herne.
               
                  Vlysses ioy'd, and thus inuok't: Heare me great seed of Ioue,
                  Vlysses in
                        •…
                     oketh Palla
                        •…
                     .
               
               That euer dost my labors grace, with presence of thy loue:
               And all my motions dost attend; still loue me (sacred Dame)
               Especially in this exploit, and so protect our fame,
               We both may safely make retreate, and thriftily imploy
               Out boldnesse in some great affaire, banefull to them of Troy.
            
            
               Then praid illustrate Diomed: Vouchsafe me likewise eare,Diomed to Pall
                        •…
                     .
               
               O thou vnconquerd Queene of armes: be with thy fauors neare,
               As to my royall fathers steps, thou wentst a bountious guide,
               When th' Achiues, and the Peeres of Thebes, he would haue pacifide,
               Sent as the Greeks Ambassador, and left them at the flood
               Of great Aesopus; whose retreat, thou mad'st to swim in blood
               Of his enambusht enemies: and if thou so protect
               My bold endeuours; to thy name, an Heiffer, most select,
               That neuer yet was tam'd with yoke, brode fronted, one yeare old,
               Ile burne in zealous sacrifice, and set the hornes in gold.
            
            
               The Goddesse heard, and both the kings, their dreadlesse passage bore,
               Through slaughter, slaughterd carkasses; armes; and discolord gore.
            
            
               
                  Nor Hector let his Princes sleepe, but all to counsell cald:
               And askt, What one is here will vow, and keepe it vnap pald,H
                        •…
                     tor to the 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               To haue a gift fit for his deed; a chariot and two horse,
               That passe for speed the rest of Greece? what one dares take take this course,
               For his renowne (besides his gifts) to mixe amongst the foe,
               And learne if still they hold their guards? or with this ouerthrow
               Determine flight, as being too weake, to hold vs longer warre?
            
            
               All silent stood, at last stood forth, one Dolon, that did dareDol
                        •…
                      offers to be explorat
                        •…
                     r.
               
               This dangerous worke; Eumedes heire, a Herald much renownd:
               This Dolon did in gold and brasse, exceedingly abound;
               But in his forme was quite deform'd; yet passing swift to run:
               Amongst fiue sisters he was left, Eumedes onely son;
               And he told Hector, his free heart, would vndertake t'explore
               The Greeks intentions; but (said he) thou shalt be sworne before,
               By this thy scepter, that the horse, of great Aeacides
               
               And his strong chariot, bound with brasse, thou wilt (before all these)
               Resigne me as my valours prise: and so I rest vnmou'd
               To be thy spie, and not returne, before I haue approu'd
               (By venturing to Atrides ship, where their consults are held)
               If they resolue still to resist; or flie, as quite expeld.
            
            
               He put his scepter in his hand, and cald the thunders GodHector sweares to D
                        •…
                     lon.
               
               (Saturnias husband to his oath, those horse should not bero de
               By any other man then he; but he for euer ioy
               (To his renowne) their seruices, for his good done to Troy.
               
               Thus swore he, and forswore himselfe; yet made base Dolon bold:Dolon armes.
               
               Who on his shoulders hung his bow, and did about him fold
               A white wolues hide; and with a helme, of weasels skins did arme
               His weasels head; then tooke his dart, and neuer tu
                     •…
                  d to harme
               The Greeks with their related drifts: but being past the troopes
               Of horse and foote, he promptly runs; and as he runs he stoopes
               To vndermine Achilles horse; Vlysses straight did see,
               And said to Diomed; this man, makes footing towards thee,
               Out of the tents; I know not well, if he be vsde as spieVlysses to Di
                        •…
                     
                     med.
               
               Bent to our fleet; or come to rob, the slaughterd enemie.
               But let vs suffer him to come, a little further on,
               And then pursue him. If it chance, that we be ouergone
               By his more swiftnesse; vrge him still, to run vpon our fleet,
               And (left he scape vs to the towne) still let thy Iaueline meet
               With all his offers of retreate. Thus stept they from the plaine
               Amongst the slaughterd carkasses; Dolon came on amaine,
               Suspecting nothing; but once past, as farre as Mules outdraw
               Oxen at plough; being both put on, neither admitted law,
               To plow a deepe soild furrow forth; so farre was Dolon past;
               Then they pursude, which he perceiu'd, and staid his speedlesse hast;
               Subtly supposing Hector sent, to countermand his spie:
               But in a Iauelins throw or lesse, he knew them enemie.
               Then laid he on his nimble knees; and they pursude like wind.
               As when a brace of greyhounds are, laid in, with Hare or Hind;Simile.
               
               
                  Close-mouth'd, and skild to make the best, of their industrious course;
               Serue eithers turne, and set on hard; lose neither ground nor force:
               So constantly did Tydeus sonne, and his towne-razing Peere,
               Pursue this spie; still turning him, as he was winding neare
               His couert: till he almost mixt, with their out-courts of guard.
            
            
               Then Pallas prompted Diomed, lest his due worths rewardDiomed to Dolon.
               
               Should be empaird, if any man, did vant he first did sheath
               His sword in him, and he be cald, but second in his death:
               Then spake he (threatning with his lance,) or stay, or this comes on,
               And long thou canst not run, before, thou be by death out-gone.
            
            
               This said, he threw his Iaueline forth: which mist, (as Diomed would)
               Aboue his right arme making way; the pile stucke in the mould:
               He staid and trembled, and his teeth, did chatter in his head.
               They came in blowing, seisd him fast; he, weeping, offeredD
                        •…
                     lons surprise and offer.
               
               A wealthy ransome for his life, and told them he had brasse,
               Much gold, and iron, that fit for vse, in many labours was;
               From whose rich heapes his father would, a wondrous portion giue,
               If, at the great Achaian fleet, he heard his sonne did liue.
            
            
               
                  Vlysses bad him cheare his heart. Thinke not of death, said he,Vlysses to Dolon.
               
               But tell vs true, why runst thou forth, when others sleeping be?
               Is it to spoile the carkasses? or art thou choicely sent,
               T'explore our drifts? or of thy selfe, seek'st thou some wisht euent?
            
            
               He trembling answerd: Much reward, did Hectors oth propose,Dolons answer.
               
               And vrg'd me much against my will, t'indeuour to disclose,
               If you determin'd still to stay, or bent your course for flight,
               As all dismaid with your late foile, and wearied with the fight:
               For which exploite, Pelides horse, and chariot, he did sweare
               I onely euer should enioy. Vlysses smil'd to heare
               So base a swaine haue any hope, so high a prise t'aspire;Vlysses to Dolon.
               
               And said, his labors did affect, a great and precious hire:
               And that the horse Pelides rein'd, no mortall hand could vse
               But he himselfe; whose matchlesse life, a Goddesse did produce.
               But tell vs, and report but truth, where lef
                     •…
                  st thou Hector now?
               Where are his armes? his famous horse? on whom doth he bestow
               The watches charge? where sleepe the Kings? intend they still to lie
               Thus neare encampt? or turne suffisd, with their late victorie?
            
            
               All this, said he, Ile tell most true. At Ilus monumentDolons relation.
               
               
                  Hector with all our Princes sits, t'aduise of this euent;
               Who chuse that place remou'd, to shnn, the rude confused sounds
               The common souldiers throw about: but, for our watch, and rounds,
               Whereof (braue Lord) thou mak'st demand; none orderly we keepe:
               The Troians that haue roofes to saue, onely abandon sleepe,
               And priuately without command, each other they exhort
               To make preuention of the worst; and in this slender sort
               Is watch, and guard maintaind with vs. Th'auxiliarie bands
               Sleepe soundly, and commit their cares, into the Troians hands;
               For they haue neither wiues with them, nor children to protect;
               The lesse they need to care, the more, they succour dull neglect.
            
            
               
                  But tell me (said wise Ithacus,) are all these forreine powresIthac
                        •…
                     .
               
               Appointed quarters by themselues, or else commixt with yours?Dol
                        •…
                     .
               
            
            
               And this (said Dolon) too (my Lords,) Ile seriously vnfold:
               The Paeons with the crooked bowes, and Cares, quarters hold
               Next to the sea; the Leieges, and Caucons ioyn'd with them,
               And braue Pelasgians; Thimbers meade, remou'd more from the streame,
               Is quarter to the Licians; the loftie Misian force;
               The Phrygians and Meonians, that fight with armed horse.
               But what need these particulars? if ye intend surprise
               Of any in our Troian campe; the Thracian quarter lies
               Vtmost of all, and vncommixt, with Troian regiments,
               That keepe the voluntary watch: new pitcht are all their tents.
               King Rhesus, Eioneus son, commands them; who hath steeds
               More white then snow, huge, and well shap't; their firie pace exceedsVirgilianum.
               
               The winds in swiftnesse: these I saw: his Chariot is with gold
               And pallid siluer richly fram'd, and wondrous to behold.
               His great and golden armour is, not fit a man should weare;
               But for immortall shoulders fram'd: come then, and quickly beare
               Your happie prisoner to your fleet: or leaue him here fast bound
               Till your well vrg'd and rich returne, proue my relation sound.
            
            
               
                  Tydides dreadfully replide: Thinke not of passage thus,Diomeds stern
                        •…
                      r
                        •…
                     ply to Dolon.
               
               Though of right acceptable newes, thou hast aduertisde vs;
               Our hands are holds more strict then so: and should we set thee free
               For offerd ransome; for this scape, thou still wouldst scouting be
               About our ships; or do vs scathe, in plaine opposed armes;
               But if I take thy life, no way, can we repent thy harmes.
            
            
               With this, as Dolon reacht his hand, to vse a suppliants part,Dolons slaughter by Diomed.
               
               And stroke the beard of Diomed; he strooke his necke athwart,
               With his forc't sword; and both the nerues, he did in sunder wound;
               And suddenly his head, deceiu'd, fell speaking on the ground:
               His wesels helme they tooke, his bow, his wolues skin, and his lance;
               Which to Minerua, Ithacus, did zealously aduance
               With lifted arme into the aire; and to her thus he spake;
            
            
               Goddesse, triumph in thine owne spoiles: to thee we first will makeVlysses offers Dolons armes to Pallas.
               
               Our inuocations, of all powers, thron'd on th'Olympian hill;
               Now to the Thracians, and their horse, and beds, conduct vs still.
               With this, he hung them vp aloft, vpon a Tamricke bow,
               As eyefull Trophies: and the sprigs, that did about it grow,
               He proined from the leauie armes, to make it easier viewd,
               When they should hastily retire, and be perhaps pursude.
               Forth went they, through blacke bloud and armes; and presently aspir'd
               The guardlesse Thracian regiment, fast bound with sleepe, and tir'd▪
               
               Their armes lay by, and triple rankes, they as they slept did keepe,
               As they should watch and guard their king; who, in a fatall sleepe,
               Lay in the midst; their charriot horse, as they coach fellowes were,
               Fed by them; and the famous steeds, that did their Generall beare,
               Stood next him, to the hinder part, of his rich chariot tied.Vlysses to Diomed.
               
               
                  Vyss
                        •…
                     s saw them first, and said: Tydides, I haue spied
               
                  The horse that Dolon (whom we slue) assur'd vs we should see:
               Now vse thy strength; now idle armes, are most vnfit for thee:
               Prise thou the horse; or kill the guard; and leaue the horse to me.
            
            
               
                  Miner
                        •…
                     a with the Azure eyes, breath'd strength into her King,
               Who fild the tent with mixed death: the soules, he set on wing,
               Issued in grones, and made aire swell, into her stormie floud:
               Horror, and slaughter had one power; the earth did blush with bloud.
               As when a hungrie Lion flies, with purpose to deuoure
               On flocks vnkept, and on their liues, doth freely vse his power:
               So Tydeus sonne assaild the foe; twelue soules before him flew;
               
                  Vlysses waited on his sword; and euer as he slew,
               He drew them by their strengthlesse heeles, out of the horses sight;
               That when he was to leade them forth, they should not with affright
               Bogle, nor snore, in treading on, the bloudie carkases;
               For being new come, they were vnusde, to such sterne sights as these.
               Through foure ranks now did Diomed, the king himselfe attaine;Diomed slaughters Rhesu
                        •…
                      king of Thrace.
               
               Who (snoring in his sweetest sleepe) was like his souldiers slaine.
               An ill dreame by Minerua sent, that night, stood by his head,
               Which was Oenides royall sonne, vnconquer'd Diomed.
               
            
            
               Meane while Vlysses loosd his horse; tooke all their raines in hand,
               And led them forth: but Tydeus sonne, did in contention stand
               With his great mind, to do some deed, of more audacitie;
               If he should take the chariot, where his rich armes did lie,
               And draw it by the beame away, or beare it on his backe;
               Or if of more dull Thracian liues, he should their bosomes sacke.
            
            
               In this contention with himselfe, Minerua did suggest,Mineru
                        •…
                      to Diomed.
               
               And bad him thinke of his retreate; lest from their tempted rest,
               Some other God should stirre the foe, and send him backe dismaid.
            
            
               He knew the voice; tooke horse, and fled; the Troians heauenly aid
               (Apollo with the siluer bow) stood no blind sentinell
               To their secure and drowsie hoast; but did discouer well
               
                  Minerua following Diomed; and angrie with his act,
               The mightie hoast of Ilion, he entred; and awak't
               The cousen germane of the king, a counsellor of Thrace,
               
               
                  Hopocoon; who when he rose; and saw the desert place
               Where Rhesus horse did vse to stand, and th' other dismall harmes,
               Men strugling with the pangs of death; he shriekt out thicke alarmes;Al
                        •…
                     rmes amongest the Troians.
               
               Cald Rhesus? Rhesus? but in vaine: then still, arme, arme, he cride:
               The noise and tumult was extreme, on euery startled side
               Of Troyes huge hoast; from whence in throngs, all gatherd and admir'd,
               Who could performe such harmfull facts, and yet be safe retir'd.
            
            
               Now, comming where they slue the scout, Vlysses stayd the steeds;
               
                  Tydides lighted, and the spoiles (hung on the Tamricke reeds)
               He tooke and gaue to Ithacus; and vp he got againe;
               Then flew they ioyfull to their fleet: Nestor did first attaine
               The sounds the horse hoofes strooke through aire, and said; My royall Peeres?Nestor to the Greeks.
               
               Do I but dote? or say I true? me thinks about mine eares
               The sounds of running horses beate. O would to God they were
               
                  Our friends thus soone returnd with spoiles: but I haue heartie feare,
               Lest this high tumult of the foe, doth their distresse intend.
               He scarce had spoke, when they were come: Both did from horse descend,
               All, with embraces and sweet words, to heauen their worth did raise.
               Then Nestor spake; Great Ithachus, euen heapt with Grecian praise;
               How haue you made these horse your prise? pierc't you the dangerous host,
               Where such gemmes stand? or did some God, your high attempts accost,
               And honord you with this reward? why, they be like the Rayes
               T
                     •…
                  e Sunne effuseth. I haue mixt, with Troians all my daies;
               And now, I hope you will not say, I alwaies lye abord
               Though an old soldier I confesse: yet did all Troy afford
               Neuer the like to any sence, that euer I possest;
               But some good God, no doubt, hath met, and your high valours blest:
               For he that shadowes heauen with clouds, loues both, as his delights:
               And she that supples earth with blood, can not forbeare your sights.
            
            
               
                  Vlysses answerd, Honord Sire, the willing Gods can giueVlysses to Nestor.
               
               Horse much more worth, then these men yeeld, since in more power they liue:
               These horse are of the Thracian breed; their king Tydides slue,
               And twelue of his most trusted guard: and of that meaner crew
               A skowt for thirteenth man we kild, whom Hector sent to spie
               The whole estate of our designes, if bent to fight or flie.
            
            
               Thus (followed with whole troopes of friends,) they with applauses past
               The spacious dike, and in the tent, of Diomed they plac't
               The horse without contention, as his deseruings meed:
               Which (with his other horse set vp) on yellow wheat did feed.
               Poore Dolons spoiles Vlysses had; who shrin'd them on his sterne,
               As trophies vow'd to her that sent, the good aboding Herne.
            
            
               Th
                     •…
                  n entred they the meere maine sea, to cleanse their honord sweate
               From off their feet, their thighes and neckes: and when their vehement heate
               Was calm'd, and their swolne hearts refresht; more curious baths they vsd;
               Where odorous and dissoluing Oyles, they through their lims diffusde.
               Then, taking breakfast, a big boule, fild with the purest wine,
               They offerd to the maiden Queene, that hath the azure eyne.
            
            The end of the tenth Booke.
         
         
            
            THE ELEVENTH BOOK OF HOMERS ILIADS.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  
                     ATrides and his other Peeres of name,
                  Leade forth their men; whom Eris doth inflame.
                  
                     Hector (by Iris charge) takes deedlesse breath,
                  Whiles Agamemnon plies the worke of death:
                  Who with the first beares his imperiall head.
                  Himselfe, Vlysses, and King Diomed,
                  
                  
                     Euripylus, and Aesculapius sonne,
                  (Enforc't with wounds) the furious skirmish shun.
                  Which martiall sight, when great Achilles viewes,
                  A little his desire of fight renewes:
                  And forth he sends his friend, to bring him word
                  From old Neleides, what wounded Lord
                  He in his chariot from the skirmish brought:
                  Which was Machaon. Nestor then besought
                  He would perswade his friend to wreake their harmes,
                  Or come himselfe, deckt in his dreadfull armes.
               
            
            
               Another Argument.
               
                  
                     Lambda presents the Generall,
                  In fight the worthiest man of all.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     AVrora, out of restfull bed, did from bright Tython rise,
               To bring each deathlesse essence light, and vse, to mortall eyes;
               When Ioue sent Eris to the Greekes, sustaining in her hand
               Sterne signes of her designes for warre: she tooke her horrid stand
               Vpon Vlysses huge blacke Barke, that did at anchor ride,
               Amidst the fleet; from whence her sounds, might ring on euery side;
               Both to the tents of Telamon, and th'authors of their smarts;
               Who held, for fortitude and force, the nauies vtmost parts.
            
            
               The red-eyd Goddesse seated there, thunderd th'Orthian song,Eris (contention) sings and excites the Gr
                        •…
                     cians.
               
               High, and with horror, through the eares, of all the Grecian throng;
               Her verse with spirits inuincible, did all their breasts inspire;
               Blew out all darknesse from their lims, and set their hearts on fire;
               And presently was bitter warre, more sweet a thousand times
               Then any choice in hollow keeles, to greet their natiu climes.
            
            
               
                  Atrides summon'd all to armes; to armes himselfe disposde:Agamemnon armes for the 
                        •…
                     eld.
               
               First on his legs he put bright Greaues, with siluer buttons closde;
               Then with rich Curace arm'd his breast, which Cyniras bestow'd
               To gratifie his royall guest; for euen to Cyprus flow'd
               
                  Th'vnbounded fame of those designes, the Greeks proposde for Tr
                        •…
                     y;
               
               And therefore gaue he him those armes, and wisht his purpose ioy.
               Ten rowes of azure mixt with blacke: twelue golden like the Sunne:
               Twise ten of tin, in beaten paths, did through this armour runne.
               Three serpents to the gorget crept, that like three rain-bowes shin'd,
               Such as by Ioue are fixt in clouds, when wonders are diuin'd.
               About his shoulders hung his sword; whereof the hollow hilt
               Was fashion'd all with shining barres, exceeding richly gilt:
               The scaberd was of siluer plate, with golden hangers grac't:
               Then tooke he vp his weigh
                     •…
                  ie shield, that round about him cast
               D
                     •…
                  fensiue shadowes: ten bright zones, of gold-affecting brasse
               Were driuen about it; and of tin (as full of glosse as glasse)
               Sweld twentie bosses out of it: in center of them all,
               One of blacke mettall had engrauen (full of extreme appall)
               An vgly Gorgon, compassed, with Terror and with Feare:
               At it, a siluer Bawdricke hung, with which he vsde to beare
               (Wound on his arme) his ample shield; and in it there was wouen
               An azure Dragon, curl'd in folds; from whose one necke, was clouen
               Three heads contorted in an orbe: then plac't he on his head
               His foure-plum'd caske; and in his hands, two darts he managed,
               Arm'd with bright steele, that blaz'd to heauen: then Iuno and the maide
               That conquers Empires; trumpets seru'd, to summon out their aide,
               In honor of the Generall: and on a sable cloud
               (To bring them furious to the field) sate thundring out aloud.
            
            
               Then all enioyn'd their charioteers, to ranke their chariot horse
               Close to the dike: forth marcht the foot; whose front they did r'enforce
               With some horse troupes: the battell then, was all of Charioteers,
               Lin'd with light horse: but Iupiter, disturb'd this forme with feares;
               And from aires vpper region, did bloudie vapors raine;
               For sad ostent, much noble life, should ere their times be slaine.
               The Troian hoast, at Ilus tombe, was in Battalia led
               By Hector and Polydamas, and old Anchises seed,
               Who God-like was esteem'd in Troy; by graue Antenors race,
               Diuine Agenor, Polybus, vnmaried Acamas,
               
               Proportion'd like the states of heauen: in front of all the field,
               
                  Troyes great Priamides did beare, his al▪wayes-equall shield,
               Still plying th'ordering of his power. And as amids the skieSimile.
               
               We sometimes see an ominous starre, blaze cleare and dreadfully,
               Then run his golden head in clouds, and straight appeare againe:
               So Hector otherwhiles did grace, the vaunt-guard, shining plaine;
               Then in the rere-guard hid himselfe, and labour'd euery where,
               To order and encourage all: his armor was so cleare,
               And he applide each place so fast; that like a lightning throwne
               Out of the shield of Iupiter, in euery eye he shone.
               And as vpon a rich mans crop, of barley or of wheate,An
                        •…
                     ther c
                        •…
                     parison.
               
               (Opposde for swiftnesse at their worke,) a sort of reapers sweate,
               Beare downe the furrowes speedily, and thicke their handfuls fall:
               So at the ioyning of the hoasts, ran Slaughter through them all;
               
                  None stoopt to any fainting thought, of foule inglorious flight,
               But equall bore they vp their heads, and far'd like wolues in fight:
               Sterne Eris, with such weeping sights, reioyc't to feed her eies;
               Who onely shew'd her selfe in field, of all the Deities.
               The other in Olympus tops, sate silent, and repin'd,
               That Ioue to do the Troians grace, should beare so fixt a mind.
               He car'd not, but (enthron'd apart) triumphant sat in sway
               Of his free power; and from his seate, tooke pleasure to displayIones prospect.
               
               The citie so adorn'd with towres, the sea with vessels fild;
               The splendor of refulgent armes, the killer and the kild.
               As long as bright Aurora rul'd, and sacred day increast,
               So long their darts made mutuall wounds, and neither had the best:
               But when in hill-enuiron'd vales, the timber-feller takesPeriphrasis of Noone.
               
               A sharpe set stomacke to his meate, and dinner ready makes,
               His sinewes fainting, and his spirits, become surcharg'd and dull;
               Time of accustom'd ease arriu'd; his hands with labour full:
               Then by their valours Greeks brake through, the Troian rankes, and chear'd
               Their generall Squadrons through the hoast: then first of all appear'd
               The person of the King himselfe; and then the Troians lost
               
                  Byanor, by his royall charge, a leader in the host:Agamemnons slaughters.
               
               Who being slaine, his chariotere (Oileus) did alight,
               And stood in skirmish with the king; the king did deadly smite
               His forehead with his eager lance, and through his helme it ranne,
               Enforcing passage to his braine, quite through the hardned pan;
               His braine mixt with his clotterd bloud, his body strewd the ground.
            
            
               There left he them; and presently he other obiects found;
               
                  Isus and Antiphus, two sonnes, king Priam did beget,
               One lawfull, th'other wantonly; both in one chariot met
               Their royall foe; the baser borne, Isus was chariotere,
               And famous Antiphus did fight: both which, king Peleus heire,Achilles.
               
               (Whilome in Ida keeping flocks) did deprehend and bind
               With pliant Osiers; and for prize, them to their Sire resign'd.
               
                  Atrides with his well aim'd lance, smote Isus on the brest
               Aboue the nipple; and his sword, a mortall wound imprest
               Beneath the eare of Antiphus: downe from their horse they fell.
               The king had seene the youths before, and now did know them well,
               Remembring them the prisoners, of swift Aeacides,
               
               Who brought them to the sable fleet, from Idas foodie leas.
            
            
               And as a Lion hauing found, the furrow of a Hind,Simile.
               
               Where she hath calu'd two little twins; at will and ease doth grind
               Their ioynts snatcht in his sollide iawes; and crusheth into mist
               Their tender liues; their dam (though neare) not able to resist;
               But shooke with vehement feare her selfe, flies through the Oaken chace
               From that fell sauage, drown'd in sweat; and seekes some couert place:
               So when with most vnmatched strength, the Grecian Generall bent
               Gainst these two Princes, none durst ayd, their natiue kings descent;
               But fled themselues before the Greeks: and where these two were slaine,
               
                  Pysander and Hypolocbus, (not able to restraine
               
                  Their head-strong horse, the silken teines, being from their hands let fall)
               Were brought by their vn
                     •…
                  uly guides, before the Generall.
               
                  Antimachus begat them both; Antimachus that tooke
               Rich guifts, and gold of Hellens loue; and would by no meanes brooke
               Iust restitution should be made, of Menelaus wealth,
               Bereft him, with his rauisht Queene, by Paris. 
                  Alexanders stealth.
               
                  Atrides, Lion-like did charge, his sonnes; who on their knees
               Fell from their chariot, and besought, regard to their degrees;
               Who, being Antimachus his sonnes, their father would affoord
               A worthie ransome for their liues; who in his house did hoord
               Much hidden treasure; brasse, and gold, and steele, wrought wondrous choise.
               Thus wept they, vsing smoothing terms; and heard this rugged voiceAgamem
                        •…
                      to Pysander and Hippolochus.
               
               Breath' from the vnrelenting king: If you be of the breed
               Of stout Antimachus, that staid, the honorable deed
               The other Peeres of Ilion, in counsell had decreed,
               To render Hellen, and her wealth; and would haue basely slaine
               My brother and wise Ithacus, Ambassadors, t'attaine
               The most due motion: now receiue, wreake for his shamefull part.
               This said, in poore Pysanders breast, he fixt his wreakfull dart;
               Who vpward spread th'oppressed earth: his brother croucht for dread,
               And as he lay, the angrie king, cut off his armes and head,
               And let him like a football lie, for euerie man to spurne.
               Then to th'extremest heate of fight, he did his valour turne,
               And led a multitude of Greeks; where foote did foote subdue,
               Horse slaughterd horse, Need featherd flight, the batterd center flew
               In clouds of dust about their eares, raisd from the horses hooues,
               That beat a thunder out of earth, as horrible as Ioues.
               
               The king (perswading speedie chace) gaue his perswasions way
               With his owne valour, slaughtring still: As in a stormie day,
               In thicke-set woods a rauenous fire, wraps in his fierce repaire
               The shaken trees, and by the rootes, doth tosse them into aire:
               Euen so beneath Atrides sword, flew vp Troyes flying heeles:
               Their horse drew emptie chariots, and sought their thundring wheeles
               Some fresh directors through the field, where least the pursuite driues:
               Thicke fell the Troians, much more sweet, to Vultures, then their wiues.
            
            
               Then Ioue drew Hector from the darts, from dust, from death and blood,
               And from the tumult: still the king, firme to the pursuite stood;
               Till at old Ilus monument, in midst of all the field,
               They reacht the wild Figtree, and long'd, to make their towne their shield.
               Yet there they rested not; the king, still cride; Pursue, pursue,
               And all his vnreproued hands, did blood and dust embrue.
               But when they came to Sceas ports, and to the Beech of Ioue,
               
               There made they stand; there euerie eye, fixt on each other, stroue
               Who should outlooke his mate amaz'd: through all the field they fled.
               And as a Lion, when the night, becomes most deafe and dead,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Inuades Oxe heards, affrighting all, that he of one may wreake
               His dreadfull hunger; and his neck
                     •…
                  , he first of all doth breake;
               Then laps his blood and e
                     •…
                  iles vp: so Agamemnon plide
               
                  The manage of the Troian chace, and still the last man di'd;
               The other fled; a number fell, by his imperiall hand:
               Some groueling downwards from their horse: some vpwards strew'd the sand.
               High was the furie of his lance: but hauing beat them close
               Beneath their walls, the both worlds Sire, did now againe repose
               On fountaine-flowing Idas tops, being newly slid from heauen,
               And held a lightning in his hand: from thence this charge was giuen
               To Iris with the golden wings: Thaumantia, flie (said he)Ioue to the Rainbow.
               
               And tell Troys Hector, that as long, as he enrag'd shall see
               The souldier-louing Atreus sonne, amongst the formost fight,
               Depopulating troopes of men: so long he must excite
               Some other to resist the foe, and he no armes aduance:
               But when he wounded takes his horse, attain'd with shaft or lance:
               Then will I fill his arme with death, euen till he reach the Fleet,
               And peacefull night treads busie day, beneath her sacred feet.
            
            
               The wind-foot swift Thaumantia, obeyd, and vsd her wings
               To famous Ilion, from the mount, enchaste with siluer springs:
               And found in his bright chariot, the hardie Troian knight:
               To whom she spake the words of Ioue, and vanisht from his sight.
            
            
               He leapt vpon the sounding earth, and shooke his lengthfull dart,
               And euerie where he breath'd exhorts, and stird vp euerie heart:
               A dreadfull fight he set on foote, his souldiers straight turnd head:
               The Greekes stood firme, in both the hoasts, the field was perfected.
               But Agamemnon formost still, did all his side exceed:
               And would not be the first in name, vnlesse the first in deed.
            
            
               Now sing faire Presidents of verse, that in the heauens embowre,
               Who first encountred with the king, of all the aduerse powre:
               
                  Iphydamas, Antenors sonne, ample and bigly set,
               Brought vp in pasture-springing-Thrace, that doth soft sheepe beget:
               In graue Cissaeus noble house, that was his mothers Sire;
               (Faire Theano) and when his breast, was heightned with the fire
               Of gaisome youth; his grand-Sire gaue, his daughter to his loue:
               Who straight his bridall chamber left; Fame, with affection stroue,
               And made him furnish twelue faire ships, to lend faire Troy his hand.
               His ships he in Percope left, and came to Troy by land:
               And now he tried the fame of Greece, encountring with the king,
               Who threw his royall lance and mist: Iphydamas did fling,
               And strooke him on the arming waste, beneath his coate of brasse,
               Which forc't him stay vpon his arme, so violent it was:
               Yet pierc't it not his wel-wrought zone; but when the lazie head
               Tried hardnesse with his siluer waste, it turnd againe like lead.
               He follow'd, grasping the ground end: but with a Lions wile,
               That wrests away a hunters staffe; he caught it by the pile,
               And pluckt it from the casters hand; whom with his sword he strookeIphydamas slain by Agamemnon
               
               Beneath the eare, and with his wound, his timelesse death he tooke:
               He fell and slept an iron sleepe; wretched young man, he dide
               Farre from his newly-married wife, in aide of forreine pride;
               And saw no pleasure of his loue; yet was her ioynture great:
               
                  An hundred Oxen gaue he her, and vow'd in his retreate
               Two thousand head of sheepe and Goates, of which he store did leaue:
               Much gaue he of his loues first fruits, and nothing did receiue.
            
            
               When Coon (one that for his forme, might feast an amorous eye,
               And elder brother of the slaine) beheld this tragedie:
               Deepe sorrow sate vpon his eyes; and (standing laterally,
               And to the Generall vndiscernd) his Iauelin he let flie:
               That twixt his elbow and his wrist, transfixt his armelesse arme:
               The bright head shin'd on th'other side. The vnexpected harme
               Imprest some horror in the king: yet so he ceast not fight,
               But rushton Coon with his lance, who made what haste he might
               (Seising his slaughterd brothers foote) to draw him from the field,
               And cald the ablest to his aide; when vnder his round shield
               The kings brasse Iauelin, as he drew, did strike him helplesse dead:
               Who made Iphydamas the blocke, and cut off Coons head.
            
            
               Thus vnder great Atrides arme, Antenors issue thriu'd,
               And to suffise precisest fate▪ to Plutos mansion diu'd.
               He with his lance, sword, mightie stones, pour'd his Heroicke wreake
               On other Squadrons of the foe, whiles yet warme blood did breake
               Through his cleft veines: but when the wound, was quite exhaust and crude;
               The eager anguish did approue, his Princely fortitude.
               As when most sharpe and bitter pangs, distract a labouring Dame;
               Which the diuine Ilithiae, that rule the painefull frame
               Of humane chid-birth poure on her: th'Ilithiae that are
               The daughters of Saturnia: with whose extreme repaire
               The woman in her trauell striues, to take the worst it giues:
               With thought it must be, tis loues fruite, the end for which she liues;
               The meane to make her selfe new borne: what comforts will redound:
               So Agamemnon did sustaine, the torment of his wound.
               Then tooke he chariot, and to Fleet, bad haste his chariotere;
               But first pour'd out his highest voice, to purchase euerie eare:
            
            
               Princes and Leaders of the Greekes, braue friends, now from our fleetAgamemnon to the Greeke Princes.
               
               Do you expell this bostrous sway: Ioue will not let me meet
               Illustrate Hector, nor giue leaue, that I shall end the day
               In fight against the Ilian power: my wound is in my way.
            
            
               This said, his readie chariotere, did scourge his spritefull horse,
               That freely to the sable fleet, performd their fierie course:
               To beare their wounded Soueraigne, apart the Martiall thrust,
               Sprinkling their powerfull breasts with foame, and snowing on the dust.
            
            
               When Hector heard of his retreate, thus he for fame contends:Hector to the Tr
                        •…
                     ians.
               
               
                  Troians, Dardanians, Lycians, all my close-fighting friends,
               Thinke what it is to be renownd: be souldiers all of name:
               Our strongest enemie is gone; lo
                        •…
                     e vowes to do vs fame:
               Then in the Grecian faces driue, your one-hou'd violent steeds,
               And fare aboue their best, be best, and glorifie your deeds.
            
            
               Thus as a dog-giuen Hunter sets, vpon a brace of Bores,
               His white-toothd hounds: pufs, showts, breaths terms, & on his emprese pores,
               All his wild art to make them pinch: so Hector vrg'd his host
               
                  To charge the Greeks, and he himselfe, most bold, and actiue most:
               He brake into the heate of fight: as when a tempest raues,
               Stoops from the clouds, and all on heapes, doth cuffe the purple waues.
            
            
               Who then was first, and last, he kild, when Ioue did grace his deed?
               
                  Asseus, and Autonous; Opys, and Clytus seed:Whom Hector s
                        •…
                     ue.
               
               Prince Dolops, and the honord Sire, of sweet Euryalus:
               
               (Opheltes) Agelaus next; and strong Hipponous:
               
               
                  Orus, Essymnus, all of name. The common souldiers fell,
               As when the hollow flood of aire, in Zephires cheeks doth swell,Simile.
               
               And sparseth all the gatherd clouds, white Notus power did draw;
               VVraps waues in waues, hurls vp the froath, beat with a vehement flaw:
               So were the common souldiers wrackt, in troops, by Hectors hand.
               Then ruine had enforc't such works, as no Greeks could withstand:
               Then in their fleete they had bene housd, had not Laertes sonne
               Stird vp the spirit of Diomed, with this impression.
            
            
               
                  Tydides, what do we sustaine, forgetting what we are?Vlysses to Diomed.
               
               Stand by me (dearest in my 
                     •…
                  oue:) twere horrible impaire
               For our two valours to endure, a customarie flight,
               To leaue our nauie still ingag'd, and but by fits to fight.
            
            
               He answerd; I am bent to stay, and any thing sustaine:
               But our delight to proue vs men, will proue but short and vaine;Diomeds answer to Vlysses.
               
               For Ioue makes Troians instruments; and virtually then,
               Wields arms himselfe: our crosse affaires, are not twixt men and men.
            
            
               This said, Thimbraeus with his 
                     •…
                  ance, he tumbled from his horse;
               Neare his left nipple wounding him: Vlysses did enforce
               Faire Molion, minion to this king, that Diomed subdude:
               Both sent they thence, till they returnd: who now the king pursude
               And furrowed through the thickned troopes. As when two chaced Bores
               Turne head gainst kennels of bold hounds, and race way through their gor
                     •…
                  :
               So (turnd from flight) the forward kings, shew'd Troians backward death:
               Nor fled the Greeks but by their wils, to get great Hector breath.
            
            
               Then tooke they horse and chariot, from two bold citie foes,Vlysses and Diomeds s
                        •…
                     aughters.
               
               
                  Merops Percosius mightie sonnes: their father could disclose,
               Beyond all men, hid Auguries; and would not giue consent
               To their egression to these wars: yet wilfully they went;
               For Fates, that order sable death, enforc't their tragedies:
               
                  Tydides slue them with his lance, and made their armes his prise.
            
            
               
                  Hypporochus, and Hyppodus, Vlysses reft of light:
               But Ioue, that out of Ida lookt, then equallisde the fight;
               A Grecian for a Troian then, paide tribute to the Fates:
               Yet royall Diomed slue one, euen in those euen debates,
               That was of name more then the rest; Paeons renowned sonne,
               The Prince Agastrophus: his lance, into his hip did run:
               His Squire detaind his horse apart, that hindred him to flie;
               Which he repented at his heart: yet did his feet applie
               His scape with all the speed they had, alongst the formost bands;
               And there his loued life dissolu'd. This, Hector vnderstands,
               And rusht with clamor on the king; right soundly seconded
               
                  With troupes of Troia
                        •…
                     s: which perceiu'd, by famous Dio
                        •…
                     d;
               
               The deepe conceit of Io
                        •…
                     es high will, stifned his royall haire;
               Who spake to neare-fought Ithachus; The fate of this affaireDi
                        •…
                     d to Vlysses.
               
               Is bent to vs: come let vs stand, and bound his violence.
               Thus threw he his long Iauelin forth; which smote his heads defence
               Full on the top, yet pierc't no skin; brasse, tooke repulse with brasse;
               His helme (with three folds made, and sharpe,) the gift of Phoebus was.
               The blow made Hector take the troupe; sunke him vpon his hand,
               And strooke him blind: the king pursude, before the formost band,
               His darts recouerie: which he found, laid on the purple plaine▪
               
               By which time, Hector was reuiu'd, and taking horse againe,
               Was farre commixt within his strength, and fled his darksome graue.
               He followd with his thirstie lance, and this elusiue Braue:
            
            
               Once more be thankfull to thy heeles, (proud dog) for thy escape:Diom
                        •…
                     d insults on Hector.
               
               Mischiefe sate neare thy bosome now; and now another rape
               Hath thy Apollo made of thee, to whom thou well maist pray,
               When through the singing of our darts, thou findst such guarded way:
               But I shall meet with thee at length, and bring thy latest houre,
               If with like fauour any God, be fautor of my powre:
               Meane while, some other shall repay, what I suspend in thee.
            
            
               This said, he set the wretched soule, of P
                        •…
                     ns issue free;
               Whom his late wound, not fully slue: but Pri
                        •…
                     ms amorous birth,Paris at Diomed.
               
               Against Tydides bent his bow, hid with a hill of earth;
               Part of the ruinated tombe, for honor'd Ilus built:
               And as the Curace of the slaine (engrauen and richly gilt)
               
                  Tydides from his breast had spoild, and from his shoulders raft,
               His target and his solide helme, he shot; and his keene shaft
               (That neuer flew from him in vaine) did naile vnto the ground
               The kings right foot: the spleenfull knight, laught sweetly at the wound,
               Crept from his couert, and triumpht: Now art thou maimd, said he,Paris insults on Diomed.
               
               And would to God my happie hand, had so much honor'd me,
               To haue infixt it in thy breast, as deepe as in thy foote,
               Euen to th'expulsure of thy soule: then blest had bene my shoote
               Of all the Troians: who had then, breath'd from their long vnrests,
               Who feare thee as the braying Goates, abhorre the king of beasts.
            
            
               Vndanted Diomed replide: You Brauer, with your bow,Diomeds reply.
               
               You slick-hair'd louer: you that hunt, and fleere at wenches so:
               Durst thou but stand in armes with me, thy silly archerie
               Would giue thee little cause to vaunt: as little suffer I
               In this same tall exploit of thine, perform'd when thou wert hid:
               As if a woman or a child, that knew not what it did,
               Had toucht my foote: a cowards steele, hath neuer any edge:
               But mine (t'assure it sharpe) still layes, dead carkasses in pledge;
               Touch it: it renders liuelesse straight: it strikes the fingers ends
               Of haplesse widowes in their cheeks; and children blind of friends:
               The subiect of it makes earth red; and aire with sighes inflames:
               And leaues lims more embrac't with birds, then with enamour'd Dames.
            
            
               Lance-fam'd Vlysses now came in, and stept before the king;
               
                  Kneeld opposite, and drew the shaft: the eager paine did sting
               Through all his bodie; straight he tooke, his royall chariot there,
               And with direction to the fleete, did charge his chariotere.
            
            
               Now was Vlysses desolate, feare made no friend remaine:
               He thus spake to his mightie mind: What doth my s
                     •…
                  ate sustaine?Vlysses to himselfe.
               
               If I should flie this ods in feare, that thus comes clu
                     •…
                  ing on,
               Twere high dishonour: yet twere worse, to be surprisd alone:
               Tis Ioue that driues the rest to flight: but thats a faint excuse;
               Why do I tempt my mind so much? pale cowards fight refuse.
               He that affects renowne in warre, must like a rocke be fixt;
               Wound, or be wounded: valours truth, puts no respect betwixt.
            
            
               In this contention with himselfe, in flew the shadie bands
               Of targateres, who sieg'd him round, with mischiefe-filled hands.
               As when a crew of gallants watch, the wild muse of a Bore;
               Their dogs put after in full crie, he rusheth on before:
               Whets, with his lather-making iawes, his crooked tuskes for blood:
               And (holding firme his vsuall haunts) breakes through the deepned woo
                     •…
                  :
               They charging, though his hote approch, be neuer so abhord:
               So, to assaile the Ioue-lou'd Greeke, the Il
                        •…
                     ans did accord,
               And he made through them: first he hurt, vpon his shoulder blade,
               
                  Deiops a blamelesse man at armes: then sent to endlesse shade
               
                  Thoon and Eunomus: and strooke, the strong Chersidamas,
                  Socus wounds Vlysses.
               
               As from his chariot he leapt downe, beneath his targe of brasse:
               Who fell, and crawld vpon the earth, with his sustaining palmes,
               And left the fight: nor yet his lance, left dealing Martiall almes:
               But Socus brother by both sid
                     •…
                  s, yong Carops did impresse:
               Then Princely Socus to his aide, made brotherly accesse,
               And (coming neare) spake in his charge; O great Laertes sonne,
               Insatiate in slie stratagems, and labours neuer done:
               This houre, or thou shalt boast to kill, the two Hypasides,
               
               And prize their armes, or fall thy selfe, in my resolu'd accesse.
            
            
               This said, he threw qui
                     •…
                  e through his shield, his fell and well-driuen lanc
                     •…
                  :
               Which held way through his curaces, and on his ribs did glance:
               Plowing the flesh alongst his sides: but Pallas did repell
               All inward passage to his life. Vlysses knowing well
               The wound vndeadly; (setting backe, his foote to forme his stand)
               Thus spake to Socus: O thou wretch, thy death is in this hand:
               That stay'st my victorie on Troy: and where thy charge was made
               In doubtfull terms (or this or that) this shall thy life inuade.
            
            
               This frighted Socus to retreate; and in his faint reuerse,
               The lance betwixt his shoulders fell, and through his breast did perse:
               Downe fell he sounding, and the king, thus playd with his misease:
            
            
               O Socus, you that make by birth, the two Hypasides:
                  Vlysses insulta
                     
                        •…
                     ion.
               
               Now may your house and you p
                     •…
                  rceiue, death can outflie the flier:
               Ah wretch, thou canst not scape my vowes: old Hypasus thy sire,
               Nor thy well honord 
                     •…
                  others hands; in both which lies thy worth,
               Shall close thy wretched eyes in death; but Vultures dig them forth,
               And hide them with their darksome wings: but when Vlysses dies,
               
                  Diuinest Greeks shall tombe my corse, with all their ob
                     •…
                  equies.
            
            
               Now from his bodie and his shield, the violent lance he drew,
               That P
                     •…
                  incely Socus had infixt: which drawne, a crimson dew
               Fell from his bosome on the earth: the wound 
                     •…
                  id dare him sore.
               And when the furious Troians saw, Vlysses forced gore:
               (Encouraging themselues in grosse) all his destruction vowd;
               Then he retir'd, and summond aide: thrise showted he allowd,
               (As did denote a man ingag'd:) thrise Menelaus eare
               Ob
                     •…
                  eru'd his aid-suggesting voice: and Aiax being neare,
               He told him of Vlysses show
                     •…
                  s, as if he were enclosd
               From all assistance: and aduisd, their aids might be disposd
               Against the Ring that circled him: lest, charg'd with troopes alone
               (Though valiant) he might be opprest, whom Greece so built vpon.
            
            
               He led, and Aiax seconded: they found their Io
                        •…
                     e-lou'd king
               Circled with foes. As when a den, of bloodie Lucerns cling
               About a goodly palmed Hart, hurt with a hunters bow,
               Whose scape, his nimble feet inforce, whilst his warme blood doth flow,
               And his light knees haue power to moue: but (maistred of his wound,
               Embost within a shadie hill) the Lucerns charge him round,
               And teare his flesh; when instantly, fortune sends in the powres
               Of some sterne Lion, with whose sight, they flie, and he deuours:
               So charg'd the Ilians Ithacus, many and mightie men:
               But then made Menelaus in, and horrid Aiax then,Aiax and Menelaus to the rescue of Vlysses.
               
               Bearing a target like a tower: close was his violent stand,
               And euerie way the foe disperst; when, by the royall hand,
               Kind Menelaus led away, the hurt Laertes sonne,
               Till his faire squire had brought his horse: victorious Telamon
               
               Still plied the foe, and put to sword, a young Priamides;
               
               
                  Doriclus, Priams bastard sonne: then did his lance impresse
               
                  Pando
                        •…
                     us, and strong Pyrasus; Lysander and Palertes,
               
               As when a torrent from the hils, swolne with Saturnian showres,
               Fals on the fields; beares blasted Oakes, and witherd rosine flowres,
               Loose weeds, and all dispersed filth, into the Oceans force:
               So, matchlesse Aiax beat the field, and slaughterd men and horse.
               Yet had not Hector heard of this, who fought on the left wing
               Of all the host, neare those sweet herbs, Scamanders flood doth spring:
               Where many foreheads trode the ground, and where the skirmish burnd
               Neare Nestor, and king Idomen; where Hector ouerturnd
               The Grecian squadrons; authoring, high seruice with his lance,
               And skilfull manadge of his horse: nor yet the discrepance
               He made in death betwixt the hosts, had made the Greeks retire,
               If faire-haird Hellens second spouse, had not represt the fire
               Of bold Machaons fortitude, who with a three-forkt head
               In his right shoulder wounded him: then had the Grecians dread,
               Lest in his strength declin'd, the foe, should slaughter their hurt f
                     •…
                  iend:
               Then Cretes king vrg'd Neleides, his chariot to ascend,
               And getting neare him, take him in, and beare him to their tents;
               A Surgeon is to be preferd, with physicke ornaments,
               
                  Before a multitude: his life, giues hurt liues natiue bounds,
               With sweet inspersion of fit balmes, and perfect search of wounds.
            
            
               Thus spake the royall Idomen: Neleides obeyd,
               And to his chariot presently, the wounded Greeke conuaid
               The sonne of Esculapius, the great Phisition:
               To fleet they flew. Cebriones, perceiu'd the slaughter done
               By Aiax on the other troopes, and spake to Hector thus:
            
            
               Whiles we encounter Grecians here, sterne Telamonius
               
               Is yonder raging, turning vp, in heapes our horse and men:
               I know him by his spacious shield: let vs turne chariot then
               Where both of horse and foote the fight, most hotely is proposde,
               In mutuall slaughters: harke, their throats, from cries are neuer closd.
            
            
               This said, with his shrill scourge he strooke, the horse that fast ensude,
               Stung with his lashes, tossing shields, and carkasses imbrude:
               The chariot tree was drownd in blood, and th'arches by the seate,
               Disperpled from the horses houes, and from the wheelebands beate.
               Great Hector long'd to breake the rankes, and startle their close fight:
               Who horribly amaz'd the Greeks, and plyed their suddaine fright
               With busie weapons, euer wingd: his lance, sword, weightie stones:
               Yet charg'd he other Leaders bands, not dreadfull Telamons,
               
               With whom he wisely shund foule blowes: but Ioue (that weighs aboue
               All humane pow'rs) to Aiax breast, diuine repressions droue,
               And made him shun, who shund himselfe: he ceast from fight amaz'd:
               Cast on his backe his seauen-fold shield, and round about him gaz'd,
               Like one turnd wilde; lookt on himselfe, in his distract retreate:
               Knee before knee did scarcely moue: as when from heards of Neate
               Whole threaues of Bores and mungrils chace, a Lion skulking neare,
               Loth he should taint the wel-prisd fat, of any stall-fed steere,
               Consuming all the night in watch; he (greedie of his prey)
               Oft thrusting on, is oft thrust off: fo thicke the Iauelins play
               On his bold charges, and so hote, the burning fire brands shine,
               Which he (though horrible) abhors, about his glowing eyne;
               And early his great heart retires: so Aiax from the foe,
               For feare their fleet should be inflam'd: gainst his swolne heart did go.
            
            
               As when a dull mill Asse comes neare, a goodly field of corneAnother simile expressing the maner of Aiax retreate.
               
               Kept from the birds by childrens cries; the boyes are ouerborne
               By his insensible approach, and simply he will eate:
               About whom many wands are broke, and still the children beate;
               And still the selfe-prouiding Asse, doth with their weaknesse beare,
               Not stirring till his panch be full; and scarcely then will stere.
            
            
               So the huge sonne of Telamon, amongst the Troians far'd;
               Bore showers of darts vpon his shield, yet scornd to flie, as skar'd;
               And so kept softlie on his way; nor would he mend his pace
               For all their violent pursuits, that still did arme the chace
               With singing lances: but at last, when their Cur-like presumes,
               More vrg'd, the more forborne; his spirits, did rarifie their fumes,
               And he reuokt his actiue strength; turnd head, and did repell
               The horse troopes that were new made in: twixt whom the fight grew fell;
               
                  And by degrees he stole retreate, yet with such puissant stay
               That none could passe him to the fleet: in both the armies sway
               He stood, and from strong hands receiu'd, sharpe Iauelins on his shield;
               Where many stucke, throwne on before; many fell short in field,
               Ere the white bodie they could reach; and stucke, as telling how
               They purposd to haue pierc't his flesh: his perill pierced now
               The eyes of Prince Eurypilus, Euemons famous sonne;
               Who came close on, and with his dart, strooke Duke Apisaon,
               
               Whose surname was Phausiades; euen to the concrete blood
               That makes the liuer: on the earth, out gusht his vitall blood.
               
                  Eurypilus made in, and easd, his shoulders of his armes:
               Which Paris seeing, he drew his bow, and wreakt in part the harmes
               Of his good friend Phausiades: his arrow he let flie,
               That smote Eurypilus, and brake, in his attainted thie:
               Then tooke he troope, to shun blacke death, and to the flyers cride;Eurypilus to the Greekes.
               
            
            
               Princes, and Leaders of the Greeks, stand, and repulse the tide
               Of this our honour-wracking chace; Aiax is drownd in darts,
               I feare past scape: turne honord friends, helpe out his ventrous parts.
               Thus spake the wounded Greeke; the sound, cast on their backs their shields,
               And raisd their darts: to whose reliefe, Aiax his person wields:
               Then stood he firmely with his friends, retiring their retire:
               And thus both hosts indifferent ioynd, the fight grew hote a
                     •…
                   fire.
            
            
               Now had Neleides sweating steeds, brought him and his hurt friend
               Amongst their Fleet; Aeacides, that wishly did intend
               (Standing asterne his tall neckt ship) how deepe the skirmish drew
               Amongst the Greeks; and with what ruth, the insecution grew:
               Saw Nestor bring Machaon hurt, and from within did call
               His friend Patroclus: who like Mars, in forme celestiallAchilles to trocl
                        •…
                     .
               
               Came forth with first sound of his voice (first spring of his decay)
               And askt his Princely friends desire: Deare friend, said he, this day
               I doubt not will enforce the Greeks, to swarme about my knees:
               I see vnsufferd Need imployd, in their extremities.
               Go sweet Patroclus and enquire, of old Neleides,
               
               Whom he brought wounded from the fight: by his backe parts, I guesse
               It is Machaon: but his face, I could not well descrie,
               They past me in such earnest speed. Patroclus presently
               Obeyd his friend, and ran to know. They now descended were,
               And Nestors squire, Eurimidon, the horses did vngeare:
               Themselues stood neare th'extremest shore, to let the gentle aire
               Drie vp their sweat; then to the tent; where Hecamed the faire
               Set chaires, and for the wounded Prince, a potion did prepare.
            
            
               This Hecamed, by wars hard fate, fell to old Nestors share,
               When Thetis sonne sackt Tenedos. She was the Princely seed
               Of worthie king Arsynous, and by the Greeks decreed
               The prize of Nestor: since all men, in counsell he surpast.
               First, a faire table she apposd, of which, the feet were grac't
               With blewish mettall, mixt with blacke: and on the same she put
               A brasse fruit dish, in which she seru'd, a holsome Onion cur,
               
                  For pittance to the potion, and honey newly wrought;
               And bread, the fruite of sacred meale: then to the boord she brought
               A right faire cup, with gold studs driuen; which Nestor did transfer
               From Pylos; on whose swelling sides, foure handles fixed were;
               And vpon euerie handle sate, a paire of doues of gold;
               Some billing, and some pecking meate. Two gilt feet did vphold
               The antique body: and withall, so weightie was the cup,
               That being proposd brim full of wine, one scarse could lift it vp:
               Yet Nestor drunke in it with ease, spite of his yeares respect.
               In this the Goddesse-like faire Dame, a potion did confect
               With good old wine of Pramnius; and scrap't into the wine
               Cheese made of Goates milke; and on it, sperst flow'r exceeding fine:
               In this sort for the wounded Lord, the potion she prepar'd,
               And bad him drinke: for companie, with him old Nestor shar'd.
            
            
               Thus physically quencht they thirst, and then their spirits reuiu'd
               With pleasant conference. And now, Patroclus being arriu'd,
               Made stay at th'entrie of the tent: old Nestor seeing it,
               Rose, and receiu'd him by the hand, and faine would haue him sit.
               He set that courtesie aside; excusing it with hast;
               Since his much to be reuerenc't friend, sent him to know who past
               (Wounded with him in chariot) so swiftly through the shore;
               Whom now, said he, I see and know, and now can stay no more:
               You know good father, our great friend, is apt to take offence:
               Whose fierie temper will inflame, sometimes with innocence.
            
            
               He answerd, When will Peleus sonne, some royall pittie showNestor to Patroci
                        •…
                     .
               
               On his thus wounded countrimen? Ah, is he yet to know
               How much affliction tires our host? how our especiall aide
               (Tainted with lances, at their tents) are miserably laide?
               
                  Vlysses, Diomed, our King, Euripylus, Machaon:
               
               All hurt, and all our worthiest friends; yet no compassion
               Can supple thy friends friendlesse breast. Doth he reserue his eye
               Till our fleet burne, and we our selues, one after other die?
               Alas, my forces are not now, as in my yonger life.
               Oh would to God I had that strength, I vsed in the strife
               Betwixt vs and the Elians, for Oxen to be driuen;
               When Itumonius lo
                     •…
                  tie soule, was by my valour giuen
               As sacrifice to destinie; Hypporocus strong sonne,
               That dwelt in Elis, and fought first, in our contention.
               We forrag'd (as proclaimed foes) a wondrous wealthie boote;
               And he, in rescue of his Herds, fell breathlesse at my foote.
               All the Dorpe Bores with terror fled; our prey was rich and great,
               Twise fiue and twentie flocks of sheepe; as many herds of neate;
               As many goates, and nastie swine; a hundred fiftie mares
               All sorrell, most with sucking foales; and these soone-monied wares,
               We draue into Neileus towne, faire Pylos; all by night.
               My fathers heart was glad to see, so much good fortune quite
               The forward mind of his young sonne, that vsde my youth in deeds▪
               
               And would not smother it in moods. Now drew the Suns bright steeds
               
                  Light from the hils; our heralds now, accited all that were
               Endamag'd by the Elians; our Princes did appeare;
               Our boote was parted; many men, th' Epeians much did owe,
               That (being our neighbors) they did spoile; afflictions did so flow
               On vs poore Pyleans though but few. In brake great Hereules
               
               To our sad confines of late yeares, and wholly did suppresse
               Our haplesse Princes: twice sixe sonnes, renownd Neleius bred;
               Onely my selfe am left of all: the rest subdude and dead.
               And this was it that made so proud, the base Epeian bands:
               On their neare neighbors, being opprest, to lay iniurious hands,
               A heard of Oxen for himselfe: a mightie flocke of sheepe,
               My Syre selected; and made choice, of shepheards for their keep:
               And from the generall spoyle, he culd, three hundred of the best:
               The Elians ought him infinite, most plagu'd of all the rest.
               Foure wager-winning horse he lost, and chariots interuented
               Being led to an appointed race. The prize that was presented
               Was a religious threefoote vrne: Augeas was the king,
               That did detaine them, and dismist, their keeper sorrowing
               For his lou'd charge, lost with foule words. Then both for words and deeds
               My Sire being worthily incenst, thus iustly he proceeds
               To satisfaction, in first choice, of all our wealthie prize:
               And as he shar'd much, much he left, his subiects to suffise;
               That none might be opprest with power, or want his portion due:
               Thus for the publike good we shar'd. Then we to temples drue
               Our complete citie: and to heauen, we thankfull rights did burne
               For our rich conquest. The third day, ensuing our returne
               The Elians flew on vs in heapes: their generall Leaders were
               The two Moliones, two boyes, vntrained in the feare
               Of horrid warre, or vse of strength. A certaine citie shines
               Vpon a loftie Prominent; and in th'extreme confines
               Of sandie Pylos, seated where, Alpheus flood doth run,
               And cald Thryessa: this they sieg'd, and gladly would haue wun:
               But (hauing past through all our fields) Minerua as our spie,
               Fell from Olympus in the night, and arm'd vs instantly:
               Nor mustred she vnwilling men, nor vnprepar'd for force.
               My Sire yet, would not let me arme, but hid away my horse,
               Esteeming me no souldier yet: yet shin'd I nothing lesse
               Amongst our Gallants, though on foote; Minerua
                        •…
                     
                   mightinesse
               Led me to fight, and made me beare, a souldiers worthie name.
            
            
               There is a floud fals into sea, and his crookt course doth frame
               Close to Arena, and is cald, bright Myniaeus streame:
               There made we halt: and there the Sun, cast many a glorious beame
               On our bright armours; horse and foote, insea'd together there:
               Then marcht we on: By fierie noone, we saw the sacred cleare
               Of great Alphaeus; where to Ioue, we did faire sacrifice:
               And to the azure God that rules, the vnder-liquid skies:
               We offerd vp a solemne Bull; a bull t' Alph
                        •…
                     us name,
               And to the blew eyd maid we burnd, a heifer neuer tame.
               
                  Now was it night, we supt, and slept, about the flood in armes;
               The foe laide hard siege to our towne, and shooke it with ala
                     •…
                  mes:
               But for preuention of their splenes, a mightie worke of warre
               Appeard behind them. For as soone, as Phoebus fierie Carre
               Cast nights foule darknes from his wheeles (inuoking reuerend Ioue,
               
               And the vnconquerd maide (his birth) we did th'euent approue,
               And gaue them battell: first of all, I slue (the armie saw)
               The mightie souldier Mulius, Augeus sonne in law;
               And spoyld him of his one-hou'd horse: his eldest daughter was
               Bright Agamede, that for skill, in simples did surpasse:
               And knew as many kind of drugs, as earths brode center bred:
               Him charg'd I with my brasse arm'd lance, the dust receiu'd him dead.
               I (leaping to his chariot) amongst the formost prest:
               And the great hearted Elyans, fled frighted, seeing their best
               And lofti'st souldier taken downe, the Generall of their horse.
               I follow'd like a blacke whi
                     •…
                  lwind, and did for prize enforce
               Full fiftie chariots, euerie one, furnisht with two arm'd men;
               Who eate the earth, slaine with my lance; and I had slaughterd then
               The two young boyes, Moliones, if their world circling Sire,
               (Great Neptune) had not saft their liues; and couered their retire
               With vnpierc't clouds: then Ioue bestow'd a haughtie victorie
               Vpon vs Pyleans. For so long, we did the chase apply,
               Slaughtring and making spoile of armes; till sweet Buprasius soile,
               
                  Alesius, and Olenia, were fam'd with our recoile.
               For there Minerua turnd our power: and there the last I slew;
               As when our battell ioyn'd, the first: the Peleans then withdrew
               To Pylos from Buprasius. Of all the Immortals then,
               They most thankt Ioue for victorie; Nestor, the most of men.
               Such was I euer, if I were, employd with other Peeres,
               And I had honour of my youth, which dies not in my yeares.
               But Great Achilles onely ioyes, habilitie of act
               In his braue Prime, and doth not daine, t'impart it where tis lackt.
               No doubt he will extremely mourne, long after that blacke howre,
               Wherein our ruine shall be wrought, and rue his ruthlesse powre.
               O friend, my memorie reuiues, the charge Menetius gaue
               Thy towardnesse; when thou setst forth, to keepe out of the graue
               Our wounded honour; I my selfe, and wise Vlysses were
               Within the roome, where euerie word, then spoken we did heare:
               For we were come to Peleus Court, as we did mustering passe
               Through rich Achaia; where thy Sire, renownd Menetius was,
               Thy selfe and great Aeacides; when Peleus the King
               To thunder-louing Ioue did burne, an Oxe for offering,
               In his Court-yard: a cup of gold, crownd with red wine he held
               On th'holy Incensorie pour'd. You, when the Oxe was feld,
               Were dressing his diuided lims; we in the Portall stood.
               
                  Achilles seeing vs come so neare; his honorable blood,
               Was strooke with a respectiue shame, rose, tooke vs by the hands,
               Brought vs both in, and made vs sit, and vsde his kind commands,
               
                  For seemely hospitable rights; which quickly were apposd.
               Then (after needfulnesse of foode) I first of all disclosd
               The royall cause of our repaire; mou'd you and your great friend,
               To consort our renown'd designes: both straight did condescend;
               Your fathers knew it, gaue consent, and graue instruction
               To both your valours. Peleus charg'd, his most vnequald sonne,
               To gouerne his victorious strength, and shine past all the rest
               In honour, as in meere maine force. Then were thy partings blest
               With deare aduices from thy Sire. My loued sonne, said he,
               
                  Achilles by his grace of birth, superiour is to thee,
               And for his force more excellent; yet thou more ripe in yeares:
               Then with sound counsels (ages fruits) imploy his honord yeares,
               Command and ouerrule his moodes; his nature will obay
               In any charge discreetly giuen, that doth his good assay.
            
            
               Thus charg'd thy Sire, which thou forgetst; yet now at last approue
               (With forced reference of these) th'attraction of his loue.
               Who knowes if sacred influence, may blesse thy good intent,
               And enter with thy gracious words, euen to his full consent?
               The admonition of a friend, is sweet and vehement.
               If any Oracle he shun, or if his mother Queene
               Hath brought him some instinct from Ioue, that fortifies his spleerie;
               Let him resigne command to thee, of all his Myrmidons,
               
               And yeeld by that meanes some repulse, to our confusions;
               Adorning thee in his bright armes, that his resembled forme
               May haply make thee thought himselfe, and calme his hostile storme:
               That so a little we may ease, our ouercharged hands;
               Draw some breath, not expire it all: the foe but faintly stands
               Beneath his labours; and your charge, being fierce, and freshly giuen,
               They easly from our tents and fleet, may to their walls be driuen.
            
            
               This mou'd the good Patroclus mind, who made his vtmost haste,
               T'informe his friend; and at the fleet, of Ithacus he past,
               (At which there markets were disposd, counsels and martiall courts,
               And where to th'Altars of the Gods, they made diuineresorts)
               He met renownd Eurypilus, Euemons noble sonne
               Halting; his thigh hurt with a shaft: the liquid sweate did run
               Downe from his shoulders, and his browes: and from his raging wound
               Forth flow'd his melancholy blood, yet still his mind was sound.
               His sight, in kinde Patroclus breast, to sacred pittie turnd,
               And (nothing more immartiall, for true ruth) thus he mournd;
               Ah wretched progenie of Greece, Princes, deiected kings:
               Was it your fates to nourish beasts, and serue the outcast wings
               Of sauage Vultures here in Troy? Tell me, Euemons fame,
               Do yet the Greeks withstand his force, whom yet no force can tame?
               Or are they hopelesse throwne to death, by his resistlesse lance?
               Diuine Patroclus (he replide) no more can Greece aduance
               Defensiue weapons; but to fleet, they headlong must retire:
               For those that to this howre haue held, our fleet from hostile fire,
               And are the bulwarks of our host, lie wounded at their tents;
               
                  And Troys vnuanquishable pow
                     •…
                  e, still as it toiles augments.
               But take me to thy blacke sternd ship, saue me, and from my thie
               Cut out this arrow; and the blood, that is ingor'd and drie,
               Wash with warme water from the wound: then gentle salues apply,
               Which thou knowest best; thy Princely friend, hath taught thee surgerie;
               Whom (of all Centaures the most iust) Chyron did institute:
               Thus to thy honorable hands, my ease I prosecute,
               Since our Physitians cannot helpe: Machaon at his tent
               Needs a Physitian himselfe, being Leach and patient:
               And Podalirius in the field, the sharpe conflict sustaines.
               Strong Menetiades replide; How shall I ease thy paines?
               What shall we do Eurypilus? I am to vse all haste,
               To signifie to Thetis sonne, occurrents that haue past
               At Nestors honorable suite: but be that worke atchieu'd,
               When this is done, I will not leaue, thy torments vnrelieu'd.
            
            
               This said, athwart his backe he cast, beneath his breast, his arme,
               And nobly helpt him to his tent: his seruants seeing his harme,
               Dispread Ox-hides vpon the earth, whereon Machaon lay:
               
                  Patroclus cut out the sharpe shaft, and clearely washt away
               With luke-warme water the blacke blood: then twixt his hands he brusde
               A sharpe and mitigatorie roote: which when he had infusde
               Into the greene well-cleansed wound, the paines he felt before
               Were well, and instantly allaid, the wound did bleed no more.
            
            The end of the eleuenth Boooke.
         
         
            
            THE TWELFTH BOOK OF HOMERS ILIA
                  •…
               S.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  
                     THe Troians at the trench, their powres engage,
                  Though greeted by a bird, of bad presage.
                  In fiue parts they diuide, their powre, to skale,
                  And Prince Sarpedon forceth downe the pale;
                  Great Hector from the Ports, teares out a stone,
                  And with so dead a strength, he sets it gone
                  At those brode gates the Grecians made to g
                        •…
                     ard
                  Their tents and ships: that, broken, and vnbard,
                  They yeeld way to his powre; when all contend
                  To reach the ships: which all at last ascend.
               
            
            
               Another Argument.
               
                  My, workes the Troians all the grace,
                  And doth the Grecian Fort deface.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     PAtroclus, thus emploid in cure, of hurt Eurypilus;
               
               Both hosts are all for other wounds, doubly contentious;
               One, all wayes labouring to expell; the other to inuade:
               Nor could the brode dike of the Grecks, nor that strong wall they made
               To guard their fleete, be long vnrac't; because it was not raisd,
               By graue direction of the Gods; nor were their Deities praisd
               (When they begun) with Hecatombes, that then they might be sure
               (Their strength being season'd wel with heauēs) it should haue force t'endure;
               And so, the safeguard of their fleete, and all their treasure there
               Infallibly had bene confirm'd; when now, their bulwarks were
               Not onely without powre of checke, to their assaulting foe
               (Euen now, as soone as they were built) but apt to ouerthrow:
               Such, as in verie little time, shall burie all their sight
               And thought, that euer they were made: as long as the despight
               Of great Aeacides held vp, and Hector went not downe:
               And that by those two meanes stood safe, king Priams sacred towne:
               So long their rampire had some vse, (though now it gaue some way:)
               But when Troyes best men sufferd Fate, and many Greeks did pay
               Deare for their sufferance; then the rest, home to their countrie turnd,
               The tenth yeare of their warres at Troy, and Troy was sackt and burnd.
               And then the Gods fell to their Fort: then they their powres imploy
               To ruine their worke, and left lesse, of that then they, of Troy.
                  Neptun
                        •…
                      and Phoeb
                        •…
                      o
                        •…
                     erturne the Grecian rampire.
               
               
                  Neptune and Phoebus tumbl'd downe, from the Idalian hils,
               An inundation of all floods, that thence the brode sea fils
               
                  On their huge rampire; in one glut, all these together rorde,
               
                  Rhesus, Heptaporus, Rhodius, Scamander, (the adorde)The names of the riuers about Troy.
               
               
                  Caresus, Simois, Grenicus, Aesepus: of them all,
               
                  Apollo open'd the rough mouths; and made their lustie fall
               Rauish the dustie champian, where, many a helme and shield,
               And halfe-god race of men were strew'd: and that all these might yeeld
               Full tribute to the heauenly worke: Neptune and Phoebus wun
               
                  Ioue to vnburthen the blacke wombes, of clouds (fild by the Sun)
               And poure them into all their streames, that quickly they might send
               The huge wall swimming to the Sea. Nine dayes their lights did spend
               To nights, in tempests; and when all, their vtmost depth had made,
               
                  Ioue, Phoebus, Neptune, all came downe, and all in state did wade
               To ruine of that impious fort: Great Neptune went before,
               Wrought with his trident, and the stones, trunkes, rootes of trees he tore
               Out of the rampire: tost them all, into the Hellespont;
               Euen all the prowd toile of the Greeks, with which they durst confront
               The to-be-shunned Deities: and not a stone remaind,
               Of all their huge foundations, all with the earth were plaind.
               Which done; againe the Gods turnd backe, the siluer flowing floods,
               By that vast channell, through whose vaults, they pourd abrode their broods,
               And couerd all the ample shore, againe with dustie sand:
               And this the end was of that wall, where now so many a hand
               Was emptied of stones and darts, contending to inuade;
               Where Clamor spent so high a throate; and where the fell blowes made
               The new-built woodden turrets grone. And here the Greeks were pent,
               Tam'd with the Iron whip of Ioue: that terrors vehement
               Shooke ouer them by Hectors hand, who was (in euerie thought)
               The terror-maister of the field, and like a whirlewind fought;Hector like a whirlwind, and Lion.
               
               As fresh, as in his morns first charge. And as a sauage Bore
               Or Lion, hunted long; at last, with hounds and hunters store,
               Is compast round; they charge him close: and stand (as in a towre
               They had inchac't him) pouring on, of darts an Iron showre:
               His glorious heart yet, nought appald, and forcing forth his way:
               Here ouerthrowes a troope, and there; a running ring doth stay
               His vtter passage: when againe, that stay he ouerthrowes,
               And then the whole field frees his rage: so Hector wearies blowes,
               Runs out his charge vpon the Fort: and all his force would force
               To passe the dike. Which being so deepe, they could not get their horse
               To venter on: but trample, snore, and on the verie brinke,
               To neigh with spirit, yet still stand off: nor would a humane thinke
               The passage safe; or if it were, twas lesse safe for retreate,
               The dike being euerie where so deep; and (where twas least deep) set
               With stakes exceeding thicke, sharpe, strong, that horse could neuer passe;
               Much lesse their chariots, after them: yet for the foote there was
               Some hopefull seruice, which they wisht. Polydamas then spake;
            
            
               
                  Hector, and all our friends of Troy, we indiscreetly makePolyd
                        •…
                      s
                        •…
                     d c
                        •…
                     nsell to Hector.
               
               Offer of passage with our horse: ye see the stakes, the wall,
               Impossible for horse to take: nor can men fight at all,
               
                  The place being streight, and much more apt, to let vs take our bane,
               Then giue the enemie: and yet, if Ioue decree the wane
               Of Grecian glory vtterly: and so bereaue their hearts,
               That we may freely charge them thus, and then, will take our parts:
               I would with all speed, wish th'assault: that vgly shame might shed
               (Thus farre from home) these Grecians bloods. But if they once turne head,
               And sallie on vs from their fleet, when in so deepe a dike
               We shall lie struggling; not a man, of all our hoast is like
               To liue, and carrie backe the newes: and therefore, be it thus:
               Here leaue we horse, kept by our men, and all on foot let vs
               Hold close together, and attend, the grace of Hectors guide;
               And then they shall not beare our charge, our conquest shall be did▪
               
               In their liues purples. This aduice, pleasd Hector, for twas sound:
               Who first obeyd it, and full arm'd, betooke him to the ground:
               And then all left their chariots, when he was seene to leade;
               Rushing about him, and gaue vp, each chariot and steed
               To their directors to be kept, in all procinct of warre:
               There, and on that side of the dike. And thus the rest prepare
               Their onset: In fiue regiments, they all their powre diuide:
               Each regiment allow'd three Chiefes; of all which, euen the pride,
               Seru'd in great Hectors Regiment: for all were set on fire
               (Their passage beaten through the wall) with hazardous desire,
               That they might once, but fight at fleete. With Hector, Captaines were,
               
                  Polydamas, and Cebriones, who was his chariotere:
               But Hector found that place a worse. Chiefes of the second band,
               Were Paris, and Alcathous, Agenor. The command
               The third strong Phalanx had, was giuen, to th'Augure Hellenus;
               
               
                  Deiphobus, that God-like man, and mightie Asius;
               
               Euen Asius Hyrtacides, that from Arisba rode
               The huge bay horse, and had his house, where riuer Selleës flowde.
               The fourth charge, good Aeneas led, and with him were combinde
               
                  Archelochus, and Acamas (Antenors dearest kinde)
               And excellent at euerie fight. The fifth braue companie,
               
                  Sarpedon had to charge; who chusde, for his commands supply,
               
                  Asteropoeus great in armes, and Glaucus; for both these
               Were best of all men, but himselfe: but he was fellowlesse.
            
            
               Thus fitted with their well wrought shields, downe the steepe dike they go;
               And (thirstie of the walls assault) beleeue in ouerthrow:
               Not doubting but with headlong fals, to tumble downe the Greeks,
               
               From their blacke nauie: in which trust, all on; and no man seeks
               To crosse Polydamas aduice, with any other course,
               But Asius Hyrtacides, who (prowd of his bay horse)
               Would not forsake them; nor his man, that was their manager,
               (Foole that he was) but all to fleete: and little knew how neare
               An ill death sat him, and a sure; and that he neuer more
               Must looke on loftie Ilion: but lookes, and all, before,
               Put on th'all-couering mist of Fate; that then did hang vpon
               The lance of greatIdomen
                        •…
                     . 
                  Deucalides: he fatally rusht on
               
                  The left hand way; by which the Greeks, with horse and chariot,
               Came vsually from field to fleet: close to the gates he got,
               Which both vnbard and ope he found; that so the easier might
               An entrie be for any friend, that was behind in flight;
               Yet not much easier for a foe: because there was a guard
               Maintaind vpon it, past his thought; who still put for it hard,
               Eagerly showting: and with him, were fiue more friends of name
               That would not leaue him, though none else, would hunt that way for fame
               (In their free choice) but he himselfe. Orestes, Iamenus,
               
               And Acamas, Asiades, Thoon, O
                        •…
                     nomaus,
               
               Were those that followed Asius: within the gates they found
               Two eminently valorous, that from the race renownd
               Of the right valiant Lapithes, deriu'd their high descent.
               Fierce Leonteus was the one, like Mars in detriment;S
                        •…
                     ch maketh Virgil Pandarus and Bitias.
               
               The other mightie Polepaet, the great Pirithous sonne.
               These stood within the loftie gates, and nothing more did shun,
               The charge of Asius and his friends, then two high hill-bred Okes,
               Well rooted in the binding earth, obey the airie strokes
               Of wind and weather, standing firme, gainst euerie seasons spight:
               Yet they poure on continued showts, and beare their shields vpright:
               When in the meane space Polypaet, and Leonteus cheard
               Their souldiers to the fleets defence: but when the rest had heard
               The Troians in attempt to skale, Clamor and flight did flow
               Amongst the Grecians: and then (the rest dismaid) these two
               Met Asius entring; thrust him backe, and fought before their doores:
               Nor far'd they then like Okes, that stood, but as a brace of Bores
               Coucht in their owne bred hill, that heare, a sort of hunters showt
               And hounds in hote traile coming on; then from their dens breake out,
               Trauerse their force, and suffer not, in wildnesse of their way,
               About them any plant to stand: but thickets, offering stay,
               Breake through, and 
                     •…
                  end vp by the roots; whet gnashes into aire,
               Which Tumult fils, with showts, hounds, horns, and all the hote affaire
               Beates at their bosomes: so their armes, rung with assailing blowes;
               And so they stird them in repulse, right well assur'd that those
               Who were within, and on the wall, would adde their parts; who knew
               They now fought for their tents, fleet, liues, and fame; and therefore threw
               Stones from the wals and towres, as thicke, as when a drift wind shakes
               Blacke-clouds in peeces, and plucks snow, in great and plumie flakes
               From their soft bosomes, till the ground, be wholly cloth'd in white;
               So earth was hid with stones and darts: darts from the Troian fight,
               Stones from the Greeks, that on the helms, and bossie Troian shields
               Kept such a rapping, it amaz'd, great Asius, who now yeelds
               Sighes, beates his thighes: and in a rage, his fault to Ioue applies.
               O Ioue (said he) now cleare thou shew'st, thou art a friend to lies;Asi
                        •…
                      neare his d
                        •…
                     ath blames 
                        〈◊〉
                      for it.
               
               Pretending, in the flight of Greece, the making of it good,
               To all their ruines: which I thought, could neuer be withstood,
               Yet they, as yellow Waspes, or Bees (that hauing made their nestApta ad rem comparatio.
               
               The gasping Cranny of a hill) when for a hunters feast,
               
                  Hunters come hote and hungrie in; and dig for honny Comes:
               They flie vpon them, strike and sting: and from their hollow homes
               Will not be beaten, but defend, their labours fruite, and brood:
               No more will these be from their port, but either lose their blood
               (Although but two, against all vs) or be our prisoners made;
               All this, to do his action grace, could not firme Ioue perswade,
               Who for the generall counsell stood; and (gainst his singular braue)
               Bestow'd on Hector that daies fame. Yet he, and these behaue
               Themselues thus nobly at this port: but how at other ports,
               And all alongst the stony wall, sole force, gainst force and forts,
               Rag'd in contention twixt both hoasts: it were no easie thing,
               (Had I the bosome of a God) to tune to life, and sing.
               The Troians fought not of themselues, a fire from heauen was throwne
               That ran amongst them, through the wall, meere added to their owne.
               The Greeks held not their owne: weake griefe, went with her witherd hand,
               And dipt it deepely in their spirits; since they could not command
               Their forces to abide the field, whom harsh Necessitie
               
               (
                     •…
                  o saue those ships should bring them home) and their good forts supply
               Draue to th'expulsiue fight they made; and this might stoope them more
               Then Need it selfe could eleuate: for euen Gods did deplore
               Their dire estates, and all the Gods, that were their aids in war:
               Who (though they could not cleare their plights) yet were their friends thus far,
               Still to vphold the better sort: for then did Polepaet passe
               A lance at Damasus, whose helme, was made with cheekes of brasse,
               Yet had not proofe enough; the pyle, draue through it, and his skull;
               His braine in blood drownd; and the man, so late so spiritfull,
               Fell now quite spirit-lesse to earth. So emptied he the veines
               Of Pylon, and Ormenus liues: and then Leonteus gaines
               The lifes end of Hippomachus, Antimachus-his sonne;
               His lance fell at his girdle stead, and with his end, begun
               Another end: Leonteus, left him, and through the prease
               (His keene sword drawne) ran desperatly, vpon Antiphates;
               
               And liuelesse tumbled him to earth. Nor could all these liues quench
               His fierie spirit, that his flame, in Menons blood did drench,
               And rag'd vp, euen to Iamens, and yong Orestes life;
               All heapt together, made their peace, in that red field of strife.
               Whose faire armes while the victors 
                     •…
                  poild; the youth of Ilion
               
               (Of which thereseru'd the most and best) still boldly built vpon
               The wisedome of Polydamas, and Hectors matchlesse strength;
               And follow'd, fild with wondrous spirit; with wish, and hope at length
               (The Greeks wall wun) to fire their fleet. But (hauing past the dike,
               And willing now, to passe the wall) this prodigie did strike
               Their hearts with some deliberate stay: A high-flowne-Eagle sorde
               On their troopes left hand, and sustaind, a Dragon all engorde,
               In her strong seres, of wondrous sise, and yet had no such checke
               In life and spirit, but still she fought; and turning backe her necke
               So stung the Eagles gorge, that downe, she cast her feruent prey,
               Amongst the multitude; and tooke, vpon the winds, her way;
               
                  Crying with anguish. When they saw, a branded Serpent sprawle
               So full amongst them; from aboue, and from Ioues fowle let fall:
               They tooke it an ostent from him; stood frighted; and their cause
               
                  Polydamas thought iust, and spake; Hector, you know, applausePolydamas to Hector.
               
               Of humour hath bene farre from me; nor fits it, or in warre,
               Or in affaires of Court, a man, imploid in publicke care,
               To blanch things further then their truth, or flatter any powre:
               And therefore, for that simple course, your strength hath oft bene sowre
               To me in counsels: yet againe, what shewes in my thoughts best,
               I must discouer: let vs ceasse, and make their flight our rest
               For this dayes honor; and not now, attempt the Grecian fleet;
               For this (I feare) will be th'euent; the prodigie doth meet
               So full with our affaire in hand. As this high flying fowle,
               Vpon the left wing of our host, (implying our controwle)
               Houerd aboue vs; and did trusse, within her golden seres
               A Serpent so embrew'd, and bigge, which yet (in all her feares)
               Kept life, and feruent spirit to fight, and wrought her owne release;
               Nor did the Eagles Airie, feed: So though we thus farre prease
               Vpon the Grecians; and perhaps, may ouerrune their wall,
               Our high minds aiming at their fleet; and that we much appall
               Their trussed spirits; yet are they, so Serpent-like disposd
               That they willl fight, though in our seres; and will at length be losd
               With all our outcries; and the life, of many a Troian breast,
               Shall with the Eagle flie, before, we carrie to our nest
               Them, or their nauie: thus expounds, the Augure this ostent;
               Whose depth he knowes; & these should feare. Hector, with countenance bent
               Thus answerd him: Polydamas, your depth in augurieHector to Polydamas.
               
               I like not; and know passing well, thou dost not satisfie
               Thy selfe in this opinion: or if thou think'st it true,
               Thy thoughts, the Gods blind; to aduise, and vrge that as our due,
               That breakes our duties; and to 
                     
                        •…
                     oue, whose vow and signe to me
               Is past directly for our speed: yet light-wingd birds must be
               (By thy aduice) our Oracles, whose feathers little stay
               My serious actions. What care I, if this, or th'other way
               Their wild wings sway them: if the right, on which the Sunne doth rise,
               Or, to the left hand, where he sets? Tis Ioues high counsell flies
               With those wings, that shall beare vp vs: Ioues, that both earth and heauen,
               Both men and Gods sustaines and rules: One augurie is giuen
               To order all men, best of all; fight for thy countries right.
               But why fearst thou our further charge? for though the dangerous fight
               Strew all men he
                     •…
                  e about the fleet, yet thou needst neuer feare
               To beare their Fates; thy warie heart, will neuer trust thee, where
               An enemies looke is; and yet fight: for, if thou dar'st abstaine,
               Or whisper into any eare, an abstinence so vaine
               As thou aduisest: neuer feare, that any foe shall take
               Thy life from thee, for tis this lance. This said, all forwards make,
               Himselfe the first: yet before him, exulting Clamor flew;
               And thunder-louing-Iupiter, from loftie Ida blew
               
                  A storme that vsherd their assault, and made them charge like him:
               It draue directly on the fleet, a dust so fierce and dim,
               That it amaz'd the Grecians: but was a grace diuine,
               To Hector and his following troopes, who wholly did encline
               To him, being now in grace with Ioue: and so put boldly on
               To raze the rampire: in whose height, they fiercely set vpon
               The Parrapets, and puld them downe, rac't euery formost fight;
               And all the Butteresses of stone, that held their towers vpright;
               They tore away, with Crowes of Iron; and hop't to ruine all.
            
            
               The Greeks yet stood, and still repaird, the forefights of their wall
               With hides of Oxen, and from thence, they pourd downe stones in showres
               Vpon the vnderminers heads. Within the formost towres,
               Both the Aiaces had command; who answer'd euerie part,
               Th'assaulters, and their souldiers; represt, and put in heart:
               Repairing valour as their wall: spake some faire, some reprou'd,
               Who euer made not good his place: and thus they all sorts mou'd;
            
            
               O countrimen, now need in aid, would haue excesse be spent:
               The excellent must be admir'd; the meanest excellent;
               The worst, do well: in changing warre, all should not be alike,
               Nor any idle: which to know, fits all, lest Hector strike
               Your minds with frights, as eares with threats; forward be all your hands,
               Vrge one another: this doubt downe, that now betwixt vs stands,
               
                  Ioue will go with vs to their wals. To this effect, alow'd
               Spake both the Princes: and as high (with this) th'expulsion flow'd.Simile.
               
               And as in winter time, when Ioue, his cold-sharpe iauelines throwes
               Amongst vs mortals; and is mou'd, to white earth with his snowes:
               (The winds asleepe) he freely poures, till highest Prominents,
               Hill tops, low meddowes, and the fields, that crowne with most contents
               The toiles of men: sea ports, and shores, are hid, and euerie place,
               But floods (that snowes faire tender flakes, as their owne brood, embrace:)
               So both fides couerd earth with stones, so both for life contend,
               To shew their sharpnesse: through the wall, vprore stood vp an end.
               Nor had great Hector and his friends, the rampire ouerrun,
               If heauens great Counsellour, high Ioue, had not inflam'd his sonne
               
                  Sarpedon (like the forrests king, when he on Oxen flies)
               Against the Grecians: his round targe, he to his arme applies
               Brasse-leau'd without: and all within, thicke Oxe-hides quilted hard:
               The verge naild round with rods of gold, and with two darts prepard;
               He leades his people: as ye see, a mountaine Lion fare,
               Long kept from prey: in forcing which, his high mind makes him dare,
               Assault vpon the whole full fold: though guarded neuer so
               With well-arm'd men, and eager dogs; away he will not go,
               But venture on, and either snatch, a prey, or be a prey:
               So far'd diuine Sarpedons mind, resolu'd to force his waySarpedons 
                        〈◊〉
                      to Glaucus, neuer equalled by 
                        •…
                     y (in this kind) of all 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •…
                     aue written.
               
               Through all the fore-fights, and the wall: yet since he did not see
               Others as great as he, in name, as great in mind as he:
               He spake to Glaucus: Glaucus, say, why are we honord more
               Then other men of Lycia, in place? with greater store
               
                  Of meates and cups? with goodlier roofes? delightsome gardens? walks?
               More lands, and better? so much wealth, that Court and countrie talks
               Of vs, and our possessions; and euery way we go,
               Gaze on vs as we were their Gods? this where we dwell, is so:
               The shores of Xanthus ring of this; and shall not we exceed,
               As much in merit, as in noise? Come, be we great in deed
               As well as looke; shine not in gold, but in the flames of fight;
               That so our neat-arm'd-Lycians, may say; See, these are right
               Our kings, our Rulers; these deserue, to eate, and drinke the best;
               These gouerne not ingloriously: these, thus exceed the rest,
               Do more then they command to do. O friend, if keeping backe
               Would keepe backe age from vs, and death; and that we might not wracke
               In this lifes humane sea at all: but that deferring now
               We shund death euer; nor would I, halfe this vaine valour show,
               Nor glorifie a folly so, to wish thee to aduance:
               Bur since we must go, though not here; and that, besides the chance
               Proposd now, there are infinite fates, of other sort in death,
               Which (neither to be fled nor scap't) a man must sinke beneath:
               Come, trie we, if this sort be ours: and either render thus,
               Glorie to others, or make them, resigne the like to vs.
            
            
               This motion, Glaucus shifted not, but (without words) obeyd;Sarpedon and Glaucus charge together.
               
               Fore-right went both, a mightie troope, of Lycians followed.
               Which, by Menestheus obseru'd; his haire stood vp on end,
               For at the towre where he had charge, he saw Calamitie bend
               Her horrid browes in their approch. He threw his looks about
               The whole fights neare, to see what Chiefe, might helpe the miserie out
               Of his poore souldiers, and beheld, where both th'Aiaces fought,
               And Teucer, newly come from fleete: whom it would profit nought
               To call, since Tumult on their helmes, shields, and vpon the ports
               L
                     •…
                  id such lowde claps; for euerie way, defences of all sorts
               Were adding, as Troy tooke away; and Clamor flew so high
               Her wings strooke heauen, and drownd all voice. The two Dukes yet so nigh
               And at the offer of assault; he to th'Aiaces sent
               
                  Thoos the herald, with this charge: Run to the regimentT
                        •…
                     oos sent to the A
                        •…
                     aces for aide by Menestheus.
               
               Of both th'Aiaces, and call Both, for both were better here,
               Since here will slaughter, instantly; be more enforc't then there.
               The Lycian Captaines this way make, who in the fights of stand,
               Haue often shew'd much excellence: yet if laborious hand
               Be there more needfull then I hope, at least afford vs some,
               Let Aiax Telamonius, and th'Archer Teucer come.
            
            
               The Herald hasted, and arriu'd; and both th'Aiaces told,
               That Peteus noble sonne desir'd, their little labour would
               Employ it selfe in succouring him. Both their supplies were best,
               Since death assaild his quarter most: for on it fiercely prest
               The well-prou'd mightie Lycian Chiefs. Yet if the seruice there
               Allowd not both, he praid that one, part of his charge would beare,
               And that was Aiax Telamon, with whom he wisht would come,
               The Archer Teucer. Telamon, left instantly his roome
               
                  To strong Lycomedes, and will'd, Aiax Oiliades
               
               With him to make vp his supply, and fill with courages
               The Grecian hearts till his returne, which should be instantly
               When he had well relieu'd his friend. With this, the companie
               Of Teucer he tooke to his aide: Teucer, that did descend
               (As Aiax did) from Telamon: with these two did attend
               
                  Pandion, that bo
                     •…
                  e Teucers bow. When to Menestheus towre
               They came, alongst the wall; they found, him, and his heartned powre
               Toyling in making strong their fort. The Lycian Princes set
               Blacke whirlwind-like, with both their powers, vpon the Parapet.
               
                  Aiax, and all, resisted them. Clamor amongst them rose:
               The slaughter, Aiax led; who first, the last deare sight did close
               Of strong Epicles, that was friend, to Ioues great Lycian sonne.
               Amongst the high munition heape, a mightie marble stone
               Lay highest, neare the Pinnacle; a stone of such a paise,
               That one of this times strongest men, with both hands, could not raise:
               Yet this did Aiax rowse, and throw; and all in sherds did driue
               
                  Epicles foure-topt caske and skull; who (as ye see one diue
               In some deepe riuer) left his height; life left his bones withall.
            
            
               
                  Teucer shot Glaucus (rushing vp, yet higher on the wall)Glaucus wounded by Teucer.
               
               Where naked he discernd his arme, and made him steale retreat
               From that hote seruice; lest some Greeke, with an insulting threat,
               (Beholding it) might fright the rest. Sarpedon much was grieu'd,
               At Glaucus parting, yet fought on; and his great heart relieu'dSarpedon reuengeth Glaucus.
               
               A little with Alcmaons blood, surnam'd Thestorides,
               
               Whose life he hurld out with his lance; which following through the prease,
               He drew from him. Downe from the towre, Alcmaon dead it strooke;
               His faire armes ringing out his death. Then fierce Sarpedon tooke
               In his strong hand the battlement, and downe he tore it quite:
               The wall stript naked, and brode way, for entrie and full fight,
               He made the many. Against him, Aiax and Teucer made;
               
                  Teucer, the rich belt on his breast, did with a shaft inuade:
               But Iupiter auerted death; who would not see his sonne
               Die at the tailes of th'Achiue ships. Aiax did fetch his run,
               And (with his lance) strooke through the targe, of that braue Lycian king;
               Yet kept he it from further passe; nor did it any thing
               Dismay his mind, although his men, stood off from that high way,
               His valour made them; which he kept, and hop't that stormie day
               Should euer make his glorie cleare. His mens fault thus he blam'd;
               O Lycians, why are your hote spirits, so quickly disinflam'd?Sarpedon to hi
                        •…
                      souldiers.
               
               Suppose me ablest of you all: tis hard for me alone,
               To ruine such a wall as this; and make Confusion,
               
               Way to their Nau
                     •…
                  e; lend your hands. What many can dispatch
               One cannot thinke: the noble worke, of many, hath no match.
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The wise kings iust rebuke did strike, a reuerence to his will
               Through all his souldiers; all stood in; and gainst all th'Achiues still
               Made strong their Squadrons; insomuch, that to the aduerse side
               The worke shewd mightie; and the wall, when twas within des
                     •…
                  ride,
               
                  No easie seruice; yet the Greeks, could neither free their wall,
               Of these braue Lycians, that held firme, the place they first did skale:
               Nor could the Lycians from their fort, the sturdie Grecians driue,
               Nor reach their fleet. But as two men, about the limits striue
                     Admiranda & pene inimitabilis comparatio (saith Spond.) and yet in the explication of it, he thinkes all super
                        •…
                      but three words, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , exiguo in loco: leauing out other words more expressiue with his old rule, vno pede, &c.
                  
               
               Of land that toucheth in a field; their measures in their hands,
               They mete their parts out curiously, and either stiffely stands,
               That so farre is his right in law; both hugely set on fire
               About a passing little ground: so greedily aspire
               Both these foes, to their seuerall ends; and all exhaust their most
               About the verie battlements (for yet no more was lost.)
            
            
               With sword, and fire they vext for them, their targes hugely round,
               With Oxehides lin'd; and bucklers light, and many a ghastly wound
               The sterne steele gaue, for that one prise; whereof though some receiu'd
               Their portions on their naked backs; yet others were bereau'd
               Of braue liues, face-turnd, through their shields: towres, bulwarks euery where
               Were freckled with the blood of men; nor yet the Greeks did beareA simile su
                        •…
                     ior to the other, in which, comparing mightiest things with mea 
                        •…
                     est, & the mea 
                        •…
                     est illustrating the mightiest: both meeting in one end of this lifes preseruatiō, and credit: our Hom. is beyond comparison and admiration. Hector to the Tro
                        •…
                     ans.
               
               Base back-turnd faces; nor their foes, would therefore be outfac't.
               But as a Spinster poore and iust, ye sometimes see strait lac't
               About the weighing of her web, who (carefull) hauing charge,
               For which, she would prouide some meanes, is loth to be too large
               In giuing, or in taking weight; but euer with her hand,
               Is doing with the weights and wooll, till Both in iust paise stand:
               So euenly stood it with these foes, till Ioue to Hector gaue
               The turning of the skoles; who first, against the rampire draue;
               And spake so lowd that all might heare: O stand not at the pale
               (Braue Troian friends) but mend your hands: vp, and breake through the wall,
               And make a bonfire of their fleet. All heard, and all in heapes
               Got 
                     •…
                  kaling ladders, and aloft. In meane space, Hector leapes
               Vpon the port, from whose out-part, he tore a massie stone
               Thicke downwards, vpward edg'd; it was so huge an one
               That two vast
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , duo v
                        •…
                     ri 
                        〈◊〉
                     . yoemen of most strength (such as these times beget)
               Could not from earth lift to a Cart: yet he did brandish it,
               Alone (Saturnius made it light:) and swinging it as nought,
               He came before the plankie gates, that all for strength were wrought,
               And kept the Port: two fold they were, and with two rafters bard;
               High, and strong lockt: he raisd the stone, bent to the hurle so hard,
               And made it with so maine a strength, that all the gates did cracke;
               The rafters left them, and the folds one from another brake:
               The hinges peece-meale flew, and through, the feruent little rocke
               Thundred a passage; with his weight, th'inwall his breast did knocke:
               And in rusht Hector, fierce and grimme, as any stormie night;
               His brasse armes, round about his breast, reflected terrible light.
               Each arme held vp, held each a dart: his presence cald vp all
               The dreadfull spirits his Being held, that to the threatned wall
               None but the Gods might checke his way: his eyes were furnaces;
               And thus he look't backe, cald in all: all fir'd their courages,
               And in they flow'd: the Grecians fled, their fleet now, and their freight
               Askt all their rescue: Greece went downe, Tumult was at his height.
            
            The end of the twelfth Booke.
         
         
            
            THE XIII. BOOKE OF HOMERS ILIADS.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  
                     NEptune (in pittie of the Greeks hard plight)
                  Like Calchas, both th' Aiaces, doth excite
                  And others; to repell, the charging foe.
                  
                     Idomeneus, brauely doth bestow
                  His kingly forces; and doth sacrifice
                  
                     Othryoneus to the Destinies;
                  
                  With diuers other. Faire Deiphobus,
                  
                  And his prophetique brother Hellenus
                  
                  Are wounded. But the great Priamides,
                  
                  (Gathering his forces) hartens their addresse
                  Against the enemie; and then, the field,
                  A mightie death, on either side doth yeeld.
               
            
            
               Another Argument.
               
                  The Greeks with Troyes bold powre dismaide,
                  Are chear'd by Neptunes secret aide.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     IOue helping Hector, and his host; thus close to th' Achiue flee
                     •…
                  ,
               He let thē then their own strēgths try; & season there their sweet
               With ceaslesse toils, and grieuances. For now he turnd his face,
               Lookt down, & viewd the far-off land, of welrode mē in Thrace.
               
               Of the renown'd amilk-nourisht men, the Hippemolgians,
               
               Long-liu'd; most iust, and innocent. And close-fought Mysians:
               
               Nor turnd he any more to Troy, his euer-shining eyes:
               Because he thought, not any one, of all the Deities;
               (When his care left th'indifferent field) would aide on either side.
               But this securitie in Ioue, the great Sea-Rector spide,
               Who sate aloft, on th'vtmost top, of shadie Samothrace,
               
               And viewd the fight. His chosen seate, stood in so braue a place,Neptunes prospect.
               
               That Priams cittie, th'Achiue ships, all Ida did appeare,
               To his full view; who from the sea, was therefore seated there.
               He tooke much ruth, to see the Greeks, by Troy, sustaine such ill,
               And (mightily incenst with Ioue) stoopt strait from that steepe hill;
               That shooke as he flew off: so hard, his parting prest the height.
               The woods, and all the great hils neare, trembled beneath the weight
               Of his immortall mouing feet: three steps he onely tooke,
               Before he far-off Aegas reacht; but with the fourth, it shooke
               With his drad entrie. In the depth, of those seas, he did hold
               His bright and glorious pallace built, of neuer-rusting gold;
               And there arriu'd, he put in Coach, his brazen-footed steeds,
               
                  All golden man'd, and pac't with wings; and all in golden weedsThe horse of Neptune.
               
               He cloth'd himselfe. The golden scourge, (most elegantly done)
               He tooke, and mounted to his seate: and then the God begun
               To driue his chariot through the waues. From whirlepits euery way
               The whales exulted vnder him, and knew their king: the Sea
               For ioy did open; and his horse, so swift, and lightly flew:
               The vnder-axeltree of Brasse, no drop of water drew.
               And thus, these deathlesse Coursers brought, their king to th' Achiu
                        •…
                     
                   ships.
            
            
               Twixt th'Imber Cliffs, and Tenedos, a certaine Cauerne creepes
               Into the deepe seas gulphie breast, and there th'earth-shaker staidChorographia.
               
               His forward steeds: tooke them from coach, and heauenly fodder laid
               In reach before them. Their brasse houes, he gi
                     •…
                   with giues of gold
               Not to be broken, nor dissolu'd; to make them firmely hold
               A fit attendance on their king. Who went to th' Achiue host,Nept une goes to the Greekes.
               
               Which (like to tempests, or wild flames) the clustring Troians tost;
               Insatiably valourous, in Hectors like command;
               High founding, and resounding shouts: for Hope chear'd euery hand
               To make the Greek fleete now their prise, and all the Greeks destroy.
               But Neptune (circler of the earth) with fresh heart did employ
               The Grecian hands. In strength of voice, and body, he did take
               
                  Calchas resemblance, and (of all) th' Aiaces first bespake;
               Who of themselues were free enough: Aiaces? you aloneNeptun
                        •…
                      to the two A
                        •…
                     aces.
               
               Sustaine the common good of Greece, in euer putting on
               The memorie of Fortitude: and flying shamefull Flight.
               
               Elsewhere, the desperate hands of Troy, could giue me no affright,
               The braue Greeks haue withstood their worst: but this our mightie wall
               Being thus transcended by their powre; graue Feare doth much appall
               My carefull spirits, lest we feele, some fatall mischiefe here;
               Where Hector raging like a flame, doth in his charge appeare,
               And boasts himselfe the best Gods sonne. Be you conceited so,
               And fire so, more then humane spirits; that God may seeme to do
               In your deeds: and with such thoughts chear'd, others to such exhort,
               And such resistance: these great minds, will in as great a sort,
               Strengthen your bodies, and force checke, to all great Hectors charge,
               Though nereso spirit-like; and though Ioue still, (past himselfe) enlarge
               His sacred actions. Thus he toucht, with his forckt scepters point
               The brests of both; fild both their spirits, and made vp euery ioynt
               With powre responsiue: when hawk-like, swift, and set sharpe to flie,Simile.
               
               That fiercely stooping from a rocke, inaccessible, and hie,
               Cuts through a field, and sets a fowle, (not being of her kind)
               Hard, and gets ground still: Neptune so, left these two; eithers mind
               Beyond themselues raisd. Of both which, Oileus first discern'd
               The masking Deitie: and said, Aiax? some God hath warn'dAiax Oileus to Aiax Telamo
                     
                        •…
                     ius.
               
               Our powres to fight, and saue our fleet. He put on him the hew
               Of th'Augure Calchas: by his pace (in leauing vs) I knew
               (Without all question) twas a God: the Gods are easly knowne:
               And in my tender brest I feele, a greater spirit blowne,
               To execute affaires of fight: I find my hands so free
               
                  To all high motion; and my feete, seeme featherd vnder me.The two 
                        〈◊〉
                      to 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               This, Telamonius thus receiu'd: So, to my thoughts, my hands
               Burne with desire to tosse my lance; each foote beneath me stands
               Bare on bright fire, to vse his speed: my heart is raisd so hie,
               That to encounter Hectors selfe, I long insatiately.
            
            
               While these thus talkt, as, ouer-ioyd, with studie for the fight,
               (Which God had stird vp in their spirits) the same God did excite
               The Greekes that were behind at fleet, refreshing their free hearts
               And ioynts; being euen dissolu'd with toyle: and (seeing the desprate parts
               Playd by the Troians, past their wall) Griefe strooke them; and their eyes
               Sweat teares from vnder their sad lids: their instant destinies
               Neuer supposing they could scape. But Neptune stepping in,
               With ease stird vp the able troopes; and did at first begin
               With Teucer, and Peneleus; th'Heroe Leitus;
               
               
                  Deipirus, Meriones, and yong Antilochus;
               
               All expert in the deeds of armes: O youths of Greece (said he)Nept
                        •…
                      to the Greekes.
               
               What change is this? In your braue fight, I onely lookt to see
               Our fleets whole safetie; and if you, neglect the harmefull field;
               Now shines the day, when Greece to Troy, must all her honours yeeld.
               O griefe! so great a miracle, and horrible to sight,
               As now I see; I neuer thought, could haue prophan'd the light:
               The Troians braue vs at our ships, that haue bene heretofore,
               Like faint and fearefull Deare in woods; distracted euermore
               With euerie sound: and yet scape not, but proue the torne-vp fare
               Of Lynces, Wolues, and Leopards; as neuer borne to warre:
               Nor durst these Troians at first siege, in any least degree,
               Expect your strength; or stand one shocke, of Grecian Chiualrie.
               Yet now, farre from their walles they dare, fight at our fleet maintaine;
               All by our Generals cowardise, that doth infect his men;
               Who (still at ods with him) for that, will needs themselues neglect;
               And suffer Slaughter in their ships. Suppose there was defect
               (Beyond all question) in our king, to wrong Aeacides;
               
               And he, for his particular wreake, from all assistance cease:
               We must not ceasse t'assist our selues. Forgiue our Generall then;Good minded men apt to forgiue.
               
               And quickly too: apt to forgiue, are all good minded men.
               Yet you (quite voide of their good minds) giue good, in you quite lost,
               For ill in others: though ye be, the worthiest of your host.
               As old as I am, I would scorne, to fight with one that flies,
               Or leaues the fight, as you do now. The Generall slothfull lies,
               And you (though sloughtfull to) maintaine, with him, a fight of splene.
               Out, out, I hate ye from my heart; ye rotten minded men.
               In this, ye adde an ill thats worse, then all your sloths dislikes.
               But as I know, to all your hearts, my reprehension strikes;
               So thither let iust shame strike to; for while you stand still here,
               A mightie fight swarms at your fleete, great Hector rageth there,
               Hath burst the long barre and the gates. Thus Neptune rowsd these men;
               
                  b And round about th'Aiaces did, their Phalanxes maintaine,
               Their station firme; whom Mars himselfe, (had he amongst them gone)
               
                  Could not disparage; nor Ioues Maide, that sets men fiercer on:
               For now the best were chosen out, and they receiu'd th'aduance
               Of Hector and his men so full, that lance, was lin'd with lance;
               Shields, thickned with opposed shields; targets to targets nail'd:
               Helmes stucke to helmes; and man to man, grew; they so close assail'd:
               Plum'd caskes, were hang'd in eithers plumes: all ioyn'd so close their stands;
               Their lances stood, thrust out so thicke, by such all-daring hands.
               All bent their firme brests to the point; and made sad fight their ioy
               Of both: Troy all in heapes strooke first, and Hector first of Troy.
               
               And as a round peece of a rocke, which with a winters floodSimile.
               
               Is from his top torne; when a showre, powr'd from a bursten cloud,
               Hath broke the naturall bond it held, within the rough steepe rocke;
               And iumping, it flies downe the woods, resounding euerie shocke;
               And on, vncheckt, it headlong leapes, till in a plaine it stay:
               And then (though neuer so impeld) it stirs not any way.
               So Hector, hereto throated threats, to go to sea in blood,
               And reach the Grecian ships and tents; without being once withstood:
               But when he fell into the strengths, the Grecians did maintaine,
               And that they fought vpon the square, he stood as fetterd then.
               And so, the aduerse sons of Greece, laid on with swords and darts,
               (Whose both ends hurt) that they repeld, his worst; and he conuerts
               His threats, by all meanes, to retreats; yet, made as he retir'd
               Onely t'encourage those behind; and thus those men inspir'd:
            
            
               
                  Troians? Dardanians? Lycians? all warlike friends, stand close;Hector to his friends.
               
               The Greeks can neuer beare me long, though towre-like they oppose;
               This lance (be sure) will be their spoile: if, euen the best of Gods,
               (High-thundring Iunos husband) stirres, my spirite with true abodes.
            
            
               With this, all strengths and minds he mou'd; but yong Deiphobus,
               
               (Old Priams sonne) amongst them all, was chiefly vertuous.D
                        •…
                     obus his 
                        •…
                     alor.
               
               He bore before him his round shield; tript lightly through the prease,
               At all parts couerd with his shield: And him Meriones
               
               Charg'd with a glittring dart, that tooke, his bul-hide orbie shield,
               Yet pierc't it not, but in the top, it selfe did peecemeale yeeld.
            
            
               
                  Deiphobus thrust forth his targe, and fear'd the broken ends
               Of strong Meriones his lance, who now turnd to his friends;
               The great Heroe, scorning much, by such a chance to part
               With lance and conquest: forth he went, to fetch another dart
               Left at his tent. The rest fought on, the Clamor heightned there
               Was most vnmeasur'd; Teucer first, did flesh the Massacre,
                  Teu
                        •…
                     ers 
                        •…
                     alor.
               
               And slue a goodly man at armes, the souldier Imbrius,
               
               The sonne of Mentor, rich in horse; he dwelt at Pedasus
               
               Before the sonnes of Greece sieg'd Troy; from whence he married
               
                  Medesicasté, one that sprung, of Priams bastard bed.
               But when the Greeke ships, (double oar'd) arriu'd at Ilion,
               
               To Ilion he returnd, and prou'd, beyond comparison
               Amongst the Troians; he was lodg'd, with Priam, who held deare
               His naturall sonnes no more then him; yet him, beneath the eare
               The sonne of Telamon attain'd, and drew his lance. He fell
               
                  As when, an Ash on some hils top, (it selfe topt wondrous well)Simile.
               
               The steele hewes downe, and he presents, his young leaues to the soyle:
               So fell he, and his faire armes gron'd; which Teucer long'd to spoyle,
               And in he ranne; and Hector in, who sent a shining lance
               At Teucer; who (beholding it) slipt by, and gaue it chance
               On Actors sonne Amphimachus, whose breast it strooke; and in
               Flew Hector, at his sounding fall, with full intent to win
               The tempting helmet from his head; but Aiax with a dart,
               Reacht Hector at his rushing in, yet toucht not any part
               About his bodie; it was hid, quite through with horrid brasse;
               The bosse yet of his targe it tooke, whose firme stuffe staid the passe,
               And he turnd safe from both the trunks: both which the Grecians bore
               From off the field; Amphimachus, Menestheus did restore,
               And Stichius, to th'Achaian strength: th'Aiaces (that were pleasd
               Still most, with most hote seruices) on Troian Imbrius seasd:
               And, as from sharply-bitten hounds, a brace of Lions forceSimile▪
                  
               
               A new slaine Goate; and through the woods, beare in their iawes the corse
               Aloft, lift vp into the aire: so, vp, into the skies
               Bore both th'Aiaces, Imbrius; and made his armes their pri
                     •…
                  e.
            
            
               Yet (not content) Oileades, enrag'd, to see there dead
               His much belou'd Amphimachus; he hewd off Imbrius head,
               Which (swinging round) bowle like he tost, amongst the Troian prease,
               And full at Hectors feete it fell. Amphimachus decease
               (Being nephew to the God of waues) much vext the Deities mind;
               And to the ships and tents he marcht: yet more, to make inclinde
               The Grecians, to the Troian bane. In hasting to which end,
               
                  Idomen
                        •…
                     us met with him, returning from a friend,
               Whose hamme late hurt, his men brought off; and hauing giuen command
               To his Physitians for his cure, (much fir'd to put his hand
               To Troyes repulse) he left his tent. Him (like Andremons sonne,
               Prince Thoas, that in Pleuron rulde, and lo
                     •…
                  rie Calidon,
               
               Th'Aetolian powres; and like a God, was of his subiects lou'd)
               
                  Neptune encountred: and but thus, his forward spirit mou'd.
            
            
               
                  Idomeneus, Prince of Crete? O whither now are fledNeptu
                        •…
                     e to Ido
                     
                        •…
                     en
               
               Those threats in thee, with which the rest, the Troians menaced?
            
            
               O Thoas (he replide) no on
                     •…
                  , of all our host, stands now
               In any question of reproofe (as I am let to know)
               And why is my intelligence false? We all know how to fight,
               And (Feare disanimating none) all do our knowledge right.
               Nor can our harmes accuse our sloth; not one from worke we misse:
               The great God onely workes our ill, whose pleasure now it is,
               That farre from home, in hostile fields, and with inglorious fate,
               Some Greeks should perish. But do thou, O Thoas (that of late
               Hast prou'd a souldier, and was wont, where thou hast Sloth beheld,
               To chide it, and exhort to paines) now hate to be repeld,
               And set on all men. He replied, I would to heauen, that he
               Who euer this day doth abstaine, from battell willinglie,
               May neuer turne his face from Troy, but here become the prey
               
                  And skorne of dogs. Come then, take armes, and let our kind assay
               Ioyne both our forces: though but two, yet being both combinde,
               The worke of many single hands, we may performe; we finde
               That Vertue coaugmented thriues, in men of little minde:
               But we, haue singly, matcht the great. This said, the God again
               (With all his conflicts) visited, the ventrous fight of men.
               The king turnd to his tent; rich armes, put on his brest, and toooke
               Two darts in hand, and forth he flew; his haste on made him looke
               Much like a fierie Meteor, with which, Ioues sulphrie hand
               Opes heauen, and hurles about the aire, bright flashes, showing aland
               Abodes; that euer run before, tempest, and plagues to men:
               So, in his swift pace, shew'd his armes: he was encountred then
               By his good friend Meriones, yet neare his tent; to whom
               Thus spake the powre of Idomen: What reason makes thee come,
               (Thou sonne of Molus, my most lou'd) thus leauing fight alone?
               Is't for some wound? the Iauelins head, (still sticking in the bone)
               Desir'st thou ease of? Bring'st thou newes? or what is it that brings
               Thy presence hither? Be assur'd, my spirite needs no stings
               To this hote conflict. Of my selfe, thou seest I come; and loth
               For any tents loue, to deserue, the hatefull taint of Sloth.
               
            
            
               He answerd, Onely for a dart, he that retreat did make,
               (Were any left him at his tent:) for, that he had, he brake
               On proud Deiphobus his shield. Is one dart all? (said he)
               Take one and twentie, if thou like, for in my tent they be;
               They stand there shining by the walls: I tooke them as my prise
               From those false Troians I haue slaine. And this is not the guise
               Of one that loues his tent, or fights, afarre off with his foe:
               But since I loue fight, therefore doth, my martiall starre bestow
               (Besides those darts) helmes, targets bost, and corslets, bright as day.
            
            
               So I (said Merion) at my tent, and sable barke, may say,
               I many Troian spoiles retaine: but now, not neare they be,
               To serue me for my present vse; and therefore aske I thee.
               Not that I lacke a fortitude, to store me with my owne:
               For euer in the formost fights, that render men renowne,
               I fight, when any fight doth stirre: and this perhaps, may well
               Be hid to others, but thou know'st, and I to thee appeale.
            
            
               I know (replide the king) how much, thou weigh'st in euerie worth,
               What needst thou therefore vtter this? If we should now chuse forth
               The worthiest men for ambushes, in all our fleet and host:
               (For ambushes are seruices, that trie mens vertues most;
               Since there, the fearefull and the firme, will, as they are, appeare:
               The fearefull altering still his hue, and rests not any where;
               Nor is his spirit capable, of th'ambush constancie,
               But riseth, changeth still his place, and croucheth curiously
               On his bent hanches; halfe his height, scarce seene aboue the ground,
               For feare to be seene, yet must see: his heart with many a bound,
               Offring to leape out of his breast, and (euer fearing death)
               The coldnesse of it makes him gnash, and halfe shakes out his teeth.
               
                  Where men of valour, neither feare, nor euer change their lookes,
               From lodging th'ambush till it rise: buut since there must be strokes,
               Wish to be quickly in their midst:) thy strength and hand in these,
               Who should reproue? For if, farre off, or fighting in the prease,
               Thou shouldst be wounded, I am sure, the dart that gaue the wound
               Should not be drawne out of thy backe, or make thy necke the ground;
               But meete thy bellie, or thy breast; in thrusting further yet
               When thou art furthest, till the first, and before him thou get.
               Buton; like children, let not vs, stand bragging thus, but do;
               Lest some heare, and past measure chide, that we stand still and wooe.
               Go, chuse a better dart, and make, Mars yeeld a better chance.
            
            
               This said, Mars-swift Meriones, with haste, a brazen lance
               Tooke from his tent; and ouertooke (most carefull of the wars)
               
                  Idomeneus. And such two, in field, as harmfull Mars,
               
               And Terror, his beloued sonne, that without terror fights;
               And is of such strength, that in warre, the frighter he affrights;
               When, out of Thrace, they both take armes, against th'Ephyran bands;
               Or gainst the great-soul'd Phlegians: nor fauour their owne hands,
               But giue the grace to others still. In such sort to the fight,
               Marcht these two managers of men; in armours full of light.
            
            
               And first spake Merion: On which part, (sonne of Deucalion)
               Serues thy mind to inuade the fight? is't best to set vpon
               The Troians in our battels aide, the right or left-hand wing,
               For all parts I suppose employd. To this the Cretan king,
               Thus answerd: In our nauies midst, are others that assist,
               The two Aiaces, Teucer too; with shafts, the expertest
               Of all the Grecians, and though small, is great in fights of stand.
               And these (though huge he be of strengh) will serue to fill the hand
               Of Hectors selfe, that Priamist, that studier for blowes:
               It shall be cald a deed of height, for him (euen suffring throwes
               For knocks still) to out labour them: and (bettring their tough hands)
               Enflame our fleet: if Ioue himselfe, cast not his fier-brands
               Amongst our nauie; that affaire, no man can bring to field:
               Great Aiax Telamonius, to none aliue will yeeld,
               That yeelds to death; and whose life takes, Ceres nutritions
               That can be cut with any iron, or pasht with mightie stones.
               Not to Aeacides himselfe, he yeelds for combats set,
               Though cleare he must giue place for pace, and free swinge of his feete.
               Since then, the battell (being our place, of most care) is made good
               By his high valour; let our aid, see all powres be withstood,
               That charge the left wing: and to that, let vs direct our course,
               Where quickly, feele we this hote foe, or make him feele our force.
            
            
               This orderd; swift-Meriones, went, and forewent his king;
               Till both arriu'd, where one enioynd: when in the Greeks left wing,
               The Troians saw the Cretan king, like fire in fortitude;
               And his attendant in bright armes, so gloriously indude,
               Both chearing the sinister troopes: all at the king addrest,
               And so the skirmish at their sternes, on both parts were increast:
               
                  That, as from hollow bustling winds, engenderd stormes arise,Simile.
               
               When dust doth chiefly clog the waies, which vp into the skies
               The wanton tempest rauisheth; begetting Night of Day;
               
               So came together both the foes: both Iusted to assay,
               And worke with quicke steele, eithers death. Mans fierce Corruptresse Fight
               
               Set vp her bristles in the field, with lances long and light,
               Which thicke, fell foule on eithers face: the splendor of the steele,
               In new skowrd curets, radiant caskes, and burnisht shields, did seele
               Th'assailers eyes vp. He sustaind, a huge spirit that was glad
               To see that labour, or in soule, that stood not stricken sad.
            
            
               Thus these two disagreeing Gods, old Saturns mightie sonnes,
               Afflicted these heroique men, with huge oppressions.
               
                  Ioue honouring Aeacides, (to let the Greeks still trie
               Their want without him) would bestow, (yet still) the victorie
               On Hector, and the Troian powre; yet for Aeacides,
               
               And honor of his mother Que
                     •…
                  e, great Goddesse of the seas,
               He would not let proude Ilion see, the Grecians quite destroid:
               And therefore, from the hoarie deepe, he sufferd so imploid
               Great Neptune in the Grecian aid; who grieu'd for them, and storm'd
               Extremely at his brother Ioue. Yet both, one Goddesse form'd,
               And one soile bred: but Iupiter, precedence tooke in birth,
               And had moreThe Empire of Ioue exceeded Neptunes (saith Plut. vpon this place) because he was more anci
                        •…
                     nt, and excellent in knowledg and wisedom
                        •…
                     . And vpon this verse, viz. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , &c. sets downe this his most worthy to be noted opinion: viz I thinke also that the blessednesse of eternall life, which God enioyes is this: that by any pastime he forgets not notions presently apprebended; for other wise the knowledge & vnderstāding of things taken away; Immortality shold not be lise, b
                        •…
                     t Time, &c. Plutde I side & Osiride. knowledge: for which cause, the other came not forth
               Of his wet kingdome, but with care, of not being seene t'excite
               The Grecian host, and like a man, appeard, and made the fight.
               So these Gods made mens valours great; but equald them with warre
               As harmefull, as their hearts were good; and stretcht those chaines as farre
               On both sides as their lims could beare: in which they were inuolu'd
               Past breach, or loosing; that their knees, might therefore be dissolu'd.
               Then, though a halfe-gray man he were, Cretes soueraigne did excite
               The Greeks to blowes; and flew vpon, the Troians, euen to flight:
               For he, in sight of all the host, Othryoneus slew,
               That from Cabesus, with the fame, of those wa
                     •…
                  es, thither drew
               His new-come forces, and requir'd, without respect of dowre,
               
                  Cassandra, fair'st of Priams race; assuring with his powre,
               A mightie labour: to expell, in their despite from Troy
               
               The sons of Greece. The king did vow, (that done) he should enioy
               His goodliest daughter. He, (in trust, of that faire purchase) fought,
               And at him threw the Cretan king, a al
                     •…
                  nce, that singl'd out
               This great assumer; whom it strooke, iust in his nauils stead;
               His brazen curets helping nought, resignd him to the dead.
               Then did the conquerour exclaime, and thus insulted then:
            
            
               
                  Othryoneus, I will praise, beyond all mortall men,
               Thy liuing vertues; if thou wilt, now perfect the braue vow
               Thou mad'st to Priam, for the wife, he promisd to bestow.
               And where he should haue kept his word, there we assure thee here,
               To giue thee for thy Princely wife, the fairest, and most deare,Idomens insultation on Othry
                     
                        •…
                     ncus.
               
               Of our great Generals femall race, which from his Argiue hall,
               We all will waite vpon to Troy; if with our aids, and all,
               
                  Thou wilt but race this well-built towne. Come therefore, follow me,
               That in our ships, we may conclude, this royall match with thee:
               Ile be no iote worse then my word. With that he tooke his feete,
               And dragg'd him through the feruent fight; In which, did Asius meete
               The victor, to inflict reuenge. He came on foote before
               His horse, that on his shoulders breath'd; so closely euermore
               His coachman led them to his Lord: who held a huge desire
               To strike the King, but he strooke first; and vnderneath his chin,Asius slaine.
               
               At his throats height, through th'other side, his cager lance draue in;
               And downe he busl'd, like an Oake, a Poplar, or a Pine,
               Hewne downe for shipwood, and so lay: his fall did so decline
               The spirit of his chariotere; that lest he should incense
               The victor to empaire his spoile, he durst not driue from thence
               His horse and chariot: and so pleasd, with that respectiue partAntilochus slaughters the chariotere of Asius.
               
               
                  Antilochus, that for his feare, he reacht him with a dart,
               About his bellies midst; and downe, his sad corse fell beneath
               The richly-builded chariot, there labouring out his breath.
               The horse Antilochus tooke off; when, (grieu'd for this euent)
               
                  Deiphobus drew passing neare, and at the victor sentDei
                        •…
                     hobus at Antilochus, and kils Hyps
                        •…
                     nor.
               
               A shining Iauelin; which he saw, and shund; with gathring round
               His body, in his all-round shield; at whose top, with a sound,
               It ouerflew; yet seising there, it did not idlely flie
               From him t
                     •…
                  at wing'd it; his strong hand, still draue it mortally
               On Prince ▪
                  Hypsenor; it did pierce, his liuer, vnderneath
               The veines it passeth: his shrunke knees, submitted him to death.
               And then did lou'd-Deiphobus, miraculously vant:
               Now Asius lies not vnreueng'd, nor doth his spirit wantDeiphobu
                        •…
                      hi
                        •…
                      Braue.
               
               The ioy I wish it; though it be, now entring the strong gate
               Of mightie Pluto: since this hand, hath sent him downe a mate.
            
            
               This glorie in him grieu'd the Greeks, and chiefly the great mind
               Of martiall Antilochus; whom, (though to griefe inclind)
               He left not yet his friend, but ran, and hid him with his shield;
               And to him came two louely friends, that freed him from the field:
               
                  Mecisteus, sonne of Echius; and the right nobly borne
               
                  Alastor, bearing him to fle
                     •…
                  t, and did extremely mourne.
            
            
               
                  Idomeneus suncke not yet, but held his nerues entire;
               His mind much lesse deficient, being fed with firme desire
               To hide more Troians in dim night, or sinke himselfe, in guard
               Of his lou'd countrimen. And then, Alcathous prepar'd
               Worke for his valour; offring fate, his owne destruction.
               A great Heroe, and had grace, to be the loued sonne
               Of Aesietes, sonne in law, to Prince Aeneas Sire;
               
                  Hippodamia marrying: who most enflam'd the fire
               Of her deare parents loue; and tooke, precedence in her birth,
               Of all their daughters; and as much, exceeded in her worth
               (For beautie answerd with her mind; and both, with housewiferie)
               All the faire beautie of young Dames, that vsde her companie;
               And therefore (being the worthiest Dame) the worthiest man did wed
               
                  Of ample Troy. Him Neptune stoopt, beneath the royall force
               Of Idomen; his sparkling eyes, deluding; and the course
               Of his illustrous lineaments, so, out of nature bound,
               That backe, nor forward, he could stirre: but (as he grew to ground
               Stood like a pillar, or high tree, and neither mou'd, nor fear'd:
               When strait the royall Cretans dart, in his mid breast appear'd;
               It brake the curets that were proofe, to euerie other dart,
               Yet now they cleft and rung; the lance, stucke shaking in his heart:
               His heart with panting made it shake. But Mars did now remit
               The greatnesse of it, and the king, now quitting the bragge fit
               Of glorie in Deiphobus, thus terribly exclam'd:
            
            
               
                  Deiphobus, now may we thinke, that we are euenly fam'd,Idomen
                        •…
                      to Deiphobus.
               
               That three for one haue sent to Dis. But come, change blowes with me,
               Thy vaunts for him thou slew'st were vaine: Come wretch, that thou maist see
               What issue loue hath; Ioue begot, Minos, the strength of Crete:
               
               
                  Minos begot Deucalion; Deucalion did beget
               Me Idomen now Cretas king, that here my ships haue brought,
               To bringthy selfe, thy father, friends, all Ilions pompe to nought.
            
            
               
                  Deiphobus at two wayes stood, in doubt to call some one
               (With some retreat) to be his aide, or trie the chance alone.
               At last, the first seem'd best to him; and backe he went to call,
               
                  Anchises sonne to friend; who stood, in troope the last of all,
               Where still he seru'd: which made him still, incense against the king,Aeneas angrie being euer disgraced by Priā.
               
               That, being amongst his best, their Peere, he grac't not any thing
               His wrong'd deserts. Deiphobus, spake to him, standing neare:
               
                  Aeneas? Prince of Troians? if any touch appeareTo him Deiphobus.
               
               Of glorie in thee: thou must now, assist thy sisters Lord,
               And one, that to thy tendrest youth, did carefull guard afford,
               
                  Alcathous, whom Cretas king, hath chiefly slaine to thee;
               His right most challenging thy hand: come therefore follow me.
            
            
               This much excited his good mind, and set his heart on fire,
               Against the Cretan: who child-like, dissolu'd not in his ire,Simile.
               
               But stood him firme: As when, in hils, a strength-relying Bore,
               Alone, and hearing hunters come (whom Tumult flies before)
               Vp thrusts his bristles, whets his tusks, sets fire on his red eyes,
               And in his braue-prepar'd repulse, doth dogs and men despise.
               So stood the famous for his lance; nor shund the coming charge
               That resolute Aeneas brought; yet (since the ods was large)
               He cald, with good right, to his aide, war-skild Ascalaphus,
                  Idomeneus cals his friends to aid
               
               
                  Aphareus, Meriones, the strong Deipyrus,
               
               And Nestors honorable sonne: Come neare, my friends (said he)
               And adde your aids to me alone: Feare taints me worthilie,
               Though firme I stand, and shew it not: Aeneas great in fight,
               And one, that beares youth in his flowre, (that beares the greatest mightAeneas yet a youth as Virgil makes him.
               
               Comes on, with aime, direct at me: had I his youthfull lim
               To beare my mind, he should yeeld Fame, or I would yeeld it him.
            
            
               This said, all held, in many soules, one readie helpfull mind,
               Clapt shields and shoulders, and stood close. Aeneas (not inclind
               
                  With more presumption then the king) cald aid as well as he:
               Diuine Agenor; Hellens loue; who followd instantly,
               And all their forces following them: as after Bellwethers
               The whole flocks follow to their drinke; which sight the shepheard cheres.
               Nor was Aeneas ioy lesse mou'd, to see such troopes attend
               His honord person; and all these, fought close about his friend.
               But two of them, past all the rest, had strong desire to shed
               The blood of either; Idomen, and Cythereas seed.Aene
                        •…
                      and Idomene
                        •…
                      in conflict.
               
               
                  Aeneas first bestowd his lance, which th'other seeing, shund;
               And that (throwne from an idle hand) stucke trembling in the ground.
               But Idomens (discharg'd at him) had no such vaine successe,
               Which Oenomaus entrailes found, in which it did impresse
               His sharpe pile to his fall: his palms, tore his returning earth.
               
                  Idomeneus strait steptin, and pluckt his Iauelin forth,
               But could not spoile his goodly armes, they prest him so with darts.
               And now the long toile of the fight, had spent his vigorous parts,
               And made them lesse apt to auoid, the foe that should aduance;
               Or (when himselfe aduanc't againe) to run and fetch his lance.
               And therefore in stiffe fights of stand, he spent the cruell day:
               When (coming softly from the slaine) Deiphobus gaue way
               To his brght Iauelin at the king, whom he could neuer brooke;
               But then he lost his enuie too: his lance yet, deadly, tookeAscalaphus the sonne of Mars slai
                        •…
                     e by 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
               
               
                  Ascalaphus, the sonne of Mars; quite through his shoulder flew
               The violent head, and downe he fell. Nor yet by all meanes knew
               Wide throated Mars, his sonne was falne: but in Olympus top
               Sad canapied with golden clouds. Ioues counsell had shut vp
               Both him, and all the other Gods, from that times equall taske,
               Which now about Ascalaphus, Strife set; his shining caske
               
                  Deiphobus had forc't from him: but instantly leapt in
               
                  Mars-swift Meriones, and strooke, with his long Iauelin,Deiphobus woū
                     ded by Meridnes.
               
               The right arme of Deiphobus, which made his hand let fall
               The sharp-topt helmet; the prest earth, resounding there withall.
               When, Vulture-like, Meriones, rusht in againe, and drew
               (From out the low part of his arme) his Iauelin, and then flew
               Backe to his friends. Deiphobus (faint with the bloods excesse
               Falne from his wound) was carefully, conuaid out of the preasse
               By his kind brother, by both 
                     •…
                  ides, (Polites) till they gat
               His horse and chariot, that were still, set fit for his retreate;
               And bore him now to Ilion. The rest, fought fiercely on,
               And set a mightie fight on foote. When next, Anchises sonne,
               
                  Aphareus Caletorides (that tan vpon him) st
                     •…
                  oke
               Iust in the throate with his keene lance, and strait his head forsooke
               His vpright cariage; and his shield, his helme, and all with him,
               Fell to the earth: where ruinous death, made prise of euerie lim.
            
            
               
                  Antilochus (discouering well, that Thoons heart tooke checke)
               Let flie, and cut the hollow veine, that runs vp to his necke,
               Along his backe part, quite in twaine: downe in the dust he fell,
               Vpwards, and with extended hands, bad all the world farewell.
               
                  
                  Antilochus rushtnimbly in; and (looking round) made prise
               Of his faire armes; in which affaire, his round set enemies
               Let flie their lances; thundering, on his aduanced targe,
               But could not get his flesh: the God, that shakes the earth, tooke charge
               Of Nestors sonne, and kept him safe: who neuer was away,
               But still amongst the thickest foes, his busie lance did play;
               Obseruing euer when he might, far-off, or neare, offend;
               And watching Asius sonne, in prease, he spide him, and did send
               (Close coming on) a dart at him, that smote in midst his shield;
               In which, the sharpe head of the lance, the blew-hair'd God made yeeld,
               Not pleasd to yeeld his pupils life; in whose shield, halfe the dart
               Stucke like a trunchion, burnd with fire; on earth lay th'other part.
               He seeing no better end of all, retir'd; in feare of worse;
               But him, Meriones pursude; and his lance foundfull course
               To th'others life: it wounded him; betwixt the priuie parts
               And nauill; where (to wretched men, that wars most violent smarts
               Must vndergo) wounds chiefly vexe. His dart, Meriones
               
               Pursude, and Adamas so striu'd, with it, and his misease,
               As doth a Bullocke puffe and storme; whom, in disdained bands,Simile.
               
               The vpland heardsmen striue to cast: so (falne beneath the hands
               Of his sterne foe) Asiades, did struggle, pant, and raue,
               But no long time; for when the lance, was pluckt out, vp he gaue
               His tortur'd soule. Then Troys turne came; when with a Thracian sword
               The temples of Deipyrus, did Hellenus afford
               So huge a blow; it strooke all light, out of his cloudie eyes,
               And cleft his helmet; which a Greeke, (there fighting) made his prise,
               (It fell so full beneath his feet.) Atrides grieu'd to see
               That sight; and (threatning) shooke a lance, at Hellenus; and he
               A bow, halfe drew, at him; at once, out flew both shaft and lance:
               The shaft, Atrides curets strooke, and farre away did glance:
               
                  Atrides dart, of Hellenus, the thrust out bow-hand strooke,Hellenus wounded.
               
               And through the hand, stucke in the bow; Agenors hand did plucke
               From forth the nailed prisoner, the Iauelin quickly out;
               And fairely with a little wooll, enwrapping round about
               The wounded hand; within c a scarffe, he bore it; which his Squire
               Had readie for him: yet the wound, would needs he should retire.
            
            
               
                  Pysander to reuenge his hurt, right on the King ran he;
               A bloodie fate suggested him, to let him runne on thee
               OScoptice. 
                  Menelaus, that he might, by thee, in dangerous warre,
               Be done to death. Both coming on, Atrides lance did erre:
               
                  Pisander strooke Atrides shield, that brake at point, the dart
               Not running through; yet he reioyc't; as playing a victors part.
               
                  Atrides (drawing his faire sword) vpon Pisander flew:
               
                  Pisander, from beneath his shield, his goodly weapon drew;
               Two-edg'd, with right sharpe steele, and long; the handle Oliue tree,
               Well polisht; and to blowes they go; vpon the top strooke he
               
                  Atrides horse-hair'd-featherd helme; Atrides, on his brow
               (Aboue th'extreme part of his nose) laid such a heauie blow,
               
                  That all the bones crasht vnder it, and out his eyes did drop
               Before his feete, in bloodie dust; he after, and shrunke vp
               His dying bodie: which the foote, of his triumphing foe
               Opened; and stood vpon his breast, and off his armes did go:
               This insultation vsde the while: c At length forsake our fleete,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      most ridi
                        •…
                     
                     lous insultation.
               
               (Thus ye false Troians) to whom warre, neuer enough is sweet:
               Nor want ye more impieties; with which ye haue abusde
               Me, (
                     •…
                  e bold dogs) that your chiefe friends, so honourably vsde:
               Nor feare you hospitable, Ioue, that lets such thunders go:
               But build vpon't, he will vnbuild, your towres, that clamber so;
               For rauishing my goods, and wife, in flowre of all her yeares,
               And without cause; nay when that faire, and liberall hand of hers
               Had vsde you so most louingly; and now againe ye would,
               Cast fire into our fleet, and kill, our Princes if ye could.
               Go too, one day you will be curb'd (though neuer so ye thirst
               Rude warre) by warre. O Father Ioue, they say thou art the first
               In wisedome, of all Gods and men; yet all this comes from thee;
               And still thou gratifiest these men, how lewd so ere they be;
               Though neuer they be cloid with sinnes: nor can be satiate
               (As good men should) with this vile warre. Satie
                     •…
                  ie of state,
               Satietie of sleepe and loue, Satietie of ease,
               Of musicke, dancing, can find place; yet harsh warre still must please
               Past all these pleasures, euen past these. They will be cloyd with these
               Before their warre ioyes: neuer warre, giues 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   satieties.
            
            
               This said, the bloody armes were off, and to his souldiers throwne,
               He mixing in first fight againe: and then Harpalion,
               
               (Kind King Pylemens sonne) gaue charge; who, to those warres of Troy,
               
               His loued father followed; nor euer did enioy
               His countries sight againe; he strooke, the targe of A
                        •…
                     reus sonne
               Full in the midst, his iauelins steele; yet had no powre to runne
               The target through: nor had himselfe, the heart to fetch his lance,
               But tooke him to his strength, and cast, on euery side a glance,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Harpalion.
               
               Lest any his deare sides should dart: but Merion as he fled,
               Sent after him a brazen lance, that ranne his eager head,
               Through his right hippe, and all along, the bladders region,
               Beneath the bone; it settl'd him, and 
                     •…
                  et his spirit gone,
               Amongst the hands of his best friends; and like a worme he lay,
               Stretcht on the earth; which his blacke blood, embrewd and flow'd away,
               His corse the Paphlagonians, did sadly waite vpon
               (Repo
                     •…
                  d in his rich chariot) to sacred Ilion.
               
               The king his father following, dissolu'd in kindly teares,
               And no wreake sought for his slaine 
                     •…
                  onne. But, at his slaughterers
               Incensed Paris spent a lance (since he had bene a guest,
               To many Paphlagonians) and through the preasse it prest.
               There was a certaine Augures sonne, that did for wealth excell,
               And yet was honest; he was borne, and did at C
                        •…
                     th dwell:
               Who (though he knew his harmefull fate) would needs his ship ascend▪
               
               His father (Polyidus) oft, would tell him, that his end
               
                  Would either seise him at his house, vpon a sharpe disease;
               Or else amongst the Grecian ships, by Troians slaine. Both these
               Together he desir'd to shun; but the disease (at last,
               And lingring death in it) he left, and warres quicke stroke embrac't:
               The lance betwixt his eare and cheeke, ran in; and dra
                     •…
                  e the mind
               Of both those bitter fortunes out: Night strooke his whole powres blind.
            
            
               Thus fought they like the spirit of fire, nor Ioue-lou'd Hector knew
               How in the fleets left wing, the Greekes, his downe-put souldiers slew
               Almost to victorie: the God, that shakes the earth, so well
               Helpt with his owne strength, and the Greeks, so fiercely did impell.
               Yet Hector made the first place good, where both the ports and wall,
               (The thicke rancke of the Greeke shields broke) he enterd, and did skall,
               Where on the gray seas shore, were drawne (the wall being there but sleight,)
               
                  Protesilaus ships, and those, of Ai
                        •…
                     x, where the fight
               Of men and horse were sharpest set. There the Boeotian band,
               Long-rob'd Iaones, Locrians, and (braue men of their hands)By I
                        •…
                     ons (for Io
                     
                        •…
                     ians) he intends the Athenians.
               
               The Phthian, and Epeian troopes, did spritefully assaile,
               The God-like Hector rushing in; and yet could not preuaile
               To his repulse, though choicest men, of Athens, there made head:
               Amongst whom, was Menesthius Chiefe; whom Phid
                        •…
                     as followed:The names of t
                        •…
                     e Captaines at the fight at the wall, and their souldiers.
               
               
                  Stichius, and Bias, huge in strength. Th'Epeian troopes were led
               By Meges, and Philides cares, Amphion, Dracius.
               
               Before the Ph
                        •…
                     hians, Medon marcht, and Meneptolemus;
               
               And these (with the Boeotian powres) bore vp the fleets defence.
               
                  Oileus, by his brothers side, stood close, and would not thence
               For any moment of that time: but as through fallow fields,Simile, wherein the two A
                        •…
                     aces are compared to two draught 
                        •…
                     xen.
               
               Blacke Oxen draw a well-ioyn'd plough, and either, euenly yeelds
               His thriftie labour; all heads coucht, so close to earth, they plow
               The fallow with their hornes, till out, the sweate begins to flow;
               The stretcht yokes cracke, and yet at last, the furrow forth is driuen:
               So toughly stood these to their taske, and made their worke as euen.
            
            
               But Aiax Telamonius, had many helpfull men,
               That when sweate ran about his knees, and labour flow'd, would then
               Helpe beare his mightie seuen-fold shield: when swift Oileades
               
               The Locrians left, and would not make, those murthrous fights of prease,The Locrians which Oileus Aiax led, were all Archers.
               
               Because they wore no bright steele caskes, nor bristl'd plumes for show,
               Round shields, nor darts of solid Ash; but with the trustie bow,
               And iackes, welld quilted with soft wooll, they came to Troy, and were
               (In their fit place) as confident, as those that fought so neare;
               And reacht their foes so thicke with shafts, that these were they that brake
               The Troian orders first; and then, the braue arm'd men did make
               Good worke with th
                     •…
                  ir close fights before. Behind whom, hauing sho
                     •…
                  ,
               The Locrians hid still; and their foes, all thought of fight forgot;
               With shewes of those farre striking shafts, their eyes were troubled so:
               And then, assur'dly, from the ships, and tents, th'insulting foe,
               Had miserably fled to Troy, had not Polydamas
               
               Thus spoke to Hector. Hector still, impossible tis to passePolyd
                        •…
                      to 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Good counsell vpon you: but say, some God prefers thy deeds:
               
                  In counsels wouldst thou passe vs too? In all things none exceeds.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      ad
                     
                        •…
                     ice to 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               To some, God giues the powre of warre; to some the sl
                     •…
                  ight to dance;
               To some, the art of instruments; some doth for voice aduance:
               And that far-seeing God grants some, th
                     •…
                   wisedome of the minde,
               Which no man can keepe to himselfe: that (though but few can 
                     •…
                  inde)
               Doth profite many, that preserues, the publique weale and sta
                     •…
                  :
               And that, who hath, he best can prise: but, for me, Ile relate
               Onely my censure what's our best. The verie crowne of warre
               Doth burne about thee; yet our men, when they haue reach
                     •…
                   thus farre,
               Suppose their valours crownd, and ceasse. A few still stir their fe
                     •…
                  ,
               And so a few with many fight; sperst thinly through the fleet▪
               
               Retire then, leaue speech to the route, and all thy Princes call;
               That, here, in counsels of most weight, we may resolue of all.
               If hauing likelihood to beleeue, that God wil conquest giue,
               We shall charge through; or with this grace, make our retreate, and liue:
               For (I must needs affirme) I feare, the debt of yesterday
               (Since warre is such a God of change) the Grecians now will pay.
               And since th'insatiate man of warre, remaines at fleet, if there
               We tempt his safetie: no howre more, 
                     •…
                  is hote soule can forbeare.
            
            
               This sound stuffe Hector lik't, approu'd, iumpt from his chariot,
               And said; Polydamas? make good, this place, and suffer not
               One Prince to passe it; I myselfe, will there go, where you see
               Those friends in skirmish; and returne (when they haue heard from me,Hector for his goodly forme compared to a hill of snow.
               
               Command, that your aduice obeys) with vtmost speed: this said,
               With day-bright armes, white plume, white skarffe, his goodly lims arraid,
               He parted from them, like a hill, remouing, all of snow:
               And to the Troian Peres and Chiefes, he flew; to let them know
               The Counsell of Polydamas. All turnd, and did reioyce;
               To haste to Panthus gentle sonne, being cald by Hectors voyce.
               Who (through the forefights making way) lookt for Deiophobus;
               
               King Hellenus, Asiades, Hyrtasian Asius:
               
               Of whom, some were not to be found, vnhurt, or vndeceast;
               Some onely hurt, and gone from field. As further he addrest,
               He found within the fights left wing, the faire-hair'd Hellens loue,
               By all meanes mouing men to blowes; which could by no meanes moue
               
                  Hectors forbeareance; his friends misse, so put his powres in storme:Hector chide
                        •…
                      Paris.
               
               But thus in wonted terms he chid: You, with the finest forme,
               Impostor, womans man: Where are (in your care markt) all these?
               
                  Deiphobus, king Hellenus, Asius Hyrtacides?
               
               
                  Othryoneus, Acamas? now haughtie Ilion
               
               Shakes to his lowest groundworke: now, iust ruine fals vpon
               Thy head, past rescue. He replyed; Hector, why chid'st thou now
               When I am guiltlesse? other times, there are for ease I know,
               Then these; for she that brought thee forth, not vtterly left me
               Without some portion of thy spirit, to make me brother thee.
               But since thou first brought'st in thy force, to this our nauall fight:
               I, and my friends, haue ceaslesse fought, to do thy seruice right.
               But all those friends thou seek'st are slaine, exeepting Hellen
                        •…
                     ,
               
               
                  (Who parted wounded in his hand) and so Deiphobus;
               
               
                  Ioue yet auerted death from them. And now leade thou as farre
               As thy great heart affects; all we, will second any warre
               That thou endurest: And I hope, my owne strength is not lost,
               Though least, Ile fight it to his best; nor further fights the most.
            
            
               This calm'd hote Hectors spleene; and both, turnd where they saw the face
               Of warre most fierce: and that was, where, their friends made good the place
               About renowm'd Polydamas, and God-like Polyphet,
               
               
                  Palmus, Ascanius; Morus, that, Hippotion did beget;
               And from Ascanias wealthie fields, but euen the day before
               Arriu'd at Troy; that with their aide, they kindly might restore
               Some kindnesse they receiu'd from thence: and in fierce fight with these,
               
                  Phalces and tall Orthaus stood, and bold Cebriones.
               
               And then the doubt that in aduice, Polydamas disclosd,
               To fight or flie, Ioue tooke away, and all to fight disposd.
               And as the floods of troubled aire, to pitchie stormes increaseSimile.
               
               That after thunder sweepes the fields, and rauish vp the seas,
               Encountring with abhorred roares, when the engrossed waues
               Boile into foame; and endlesly, one after other raues:
               So rank't and guarded, th'Ilians marcht; some now, more now, and thenThe Troian host, and Hector glorified.
               
               More vpon more, in shining steele; now Captaines, then their men.
               And Hector, like man▪ killing Mars, aduanc't before them all,
               His huge round target before him, through thickn'd, like a wall,
               With hides well coucht, with store of brasse; and on his temples shin'd
               His bright helme, on which danc't his plume: and in this horrid kind,
               (All hid within his worldlike shield) he euerie troope assaid
               For entrie; that in his despite, stood firme, and vndismaid.
               Which when he saw, and kept more off; Aiax came stalking then,
               And thus prouokt him: O good man, why fright'st thou thus our men?
               Come nearer; not Arts want in warre, makes vs thus nauie-bound,Aiax his speech to Hector, Scopt
                        •…
                     cè.
               
               But Ioues direct scourge; his arm'd hand, makes our hands giue you ground:
               Yet thou hop'st (of thy selfe) our spoile: but we haue likewise hands
               To hold our owne, as you to spoile: and ere thy countermands
               Stand good against our ransackt fleete; your hugely-peopl'd towne
               Our hands shall take in; and her towres, from all their heights pull downe.
               And I must tell thee, time drawes on, when, flying, thou shalt crie
               To Ioue, and all the Gods, to make, thy faire-man'd horses flie
               More swift then Falkons; that their hoofes, may rouse the dust, and beare
               Thy bodie, hid, to Ilion. This said, his bold words were
               Confirm'd, as soone as spoke; Ioues bird, the high flowne Eagle tooke
               The right hand of their host, whose wings, high acclamations strooke,
               From foorth the glad breasts of the Greeks. Then Hector made replie:
               Vaine-spoken man, and glorious; what hast thou said? would IHector to Aiax.
               
               As surely were the sonne of Ioue, and of great Iuno borne;
               Adorn'd like Pallas, and the God, that lifts to earth the Morne;
               As this day shall bring harmefull light, to all your host; and thou,
               (If thou dar'st stand this lance) the earth, before the ships shalt strow,
               Thy bosome torne vp; and the dogs, with all the fowle of Troy,
               
               
                  Be satiate with thy fat, and flesh▪ This said, with showting ioy
               His first troopes follow'd; and the last, their showts with showts repeld:
               
                  Greece answerd all, nor could her spirits, from all shew rest conceald.
               And to so infinite a height, all acclamations stroue,
               They reacht the splendors, stucke about, the vnreacht throne of Ioue.
               
            
            
               COMMENTARIVS.
               
                  a 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. illustrium Hippemolgorum: 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Lacte Vescentium, &c. Laurentius Valla, and Eobanus Hessus, (who I thinke translated Homer into Hexameters out of Vallas prose) take 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the Epithete to 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , for a nation so called, and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , translates, vt quae sine vllis diuitijs, equino victitat lacte; intending gens Agauorum: which he takes for those iust men of life likewise, which Homer commends: vtterly mistaking 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   signifying preclarus, or illustris, whose genitiue case plurall is vsed here: and the word, Epithete to 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ; together signifying, Illustrium Hippemolgorum, and they being bred, and continually fed with milke (which the next word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   signifies) Homer cals most iust, long-liued & innocēt, in the words 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , signifying longaeuus; ab 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      epitatico, & 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      vita. But of some inops, being a compound ex 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      priuat. & 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      victus: and frō thence had Valla his interpretation: vt quae sine vllis diuitijs, but where is equino lacte? But not to shew their errors, or that I vnderstand how others take this place different from my translation, I vse this note, so much as to intimate what Homer would haue noted, and doth teach; that men brought vp with that gentle, and soft-spirit-begettingmilk, are long liued, & in nature most iust and innocent. Which kind of food, the most ingenious and graue Plutarch, in his oration, De esu carnium, seems to prefer before the foode of flesh: where he saith, By this meanes also, Tyrants laide the foundations of their homicides: for, (as amongst the Athenians) first, they put to death the most notorious or vilest Sycophant Epitedeius; so the second and third: then being accustomed to blood, they slue good, like bad: as Niceratus, the Emperour Theramenes, Polemarchus the Philosopher, &c. So at the first, men killed some harmfull beast or other, then some kind of fowle, some fish; till taught by these, and stirred vp with the lust of their pallats, they proceeded to slaughter of the laborious Ox, the man clothing, or adorning sheepe, the house guarding cocke, &c. and by little and little cloyed with these: warre, and the foode of men, men fell to, &c.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. Circum autem Aiaces, &c. To iudgement of this place Spondanus calleth all sound iudgements, to condemnation of one Panaedes a Iudge of games on Olympus: whose brother Amphidamas being dead, Gamnictor his son celebrated his funerals, calling all the most excellent to contention, not onely for strength and swif
                     •…
                  nesse, but in learning likewise, and force of wisedome. To this generall co
                     •…
                  tention came Homer, and Hesiodus: who casting downe verses on both parts, and of all measures, (Homer by all consents questionlesse obtaining the garland.) Panaedes bade both recite briefly their best: for which Hesiodus cited these verses: which as well as I could, in haste, I haue translated out of the beginning of his second Booke of workes and dayes.
               
                  When Atlas birth, (the Pleiades) arise,
                  Haruest begin; plow, when they leaue the skies.
                  Twise twentie nights, and daies, these hide their heads:
                  The yeare then turning, leaue againe their beds,
                  And shew when first to whet the haruest steele.
                  
                     This likewise is the fields law, where men dwell
                  Neare Neptunes Empire: and where farre away,
                  The winding vallies, flie the flowing sea,
                  And men inhabite the fat region.
                  There, naked plow, sow naked, nak't cut downe;
                  If Ceres labours thou wilt timely vse,
                  That timely fruits, and timely reuenewes,
                  Serue thee at all parts, lest at any, Need
                  Send thee to others grudging dores to feed, &c.
               
               These verses (howsoeuer Spondanus stands for Homers) in respect of the peace and thrift they represent; are like enough to carrie it for Hesiodus, euen in these times iudgements. Homers verses are these.
               
                  —Thus Neptune rowsd these men;
                  And round about th' Aiaces did, their Phalanxes maintaine,
                  Their station firme; whom Mars himselfe, (had he amongst them gone)
                  Could not disparage; nor Ioues Maide, that sets men fiercer on.
                  For now the best were chosen out, and they receiu'd th'aduance
                  Of Hector and his men so full, that lance, was lin'd with lance;
                  Shields, thickned with opposed shields; targets to targets nail'd:
                  Helmes stucke to helmes; and man to man, grew; they so close assail'd:
                  Plum'd caskes, were hang'd in eithers plumes: all ioyn'd so close their stands;
                  Their lances stood, thrust home so thicke, by such all-daring hands.
                  All bent their firme breasts to the point; and made sad fight their ioy
                  Of both: Troy all in heapes strooke first, and Hector first of Troy.
                  
                  And as a round peece of a rocke, &c.
               
               Which martiall verses, though they are as high as may be for their place, and end of our Homer: are yet infinitely short of his best in a thousand other places. Nor thinke I the contention at any part true; Homer being affirmed by good Authors, to be a hundred yeares before Hesiodus: and by al others much the older, Hesiodus being neare in blood to him. And this, for some varietie in your delight, I thought not amisse to insert here.
               
                  c 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the Commentors translate in this place, funda, most vntruly: there being no slings spoken of in all these Iliads; nor any such seruice vsed in all these wars, which in my last annotation in this booke will appearemcre apparent. But here, and in this place, to translate the word funda (though most commonly it signifieth so much) is most ridiculous. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   likewise signifying, ornamentum quoddam muliebre: which therefore I translate a skarffe: a fitter thing to hang his arme in then a sling; and likely that his Squire carried about him, either as a fauour of his owne mistresse, or his maisters, or for eithers ornament: skarffs being no vnusuall weare for souldiers.
               
                  d 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. Relinquetis demum sic, &c. At length for sake our fleete, &c. Now come we to the continuance (with cleare notes) of Menelaus ridic
                     •…
                  lous character. This verie beginning of h
                     •…
                   insultation, (in the maner of it) preparing it, and the simply vttered vpbraids of the Troians following, confirming it most ing
                     •…
                  
                  niously. First, that the Troians rauished his wife in the flowre of her yeares, calling her 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which Spondanus translateth virginē vxorem, being here to be translated iuuenilē vxorem: 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   signifying iuuenilis: but they will haue it virginem; because Homer must be taxed, with ignorance of what the next age after Troys siege reuealed of the age before; in which Theseus is remembred first to haue rauish
                     •…
                  
                  
                  Hellen; and that by Theseus, Iphigenia was begotten of her: which being granted, maketh much against Homer (if yòu marke at) for making Menelaus thinke yet, he maried her a virgin (if Spondanus translation should passe.) First, no man being so simple to thinke, that the Poet thinketh alwaies as he maketh others speake: and next, it being no verie strange, or rare credulitie, in men, to beleeue they marrie maids when they do not. Much more such a man made for the purpose as M
                        •…
                     laus, whose good husbandly imagination of his wiues maidenhead at their mariage, I hope answereth at full the most foolish taxation of Homers ignorance: in which a man 
                     •…
                  ay wonder at these learned Criticks ouerlearnednesse: and what ropes of sand they make with their kinde of intelligencing knowledge. I meane, in such as abuse the name of Criticks, as many versers do, of Poets: the rest, for their industries, I reuerence. But all this time, I lose my collection of Menelaus sillie and ridiculous vpbraids here giuen to the Troians. First, (as aboue said) for rauishing his wife in the flowre of her yeares: when should a man play such a part but then? though in deed poore Menelaus had the more wrong or losse in it, and yet Paris the more reason. He addeth then, and without cause or iniurie, a most sharp one in Homer, and in Menelaus as much ridiculous: as though louers looked for more cause in their loue-suits, then the beauties of their beloued: or that men were made cuckolds only for spite, or reuenge of some wrong precedent. But indeed, Menelaus true simplicitie in this, to thinke harmes should not be done without harmes foregoing (no not in these vnsmarting harmes) maketh hi
                     •…
                   well deserue his Epithete 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Yet further see how his pure imbecillitie preuaileth: and how by a thred Homer cutteth him out here, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , postquam amicè tractati fuistis apud ipsam, after ye had bene kindly entertaind at her hands, I hope you will thinke nothing could encourage them more then that. See how he speaketh against her in taking her part: and how ingeniously Homer giueth him still some colour of reason for his senslesnesse, which colour yet, is enough to deceiue our Commentors: they finde not yet the tame figure of our horned. But, they and all Translators, still force his speeches to the best part. Yet further then make we our dissection. And now (saith our Simplician) you would againe shew your iniquities, euen to the casting of pernicious fire into our fleete, and killing our Princes if you could. Would any man thinke this in an Enemie? and such an Enemie as the Troians? Chide Enemies in armes, for offering to hurt their Enemies? Would you haue yet plainer this good Kings simplicity? But his slaughters sometimes, and wise words, are those mists our Homer casteth before the eyes of his Readers, that hindereth their prospects, to his more constant and predominant softnesse and simplicitie. Which he doth, imagining his vnderstanding Readers eyes more sharpe, then not to see peruially through them. And yet, would not haue these great ones themselues neede so subtle flatteries: but that euerie shadow of their worth might remoue all the substance of their worthlesnesse. I am weary with beating this thin thicket for a woodcocke, and yet, lest it proue still too thicke for our sanguine and gentle complexions to shine through, in the next words of his lame reproofe, he crieth out against Iupiter, saying, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Profectò, te aiunt sapientia (vel circa mentem) superare caeteros homines atque Deos: wherein he affirmeth, that men say so, building (poore man) euen that vnknowne secret to himselfe, vpon others, & now, I hope, sheweth himselfe emptie enough. But, lest you should say I striue to illustrate the Sun, and make cleare a thing plaine, heare how darke, and perplext a riddle it sheweth yet to our good Spondanus, being an excellent scholler, and Homers Commentor. Whose words vpon this speech, are these: Facundiam Menelai cum acumine,

antea praedicauit Homerus (intending in Antenors speech, lib. 3. vnt
                     •…
                   which I pray you turne) cuius hîc luculentum exemplum habes. Vehemens autem est eius hoc loco oratio, vt qui iniuriarum sibi à Troianis in vxoris raptu illatarum recordetur, qua praesens eorundem in Graecos impetus exacerbauit. Primùm itaque in Troianos inuehitur, & eorum furorem tandem aliquando cohibitum iri comminatur. Deindè, per Apostrophem, ad Iouem conqueritur, de inexplebili pugnandi ardore, quibus Troiani vehementer inflammantur. Would any man beleeue this serious blindnes in so great a scholler? Nor is he alone s
                     •…
                   taken in his eyes, but al the rest, of our most prophaned and holy Homers Traducers.
               
                  c 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. Et benè torta ouis lana (or rather, benè torto ouis flore.) Definitio fundae (saith Spondanus) vel potius periphrastica descriptio. The definition, or rather paraphrasticall description of a sling: a most vnsufferable exposition: not a sling being to be heard of (as I before affirmed) in all the seruices exprest in these Iliads. It is therefore the true periphrasis of a light kind of armor called a iacke, that all our archers vsed to serue in of old: and were euer quilted with wooll: and (because 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   signifieth as well qui facili motu versatur & circumagitur, as well as, benè vel pulchré tortus) for their lightnesse and aptnesse to be worne, partaketh with the word in that signification. Besides, note the words that follow, which are: 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , & Metri causa vsurpatur 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. frequenter iacientes, and à tergo iacientes, shooting, striking, or wounding so thicke, and at the backes of the armed men; not hurling: here being no talke of any stones, but onely 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , conturbabant enim sagittae. And when saw any man slings lined with w
                     •…
                  ll? to keepe their stones warme? or to dull their deliuerie? and I am sure they hurled not shafts out of them? The agreement of the Greekes with our English, as well in all other their greatest vertues, as this skill with their bowes: other places of these Annotations shall clearely demonstrate; and giue (in my conceipt) no little honour to our Countrie.
            
            The end of the thirteenth Booke.
         
         
            
            THE XIIII. BOOKE OF HOMERS ILIADS.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  
                     ATrides, to behold the skirmish, brings
                  Old Nestor▪
                      and the other 
                        •…
                     ounded kings.
                  
                     Iuno (receiuing of the Cyprian Dame
                  Her Ceston, whence her sweet enticements came)
                  Descends to Somnus, and gets him to bind
                  The powres of Ioue with sleepe, to free her mind.
                  
                     Neptune assists the Greeks, and of the foe,
                  
                     Slaughter inflicts a mightie ouer throw.
                  
                     Aiax, so sore, strikes Hector with a stone,
                  It makes him spit blood, and his sense sets gone.
               
            
            
               Another Argument.
               
                  In 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      with sleepe, and bed, heauens Queene,
                  Euen Ioue himselfe, makes ouerseene.
               
            
            
               
                  NOt wine, nor feasts, could lay their soft chaines on old Nestors 
                  
                     •…
                  areThis first verse (after the first foure syllables) is to be read 
                        〈◊〉
                      one of our Tens.
               
               To this high Clamor; who requir'd, Machaons thoughts to beare
               His care in part, about the cause; for me thinke still (said he)
               The crie increases. I must needs, the watch towre mount to see
               Which way the flood of warre doth driue. Still drinke thou wine, and eate
               Till faire-hair'd Hecamed hath giuen, a little water heate,
               To cleanse the quitture from thy wound. This said, the goodly shield
               Of war-like Thrasimed, his sonne, (who had his owne in field)
               He tooke; snatcht vp a mightie lance; and so stept forth to view
               Cause of that Clamor. Instantly, th'vnworthy cause he knew,
               The Grecians wholly put in rout; the Troians rowting still,
               Close at the Greeks backs, their wall rac't: the old man mournd this ill;
               And as when, with vnwieldie waues, the great Sea forefeeles winds,Simil
                        •…
                     .
               
               That both waies murmure, and no way, her certaine current finds,
               But pants and swels confusedly; here goes, and there will stay,
               Till on it, ai
                     •…
                  e casts one firme winde, and then it rolles away:
               So stood old Nestor in debate, two thoughts at once on wing
               In his discourse; if first to take, direct course to the King,
               Or to the multitude in fight. At last, he did conclude
               To visite Agamemnon first: meane time both hosts imbrewd
               Their steele in one anothers blood, nought wrought their healths but harmes:
               Swords, huge stones, double-headed darts, still thumping on their armes.
               And now the Ioue-kept Kings, whose wounds, were yet in cure, did meet
               Old Nestor, Diomed, Ithacus, and Atreus sonne, from fleet,
               
                  Bent for the fight, which was farre off, the ships being drawne to shoreAgamemnon, Vlysses, and Diomed wounded, go towards▪ the 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               On heapes at first, till all theire stems, a wall was raisd before;
               Which (though not great) it yet suffisd, to hide them, though their men
               Were something streighted; for whose scope, in forme of battel then,
               They drew them through the spacious shore, one by another still;
               Till all the bosome of the Strand, their sable bulks did fill:
               Euen till they tooke vp all the space, twixt both the Promontori
                     •…
                  .
               These kings (like Nestor) in desire, to know for what those cries
               Became so violent; came along (all leaning on their da
                     •…
                  ts)
               To see, though not of powre to fight; sad, and suspicious heartsAgamemnon to Nestor.
               
               Distempring them, and (meeting now, Nestor) the king in feare
               Cried out, O Nestor our renowne? why shewes thy presence here?
               The harmefull fight abandoned? now Hector will make good,
               The threatning vow he made, (I feare) that till he had our blood,
               And fir'd our fleet, he neuer more, would turne to Ilion.
               
               Nor is it long, I see, before, his whole will, will be done.
               O Gods, I now see all the Greeks, put on Achilles ire,
               Against my honour; no meane left, to keepe our fleet from fire.
            
            
               He answerd; Tis an euident truth, not Ioue himselfe can now,Nestor to Aga
                     
                        •…
                     emnon.
               
               (With all the thunder in his hands) preuent our ouerthrow.
               The wall we thought inuincible, and trusted more then Ioue;
               
               Is scal'd, rac't, enterd, and our powres, (driuen vp) past breathing, proue
               A most ineuitable fight: both slaughters so commixt,
               That for your life, you cannot put, your diligent'st thought betwixt
               The Greeks and Troians; and as close, their throates cleaue to the skie.
               Consult we then (if that will serue;) for fight, aduise not I;
               It fits not wounded men to fight. Atrides answerd him,
               If such a wall, as cost the Greeks, so many a tired lim,
               And such a dike be past, and rac't, that (as your selfe said well)Agamemnons replie to Nestor, 
                        •…
                     rging flight.
               
               We all esteemd inuincible, and would, past doubt repell
               The world, from both our fleete and vs: it doth directly show,
               That here Ioue vowes our shames, and deaths. I euermore did know
               His hand from ours, when he helpt vs: and now I see as cleare
               That (like the blessed Gods) he holds, our hated enemies deare;
               Supports their armes, and pinnions ours. Conclude then, tis in vaine
               To striue with him. Our ships drawne vp, now let vs lanch againe,
               And keepe at anchor, till calme Night; that then (perhaps) our foes
               May calme their stormes, and in that time, our scape we may dispose:
               
                  It is not any shame to flie, from ill, although by night:
               
               
                  Knowne ill, he better does that flies, then he it takes in fight.
               
            
            
               
                  Vlysses frown'd on him, and said; Accurst, why talk'st thou thus?Vlysses bitter answer to Aga
                     
                        •…
                     mnon.
               
               Would thou hadst led some babarous host, and not commanded vs
               Whom Ioue made souldiers from our youth, that age might scorne to flie
               From any charge it vndertakes; and euery dazeled eye
               The honord hand of warre might close. Thus wouldst thou leaue this towne
               For which our many miseries felt, entitle it our owne?
               Peace, lest some other Greeke giue eare, and heare a sentence such
               As no mans pallate should prophane; at least, that knew how much
               
                  His owne right weigh'd, and being a Prince, and such a Prince as beares
               Rule of so many Greeks as thou. This counsell lothes mine eares;
               Let others toyle in fight and cries, and we so light of heeles
               Vpon their verie noise, aud grones, to hoise away our keeeles.
               Thus we should fit the wish of Troy, that being something neare
               The victorie, we giue it cleare: and we were sure to beare
               A slaughter to the vtmost man: for no man will sustaine
               A stroke, the fleete gone; but at that, looke still, and wish him slaine:
               And therefore (Prince ofa men) be sure, thy censure is vnfit.
            
            
               O Ithacus (replied the King) thy bitter termes haue smit
               My heart in sunder. At no hand, gainst any Princes will
               Do I command this; would to God, that any man of skill,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to Vlysses.
               
               To giue a better counsell would; or old, or younger man:
               My voice should gladly go with his. Then Diom
                        •…
                     d began.
            
            
               The man not farre is, nor shall aske, much labour to bring in,Diomed to Aga
                     
                        •…
                     non and the rest.
               
               That willingly would speake his thoughts, if spoken, they might win
               Fit eare; and suffer no empaire, that I discouer them,
               Being yongest of you: since, my Sire, that heir'd a Diadem,
               May make my speech to Diadems, decent enough, though he
               Lies in his sepulcher at Thebes. I bost this pedigree, b
                  Diom
                        •…
                     ds pod
                        •…
                     
                     gree.
               
               
                  Portheus, three famous sonnes begot, that in high Calidon,
               
               And Pleuron kept, with state of kings, their habitation.
               
                  Agrius, Melas, and 
                     •…
                  he third, the horseman Oeneus,
               
               My fathers father, t
                     •…
                  at exceld, in actions generous,
               The other two: but these kept home, my father being driuen
               With wandring, and aduentrous spirits; for so the king of heauen,
               And th'other Gods, set downe their willes: and he to Argos came,
               Where he begun the world, and dwelt; there marying a dame,
               One of Adrastus femall race. He kept a royall house,
               For he had great demeanes, good land, and (being industrious)
               He planted many orchard grounds, about his house; and bred
               Great store of sheepe. Besides all this, he was well qualited,
               And past all Argiues for his speare: and these digressiue things
               Are such as you may well endure; since (being deriu'd from kings,
               And kings not poore, nor vertulesse) you cannot hold me base,
               Nor scorne my words: which oft (though true) in meane men, meet disgrace.
               How euer; they are these in short. Let vs be seene at fight,
               And yeeld to strong Necessitie, though wounded; that our sight
               May set those men on, that of late, haue to Ac
                        •…
                     illes spleene
               Bene too indulgent, and left blowes: but be we onely seene
               Not come within the reach of darts; lest wound, on wound we lay:
               (Which reuerend Nestors speech implide) and so farre him obay.
            
            
               This counsell gladly all obseru'd; went on, A
                        •…
                     des led;
               Nor Neptune this aduantage lost, but closely followed;
               And like an aged man appear'd, t' A
                        •…
                     ides; whose right hand
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      appears lik
                        •…
                      an aged 
                        〈◊〉
                      to 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               He seisd, and said; Atrides, this, doth passing 
                     •…
                  tly stand
               With sterne Achilles wreakfull spirit; that he can stand a sterne
               His ship; and both in fight and death, the Greci
                        •…
                     
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   discerne:
               
                  Since, not in his breast glowes one sparke, of any humane mind;
               But, be that his owne bane; let God, by that losse make him findNeptune to Agam
                        •…
                     non.
               
               How vile a thing he is: for know, the blest Gods haue not giuen
               Thee euer ouer; but perhaps, the Troians may from heauen
               Receiue that iustice. Nay tis sure, and thou shalt see their fals:
               Your fleete soone freed; and for fights here, they glad to take their wals.
               This said, he made knowne who he was, and parted with a crie,
               As if ten thousand men had ioynd, in battaile then; so hie
               His throate flew through the host: and so, this great earth-shaking God
               Chear'd vp the Greeke hearts, that they wisht, their paines no period.
            
            
               
                  Saturnia from Olympus top, saw her great brother there,
               And her great husbands brother too, exciting euery where
               The glorious spirits of the Greeks; which, as she ioy'd to see:
               So (on the fountfull Idas top) Ioues sight did disagree
               With her contentment; since she fear'd, that his hand would descend,
               And checke the sea-Gods practises. And this she did contend
               How to preuent; which thus seem'd best: To decke her curiously,Iu
                        •…
                     o prepares her selfe to deceiue Ioue.
               
               And visite the Idalian hill, that so the Lightners eye
               She might enamour with her lookes, and his high temples steepe
               (Euen to his wisedome) in the kind, and golden iuyce of sleepe.
               So tooke she chamber, which her sonne, the God of ferrary,
               With firme doores made, being ioyned close, and with a priuie key,
               That no God could command but Ioue; where (enterd) she made fast
               The shining gates; and then vpon, her louely bodie cast
               
                  Ambrosia, that first made it cleare; and after, laid on it
               An odorous, rich, and sacred oyle, that was so wondrous sweet,Te
                        •…
                     hyomenon 
                        •…
                     guentum.
               
               That, euer, when it was but toucht, it sweetn'd heauen and earth.
               Her body being cleansd with this, her Tresses she let forth,
               And comb'd, (her combe dipt in the oyle) then wrapt them vp in cutles:
               And thus (het deathlesse head adornd) a heauenly veile she hurles
               On her white shoulders; wrought by her, that rules in housewiferies,
               Who woue it full of antique workes, of most diuine deuice.
               And this, with goodly clasps of gold, she fastn'd to her breast:
               Then with a girdle (whose rich sphere, a hunderd studs imprest)
               She girt her small wast. In her eares (tenderly pierc't) she wore
               Pearles, great, and orient: on her head, a wreath not worne before
               Cast beames out like the Sunne. At last, she to her feete did tie
               Faire shoes; and thus entire attir'd, she shin'd in open skie:
               Cald the faire Paphian Queene apart, from th'other Gods, and said;
               Lou'd daughter? should I aske a grace, should I, or be obeyd?I
                        •…
                     o to Venus.
               
               Or wouldst thou crosse me? being incenst, since I crosse thee, and take
               The Greeks part, thy hand helping Troy? She answerd, That shall makeV
                        •…
                     us to Iu
                        •…
                     .
               
               No difference in a different cause: aske (ancient Deitie)
               What most contents thee; my mind stands, inclin'd as liberally,
               To grant it, as thine owne to aske; prouided that it be
               A fauour fit, and in my powre. She (giuen deceiptfully)
               Thus said; Then giue me those two powres, with which both men and Gods
               Thou vanquishest, Loue, and Desire, For now, the periods
               
                  Of all the many-feeding earth, and the originall
               Of all the gods, Oceanus; and Thetis, whom we call
               Our mother, I am going to greet: they nurst me in their court,
               And brought me vp; receiuing me, in most respectfull sort
               From Phaea; when Ioue vnder earth, and the vnfruitfull seas
               Cast Saturne. These I go to see, intending to appease
               Iarres growne betwixt them, hauing long, abstaind from speech and bed;
               Which iarres, could I so reconcile, that, in their angers stead
               I could place loue; and so renew, their first societie;
               I should their best lou'd be esteem'd, and honord endlesly.
            
            
               She answerd, Tis not fit, nor iust, thy will should be denied,Venus to Iuno.
               
               Whom Ioue, in his embraces holds. This spoken, she vntied,
               And from her odorous bosome tooke, her Ceston; in whose sphere
               Were all enticements to delight, all Loues; all Longings were,
               
                  Kind conference; Faire speech, whose powre, the wisest doth enflame:
               This, she resigning to her hands, thus vrg'd her by her name.
            
            
               Receiue this bridle, thus faire wrought; and put it twixt thy brests:
               Where all things, to be done, are done; and whatsoeuer rests
               In thy desire, returne with it. The great-eyd Iuno smild,
               And put it twixt her brests. Loues Queene, thus cunningly beguild,
               To Ioues court flew. Saturnia, (straight stooping from heauens height)
               
                  Pieria, and Emathia, (those countries of delight)
               Soone reacht, and to the snowy mounts, where Thracian souldiers dwell,
               (Approaching) past their tops vntoucht. From Athos then she fell,
               Past all the brode sea; and arriu'd, in Lemnos, at the towres,
               Of god-like Thoas; where she met, the Prince of all mens powres,
               
                  Deaths brother, Sleepe; whose hand she tooke, and said; Thou king of men,Iuno to Somn
                        •…
                     .
               
               Prince of the Gods too: if before, thou heardst my suites: againe
               Giue helpefull eare, and through all times, Ile offer thanks to thee.
               Lay slumber on Ioues fierie eyes: that I may comfort me
               With his embraces. For which grace, Ile grace thee with a throne
               Incorruptible, all of gold, and elegantly done
               By Mulciber: to which, he forg'd, a footestoole for the ease
               Of thy soft feete; when wine, and feasts, thy golden humours please.
            
            
               Sweet Sleepe replyed; Saturnia, there liues not any godSomn
                        •…
                      to Iuno.
               
               (Besides Ioue) but I would becalme: I, if it were the flood
               That fathers all the Deities, the great Ocean
                        •…
                     s.
               
               But Ioue we dare not come more neare, then he commandeth vs.
               Now you command me, as you did, when Ioues great minded sonne,
               
                  Alcides (hauing sackt the towne, of stubborne Ilion)
               Tooke saile from thence; when by your charge; I pour'd about Ioues mind
               A pleasing slumber; calming him, till thou drau'st vp the wind,
               In all his cruelties, to sea; that set his sonne ashore,
               In Cous, farre from all his friends; which (waking) vext so sore
               The supreme godhead, that he cast, the gods about the skie,
               And me (aboue them all) he fought: whom he had vtterly
               Hurld from the sparkling firmament; if all-gods-
                     •…
                  aming Night,
               
               (Whom, flying, I besought for aid) had sufferd his despight,
               
                  And not preseru'd me: but his wrath, with my offence dispenc't,
               For feare t'offend her; and so ceast, though neuer so incenst:
               And now another such escape, you wish I should prepare.
            
            
               She answerd; What hath thy deepe rest, to do with his deepe care▪
                  Iuno to Som
                        •…
                     .
               
               As though Ioues loue to Ilion, in all degrees were such,
               As twas to Hercules, his sonne? and so would storme as much
               For their displeasure, as for his? away, I will remoue
               Thy feare, with giuing thee the dame, that thou didst euer loue;
               One of th
                     •…
                   faire young Graces borne, diuine Pasithae.
               
            
            
               This started Somnus into ioy; who answerd, Sweare to me,
               By those inuiolable springs, that feed the Stygian lake:
               With one hand touch the nourishing earth; and in the other, take
               The marble sea; that all the gods, of the infernall state,
               Which circle Saturne, may to vs, be witnesses; and rate
               What thou hast vow'd: that with all truth, thou wilt bestow on me,
               The dame (I grant) I euer lou'd, diuine Pasithae.
               
            
            
               She swore, as he enioyn'd in all, and strengthend all his ioyes,The oath of Iuno to Som
                        •…
                     .
               
               By naming all th'infernall gods, surnam'd the Titanois.
               
            
            
               The oath thus taken, both tooke way, and made their quicke repaire
               To Ida, from the towne, and Ile, all hid in liquid aire.
               At Lecton first, they left the sea; and there, the land they trod▪
               
               The fountfull nurse of sauages, with all her woods did nod,
               Beneath their feete: there Somnus staid, lest Ioues bright eye should see;
               And yet (that he might see to Ioue) he climb'd the goodliest treeSomnus climes a 
                        〈◊〉
                      tree.
               
               That all th'Idalian mountaine bred, and crownd her progenie:
               A firre it was, that shot past aire, and kist the burning skie.
               There sate he hid in his darke armes, and in the shape, withall,
               Of that continuall prating bird, whom all the Deities call
               
                  Chalcis; but men Cymmindis name. Saturnia tript apace
               Vp to the top of Gargarus, and shewd her heauenly face
               To Iupiter; who saw, and lou'd; and with as hote a fire,
               (Being curious in her tempting view) as when with first desire
               (The pleasure of it being stolne) they mixt, in loue and bed.
               And (gazing on her still) he said: Saturnia, what hath bred
               This haste in thee, from our high court? and whither tends thy gate?
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to Iuno:
               
               That voide of horse and chariot, fit for thy soueraigne state,
               Thou lackiest here? Her studied fraude, replyed; My iourney now
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      answer.
               
               Leaues state, and labours to do good. And where, in right I owe
               All kindnesse to the Sire of gods; and our good mother Queene,
               That nurst, and kept me curiously, in court, (since both haue bene
               Long time at discord) my desire, is to attone their hearts;
               And therefore go I now to see, those earths extremest parts;
               For whose farre-seate, I spar'd my horse, the skaking of this hill,
               And left them at the foote of it: for they must taste their fill
               Of trauaile with me; that must draw, my coach, through earth and seas;
               Whose farre-intended reach, respect, and care not to displease
               Thy graces: made me not attempt, without thy gracious leaue.
            
            
               The cloud-compelling god, her guile, in this sort did receiue;
               
                  
                  Iuno, thou shalt haue after leaue, but ere so farre thou stray,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      with his 
                        〈◊〉
                      to Iuno.
               
               Conuert we our kind thoughts to loue; that now, doth euery way
               Circle, with victorie, my powers: nor yet with any dame;
               (Woman, or goddesse) did his fires, my bosome so enflame
               As now, with thee: not when it lou'd, the parts so generous
               
                  Ixions wife had, that brought foorth, the wise Pyrithous;
               
               Nor when the louely dame, Acrisius daughter stird
               My amorous powres, that Perseus bore, to all men else preferd;
               Nor when the dame that Phenix got, surprisd me with her sight;
               Who, the diuine-soul'd Rhadamanth, and Minos brought to light;
               Nor Semele, that bore to me, the ioy of mortall men,
               The sprightly Bacchus; Nor the dame, that Thebes renowned then,
               
                  Alcmena, that bore Hercules; Latona, so renownd;
               Queene Ceres, with the golden haire; nor thy faire eyes did wound,
               My entrailes to such depth as now, with thirst of amorous ease.
            
            
               The cunning dame seem'd much incenst, and said, what words are these,Iunos 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to Ioue in satisfying his 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Vnsufferable Saturns sonne? What? here? in Idas height?
               Desir'st thou this? how fits it vs? or what if in the sight
               Of any god, thy will were pleasd? that he, the rest might bring
               To witnesse thy incontinence; t'were a dishonourd thing.
               I would not shew my face in heauen, and rise from such a bed.
               But if loue be so deare to thee, thou hast a chamber sted,
               Which Vulcan purposely contriu'd, with all fit secrecie:
               There sleepe at pleasure. He replyed; I feare not if the eye
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Of either god, or man obserue; so thicke a cloude of gold
               Ile cast about vs, that the Sunne, (who furthest can behold)
               Shall neuer find vs. This resolu'd, into his kind embrace,
               He tooke his wife: beneath them both, faire Tellus strewd the placeThe bed of 
                        〈◊〉
                      and Iuno.
               
               With fresh-sprung herbes, so soft, and thicke, that vp aloft it bore
               Their heauenly bodies: with his leaues, did deawy Latus store
               Th'Elysian mountaine; Saffron flowres, and Hyacinths helpt make
               The sacred bed; and there they slept: when sodainly there brake,
               A golden vapour out of aire, whence shining dewes did fall;
               In which they wrapt them close, and slept, till Ioue was tam'd withall.
            
            
               Meane space flew Somnus to the ships, found Neptune out, and said,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Now, chearfully assist the Greeks, and giue them glorious head;
               At least, a little, while Ioue sleepes; of whom through euery limme,
               I pour'd darke sleepe; Saturnias loue, hath so 
                     〈◊〉
                   him.
            
            
               This newes made Neptune more secure, in giuing Grecians heart;
               And through the first fights, thus he stird, the men of most desert.
            
            
               Yet, Grecians: shall we put our ships, and conquest in the hands,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to the 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Of Priams Hector, by our sloth? he thinks so, and commands,
               With pride according; all because, Achilles keepes away.
               Alas, as we were nought but him? we little need to stay▪
               
               On his assistance, if we would, our owne strengths call to field,
               And mutually maintaine repulse. Come on then, all men yeeld
               To what I order; we that bea
                     •…
                  e, best armes in all our host;
               Whose heads sustaine the brightest helms; whose hands are bristl'd most
               
                  With longest lances, let vs on: But stay, Ile leade you all;
               No
                     •…
                   thinke I, but great Hectors spirits, will suffer some apall,
               Though they be neuer so inspir'd: the ablest of vs then,
               That on our shoulders worst shields beare, exchange with worser men
               That fight with better. This proposd, all heard it, and obeyd:
               The kings (euen those that sufferd wounds, Vlysses, Diomed,
               
               And Agamemnon) heplt t'instruct, the complete army thus;
               To good, gaue good armes; worse, to worse; yet none were mutinous.
            
            
               Thus (arm'd with order) forth they flew, the great Earth-shaker led;Neptune leades the Greekes.
               
               A long sword in his sinowy hand, which when he brandished,
               It lighten'd still: there was no law, for him, and it; poore men
               Must quake before them. These thus man'd, illustrous Hector then
               His hoast brought vp. The blew-hair'd god, and he, stretcht through the prease
               A greiuous fight: when to the ships, and tents of Gre
                        •…
                     ce, the seas
               Brake loose, and rag'd. But when they ioynd, the dreadfull Clamor rose
               To such a height; as not the sea, when vp, the North-spirit blowes
               Her raging billowes; bellowes so, against the beaten shore:
               Nor such a rustling keeps a fire, driuen with violent blore,
               Through woods that grow against a hill: nor so the feruent strokes
               Of almost-bursting winds resound, against a groue of Okes;
               As did the clamor of these hoasts, when both the battels closd.
               Of all which, noble Hector first, at A
                        •…
                     ax breast disposdH
                        •…
                     tor at Aiax.
               
               His iauelin, since so right on him, the great-soul'd souldier bore;
               Nor mist it, but the bawdricks both, that his brode bosome wore,
               To hang his shield and sword, it strooke; both which, his flesh preseru'd:
               
                  Hector (disdaining that his lance, had thus, as good as sweru'd)
               Trode to his strength; but going off, great Aiax with a stone,Ai
                        •…
                     x at Hector.
               
               (One, of the many props for ships, that there lay trampl'd on)
               Strooke his brode breast, aboue his shield, iust vnderneath his throte;
               And shooke him peecemeale. When the stone, sprung backe againe & smo
                     •…
                  e
               (cEarth, like a whirlewind gathering dust, with whirring fiercely round,
               For feruour of his vnspent strength, in setling on the ground:
               And, as when Ioues bolt, by the rootes, rends from the earth an Oke;Simile.
               
               His sulphure casting with the blow, a strong, vnsauoury smoke;
               And on the falne plant none dare looke, but with amazed eyes,
               (Ioues thunder being no laughing game) so bowd strong Hectors thyes;Hector ouerthrown
                        •…
                     .
               
               And so, with tost-vp heeles he fell: away, his lance he flung,
               His round shield followd; then his helme, and out his armour rung.
            
            
               
                  
                     •…
                  he Greeks then showted, and ran in, and hop't to hale him off;
               A
                     •…
                  d therefore powr'd on darts, in stormes, to keepe his aide aloofe;
               But none could hurt the peoples guide; no
                     •…
                   stirre him from his ground:
               
                  Sarpedon, prince of Lycia; and Glaucus, so renownd,Hector rescued.
               
               Diuine Agenor, Venus sonne, and wise Polydamas
               
               Rusht to his rescue, and the rest: no one, neglectiue was
               Of Hectors safetie; all their shields, they coucht about him close;
               Raisd him from earth, and (giuing him, in their kind armesrepose)
               From off the labour, caried him, to his rich chariot,
               And bore him mourning towards Troy: but when the flood they got
               
                  Of gulphy Xanthus, that was got, by deathlesse Iupiter;
               
               There tooke they him from chariot, and all be sprinkled there
               His temples with the streame; he breath'd, lookt vp, assaid to rise,
               And on his knees staid, spitting blood: againe then, closd his eyes,
               And backe againe his body fell; the maine blow had not done
               Yet with his spirit. When the Greeks, saw worthy Hector gone;
               Then thought they of their worke; then charg'd, with much more chere the foe
               And then (farre first) Oileades, began the ouerthrow;
               He darted Satnius, Enops sonne, whom famous Nais bo
                     •…
                  e,
               (As she was keeping Enops flocks) on Satnius riuers shore:
               And strooke him in his bellies rimme; who vpwards fell, and raisd
               A mightie skirmish with his fall: and then Panthaedes seisd
               
                  Prothenor Areilicides, with his reuend'gfull speare,
               On his right shoulder; strooke it through, and laid him breathlesse there.
               For which he insolently bragd, and cryed out; Not a dartPolyda
                        •…
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      his insultation.
               
               From great-soul'd Panthus sonne, I thinke, shall euer vainlier part;
               But some Greeke bosome it shall take, and make him giue his ghost.
               This bragge the Grecians stomackt much, but Telamonius most,
               Who stood most neare Prothenors fall: and out he sent a lance,
               Which Panthus sonne (declining) scap't, yeet tooke it to sad chance,
               
                  Archelochus, Antenors sonne, whom heauen did destinate
               To that sterne end, twixt necke, and head, the iauelin wrought his fate,
               And ran in at the vpper ioint, of all the backe long bone,
               Cut both the nerues, and such a lode, of strength, laid Aiax on,
               As, that small part, he seisd, outwaid, all th'vnder lims; and strooke
               His heeles vp so, that head, and face, the earths possessions tooke,
               When all the low parts sprung in aire; and thus did Aiax quit
               
                  Panthaedes Braue; Now, Panthus sonne, let thy prophetique wit,Ai
                        •…
                      insults in requit all of Polydamas.
               
               Consider, and disclose a truth, if this man do not wey
               Euen with Prothaenor? I conceiue, no one of you will say,
               That either he was base himselfe, or sprung of any base;
               
                  Antenors brother, or his sonne, he should be, by his face;
               One of his race, past question, his likenesse shewes he is.
            
            
               This spake he, knowing it well enough. The Troians storm'd at this,
               And then slue Acamas (to saue, his brother yet ingag'd)
               
                  Boeotius, dragging him to spoile; and thus the Greeks enrag'd.
            
            
               O Greeks? euen borne to beare our darts, yet euer breathing threats;
               Not alwayes vnder teares, and toyles, ye see our fortune sweats;
               But sometimes you drop vnder death? see now, your quicke among
               Our dead, intranc't with my weake lance; to proue I haue, ere long
               Reueng'd my brother: tis the wish, of euery honest man▪
               
               His brother slaine in Mars his field, may rest wreakt in his Phane.
            
            
               This stird fresh enuie in the Greeks, but vrg'd Peneleus most,
               Who hurld his lance at Acamas; he scap't: nor yet it lost
               The force he gaue it, for it found, the flocke-rich Phorbas sonne,
               
                  Ilioneus, whose deare Sire, (past all in Ilion)
               Was lou'd of Hermes, and enricht; and to him onely bore
               His mother, this now slaughterd man. The dart did vndergore
               
                  His eye-lid, by his eyes deare rootes; and out the apple fell,
               The eye pierc't through: nor could the nerue, that staies the necke, repell
               His strong-wing'd lance; but necke and all, gaue way, and downe he dropt.
               
                  Peneleus then vnsheath'd his sword, and from the shoulders chopt
               His lucklesse head; which downe he threw; the helme still sticking on:
               And still the lance, fixt in his eye; which, not to see, alone,
               Contented him; but vp againe, he snatcht, and shewd it all;
               With this sterne Braue; Ilians, relate, braue Ilioneus fall,
               To his kind parents; that their roofes, their teares may ouerrunne;
               For so the house of Promachus, and Alegenors sonne,
               Must with his wiues eyes, ouerflow: she neuer seeing more
               Her deare Lord, though we tell his death; when to our natiue shore,
               We bring from ruin'd Troy our fleete, and men so long forgone.
               This said, and seene, pale Feare possest, all those of Ilion:
               
               And eu'ry man cast round his eye, to see, where Death was not,
               That he might flie him. Let not then, his grac't hand be forgot,
               (O Muses you that dwell in heauen) that first embrude the field,
               With Troian spoile; when Neptune thus, had made their irons yeeld.
            
            
               First Aiax Telamonius, the Mysian Captaine slew
               Great Hyrtius Gyrtiades. Antilochus o'rethew
               
                  Phalces and Mermer, to their spoyle. Meriones gaue end,
               To Moris and Hippotion. Teucer, to Fate did send,
               
                  Prothoon and Periphetes. Atrides Iauelin chac't
               Duke Hyperenor; wounding him, d in that part that is plac't
               Betwixt the short ribs and the bones, that to the triple gut
               Haue pertinence. The Iauelins head, did out his entrailes cut,
               His forc't soule breaking through the wound: nights black hand closde his eies.
               Then Aiax, great Oileus sonne, had diuers victories:Aiax Oi
                        •…
                      vertue for swistnesse.
               
               For when Saturnius sufferd flight; of all the Grecian race,
               Not one with swiftnesse of his feete, could so enrich a chace.
            
            
               COMMENTARIVS.
               
                  a 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Princeps populorum (the end of Vlysses speech in the beginning of this book) which ascription our Spond. takes to be giuen in scorne: and that all Vlysses speech is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , or scoffing; which is spoken altogether seriously and bitterly to this title at the end: which was spoken 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , molliter or benigne; of purpose to make Agamemnon beare the better the iustice of his other austeritie.
               
                  b 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , & ego quoad genus glorior esse. The long digression, that followes this, in the speech of Diomed (being next to Agamemnons reply to Vlysses) bewrayes an affectation he had by all-any-thing-fit-meanes, to talke of his pedigree: and by reason of that humor, hath shewne his desire elsewhere, to learne the pedigreees of others: as in the sixt booke, in his enquirie of Glaucus pedigree. And herein is exprest part of his character.
               
                  c 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. ouerpassing, for speed, many things in this booke that crie out for the praise of our Homer, and note of that, which in most readers I know will be lost: I must onely insist still on those parts that (in my poore vnderstanding) could neuer yet find apprehension in any of our Commentors or translators: as in this simile againe of the whirlewind; to which the stone that Aiax hurled at Hector, is resembled. Valla and Eobanus, Salel in French, so vnderstanding, Hector
                  
turned abo
                     •…
                  t with the blow, like a whirlewind. Vallas words are these, (translating 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which ad verbum saie thus much in euery common translation; Trochum autem sicut concussit feriens, rotatusque est vndique.) Quo ictu Hector velut turbo, quem Strombum dicunt, 
                        •…
                     tato corpore, &c. Eobanus conuerting it thus:—Stetit ille tremens, ceu turbo rotatus.Which though it harpe vpon the other, makes yet much worse musicke, saying, Hector stood trembling, being wheeled about like a whirlwind. He stood, yet was turned about violently. How grosse both are, I thinke, the blindest see: and must needs acknowledge a monstrous vnworthines in these men to touch our Homer, esteeming it an extreme losse to the world, to haue this and the like vndiscouered. For (as I apprehend it) being exprest no better then in my silly conuersion (and the stone, not Hector likened to the 
                     •…
                  rlewind) it is aboue the wit of a man to imitate our Homers wit, for the m
                     •…
                  st fierie illustration both of Aiax strength, and Hectors: of Aiax for giuing such a force to it, as could not spend it selfe vpon Hector, but turne after vpon the earth, in that whirlewind like violence: of Hector, for standing it so solidly; for without that consideration, the stone could neuer haue recoild so fiercely. And here haue we a ruled case against our plaine and smug writers; that because their owne vnweildinesse will not let them rise thēselues, would haue euery man grouel like thē: their fethers not passing the pitch of euery womans capacity. And (indeed) where a man is vnderstood, there is euer a proportiō betwixt the writers wit & the writees (that I may speake with authority) according to my old lesson in Philosophy: Intellectus in ipsa intelligibilia transit. But herein this case is ruled against such men, that they affirme these hyperthe ticall or superlatiue sort of expressions & illustratiōs are too bold, and bumbasted; and out of that word is spunne that which they call our Fustian: their plaine writing, being stuffe nothing so substantial, but such grosse sowtedge, or hairepatch, as euery goose may eate oates through. Against which, and all these plebeian opinions, that a man is bound to write to euery vulgar readers vnderstanding, you see the great master of all 
                     •…
                  locution hath written so darkly, that almost three thousand sunnes haue not discouered him, no more in fiue hundred other places then here; and yet all peruiall enough (you may well say) when such a one as I comprehend them. But the chiefe end why I extend this annotation, is onely to intrea
                     •…
                  e your note here of Homers maner of writing, which (to vtter his after store of matter and varietie) is so presse, and puts on with so strong a current, that it farre ouer runnes the most laborious pursuer, if he haue not a Poeticall foote, and Poesies quicke eye to guide it. The verse in question, I referre you to before, which sayes, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , signifying a stone of a handfull, or that with one hand may be raised and cast, spoken of before; and (here being vnderstood) shooke Hector at all parts, in striking him, and like a whirlwind wheeled or whirred about. Wherein he speakes not of bounding to the earth again, and raising a dust with his violent turnings: in which the conceit and life of his simile lies, but leaues it to his reader, and he leaues it to him: notwithstanding he vtters enough to make a stone vnderstand it; how stupidly soeuer all his interpreters would haue Hector (being strooke into a trembling, and almost dead) turne about like a whirlewind. I conclude then with this question: What fault is it in me, to furnish and adorne my verse (being his Translator) with translating and adding the truth and fulnesse of his conceit; it being as like to passe my reader, as his, and therefore necessarie? If it be no fault in me, but fit, then may I iustly be said to better Homer? or not to haue all my inuention, matter and forme from him, though a little I enlarge his sorme? Virgil, in all places

where he is compared and preferred to Homer, doth nothing more. And therefore my assertion in the second Booke is true, that Virgil hath in all places, wherein he is compared and preferred to Homer by Scaliger, &c. both his inuention, matter and forme from him.
               
                  d 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. vulnerauit ad Ile; it is translated: and is in the last verses of this Booke, where Menelaus is said to wound Hyperenor. But 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , dicitur ea pars corporis quae posita est inter costas nothas, & ossa quae ad Ilia pertinent, quòd inanis sit, & desiderat. Hip. in lib. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ; and therfore I accordingly translate it. And note this beside, both out of this place and many others, how excellent an Anatomist our Homer was, whose skill in those times, me thinkes, should be a secret.
            
            The end of the fourteenth Booke of Homers Iliads.
         
         
            
            THE FIFTEENTH BOOK OF HOMERS ILIADS.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  
                     IOue waking, and beholding Troy in flight,
                  Chides Iuno, and sends Iris to the fight,
                  To charge the sea-god, to forsake the field;
                  And Phoebus, to inuade it, with his shield,
                  Recouering Hectors broosde, and crased powres.
                  To field he goes, and makes new conquerours;
                  The Troians giuing now, the Grecians chace,
                  Euen to their fleete. Then Aiax turnes his face,
                  And feeds, with many Troian liues, his ire;
                  Who then brought brands to set the fleete on fire.
               
            
            
               Another Argument.
               
                  Ioue sees in, O, his ouersight,
                  
                  
                     Chides Iuno, Neptune cals from fight.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  THe Troians (beate past pale and dike, and numbers prostrate laide)
               All got to chariot, feare-driuen all; and fear'd as men dismaide:
               Then Ioue, on Idas top, awakt; rose from Saturnias side,
               Stood vp, and lookt vpon the warre; and all inuerted, spide,
               Since he had seene it, th' Ilians now, in rowt; the Greeks in fight:
               King Neptune, with his long sword, Chiefe; great Hector put downe quite,
               Laide flat in field, and with a crowne, of Princes compassed;
               So stopt vp, that he scarce could breath; his minds sound habite fled,
               And he still spitting blood. Indeed, his hurt was not set on
               By one that was the weakest Greeke. But him Ioue lookt vpon
               With eyes of pittie: on his wife, with horrible aspect;
               To whom he said: O thou in ill, most cunning ArchitectIupiters wrath against Iu
                        •…
                     .
               
               All Arts, and comments that exceedst! not onely to enforce
               
                  Hector from fight; but with his men, to shew the Greeks a course.
               I feare (as formerly) so now, these ils haue with thy hands,
               Their first fruits sowne, and therefore could, lode all thy lims with bands.
               Forgetst thou, when I hangd thee vp; how to thy feete I tyed
               Two Anuils; golden manacles, on thy false wrists implied,
               And let thee mercilesly hang, from our refined heauen
               Euen to earths vapors; all the gods, in great Olymp
                        •…
                     s, giuen
               To mutinies about thee; yet, (though all stood staring on)
               None durst dissolue thee; for these hands (had they but seisd vpon
               Thy friend) had headlong throwne him off, from our star-bearing round,
               Till he had tumbl'd out his breath; and peecemeale dasht the ground.
               
                  Nor was my angry spirit calm'd, so soone, for those foule seas,
               On which (inducing Northerne flawes) thou shipwrack'dst Hercules,
               
               And tost him to the Coon shore; that thou shouldst tempt againe
               My wraths importance, when thou seest (besides) how grosly vaine,
               My powres can make thy policies: for from their vtmost force,
               I freed my sonne, and set him safe, in Argos, nurse of horse.
               These I remember to thy thoughts, that thou mayst shun these sleights,
               And know how badly bed-sports thriue, procur'd by base deceits.
            
            
               This frighted the offending Queene, who, with this state, excusde
               Her kind vnkindnesse: Witnesse earth, and heauen, so farre diffusde:Iunoes 
                        •…
                     th in clearing her self to Iupiter.
               
               Thou Flood, whose silent-gliding waues, the vnder ground doth beare,
               (Which is the great'st, and grauest oath, that any god can sweare)
               Thy sacred head; those secretioyes, that our yong bed gaue forth,
               (By which I neuer rashly swore) that he who shakes the earth,
               Not by my counsell did this wrong, to Hector and his host;
               But (pittying th'oppressed Greekes, their fleete being neerly lost)
               Relieu'd their hard condition; yet vtterly impeld
               By his free mind: which since I see, is so offensiue held,
               To thy high pleasure, I will now, aduise him not to tread,
               But where thy tempest-raising feete, (O Iupiter) shall leade.
            
            
               
                  Ioue laught to heare her so submisse; and said: My faire-eyd loue,
               If still thus thou and I were one, (in counsels held aboue)Iupiters charge to Iuno, and reconciliation.
               
               
                  Neptune would still, in word and fact, be ours, if not in heart;
               If then thy tongue and heart agree, from hence to heauen depart,
               To call the excellent in bowes; the Raine-bow, and the Sunne,
               That both may visite both the hosts; the Grecian armie, one;
               And that is Iris; let her haste, and make the sea-god cease,
               T'assist the Greekes; and to his court, retire from warre, in peace.
               Let Phoebus (on the Troian part) inspire with wonted powre
               Great Hectors spirits: make his thoughts, forget the late sterne houre,
               And all his anguish; setting on, his whole recouer'd man
               To make good his late grace in fight, and hold inconstant wane
               The Grecian glories, till they fall, in flight before the fleete
               Of vext Achilles; which extreme, will proue the meane to greete
               Thee with thy wish: for then the eyes, of great Aeacides,
               
               (Made witnesse of the generall ill, that doth so neare him prease)
               Will make his owne particular, looke out; and by degrees
               Abate his wrath, that through himselfe, for no extremities
               Will seeme reflected; yet his friend, may get of him the grace,
               To helpe his countrey, in his Armes; and he shall make fit place,
               For his full presence, with his death; which shall be well forerunne:
               For I will first renowne his life, with slaughter of my sonne,
               (Diuine Sarpedon) and his death, great Hectors powre shall wreake,
               Ending his ends. Then at once, out shall the furie breake
               Of fierce Achilles: and with that, the flight now felt, shall turne;
               And then last, till in wrathfull flames, the long-sieg'd Ilion burne.
               
                  Mineruaes counsell shall become, graue meane, to this my will;
               Which no god shall neglect, before, Achilles take his fill
               
                  Of slaughter, for his slaughterd friend: euen Hectors slaughter, throwne
               Vnder his anger; that these facts, may then make fully knowne
               My vowes performance, made of late: and with my bowed head,
               Confirm'd to Thetis, when her armes, embrac't my knees, and praid
               That to her citie-racing sonne, I would all honour shew.
            
            
               This heard, his charge she seem'd t'intend, and to Olympus flew.
               But, as the mind of such a man, that hath a great way gone,S
                        •…
                     .
               
               And either knowing not his way; or then would let alone
               His purposde iourney, is distract; and in his a vexed mind
               Resolues now not to go; now goes, still many wayes inclin'd:
               So reuerend Iuno headlong flew, and'gainst her stomacke striu'd.
               For (being amongst th'immortall gods, in high heauen, soone arriu'd,
               All rising, welcoming with cups, her litle absence thence)
               She all their courtships ouerpast, with solemne negligence,
               Saue that which faire-cheekt Themis shewd; and her kind 
                     •…
                  up she tooke:T
                        •…
                      
                     
                        •…
                     o 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               For first, she ranne and met with her, and askt; What t
                     •…
                  oubled looke
               She brought to heauen? She thought (for truth) that Ioue had terti
                     •…
                  
               
               Her spirits strangely, since she went. The faire arm'd Queene replide:
            
            
               That truth may easily be supposde, you (goddesse Themis) know
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •…
                     ply.
               
               His old seueritie and pride; bu
                     •…
                   you bear't out with show,
               And like the banquets arbiter, amongst th'Immortals fare,
               Though well you heare amongst them all, how bad his actions are;
               Nor are all here, nor any where, mortals, nor gods (I feare)
               Entirely pleasd with what he does, though thus ye banquet here.
            
            
               Thus tooke she place, displeasedly; the feast in generall,
               Bewraying priuie splenes at Ioue; and then (to colour all)
               She laught, but meerly from her lips: for, ouer her blacke browes
               Her still-bent forehead was not cleer'd; yet this her passions throwes,
               Brought forth in spight, being lately school'd; alas, what fooles are we?
               That enuie Ioue? or that by act, word, thought, can fantasie,
               Any resistance to his will? he sits farre off, nor cares,
               Nor moues, but sayes he knowes his strength, to all degrees compares
               His greatnesse, past all other gods: and that in fortitude,
               And euery other godlike powre; he reignes, past all indude.
               For which great eminence, all you Gods, what euer ill he does
               Sustaine with patience: here is Mars, I thinke, not free from woes;
               And yet he beares them like himselfe. The great God had a sonne,I
                        •…
                      speech of purpose to in
                        •…
                      M
                        •…
                      Scopti
                        •…
                     .
               
               Whom he himselfe yet iustifies, one that from all men wonne,
               Iust surname of their best belou'd, Ascalaphus; yet he
               (By Ioues high grace to Troy) is slaine. Mars started horribly
               (As Iuno knew he would) at this; beate, with his hurld out hands,
               His brawnie thighes; cried out, and said: O you that 
                     〈◊〉
                   commands
               In these high temples, beare with me, if I reuenge the death
               Of such a sonne; Ile to the fleete; and though I sinke beneath
               The fate of being shot to hell, by Ioues fell thunder stone:
               And lie all grim'd amongst the dead, with dust and bloud; my sonne,
               Reuenge shall honour. Then he charg'd, Feare and Dismay to ioyne
               His horse and chariot: he got armes, that ouer heauen did shine:
               
                  And then a wrath, more great and graue, in Ioue had bene prepar'd
               Against the gods, then Iuno causde; if Pallas had not car'd
               More for the peace of heauen then Mars; who leap
                     •…
                   out of her throne,
               Rapt vp her helmet, lance, and shield, and made her Phanes porch grone,
               With her egression to his stay: and thus his rage defers:
               Furious, and foolish? th'art vndone; hast thou, for nought, thine eares?Pallas to Mars.
               
               Heard'st thou not Iuno, being arriu'd, from heauens great king but now?
               Or wouldst thou he himselfe should rise (forc't with thy rage) to show,
               The dreadfull powre she vrg'd in him, so iustly being stird?
               Know (thou most impudent and mad) thy wrath had not inferd
               Mischiefe to thee; but to vs all: his spirit had instantly
               Left both the hosts, and turn'd his hands, to vprores in the skie.
               Guiltie and guiltlesse, both to wracke, in his high rage had gone;
               And therefore (as thou louest thy selfe) ceasse furie for thy sonne.
               Another, farre exceeding him, in heart and strength of hand,
               Or is, or will be shortly slaine. It were a b worke would stand
               
                  Ioue in much trouble, to free all, from death, that would not die.
            
            
               This threat, euen nail'd him to his throne, when heauens chiefe Maiestie,
               Cald bright Apollo from his Phane; and Iris that had place
               Of Internunciesse from the Gods; to whom she did the grace
               Of Iupiter, to this effect: It is Saturnius will,Iuno to Apollo and Iris.
               
               That both, with vtmost speed, should stoope, to the Idalian hill,
               To know his further pleasure, there. And this let me aduise,
               When you arriue, and are in reach, of his refulgent eyes:
               His pleasure heard, performe it all, of whatsoeuer kind.
            
            
               Thus mou'd she backe, and vsde her throne. Those two outstript the wind,
               And Ida (all enchac't with springs) they soone attaind, and found
               Where farre-discerning Iupiter, in his repose, had crown'd
               The browes of Gargarus, and wrapt, an odoriferous cloud
               About his bosome. Coming neare, they stood; nor now he showd'
               His angry countenance, since so soone, he saw they made th'accesse
               That his lou'd wife enioyn'd. But first, the faire Ambassad
                     •…
                  esse,
               He thus commanded; Iris, Go, to Neptune, and relateIoue to Iris.
               
               Our pleasure truly, and at large; command him from the Fate
               Of humane warre; and either greete, the gods societie,
               Or the diuine sea, make his seate. If proudly he denie,
               Let better counsels be his guides, then such as bid me warre,
               And tempt my charge, though he be strong; for I am stronger farre,
               And elder borne: nor let him dare, to boast euen state with me,
               Whom all Gods else preferre in feare. This said: downe hasted she
               From Idaes top to Ilion; and like a mightie snow,
               Or gelide haile, that from the clouds, the Northerne spirit doth blow;
               So fell the windie-footed Dame; and found with quicke repaire
               The watrie God; to whom she said: God, with the sable haire,Iris to 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               I came from Aegis-bearing Ioue, to bid thee ceasse from fight,
               And visite heauen, or th'ample seas; which, if in his despight,
               Or disobedience, thou deniest; he threatens thee to come
               (In opposite fight) to field himselfe: and therefore warnes thee home,
               
                  His hands eschewing; since his powre, is farre superiour;
               His birth before thee; and affirmes, thy lou'd heart should abhorre
               To vaunt equalitie with him, whom euery deitie feares.
            
            
               He answerd, O vnworthy thing! though he be great, he beares
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to Iris, being 
                        〈◊〉
                      with Iupiter.
               
               His tongue too proudly; that our selfe, borne to an equall share
               Of state and freedome, he would force. Three brothers borne, we are,
               To Saturne; Rhea brought vs forth: this Iupiter, and I,
               And Pluto, god of vnder-grounds. The world indifferentlyThe 
                        〈◊〉
                      proper to 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Disposde betwixt vs; euery one his kingdome; I, the seas;
               
                  Pluto the blacke lot; Iupiter, the principalitiesNeptune and Pluto being three brothers.
               
               Of broad heauen; all the skie and clouds, was sorted out: the earth
               And high Olympus, common are, and due to eithers birth.
               Why then should I be aw'd by him? Content he his great heart,
               With his third portion; and not thinke, to amplifie his part
               With terrors of his stronger hands, on me, as if I were
               The most ignoble of vs all: let him containe in feare,
               His daughters and his sonnes, begot, by his owne person: this
               Holds more conuenience: they must heare, these violent threats of his.
            
            
               Shall I (said Iris) beare from thee, an answer so austere?
               Or wilt thou change it? Changing minds, all noble natures beare:Iris to N
                        •…
                     tune.'
               
               And well thou know'st, these greatest borne, the Furies follow still.Neptune againe to Iris.
               
            
            
               He answerd: Iris, thy reply, keepes time, and shewes thy skill:
               O tis a most praise-worthy thing, when messengers can tell
               (Besides their messages) such things, as fit th'occasion well.
               But this much grieues my heart and soule, that being in powre and state
               All wayes his equall, and so fixt, by one decree in fate,
               He should to me, as vnder him, ill language giue, and chide;
               Yet now (though still incenst) I yeeld, affirming this beside:
               And I enforce it with a threat, that if without consent
               Of me, Minerua, Mercurie; the Queene of regiment,
               And Vulcan; he will either spare, high Ilion, or not race
               Her turrets to the lowest stone; and (with both these) not grace
               The Greekes, as victors absolute: informe him this from me;
               His pride and my contempt shall liue, at endlesse enmitie.
            
            
               This said, he left the Greeks, and rusht, into his watrie throne;
               Much mist of all the th'heroicke host. When Ioue discern'd him gone,
               
                  Apolloes seruice he employd, and said: Lou'd Phoebus, go
               To Hector: now th'earth-shaking god, hath taken sea, and soIupiter to Apoll
                        •…
                     
                  
               
               Shrunke from the horrors I denounc't; which standing, he, and all
               The vnder-seated deities, that circle Saturnes fall,
               Had heard of me in such a fight, as had gone hard for them.
               But both for them and me, tis best, that thus they flie th'extreme,
               That had not past vs without sweate. Now then, in thy hands take
               My Adder-fring'd affrighting shield, which, with such terror shake,
               That Feare may shake the Greekes to flight: besides this, adde thy care
               (O Phoebus farre-off-shooting god) that this so sickly fare,
               Of famous Hector be recur'd; and quickly so excite
               His amplest powres, that all the Greeks, may grace him with their 
                     •…
                  iht,
               
                  Euen to their ships, and Hellespont; and then will I deuise
               All words and facts againe for Greece, that largely may suffice,
               To breathe them from their instant toiles. Thus from th'Idean height,
               (Like ayres swift-pigeon-killer, stoupt, the far-shot God of light,
               And found great Hector, sitting vp, not stretcht vpon his bed;Apollo visits Hector.
               
               Not wheasing with a stopt-vp spirit; not in cold sweates; but fed
               With fresh and comfortable veines: but his mind, all his owne;
               But round about him, all his friends, as well as euer knowne.
               And this was with the mind of Ioue, that flew to him before
               
                  Apollo came; who (as he saw, no signe of any sore)
               Askt (like a chearfull visitant) why in this sickly kind
               (Great Hector) sitst thou so apart? can any griefe of mind,
               Inuade thy fortitude? He spake; but with a feeble voice:Hector to Apollo
               
               O thou, the best of deities! why (since I thus reioyce
               By thy so serious benefite) demandst thou (as in mirth,
               And to my face) if I were ill? for (more then what thy worth
               Must needs take note of) doth not Fame, from all mouthes fill thine 
                     〈◊〉
                  ;
               That (as my hand at th'Achiue fleete, was making massacres
               Of men, whom valiant Aiax led) his strength, strooke with a stone,
               All powre of more hurt from my brest? my very soule was gone:
               And once to day, I thought to see, the house of Dis and Death.
               
            
            
               Be strong (said he) for such a spirit, now sends the god of breathApollo to Hector
               
               From airie Ida, as shall runne, through, all Greeke spirits in thee;
               
                  Apollo with the golden sword, the cleare farre-seer, see,
               Him, who betwixt death and thy life; twixt ruine and those towres,
               Ere this day, oft hath held his shield. Come then, be all thy powres,
               In wonted vigour: let thy knights, with all their horse assay
               The Grecian fleete; my selfe will leade, and scoure so cleare the way,
               That Flight shall leaue no Greeke a Rub. Thus instantly inspir'd
               Were all his nerues with matchlesse strength; and then his friends he fir'd
               Against their foes; when (to his eyes) his eares confirm'd the god.
               Then, as a goodly headed Hart, or Goate, bred in the wood,Simile.
               
               A rout of country huntsmen chase, with all their hounds in crie;
               The beast yet, or the shadie woods, or rocks excessiue hie,
               Keepe safe; or our vnwieldie fates (that euen in hunters sway)
               Barre them, the poore beasts pulling downe; when straight the clamorous fray,
               Cals out a Lion, hugely man'd; and his abhorred view
               Turnes headlong in vnturning flight (though ventrous) all the crew:
               So hitherto the chasing Greeks, their slaughter dealt by troupes;
               But, after Hector was beheld, range here and there; then stoupes
               The boldest courage; then their heeles, tooke in their dropping harts,
               And then spake Andremonides, a man of farre-best parts
               Of all th'Aetolians, skild in darts; strenuous in fights of stand;
               And one of whom few of the Greekes, could get the better hand,
               (For Rhetorique) when they fought with words; with all which, being wise,
               Thus spake he to his Grecian friends: O mischiefe! now mine eyesAndremonides to the Greekes.
               
               Discerne no litle miracle; Hector escapt from death,
               And all recouerd, when all thought, his soule had sunke beneath
               
                  The hands of Aiax: but some God, hath sau'd and freed againe,
               Him that but now dissolu'd the knees, of many a Grecian.
               
               And now I feare will weaken more; for not without the hand
               Of him that thunders, can his powres, thus still the forefights stand;
               Thus still triumphant: heare me then; our troupes in quicke retreate,
               Let's draw vp to our fleete, and we, that boast our selues, the Great,
               Stand firme, and trie, if these that raise, so high their charging da
                     •…
                  ts,
               May be resisted: I beleeue, euen this great heart of harts,
               Will feare, himselfe to be too bold, in charging thorow vs.
            
            
               They easely heard him, and obeyd, when all the generous
               They cald t'encounter Hectors charge, and turn'd the common men
               Backe to the fleete: and these were they, that brauely furnisht then
               The fierce forefight; th'Aiaces both; the worthy Cretan king;
               The Mars-like Meges; Merion, and Teucer. Vp then, bring
               The Troian chiefes, their men in heapes; before whom (amply pac't)
               Marcht Hector; and in front of him, Apollo, who had cast
               About his bright aspect, a cloud; and did before him beare
               
                  Ioues huge and each-where shaggie shield; which (to containe in feare
               Offending men) the god-smith gaue, to Ioue; with this he led
               The Troian forces. The Greeks stood; a feruent clamor spred
               The aire on both sides as they ioyn'd; out flew the shafts and darts,
               Some falling short, but othersome, found buts in brests and harts.
               As long as Phoebu
                        •…
                     
                   held but out, his horrid shield, so long
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      sight discomfits th
                        •…
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               The darts flew raging either way, and death grew both wayes strong.
               But when the Greeks had seene his face, and who it was that shooke
               The bristled targe, knew by his voice; then all their strengths forsooke
               Their nerues and minds; and then looke how, a goodly herd of Neate,Simil
                        •…
                     .
               
               Or wealthy flocke of sheepe, being close, and dreadlesse at their meate,
               In some blacke midnight, sodainly (and not a keeper neere)
               A brace of horrid Beares rush in, and then flie here and there
               The poore affrighted flocks or herds; So euery way disperst
               The heartlesse Grecians: so the Sunne, their headstrong chace reuerst
               To headlong flight; and that day raisde, with all grace, Hectors head.
            
            
               
                  Arcesilaus then he slue, and Stichius; Stichius led
               
                  Boeotias brazen-coted men: the other was the friend
               Of mightie-soul'd Menestheus. Aeneas brought to end,
               
                  Medon, and Iasus; Medon was, the brother (though but base)
               Of swift Oileades; and dwelt, farre from his breeding place,
               In Phylaca; the other led, th'Athenian bands: his Sire
               Was Spelus, Bucolus his sonne. Mecistheus did expire
               Beneath Polydamas his hand. Polites, Echius slew
               Iust at the ioyning of the hosts. Agenor ouerthrew
               
                  Clonius. Bold Deiochus, felt Alexanders lance;
               It strooke his shoulders vpper part, and did his head aduance
               Quite through his brest, as from the fight, he turn'd him for retreat.
            
            
               While these stood spoiling of the flaine, the Greeks found time to get
               Beyond the dike, and th'vndik't pales: all scapes they gladly gain'd,
               Till all had past the vtmost wall; Necessitie so raign'd.
            
            
               
                  Then Hector cried out: Take no spoile, but rush on to the fleete;
               From whose assault (for spoile, or flight) if any man I meete,Hector to his soldiers.
               
               He meets his death: nor in the fire, of holy funerall,
               His brothers or his sisters hands, shall cast (within our wall)
               His lothed body; but without, the throtes of dogs shall graue
               His manlesse lims. This said; the scourge, his forward horses draue
               Through euery order; and with him, all whipt their chariots on;
               All threatningly, out thundering shouts, as earth were ouerthrowne.
            
            
               Before them marcht Apollo still; and, as he marcht, digd downe,Apollo leades the Troians.
               
               (Without all labour) with his feete, the dike; till, with his owne,
               He fild it to the top; and made, way, both for man and horse,
               As broade and long, as with a lance (cast out to trie ones force)
               A man could measure. Into this, they powr'd whole troupes as fast,
               As numerous: Phoebus still, before, for all their hast,
               Still shaking Ioues vnualewed shield, and held it vp to all.
               And then, as he had chok't their dike, he tumbl'd downe their wall.
               And looke how easely any boy, vpon the sea-
                     •…
                  bd shore,A simile, from how low things it may be taken, to expresse the 
                        •…
                     ighest.
               
               Makes with a litle sand a toy, and cares for it no more;
               But as he raisd it childishly, so in his wanton vaine,
               Both with his hands and feete, he puls, and spurnes it downe againe:
               So sleight, O Phoebus, thy hands made, of that huge Grecian toile;
               And their late stand, so well resolu'd, as easely mad'st recoile.
            
            
               Thus stood they driuen vp at their fleete, where each heard others thought,
               Exhorted: passing humbly prayd: all, all the gods besought,
               (With hands held vp to heauen) for helpe; 'mongst all, the good old man,
               Graue Nestor (for his counsels cald, the Argiues guardian)
               Fell on his aged knees, and prayd; and to the starrie host,
               Stretcht out his hands for ayd to theirs; of all, thus mouing most:
               O father Ioue, if euer man, of all our host did burneNestors prayer to Iupiter.
               
               Fat thighes of oxen or of sheepe (for grace of safe returne)
               In fruitfull Argos; and obtaind, the bowing of thy head,
               For promise of his humble prayers: O now remember him,
               (Thou meerly heauenly) and cleare vp, the foule browes of this dim
               And cruell day; do not destroy, our zeale for Troian pride.
               He prayd, and heauens great Counsellor, with store of thunder tride
               His former grace good; and so heard, the old mans heartie prayres.
               The Troians tooke Ioues signe for them; and powr'd out their affaires
               In much more violence on the Greeks; and thought on nought but fight.
               And as a huge waue of a sea, swolne to his rudest height,Simile.
               
               Breakes ouer both sides of a ship; being all vrg'd by the wind;
               For that's it makes the waue so proud: in such a borne-vp kind,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      they 
                        〈◊〉
                      puft vp by Apollo.
               
               The Troians ouergat the wall; and getting in their horse,
               Fought close at fleete; which now the Greeks, ascended for their force.
               Then from their chariots, they with darts; the Greeks with bead-hooks fought,
               (Kept still aboord for nauall fights) their heads with iron wrought,
               In hookes and pikes. Achilles friend, still while he saw the wall
               That stood without their fleete, affoord, employment for them all,
               Was neuer absent from the tent, of that man-louing Greeke,
               
               
                  Late-hurt Eurypilus; but sate, and euery way did seeke
               To spend the sharpe time of his wound, with all the ease he could,
               In medicines, and in kind discourse: but when he might behold
               The Troians past the wall; the Greekes, flight driuen, and all in cries;
               Then cride he out, Cast downe his hands, and beate with griefe his thighes:
               Then, O Eurypilus, (he cride) now all thy need of me,Patroclus to Eurypilus.
               
               Must beare my absence: now a worke, of more necessitie,
               Cals hence; and I must hast to call, Achilles to the field:
               Who knowes, but (God assisting me) my words may make him yeeld?
               The motion of a friend is strong. His feete thus tooke him thence.
               The rest yet stood their enemies firme; but all their violence
               (Though Troy fought there with fewer men) lackt vigor to repell
               Those fewer from their Nauies charge; and so, that charge as well
               Lackt force to spoile their fleete, or tents. And as a shipwrights lineA diuine fimile.
               
               (Disposde by such a hand, as learn'd, from th'Artizan diuine,
               The perfect practise of his Art) directs or guards so well
               The nauall timber then in frame; that all the layd-on steele,
               Can hew no further then may serue, to giue the timber th'end,
               Fore-purposde by the skilfull wright: so both hosts did contend,
               With such a line, or law applide, to what their steele would gaine.
            
            
               At other ships fought other men, but Hector did maintaine
               His quarrell firme at Aiax ship; and so did both employ,
               About one vessell, all their toyle: nor could the one destroy
               The ship with fire; nor force the man, nor that man yet get gone
               The other from so neare his ship, for God had brought him on.
            
            
               But now did Aiax with a dart, wound deadly in the brest,
               
                  Calctor, sonne of Clytius, as he with fire addrestAiax slaughter
                        •…
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               To burne the vessell; as he fell, the brand fell from his hand.
            
            
               When Hector saw his sisters sonne, lie slaughterd in the sand,
               He cald to all his friends, and prayd, they would not in that streight
               Forsake his nephew, but maintaine, about his corse the fight,
               And saue it from the spoile of Greece. Then sent he out a lanceHector at Aiax.
               
               At Aiax, in his nephewes wreake; which mist, but made the chance
               On Lycophron Mastorides, that was the houshold friend
               Of Aiax, borne in Cythera, whom Aiax did defend,Hector 
                        〈◊〉
                      Aiax, 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      friend.
               
               (Being fled to his protection) for killing of a man
               Amongst the god-like Cytherans: the vengefull Iauelin ran
               Quite through his head, aboue his eare, as he was standing by
               His Fautor, then asterne his ship, from whence his soule did flie,
               And to the earth his body fell: the haire stood vp an end
               On Aiax; who to Teucer cald, (his brother) saying: Friend,
               Our loued consort, whom we brought, from Cythera; and grac't,
               So like our father; Hectors hand, hath made him breathe his la
                     •…
                  t.
               Where then are all thy death-borne shafts? and that vnuallewed bow
               
                  Apollo gaue thee? Teucer strait, his brothers thoughts did know,
               Stood neare him, and dispatcht a shaft, amongst the Troian fight▪
               
               It strooke Pysenors goodly sonne, yong Clyt
                        •…
                     , the delight
               Of the renowm'd Polydamas; the bridle in his hand,
               
                  As he was labouring his horse, to please the high command
               Of Hector, and his Tioian friends; and bring him, where the fight
               Made greatest tumult. But his strife, for honour in their sight,
               Wrought not what sight or wishes helpt; for turning backe his looke,
               The hollow of his necke, the shaft, came singing on, and strooke,
               And downe he fell; his horses backe, and hurried through the field
               The emptie chariot. Panthus sonne, made all haste, and withheld
               Their loose carier; disposing them, to Protiaons sonne,
               
                  Astinous; with speciall charge, to keepe them euer on,
               And in his sight: so he againe, amongst the foremost went.
            
            
               At Hector then another shaft, incensed Te
                        •…
                     er sent;Teucer at Hector.
               
               Which, had it hit him, sure had hurt; and had it hurt him, slaine;
               And had it slaine him, it had driuen, all those to Troy againe.
            
            
               But Ioues mind was not sleeping now; it wak't to Hectors fame,
               And Teucers infamie; himselfe (in Teucers deadly aime)Ioue breakes Te
                        •…
                     cers bow.
               
               His well-wrought string disseuering, that seru'd his brauest bow;
               His shaft flew quite another way; his bow the earth did strow.
               At all which, Teucer stood amaz'd, and to his brother cride,
               O prodigie! without all doubt, our Angell doth derideTeucer to Aiax.
               
               The counsels of our fight; he brake, a string, my hands put on
               This morning, and was newly made; and well might haue set gone
               A hundred arrowes; and beside, he strooke out of my hand
               The bow Apollo gaue. He 
                     •…
                  ayd, Then (good friend) do not standAiax to Teucer.
               
               More on thy archerie, since God (preuenter of all grace,
               Desir'd by Grecians) sleights it so. Take therefore in the place,
               A good large lance; and on thy necke, a target cast, as bright;
               With which, come fight thy selfe with some, and othersome excite,
               That without labour at the least (though we proue worser men)
               
                  Troy may not brag it tooke our ships: come, mind our businesse then.
            
            
               This said, he hasted to his tent; left there his shafts and bow,Teucer changeth his armes.
               
               And then his double, double shield, did on his shoulders throw;
               Vpon his honor'd head he plac't, his helmet, thickly plum'd;
               And then his strong, and well pilde lance, in his faire hand assum'd,
               Return'd, and boldly tooke his place, by his great brothers side.
            
            
               When Hector saw his arrowes broke, out to his friends he cride,Hectors admiration of Ioues breaking Teu
                     
                        •…
                     ers 
                        •…
                     ow.
               
               O friends! be yet more comforted, I saw the hands of Ioue,
               
               Breake the great Grecian archers shafts: tis easie to approue,
               That Ioues powre is direct with men; as well in those set hi
                     •…
                  
               
               Vpon the sodaine, as in those, deprest as sodainly:
               And those not put in state at all: as now he takes away
               Strength from the Greeks, and giues it vs; then vse it, and assay
               With ioyn'd hands this approched fleete. If any brauely buy
               His fame or fate, with wounds or death; in Ioues name let him die.
               Who for his country suffers death, sustaines no shamefull thing:
               His wife in honour shall suruiue, his progenie 
                     •…
                  hall spring
               In endlesse summers; and 
                     •…
                  heir roofes, with patrimonie swell;
               And all this, though with all their freight, the Greeke ships we repell.
            
            
               His friends thus cheer'd, on th'other part, strong Aiax stird his friends:
               
                  O Greeks (said he) what shame is this, that no man more defends,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to the Greek
                        •…
                     .
               
               His fame and safetie; then to liue, and thus be for
                     •…
                  't to shrinke:
               Now either 
                     •…
                  aue your fleet, or die; vnlesse ye vainly thinke,
               That you can liue, and they destroyd? perceiues no
                     •…
                   euery 
                     •…
                  are,
               How Hector hartens vp his men? and hath his firebrands here,
               Now ready to enflame ourfleet? he doth not bid them dance;
               That you may take your ease, and see; but to the fight aduance.
               No counsell can serue vs but this: to mixe both hands and har
                     •…
                  
               
               And beare vp close; tis better much, t'expose our vtmost parts
               To one daies certaine life or death; then languish in a warre
               So base as this; beate to our ships, by our inferiours farre.
            
            
               Thus rowsd he vp their spirits and strengths: To work then, both sides went
               When Hector, the Phocensian Duke, to fields of darknesse sent;
               Fierce Schedius, Perimedes sonne; which Aiax did requite,
               With slaughter of Laodamas, that led the foote to fight,
               And was Antenors famous sonne. Polydamas did end
               
                  Otus, surnam'd Cyllenius; whom Phydas made his friend;
               Being chiefe of the Epeians Bands: whose fall, when M
                        •…
                     ges viewd,
               He let flie at his fellers life; who (shrinking-in) eschew'd
               The wel-aym'd lance: Apollos will, denied that Pantbus sonne
               Should fall amongst the foremost fights; the dart, the mid-brest wonne
               Of Craesmus; Meges wonne his armes. At Meges, Dolops then
               Bestow'd his lance; he was the sonne, of Lampus, best of men:
               And Lampus, of Laomedon, well skild in strength of mind;
               He strooke Phylides shield quite through, whose 
                     〈◊〉
                  , better lin'd
               And hollow'd fitly, sau'd his life: Phyleus left him them,
               Who from Epirus brought them home; on that part where the streme
               Of famous Seléés doth runne; Euphetes did bestow
               (Being guest with him) those wel-prou'd armes, to weare against the foe,
               And now they sau'd his sonne from death. At Dolops, Meges threw
               A speare well pilde; that strooke his caske, full in the height; off flew
               His purple feather, newly made; and in the dust it fell.
            
            
               While these thus striu'd for victorie; and eithers hope seru'd well;
               
                  Atrides came to Meges aide; and (hidden with his side)
               Let loose a lauelin at his foe, that through his backe implied
               His lustie head, euen past his breast; the ground receiu'd his weight.
            
            
               While these made-in, to spoyle his armes; great Hector did excite,
               All his allies to quicke reuenge; and first he wrought vpon
               Strong Menalippus (that was sonne, to great Hycet
                        •…
                     n)
               With some reproofe. Before these warres, he in Perco
                        •…
                     
                   fed
               Clouen-footed Oxen; but did since, ret
                     •…
                  rne where he was bred;
               Exceld amongst the Ilians, was much of Pri
                        •…
                     m lou'd;
               And in his court kept, as his sonne; him Hect
                        •…
                     r thus reprou'd.
            
            
               Thus Menalippui, shall our blood, accuse vs of neglect:Hector to Me
                     
                        •…
                     alippui.
               
               Nor moues it thy lou'd heart (thus vrg'd) thy kinsman to protect?
               Seest thou not, how they seeke his spoyle? Come, follow; now no more
               Our fight must stand at 
                     〈◊〉
                  , but close: nor leaue the close, before
               We close the latest eye of them; or they, the lowest 
                     •…
                  one
               
                  Teare vp, and sacke the citizens, of loftie Ili
                        •…
                     .
               
               He led; he followd like a god: and then must Aiax needs
               (As well as Hector) cheare his men; and thus their spirits he feeds:
               Good friends bring but your selues to feele, the noble stings of shame,Aiax to his souldiers, in imitation of Agamem▪ n
                        •…
                     n, obserued by him before, 
                        •…
                     ing the same words.
               
               For what ye suffer, and be men: respect each others fame;
               For which, who striues, in shames fit feare; and puts on neare so farre,
               Comes oftner off, then sticke engag'd: these fugitiues of warre,
               Saue neither life, nor get renowne; nor beare more minds then sheepe.
            
            
               This short speeeh fir'd them in his aide, his spirit toucht them deepe;
               And turn'd them all before the fleet, into a wall of brasse:
               To whose assault, Ioue stird their foes: and young Atrides was
               
                  Ioues instrument; who thus set on, the yong Antilo
                        •…
                     us:
               
               
                  Antiloch
                        •…
                     s, in all our host, there is not one of vsMenelaus to Antilochus.
               
               More yong then thou; more swift of foote; nor (with both those) so strong.
               O would thou wouldst then (for thou canst) one of this lustie throng,
               That thus comes skipping out before, (whoeuer, any where)
               Make sticke (for my sake) twixt both hosts, and leaue his bold blood there.
            
            
               He said no sooner, and retir'd; but forth he rusht, before
               The foremost fighters, yet his eye, did euery way explore
               For doubt of ods; out flew his lance: the Troians did abstaine
               While he was darting; yet his dart, he cast not off in vaine:
               For Menalippus (that rare sonne) of great Hycetaon;
                  Anti
                        •…
                      
                     
                        •…
                     ters Me
                     
                        •…
                     ppus.
               
               (As brauely he put foorth to fight) it fiercely flew vpon;
               And, at the nipple of his breast, his breast, and life did part.
               And then, much like an eager hound, cast off at some yong Hart,Simile.
               
               Hurt by the hunter; that had left, his couert then, but new,
               The great-in-warte-Antilochus, (O Menalippus) flew
               On thy torne bosome, for thy spoyle. But thy death could not lie
               Hid to great Hector; who all haste, made to thee, and made flie
               
                  Antilochus; although in watre, he were at all parts skild:
               But as some wild beast, hauing done, some shrewd turne, (either kild
               The heardsman, or the heardsman dogge,) and skulks away before
               The gatherd multitude makes in: so Nestors sonne forbore,A Simile suiting the other before to the life.
               
               But after him, with horrid cryes, both Hector and the rest
               Showres of teare-thirstie lances powr'd; who hauing arm'd his brest
               With all his friends, he turn'd it then. Then on the ships, all Troy,
               
               Like raw-flesh-nourisht Lions rusht, and knew they did imploy
               Their powres to perfect Ioues high will; who still their spirits enflam'd,
               And quencht the Grecians; one, renownd; the other, often sham'd;
               For Hectors glorie still he stood; and euer went about,
               To make him cast the fleet such fire, as neuer should go our;
               Heard The
                        •…
                     
                   foule petition; and wisht, in any wise,
               The splendor of the burning ships, might satiate his eyes.
               From him yet, the repulse was then, to be on Troy conferd,
               The honor of it giuen the Greeks; which (thinking on) he stird
               (With such addition of his spirit) the spirit Hector bore,
               To burne the fleet; that of it selfe, was hote enough before.
               But now he far'd like Mars himselfe, so brandishing his lance;
               
                  As through the deepe shades of a hill, a raging fire should glance;
               Held vp to all eyes by a hill; about his lips, a fomeH
                        •…
                     s 
                        〈◊〉
                      app
                        •…
                     .
               
               Stood; as when th'Ocean is enrag'd; his eyes were ouercome
               With feruour, and resembl'd flames; set off, by his darke browes:
               And from his temples, his bright helme, abhorred lightnings throwes.
               For Ioue, from foorth the sphere of starres, to his state, put his owne;
               And all the blaze of both the hosts, confin'd, in him alone.
               And all this was, since after this, he had not long to liue;
               This lightning flew before his death: which Pallas was to giue,
               (A small time thence, and now prepar'd) beneath the violence
               Of great Pelides. In meane time, his present eminence,
               Thought all things vnder it: and he, still where he saw the stands
               Of greatest strength, and brauest arm'd, there he would proue his hands:
               Or no where; offering to breake through But that past all his powre,
               Although his will, * were past all theirs; they stood him like a towre
               Conioynd so firme: that as a rocke, exceeding high and great;
               And standing neare the hoarie sea, beares many a boisterous threate
               Of high-voic't winds, and billowes huge, belcht on it by the stormes;
               So stood the Greeks great Hectors charge, nor stird the
                     •…
                   battellous formes.
            
            
               He (guirt in fire, borne for the fleet) still rusht at euery troope;
               And fell vpon it like a waue, high raisd, that then doth stoopeSimile.
               
               Out from the clouds; grows as it stoops, with stormes; then downe doth come
               And cuffe a ship; when all her sides, are hid in brackish some;
               Strong gales still raging in her sailes; her sailers minds dismaid,
               Death being but little from their liues: so Ioue-like Hector fraid,
               And plyde the Greeks; who knew not what, would chance, for all their guards.
            
            
               And as the banefull king of beasts, leapt in to Oxen heards,Simile.
               
               Fed in the meddowes of a fenne, exceeding great; the beasts
               In number infinite; mongst whom, (their heardsmen wanting breasts
               To fight with Lions, for the price, of a blacke Oxes life,)
               He here, and there iumps; first, and last, in his bloodthirstie strife,
               Chac't and assaulted; and at length, downe in the midst goes one,
               And all the rest, sperst through the fenne: so now, all Greece was gone.
               So Hector (in a flight from heauen, vpon the Grecia
                        •…
                     s cast)
               Turnd all their backs; yet onely one, his deadly lance laid fast:
               Braue Mycenaus Periphes, Cypraeus dearest sonne;
               Who, of the heauens-Queene-lou'd-king, (great 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  ) wonne
               The grace, to greet in Ambassie, the strength of Hercules,
               
               Was farre superiour to his sire; in feete, fight, noblenes
               Of all the vertues; and all those, did such a wisedome guide,
               As all Mycena could not match: and this man dignified,
               (Stil making greater his renowne) the state of Priams sonne.
               For his vnhappie hastie foote, as he addrest to runne,
               Stucke in th'extreme ring of his shield, that to his ankles reach
                     •…
                  ;
               And downe he vpwards fell, his fall, vp from the center fetcht
               A huge sound, with his head, and helme; which Hect
                        •…
                     
                   quickly spide;
               Ranne in, and in his worthy breast, his lances head did hide;
               And slue about him all his friends, who could not giue him aide:
               
                  They grieu'd; and of his god-like foe, fled so extreme afraid.
            
            
               And now, amongst the nearest ships, that first were drawne to shore,
               The Greeks were driuen; beneath whose sides, behind them, and before;
               And into them they powr'd themselues, and thence were driuen againe
               Vp to their tents, and there they stood: not daring to maintaine
               Their guards more outward; but betwixt, the bounds of Feare and Shame,
               
               Chear'd still each other; when th'old man, that of the Grecian name,
               Was cald the pillar; euery man, thus by his parents praid:
            
            
               O friends, be men, and in your minds, let others shames be weigh'd;
               Know you haue friends besides your selues; possessions, parents, wiues;Nestor to the Greekes.
               
               As well those that are dead to you, as those ye loue with liues;
               All sharing still their good, or bad, with yours: by these I pray,
               That are not present (and the more, should therefore make ye wey
               Their misse of you, as yours of them) that you will brauely stand
               And this forc't flight, you haue sustain'd, at length yet countermand.
            
            
               Supplies of good words, thus supplide, the deeds and spirits of all;
               And so, at last Minerua clear'd, the cloud that Ioue let fallMinerua cleares the darknes Ioue powred on the Grecian armie.
               
               Before their eyes: a mightie light, flew beaming euery way;
               As well about their ships, as where, their darts did hotest play:
               Then saw they Hector great in armes, and his associates;
               As well all those, that then abstaind, as those that helpt the fates;
               And all their owne fight at the fleete. Nor did it now content
               
                  Aiax, to keepe downe like the rest; he, vp the hatches went,
               Stalkt here and there; and in his hand, a huge great beadhooke held,
               Twelue cubits long, and full of Iron; And as a man well skild
               In horse, made to the martiall race; when, (of a number more)A simile of Alax managing the fight at the fleet.
               
               He chuseth foure, and brings them foorth, to runne them all before
               Swarmes of admiring citizens, amids their townes high-way;
               And (in their full carier) he leapes, from one, to one; no stay
               Enforc't on any; nor failes he, in either seate or leape:
               So Aiax with his beadhooke leapt, nimbly from ship to ship,
               As actiuely, commanding all; them in their men, as well
               As men in them: most terribly, exhorting to repell;
               To saue their nauie, and their tents. But Hector nothing needs
               To stand on exhortations now, at home; he striues for deeds.
               And looke how Ioues great Queene of birds, (sharpe set) lookes out for prey;Simile of Hector
               
               Knowes floods that nourish wild-wing'd fowles, and (from her airie way)
               Beholds where Cranes, Swans, Cormorands, haue made their foody fall;
               Darkens the riuer with her wings, and stoopes amongst them all:
               So Hector flew amongst the Greekes, directing his command
               (In chiefe) gainst one opposite ship; Ioue with a mightie hand
               Still backing him, and all his men: and then againe there grew,
               A bitter conflict at the fleet; you would haue said, none drew
               A wearie breath, nor euer would; they layd so freshly on:
               And this was it that fir'd them both; the Greeks did build vpon
               No hope, but what the field would yeeld; flight, an impossible course.
               The Troians all hope entertaind, that sword, and fire should force
               Both ships, and liues, of all the Greekes; and thus, vnlike affects
               
                  Bred like strenuitie in both. Great Hector still directs
               His powres against the first neare ship. T was that faire barke that brought
               
                  Protesilaus to those warres; and now, her selfe to nought,
               With many Greeke and T
                        •…
                     oian liues; all spoyld about her spoyle:
               One slue another desperately; and close the deadly toyle
               Was pitcht on both parts: not a shaft, nor farre-of striking dart,
               Was vsde through all: one fight fell out, of one despitefull hart;
               Sharpe axes, twibils, two-hand swords, and speares with two heads borne,
               Were then the weapons; faire short swords, with sanguine hilts still worne,
               Had vse in like sort; of which last, ye might haue numbers view'd,
               Drop with dissolu'd armes from their hands; as many downright hew'd
               From off their shoulders as they fought, their bawdricks cut in twaine:
               And thus the blacke blood flow'd on earth, from souldiers hurt and slaine.
            
            
               When Hector once had seisd the ship, he clapt his faire brode hand
               Fast on the sterne, and held it there; and there gaue this command:Hector 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      ship, to the Troians.
               
            
            
               Bring fire, and altogether showt; now Ioue hath drawne the veile
               From such a day, as makes amends, for all his stormes of haile:
               By whose blest light, we take those ships, that in despite of heauen
               Tooke sea, and brought vs worlds of woe: all, since our Peeres were giuen
               To such a lasinesse and feare; they would not let me end
               Our lingring banes; and charge thus home; but keepe home, and defend.
               And so they rul'd the men I led; but though Ioue then withheld
               My naturall spirit: now by Ioue, tis freed; and thus impeld.
            
            
               This more inflam'd them; in so much, that Aiax now, no more,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to withdraw himselfe from the fight.
               
               Kept vp, he was so drownd in darts; a little he forbore
               The hatches, to a seate beneath, of seuen foote long; but thought
               It was impossible to scape; he sate yet, where he fought,
               And hurld out lances thicke as haile, at all men that assaid
               To fire the ship; with whom he found, his hands so ouerlaid,
               That on his souldiers thus he cryed: O friends, fight I alone?
               Expect ye more wals at your backes? townes rampir'd, here are none;
               No citizens to take ye in; no helpe in any kind;
               We are, I tell you, in Troys fields; haue nought but seas behind,
               And foes before; farre, farre, from Greece; for shame, obey commands;
               There is no mercie in the warres; your healthes lie in your hands.
            
            
               Thus rag'd he, and powr'd out his darts: who euer he espied
               Come neare the vessell, arm'd with fire, on his fierce dart he died;
               All that pleasd Hector, made him mad: all, that his thanks would erne;
               Of which twelue men, his most resolu'd, lay dead before his sterne.
            
            
               COMMENTARIVS.
               
                  a 
                  I must here be enforced (for your easier examination) of a simile before, to cite the originall words of it; which of all Homers translators and commentors haue bene most grosly mistaken; his whole intent and sence in it, vtterly f
                        •…
                     lsified. The simile illustrates the manner of Iunos parting from Ioue, being commanded by him to a businesse so abhorring from her will, is this:
               
               
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Which is thus conuerted ad verbum by Spondanus:
               
                  Sicut autem quando discurrit mens viri, qui per multam
                  Terram profectus, mentibus prudentibus considera
                        •…
                     it,
                  Huc iueram vel illuc, cogitarit
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      multa;
                  Sic citò properans peruolauit veneranda Iuno.
               
               
                  Which Lauren. Valla in prose thus translates.
               
               Subuolauit Iuno in coelum, eadem festinatione, ac celeritate, qua mens prudentis hominis, & qui multum terrarum peragrauit, recursat, cum multa sibi agenda instant, huc se conferat an illuc.
               Eobanus Hessus in verse thus:
               
               
                  Tam subitò, quàm sana viri mens plura scientis,
                  Quique peragrarit vastae loca plurima terrae,
                  Multa mouens animo, nunc huc, nunc auolat illuc.
               
               To this purpose likewise the Italian and French copies haue it. All vnderstanding Homers intent was (as by the speedinesse of a mans thought or mind) to illustrate Iunos swiftnesse in ha
                     •…
                  ing about the commandement of Iupiter, which was vtterly otherwise: viz. to shew the distraction of Iunos mind, in going against her will, and in her despite about Ioues commandment, which all the history before, in her inueterate and inflexible grudge to do any thing for the good of the Troians, confirmeth without question. Besides, her mor
                     •…
                  tie, and solemne apparance amongst the gods and goddesses, (which Themis notes in her lookes) shewes, if she went willingly, much lesse swiftly about that busines. Nor can the illustration of swiftnes be Homers end in this simile, because he makes the mans mind, to which he resembles her going, stagger; inclining him to go this way, and that; not resolued which way to go: which very poorely expresseth swiftnesse, and as properly agrees with the propertie of a wise man; when he hath vndertaken, and gone farre in a iourney, not to know whether he should go forward or backeward. Let vs therefore examine the originall words.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. Sicut verò quando discurrit vel prorumpit; vel cum impetu exurgit mens viri, 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   signifying ruo, prorumpo, vel cum impetu exurgo: as hauing trauelled farre on an irkesome iourney (as Iuno had done for the Greekes; faining to Ioue and Venus, she was going to visite 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , multa nutrientes fines terrae,) and then knowes not whether he should go backeward or forward, sustaines a vehement discourse with himselfe, on what course to resolue: and vext in mind, (which the words, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , expresse: being to be vnderstood mentibus amaris, vexatis, or distractis: with a spitefull, sorrowfull, vext, or distracted mind: not mentibus prudentibus, as all most vnwisely in this place conuert it: though in other places it intimates so much. But here the other holds congruence with the rest of the simile; from which in the wise sence it abhorres: 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   signifying amarus more properly then prudens; being translated prudens meerely metaphorically, acccording to the second deduction; where here it is vsed more properly according to the first deduction: which is taken from 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   the Larcher tree, whose gumme is exceeding bitter; and because things irkesome and bitter, (as afflictions, crosses, &c.) are meanes to make men wise, and take heede by others harmes: therefore according to the second deduction, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   is taken for cautus or prudens. But now, that the 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   or application seemes to make with their sence of swiftnesse, the words 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , being translated by them sic citò properans; it is thus to be turned in this place, sic rapidè & impetu pulsa,
                  
so snatchingly or headlongly driuen, flew Iuno. As we often see with a clap of thunder, Doues or other fowles driuen headlong from their seates, not in direct flight; but as they would breake their neckes with a kind of reeling: 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   being deriued of 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   signifying impetu ferri, vel furibundo impetu ferri: all which most aptly agreeth with Iunos enforced and wrathfull parting from Ioue, and doing his charge distractedly. This for me; if another can giue better, let him shew it, and take it. But in infinite other places is this diuine Poet thus prophaned; which for the extreme 
                     •…
                  
                  bour I cannot yet touch at.
               
                  b 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c, Difficile est, it is a hard thing (saith Minerua to Mars, when she answers his anger for the slaughter of his sonne Ascalaphus) for Ioue to deliuer the generation and birth of all men from death; which Commentors thus vnderstand; There were some men that neuer died; as Tython the husband of Aurora, Chyron, Glaucus made a sea god, &c. and in holy Writ (as Spondanus pleaseth to mixe them) Enoc and Elias: but because these few were freed from death, Mars must not looke that all others were. But this interpretation (I thinke) will appeare to all men at first sight, both ridiculous and prophane. Homer making Minerua onely iest at Mars here, (as she doth in other places) bidding him not storme that his sonne should be slaine more then better borne, stronger, and worthier men; for Ioue should haue enough to do (or it were hard for Ioue) to free all men from Death that are vnwilling to die. This mine, with the rest: the other others; accept which you please.
            
            The end of the fifteenth Booke.
         
         
            
            THE SIXTEENTH BOOK OF HOMERS ILIADS.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  
                     A Chilles, at Patroclus suite, doth yeeld
                  His armes, and Myrmidons; which brought to field,
                  The Troians flie. Patroclus hath the grace
                  Of great Sarpedons death, sprong of the race
                  Of Iupiter; he hauing slaine the horse
                  Of Thetis sonne, (fierce Pedasus,) the force
                  Of Hector doth reuenge, the much-ru'dend
                  Of most renown'd Sarpedon, on the friend
                  Of Thetides; first, by Euphorbus, harm'd
                  And by Apollos personall powre disarm'd.
               
            
            
               Another Argument.
               
                  In 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Patroclus beares the chance
                  Of death, imposd by Hectors lance.
               
            
            
               
                  THus fighting for this well-built ship; Patroclus all that space
               Stood by his friend, preparing words, to win the Greeeks his grace
               With powre of vncontained teares: and (like a fountaine pour'd
               In blacke streams, frō a lofty rocke) the Greeks, so plagu'd, deplor'd.
               
                  Achilles (ruthfull for his teares) said: Wherefore weepes my friend
               So like a girle, who, though she sees, her mother cannot tendAchilles chides Patroclus for his teares.
               
               Her childish humours, hangs on her, and would be taken vp;
               Stil viewing her, with teare-drownd eyes, when she hath made her stoope.
               To nothing liker, I can shape, thy so vnseemely teares;
               What causeth them? hath any ill, sollicited thine eares,
               Befalne my Myrmidons? or newes, from loued Phthia brought,
               Told onely thee? lest I should grieue, and therefore thus hath wrought
               On thy kind spirit? Actors sonne, the good Me
                        •…
                     tius,
               
               (Thy father) liues; and Peleus (mine) great sonne of Aeacus,
               
               Amongst his Myrmidons; whose deaths, in dutie we should mourne.
               Or is it what the Greeks sustaine, that doth thy stomacke turne?
               On whom (for their iniustice sake) plagues are so iustly laide?
               Speake man, let both know eithers heart. Patroclus (sighing said)
            
            
               O Peleus sonne, (thou strongest Greeke, by all degrees, that liues)
               Still be not angrie; our sad state, such cause of pittie giues.Patroclus answer to Achilles.
               
               Our greatest Greeks lie at their ships, sore wounded; Ithachus,
               
               King Agamemnon, Diomed, and good Eurypilus:
               
               But these, much-medcine-knowing men (Physitions) can recure;
               Thou yet vnmedcinable still; though thy wound, all endure.
               Heauen blesse my bosome from such wrath, as thou sooth'st as thy blisse,
               
                  (Vnprofitably vertuous) How shall our progenies,
               Borne in thine age, enioy thine aide? when these friends in thy flowre
               Thou leau'st to such vnworthy death? O idle, cruell powre;
               Great Peleus neuer did beget, nor Thetis, bring foorth thee;
               Thou, from the blew sea, and her rockes, deriu'st thy pedegree.
               What so declines thee? If thy mind, shuns any augurie,
               Related by thy mother Queene, from heauens foreseeing eye,
               And therefore thou forsak'st thy friends; let me go ease their mones
               With those braue reliques of our host, thy mightie Myrmidons;
               
               That I may bring to field more light, to Conquest then hath bene;
               To which end grace me with thine armes, since any shadow seene
               Of thy resemblance; all the powre, of periur'd Troy will flie,
               And our so tired friends will breathe: our fresh-set-on supplie
               Will easily driue their wearied off. Thus (foolish man) he su'd
               For his sure death; of all whose speech, Achilles first renu'd
               The last part, thus: O worthy friend, what haue thy speeches bene?Achilles to 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
            
            
               I shun the fight for Oracles? or what my mother Queene
               Hath told from Ioue? I take no care, nor note of one such thing;
               But this fit anger stings me still, that the insulting king,
               Should from his equall take his right; since he exceeds in powre.
               This, (still his wrong) is still my griefe; he tooke my Paramour
               That all men gaue: and whom I wonne, by vertue of my speare,
               That (for her) ouerturn'd a Towne. This rape he made of her,
               And vsde me like a fugitiue; an Inmate in a towne,
               That is no citie libertine, nor capable of their gowne.
               But, beare we this, as out of date; tis past, nor must we still
               Feed anger in our noblest parts; yet thus, I haue my will
               As well as our great king of men; for I did euer vow,
               Neuer to cast off my disdaine, till (as it fals out now)
               Their misse of me, knockt at my fleet; and told me in their cries,
               I was reueng'd, and had my wish, of all my enemies.
               And so of this repeate enough: Take thou, my fame-blaz'd armes,
               And my fight-thirstie Myrmidons, leade to these hote alarmes.
               Whole clouds of Troians circle vs, with hatefull eminence:
               The Greeks shut in a little shore; a sort of citizens
               Skipping vpon them: all because, their prowd eyes do not see
               The radiance of my helmet there, whose beames had instantly
               Thrust backe, and all these ditches fild, with carrion of their flesh,
               If Agamemnon had bene kind: where now, they fight as fresh,
               As thus farre they had put at ease; and at our tents contend.
               And may; for the repulsiue hand, of Diomed, doth not spend
               His raging darts there, that their Death, could fright out of our fleet:
               Nor from that head of enmitie, can my poore hearers meet
               The voice of great Atrides now: now Hectors onely voyce,
               Breakes all the aire, about both hosts; and with the very noise,
               Bred by his lowd encouragements, his forces fill the field,
               And fight the poore Achaians downe. But on; put thou my shi
                     •…
                  ld
               Betwixt the fire-plague and our fleet: rush brauely on, and turne
               
                  Warres tide as headlong on their throtes. No more let them aiourne
               Our sweet-home-turning: but obserue, the charge I lay on thee
               To each least point, that thy rul'd hand, may highly honour me;
               And get such glorie from the Greeks, that they may send againe
               My most sweet wench, and gifts to boote; when thou hast cast a raine
               On these so head-strong citizens, and forc't them from our fleet.
               With which grace, if the god of sounds, thy kind egression greet;Iupiter called the god of sounds for the chiefe sound his thunder.
               
               Retire, and be not tempted on (with pride, to see thy hand
               Raine slaughterd carkasses on earth) to runne forth thy command
               As farre as Ilion; left the gods, that fauour Troy, come forth
               To thy encounter; for the Sunne, much loues it; and my worth
               (In what thou suffer'st) will be wrong'd, that I would let my friend
               Assume an action of such weight, without me; and transcend
               His friends prescription; do not then, affect a further fight,
               Then I may strengthen: let the rest, (when thou hast done this right)
               Performe the rest. aO would to Ioue, thou Pallas, and thou Sunne,
               That not a man housd vnderneath, those towres of Ilion,
               
               Nor any one of all the Greeks, (how infinite a summe
               Soeuer, altogether make) might liue vnouercome:
               But onely we two (scaping death) might haue the thundring downe
               Of euery stone, stucke in the wals, of this so sacred towne.
            
            
               Thus spake they onely twixt themselues. And now the foe no more
               Could Aiax stand, being so opprest, with all the iron store
               The Troians powr'd on; with whose darts, and with Ioues will beside,
               His powres were cloyd, and his bright helme, did deafning blowes abide;
               His plume, and all head* ornaments, could neuer hang in rest:
               His arme yet laboured vp his shield; and, hauing done their best,
               They could not stirre him from his stand; although he wrought it out
               With short respirings, and with sweate; that ceaslesse flow'd about
               His reeking lims: no least time giuen, to take in any breath;
               Ill strengthned ill; when one was vp, another was beneath.
            
            
               Now Muses, you that dwell in heauen, the dreadfull meane inspire
               That first enforc't the Grecian fleete, to take in Troian fire:
               First Hector with his huge brode sword, cut off, at setting on,
               The head of Aiax Ashen lance; which Aiax seeing gone;
               And that he shooke a headlesse speare (a little while vnware)
               His warie spirits told him straight, the hand of heauen was there,
               And trembl'd vnder his conceipt; which was, bthat twas Ioues deed:
               Who, as he pold off his darts heads; so, sure he had decreed,
               That all the counsels of their warre, he would polle off like it,
               And giue the Troians victorie: so, trusted he his wit,
               And left his darts. And then the ship, was heapt with horrid brands
               Ofkindling fire; which instantly, was seene through all the strands,
               In vnextinguishible flames, that all the ship embrac't:
               And then Achilles beate his thighes; cryed out, Patroclus, haste,
               Make way with horse; I see at fleet, a fire of fearfull rage:
               Arme, arme, lest all our fleet it fire, and all our powre engage;
               Arme quickly, Ile bring vp the troopes. To these so dreadfull warres
               
                  
                  Patroclus, in Achilles armes, (enlightned all with starres,
               And richly ameld) all haste made: he wore his sword, his shield,
               His huge-plum'd helme; and two such speares, as he could nimbly wield.
               But the most fam'd Achilles speare, big, solid, full of weight,
               He onely left, of all his armes; for that, farre past the might
               Of any Greeke to shake, but his; Achilles onely i
                     •…
                  e
               Shooke that huge weapon; that was giuen, by Chyron to his sire,
               Cut from the top of Pelion, to be Heroes deaths.
               His steeds, Automedon straight ioyn'd; like whom no man that breaths
               (Next Peleus sonne) Patroclus lou'd; for like him, none so greatAutomedon friend to Patro clus, and mana ger of Achilles horses.
               
               He found, in faith, at euery fight, nor to out▪looke a threat:
               
                  Automedon did therefore guide (for him) Achilles steeds,
               (Xanthus, and Balius swift as wind) begotten by the seeds
               Of Zephyr, and the Harpie borne, Pordarge; in a meade
               Close to the wauie Ocean, where that fierce Harpye feade.
               
                  Automedon ioyn'd these before, and with the hindmost geres
               He fastn'd famous Pedasus, whom, from the massakers
               Made by Achilles, when he tooke, Eetions wealthie towne,
               He brought; and (though of mortall race) yet gaue him the renowne
               To follow his immortall horse. And now, before his tents,
               Himselfe had seene his Myrmidons, in all habiliments
               Of dreadfull warre: And when ye see (vpon a mountaine bred)A simile most liuely expressiu
                        •…
                     .
               
               A den of Wolues, (about whose hearts, vnmeasur'd strengths are fed)
               New come from currie of a Stagge; their iawes all blood-besmeard;
               And when from some blacke water-fount, they altogether herd;
               There hauing plentifully lapt, with thin, and thrust out tongs,
               The top and clearest of the spring; go belching from their lungs
               The clotterd gore; looke dreadfully, and entertaine no dread,
               Their bellies gaunt; all taken vp, with being so rawly fed:
               Then say, that such, in strength, and looke, were great Achilles men,
               Now orderd for the dreadfull fight: and so with all them then
               Their Princes, and their Chiefes did show, about their Generals friend;
               His friend, and all, about himselfe: who chiefly did intendThe powers Achilles brought to Troy.
               
               Th'embattelling of horse, and foote. To that siege, held so long,
               Twise fiue and twenty saile he brought; twise fiue and twentie strong
               Of able men, was euery saile: fiue Colonels he made
               Of all those forces, trustie men; and all of powre to leade,
               But he, of powre, beyond them all. Menesthius was one,
               That euer wore discolour'd armes; he was a riuers sonne
               That fell from heauen, and good to drinke, was his delightfull streame:
               His name, vnwearied Sperchius; he lou'd the louely dame
               Faire Polydora, Peleus seed; and deare in Borus sight,
               And she, to that celestiall flood, gaue this Menesthius light:
               A woman, mixing with a god. Yet Borus bore the name
               Of father to Menesthius: he marrying the dame,
               And giuing her a mightie dowre; he was the kind descent
               Of Perieris. The next man, renown'd with regiment,
               Was strong Eudorus; brought to life, by one supposd a maide;
               
                  Bright Polymela (Phylas seed;) but had the wanton plaid,
               With Argus-killing Mercurie; who (fir'd with her faire eyes
               As she was singing in the quire, of her that makes the cries
               In clamorous hunting, and doth beare, the crooked bow of gold)
               Stole to her bed, in that chaste roome, that Phebe chast did hold;
               And gaue her that swift-warrelicke sonne, (E
                        •…
                     dirys) brought to light
               As she was dancing: but as soone, as she that rules the plightEudorus borne as Polymela his mother was dancing.
               
               Of labouring women, easd her throwes; and shew'd her 
                     •…
                  onne the Sunne,
               Strong Echeclaeus, Actors heire; woo'd earnestly, and wonne
               Her second fauour, feeing her, with gifts of infinite prise;
               And after brought her to his house; where, in his grandsires eyes,
               (Old Phylas) Polymelas sonne, obtaind exceeding grac
                     •…
                  ,
               And found as carefull bringing vp, as of his naturall race
               He had descended. The third chiefe, was faire Memalides
                  Memalides the third Collonell.
               
               
                  Pysandrus; who in skill of darts, obtaind supremest praise
               Of all the Myrmidons, except, their Lords companion.
               The fourth charge aged Phoenix had. The fifth, Alcimedon,
                  Phoenix the fourth.
               
               Sonne of Laercus, and much fam'd. All these digested thus
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      the fif
                        •…
                     h.
               
               In fit place, by the mightie sonne, of royall Peleus;
               
               This sterne remembrance he gaue all: You Myrmidons, (said he)Achilles to his Myrmidons.
               
               Lest any of you should forget, his threatnings vsde to me
               In this place; and through all the time, that my iust anger raign'd;
               Attempting me with bitter words, for being so restrain'd
               (For my hote humour) from the fight: remember them, as these:
               Thou cruell sonne of Peleus, whom she that rules the seas,
               Did onely nourish with her gall; thou dost vngently hold
               Our hands, against our wills, from fight; we will not be controld;
               But take our ships and saile for home; before we loyter here,
               And feed thy furie. These high words, exceeding often were
               The threates, that in your mutinous troopes, ye vsde to me, for wrath
               To be detaind so from the fi
                     •…
                  ld: now then, your splenes may bath
               In sweate of those great works ye wisht; now he that can employ
               A generous heart, go fight, and fright, these bragging sonnes of Troy.
               
            
            
               This set their minds, and strengths on fire; the speech enforcing well,
               Being vsde in time; but being their kings, it much more did impell;
               And closer rusht-in all the troopes. And, as for buildings hie,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               The Mazon layes his stones more thicke, against th'extremitie
               Of wind and weather; and euen then, if any storme arise,
               He thickens them the more for that; the present act so plies
               His honest mind to make sure worke. So, for the high estate
               This worke was brought to, these mens minds, (according to the rate)
               Were raisd, and all their bodies ioyn'd: but there well-spoken king,
               With his so timely-thought-on speech, more sharpe made valours sting;
               And thickn'd so their targets bost; so all their helmets then;
               That shields propt shields; helmes helmets knockt, and men encourag'd men.
            
            
               
                  Patroclus, and Automedon, did arme before them allPatroclus and Automedon arme together.
               
               Two bodies, with one mind inform'd; and then the Generall,
               Betooke him to his priuate Tent, where (from a coffer wrought
               
                  Most rich and curiously; and giuen, by Thetis, to be brought
               In his owne ship, top-fild with vests; warme robes to checke cold wind;
               And tapistries, all golden fring'd, and curl'd with thrumbs behind:
               He tooke a most vnualewed boule, in which none dranke but he;Achilles sacrifice for his friends safe returne.
               
               Nor he, but to the deities; nor any deitie,
               But Ioue himselfe was seru'd with that; and that he first did clense
               With sulphure, then with fluences, of sweetest water rense.
               Then washt his hands, and drew himselfe, a boule of mightie wine;
               Which (standing midst the place enclosde, for seruices diuine,
               And looking vp to heauen and Ioue, who saw him well) he pour'd
               Vpon the place of sacrifice, and humbly thus implor'd:
            
            
               Great Dodonaeus, President, of cold Dodonaes towres;Achilles 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Diuine Pelasgicus, that dwell'st, farre hence; about whose bowres
               Th'austere prophetique Selli dwell, that still sleepe on the ground,
               Go bare, and neuer clense their feete: as I before haue found
               Grace to my vowes, and hurt to Greece, so now my prayres intend.
               I still stay in the gatherd fleete, but haue dismist my friend
               Amongst my many Myrmidons, to danger of the dart.
               O grant his valour my renowne; arme with my mind his hart,
               That Hectors selfe may know, my friend, can worke in single warre;
               And not then onely shew his hands, so hote and singular,
               When my kind presence seconds him: but, fight he nere so well;
               No further let him trust his fight: but when he shall repell
               Clamor and Danger from our fleete, vouchsafe a safe retreate
               To him and all his companies, with fames and armes compleate.
            
            
               He prayd, and heauens great Counsellor, gaue satisfying eare,
               To one part of his orisons, but left the other there:
               He let him free the fleete of foes, but safe retreate denide.
               
                  Achilles left that vtter part, where he his zeale applide;
               And turn'd into his inner tent; made fast his cup; and then
               Stood forth, and with his mind beheld, the foes fight and his men,
               That follow'd his great minded friend, embattail'd, till they brake
               With gallant spirit vpon the foe: And as fell waspes, that makeSimile.
               
               Their dwellings in the broade high way; which foolish children vse
               (Their cottages being neare their nests) to anger and abuse
               With euer vexing them, and breed (to sooth their childish warre)
               A common ill to many men; since if a traueller
               (That would his iourneys end apply, and passe them vnassayd)
               Come neare and vexe them, vpon him, the childrens faults are layd;
               For on they flie, as he were such, and still defend their owne:
               So far'd it with the feruent mind, of euery Myrmidon,
               
               Who pour'd themselues out of their fleete, vpon their wanton foes,
               That needs would stirre them, thrust so neare; and cause the ouerthrowes
               Of many others that had else, bene neuer toucht by them,
               Nor would haue toucht. Patroclus then, put his wind to the streame,Patroclus to the 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               And thus exhorted: Now my friends, remember you expresse
               Your late-v
                     •…
                  g'd vertue, and renowme, our great Aeacides;
               
               That he being strongst of all the Greeks, his eminence may dimme
               
                  All others likewise in our strengths, that farre off imitate him.
               And Agamemnon now may see, his fault as generall,
               As his place high; dishonoring him, that so much honors all.
            
            
               Thus made he sparkle their fresh fire, and on they rusht; the fleete
               Fild full her hollow sides with sounds, that terribly did greete
               Th'amazed Troians: and their eyes, did second their amaze,
               When great Men
                        •…
                     tius sonne they saw, and his friends armor blaze;The terror of Patroclus to the Troians.
               
               All troupes stood troubl'd with conceit, that Peleus sonne was there;
               His anger cast off at the ships; and each lookt euery where
               For some authoritie to leade, the then prepared flight.
               
                  Patroclus greeted with a lance, the region where the fight
               Made strongest tumult; neare the ship, Protesilaus brought,
               And strooke Pyrechmen, who before, the faire-helmd P
                        •…
                     ons fought,
               Led from Amydon, neare whose wals, the broad stream'd Axius flowes.
               Through his right shoulder flew the dart, whose blow strooke all the blowesPyrechmen slain by Patroclus, and the 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               In his powre, from his powrelesse arme; and downe he groning fell:
               His men all flying (their Leader fled.) This one dart did repell
               The whole guard plac't about the ship; whose fire extinct, halfe burn'd
               The Paeons left her; and full crie, to clamorous flight return'd.
               Then spread the Greeks about their ships; triumphant tumult flow'd:
               And as from top of some steepe hill, the lightner strips a clowd,Simile.
               
               And lets a great skie out from heauen; in whose delightsome light,
               All prominent foreheads, forrests, towres, and temples cheare the sight:
               So clear'd these Greeks, this Troian cloud; and at their ships and tents
               Obtain'd a litle time to breathe, but found no present vents
               To their inclusions; nor did Troy (though these Paeonians fled)
               Lose any ground, but from this ship, they needfully turn'd head.
            
            
               Then euery man, a man subdude; Patroclus in the thigh
               Strooke Areilicus; his dart, the bone did breake, and flie
               Quite through, and sunke him to the earth. Good Menelaus slew
               Accomplisht Thoas, in whose breast (being nak'd) his lance he threw,
               Aboue his shield, and freed his soule. Phylides (taking note
               That bold Amphidus bent at him) preuented him, and smote
               His thighes extreme part, where (of man) his fattest muscle lies,
               The nerues torne with his lances pile, and darknesse closde his eyes.
               
                  Antilochus, Atymnius seizd, his steele lance did impresse
               His first three guts, and loosd his life. At yong Nestorides,
               
               
                  Maris, Atymnius bother flew; and at him, Thrasimed,
               
               (The brother to Antilochus) his eager Iauelins head,
               The muscles of his arme cut out, and shiuer'd all the bone;
               Night closde his eyes; his liuelesse corse, his brother fell vpon.
               And so by two kind brothers hands, did two kind brothers bleed:
               Both being diuine Sarpedons friends; and were the darting seed
               Of Amisodarus, that kept, the bane of many men,
               Abhord Chim
                        •…
                     ra; and such bane, now caught his childeren.
               
                  Aiax Oileades did take, Cleobulus aliue,
               Inuading him, (staid by the prease) and at him then let driue,
               With his short sword, that cut his necke; whose bloud warm'd all the steele:
               
                  And cold Death, with a violent fate, his sable eyes did secle.
               
                  Peneleus and Lycon, cast, together off their darts;
               Both mist, and both together then, went with their swords; in parts
               The blade and hilt went, laying on, vpon the helmets height;
               
                  Peneleus sword caught Lycons necke, and cut it thorough quite.
               His head hung by the very skin. The swift Meriones,
               
               (Pursuing flying Acamas) iust as he got accesse
               To horse and chariot, ouertooke, and tooke him such a blow
               On his right shoulder, that he left, his chariot, and did strow
               The dustie earth; life left his lims, and night his eyes possest.
            
            
               
                  Idomenaeus his sterne dart, at Erymas addrest,
               As (like to Acamas) he fled; it cut the sundry bones
               Beneath his braine, betwixt his necke, and foreparts, and so runs
               (Shaking his teeth out) through his mouth; his eyes all drown'd in blood:
               So through his nostrils and his mouth (that now dart-open stood)
               He breath'd his spirit. Thus had death, from euery Grecian Chiefe,
               A Chiefe of Troy. For, as to Kids, or Lambes, their cruelst thiefeSimil
                        •…
                     .
               
               (The Wolfe) steales in; and when he sees, that by the shepheards sloth,
               The dams are sperst about the hils; then serues his rauenous tooth
               With ease, because his prey is weake: So seru'd the Greeks their foes,
               Discerning well, how shrieking flight, did all their spirits dispose;
               Their biding vertues quite forgot; And now the naturall splene
               That Aiax bore to Hector, still, by all meanes would haue bene
               Within his bosome with a dart: but he, that knew the warre,
               (Well couer'd in a well-lin'd shield) did well perceiue how farre
               The arrowes and the iauelins reacht, by being within their sounds
               And ominous singings; and obseru'd, the there-inclining bounds
               Of Conquest, in her aide of him, and so obeyd her change;
               Tooke safest course for him and his, and stood to her as strange.
               And as when Ioue intends a storme, he lets out of the starresSimile.
               
               From steepe Olympus, a blacke cloud, that all heauens splendor barres
               From men on earth: so from the hearts, of all the Troian host,
               All comfort lately found from Ioue, in flight and cries was lost.
               Nor made they any faire retreat; Hectors vnruly horse,
               Would needs retire him; and he left, engag'd his Troian force;
               Forc't by the steepnesse of the dike, that in ill place they tooke,
               And kept them that would faine haue gone. Their horses quite forsooke
               A number of the Troian kings, and left them in the dike;
               Their chariots in their foreteames broke. Patroclus then did strike
               While steele was hote, and chear'd his friends; nor meant his enemies good:
               Who when they once began to flie, each way receiu'd a flood,
               And chok't themselues with drifts of dust. And now were clouds begot
               Beneath the clouds; with flight, and noise; the horse neglected not
               Their home intendments; and where rout, was busiest, there pour'd on
               
                  P
                        •…
                     troclus most exhorts and threats; and then lay ouerthrowne
               Numbers beneath their axle-trees, who (lying in flights streame)
               Made th'after chariots iot and iumpe, in driuing ou
                     •…
                  r them.
            
            
               Th'immortall horse Patroclus rode, did passe the dike with ease,
               
                  And wisht the depth and danger more: and Menetiades
               
               As great a spirit had to reach, retiring Hectors hast;
               But his fleete horse had too much law, and fetcht him off too fast.
               And as in Autumne the blacke earth, is loden with the stormes,Simile.
               
               That Ioue in gluts of raine poures downe; being angry with the formes
               Of iugdement in authorisde men, that in their courts maintaine
               (With violent office) wrested lawes, and (fearing gods, nor men)
               Exile all iustice; for whose faults, whole fields are ouerflowne,
               And many valleys cut away, with torrents headlong throwne,
               From neighbour mountaines; till the sea, receiue them, roring in;
               And iudg'd mens labours then are vaine, plagu'd for their Iudges sin:
               So now the foule defaults of some, all Troy were laid vpon:
               So like those torrents roar'd they backe, to windie Ilion;
               
               And so like tempests, blew the horse, with rauishing backe againe
               Those hote a
                     •…
                  sailants, all their workes, at fleete now rendred vaine.
            
            
               
                  Patroclus (when he had disperst, the formost Phalanxes)
               Cald backe his forces to the fleete, and would not let them prease
               (As they desir'd) too neare the towne; but twixt the ships and floud,
               And their steepe rampire, his hand steept, Reuenge in seas of bloud.
            
            
               Then Pronous was first that fell, beneath his fierie lance,
               Which strooke his bare brest, neare his shield. The second, Thestors chance
               (Old Enops sonne) did make himselfe; who shrinking, and set close
               In his faire seate (euen with th'approch, Patroclus made) did lose
               All manly courage; insomuch, that from his hands, his raines
               Fell flowing downe; and his right iaw, Patroclus lance, attaines;
               Strooke through his teeth, and there it stucke, and by it, to him drew
               Dead Thestor to his chariot: it shewd, as when you viewSimile.
               
               An Anglet from some prominent rocke, draw with his line and hooke
               A mightie fish out of the sea: for so the Greeke did plucke
               The Troian gaping from his seate; his iawes op't with the dart;
               Which when Patroclus drew, he fell; his life and brest did part.
            
            
               Then rusht he on Eryalus, at whom he hurl'd a stone,
               Which strake his head so in the midst, that two was made of one;
               Two wayes it fell, cleft through his caske: and then Tlepolemus,
               
               
                  Epaltes, Damastorides, Euippus, Echius,
               
               
                  Ipheas, bold Amphoterus, and valiant Erymas,
               
               And Polymelus (by his sire, surnam'd Argeadas)
               He heapt vpon the much-fed earth. When Ioues most worthy sonne
               (Diuine Sarpedon) saw these friends thus stayd, and others runne;
                     
                        •…
                     arpedon to the 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
            
            
               O shame! why flie ye, then he cride? now shew ye feete enow:
               O
                     •…
                  , keepe your way; my selfe will meete, the man that startles you;
               To make me vnderstand his name, that flants in conquest thus,
               And hath so many able knees, so soone dissolu'd to vs.
            
            
               Downe iumpt he from his chariot; downe leapt his foe as light:
               And as on some farre-looking rocke, a cast of Vultures fight,Simile.
               
               Flie on each other, strike, and trusse, part, meete, and then sticke by,
               Tug, both with crooked beakes, and seres; crie, fight; and fight, and cry:
               So fiercely fought these angry kings, and shew'd as bitter gals.
            
            
               
                  
                  Ioue (turning eyes to this sterne fight) his wife and sister cals,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      the fate of 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               And (much mou'd for the Lycian Prince) said: O that to my sonne,
               Fate, by this day, and man should cut, a thread so nobly spunne.
               Two minds distract me; if I should, now rauish him from fight,
               And set him safe in Lycia; or giue the Fates their right.
            
            
               Austere Saturnius, (she replide) what vniust words are thei
                     •…
                  e?
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               A mortall long since markt by Fate, wouldst thou immortalise?
               Do; but by no god be approu'd; free him, and numbers more
               (Sonnes of immortals) will liue free, ▪that death must taste before
               These gates of Ilion; euery god, will haue his sonne a god,
               Or storme extremely. Giue him then, an honest period,
               In braue fight, by Patroclus sword, if he be deare to thee,
               A
                     •…
                  d grieues thee, for his danger'd life: of which, when he is free,
               Let Death and Somnus beare him hence; till Lycias naturall wombe
               Receiue him from his brothers hands, and citizens; a Tombe
               And columne raisd to him; this is, the honor of the dead.
            
            
               She said; and her speech rul'd his powre: but in his safeties stead,
               For sad ostent of his neare death, he steept his liuing name
               In drops of blood, heauen swet for him, which earth drunke to his fame.
            
            
               And now, as this high combat grew, to this too humble end;
               
                  Sarpedons death had this state more; twas vsherd by his friend,
               And chariotere, braue Thrasimed; whom, in his bellies rim,
               
                  Patroclus wounded with his lance, and endlesse ended him.
            
            
               And then another act of name, foreranne his princely fate;
               His first lance missing, he let flie, a second that gaue dateSarpedon 
                        〈◊〉
                      Pedasus, one of 
                        •…
                     chilles horse.
               
               Of violent death to Pedasus; who (as he ioy'd to die
               By his so honorable hand) did (euen in dying) ney.
            
            
               His ruine startl'd th'other steeds; the geres crackt, and the raines
               Strappl'd his fellowes; whose mis-rule, Automedo
                        •…
                     
                   restraines,
               By cutting the intangling geres; and so dissundering quite,
               The braue-slaine Beast; when both the rest, obeyd, and went foreright:
               And then the royall combattants, fought for the finall stroke,The last 
                        〈◊〉
                      of Sarpedon and Patroclus.
               
               When Lycias Generall mist againe; his high-raisde 
                     〈◊〉
                   tooke,
               Aboue his shoulder, emptie way. But no such 
                     〈◊〉
                   flight
               
                  Patroclus let his speare performe, that on the breast did light,
               Of his braue foe; where lifes strings close, about the solid hart,
               Impressing a recurelesse wound; his k
                     •…
                  ees then, left their part,
               And let him fall; when like an Oke, a Poplar, or a Pine,
               New feld by arts-men on the hils; 
                     •…
                  e stretcht his forme 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Before his horse and chariot. And as a Lion leapesSimile.
               
               Vpon a goodly yellow Bull, driues all the herd in heapes;
               And vnder his vnconquerd iawes, the braue beast sighing di
                     •…
                  s▪
               
               So sigh'd Sarpedon vnderneath, this prince of enemies;
               Cald Glaucus to him (his deare friend,) and said: Now 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      dying▪ to Glaucus his friend.
               
               Much dutie owe to fight, and armes▪ now, for my loue, it 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Thy heart in much hand to approue, that warre 
                     〈◊〉
                   harmefull▪ 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               How actiue all thy forces are, this one houres act must show▪ 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               First call our Lycian Captaines vp, looke round, and bring vp 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               
                  And all exhort, to stand like friends, about Sarpedons fall;
               And spend thy selfe thy steele for me: for be assurd, no day
               Of all thy life, to thy last houre, can cleare thy blacke dismay
               In woe and infamie for me; if I be taken hence,
               Spoil'd of mine armes; and thy renowme, despoil'd of my defence.
               Stand firme then, and confirme thy men. This said; the bounds of death
               Concluded all sight to his eyes, and to his nosthrils breath.
            
            
               
                  Patroclus (though his guard was strong) forc't way through euery doubt:
               Climb'd his high bosome with his foote, and pluckt his iauelin out;
               And with it dr
                     •…
                  w the filme and strings, of his yet-panting hart;
               And last, together with the pile, his princely soule did part.
            
            
               His horse (spoil'd both of guide and king, thicke sno
                     •…
                  ing, and amaz'd,
               And apt to flight) the Myrm
                        •…
                     dons, made nimbly to, and seaz'd.
            
            
               
                  Glaucus, to heare his friend aske aide, of him past all the r
                     •…
                  st;
               (Though well he knew his wound vncur'd) Confusion fild his brest,The sorrow of Glaucus for Sarpedon, and praier to Ph
                        •…
                     bus.
               
               Not to haue good in any powre; and yet so much good will.
               And (laying his hand vpon his wound, that pain'd him sharply still;
               And was by Teucers hand set on, from their assail'd steepe wall,
               In keeping hurt from other men) he did on Phoebus call
               (The god of Medcines) for his cure: Thou king of cures (said he)
               That art perhaps in Lycia, with her rich progeni
                     •…
                  ,
               Or here in Troy; but any where, since thou hast powre to heare;
               O giue a hurt, and wofull man (as I am now) thine eare.
               This arme sustaines a cruell wound, whose paines shoot euery way,
               Afflict this shoulder, and this hand, and nothing long can stay,
               A fluxe of blood still issuing; nor therefore can I stand
               With any enemie in fight, nor hardly make my hand
               Support my lance; and here lies dead, the worthiest of men;
               
                  Sarpedon, worthy sonne to Ioue; (whose power could yet abstaine
               From all aide in this deadly need) giue thou then aide to me,
               (O king of all aide to men hurt) asswage th'extremitie
               Of this armes anguish; giue it strength, that by my president,
               I may excite my men to blowes; and this dead corse preuent
               Of further violence. He praid, and kind Apollo heard;
               Allayd his anguish, and his wound, of all the blacke bloud clear'd,
               That vext it so; infusde fresh powres, into his weakened mind,
               And all his spirits flow'd with ioy, that Phoebus stood inclin'd
               (In such quicke bountie) to his prayres. Then, as Sarpedon wild,
               He cast about his greedie eye, and first of all instild
               To all his Captaines, all the stings, that could inflame their fight,
               For good Sarpedon. And from them, he stretcht his speedie pace,
               T'Agenor, Hector, Venus sonne, and wise Polydamas;
               
               And (onely naming Hector) said: Hector, you now forget
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , to Hector.
               
               Your poore auxiliarie friends, that in your toiles haue swet
               Their friendlesse soules out, farre from home; Sarpedon, that sustain'd
               With Iustice, and his vertues all, broade Lycia hath not gain'd
               The like guard for his person here; for yonder dead he lies,
               Beneath the great Patroclus lance: but come, let your supplies
               
                  (Good friends) stand neare him: O disdaine, to see his corse defil'd
               With Grecian furie; and his armes, by their oppressions spoil'd;
               The Myrmidons are come enrag'd, that such a mightie boote
               Of Greekes, Troys darts haue made at fleete. This said, from head to foote
               Griefe strooke their powres, past patience, and not to be restrain'd,
               To heare newes of Sarpedons death; who, though he appertain'd
               To other cities; yet to theirs, he was the very Fort,
               And led a mightie people there; of all whose better sort,
               Himselfe was best. This made them runne, in flames vpon the foe;
               The first man, Hector, to whose heart, Sarpedons death did go.
            
            
               
                  Patroclus stird the Grecian spirits; and first, th'Aiaces, thus:Patroclus to the Grecians, and particularly to both the 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Now brothers, be it deare to 
                     •…
                  ou, to fight, and succour vs,
               As euer heretofore ye did, wi
                     •…
                   men first excellent.
               The man lies slaine, that first did scale, and raze the battlement,
               That crown'd our wall; the Lycian Prince. But if we now shall adde
               Force to his corse, and spoile his armes, a prise may more be had
               Of many great ones, that for him, will put on to the death.
            
            
               To this worke, these were prompt enough; and each side ordereth
               Those Phalanxes that most had rate, of resolutions;
               The Troia
                        •…
                     s, and the Lycian powres; the Greeks, and Myrmido
                        •…
                     s.
               
               These ranne together for the corse, and closde with horrid cries;
               Their armours thundering with the claps, laid on about the prise.
               And Ioue about th'impetuous broile, pernicious night powr'd out,
               As long as for his loued sonne, pernicious Labour fought.
            
            
               The first of Troy, the first Greekes foil'd, when, not the last indeed,
               Amongst the Myrmidons was slaine: the great Aiacleus seed;
               Diuine Epigeus, that before, had exercisde command
               In faire Budaeus; but because, he laid a bloudie hand
               On his owne sisters valiant sonne; To Peleus, and his Queene,
               He came for pardon, and obtain'd; His slaughter being the meane
               He came to Troy, and so to this. He ventur'd euen to touch
               The princely carkasse, when a stone, did more to him, by much;
               (Sent out of able Hectors hand) it cut his skull in twaine,
               And strooke him dead. Patroclus (grieu'd, to see his friend so slaine)
               Before the foremost thrust himselfe: and as a Faulcon frayesSi
                        •…
                     ile.
               
               A flocke of Stares or Caddesses; such feare brought his assayes
               Amongst the Troians, and their friends; and (angry at the hart,
               As well as grieu'd) for him so slaine: another stonie dart,
               As good as Hectors, he let flie, that dusted in the necke
               Of Sthenelaus; thrust his head, to earth first, and did breake
               The nerues in sunder, with his fall; off fell the Troia
                        •…
                     s too;
               Euen Hectors selfe, and all as farre, as any man can throw,
               (Prouokt for games, or in the warres, to shed an enemies soule)
               A light, long dart. The first that turn'd, was he that did controule
               The Targatiers of Lycia; Prince 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , who to hell
               Sent Bathycleus, Chalco
                        •…
                     s sonne; he did in Hellas dwell,
               And shin'd, for wealth and happinesse, amongst the Myrmidons;
               
               His bosomes midst the Iauelin strooke, his fall gat earth with grones.
               
                  The Greeks grieu'd, and the Tro
                        •…
                     ns ioy'd, for so renowm'd a man;
               About whom stood the Grecians firme: and then the death began
               On Troyes side by Meriones; he slue one great in warre,
               
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , On
                        •…
                     tors sonne, the Priest of Iupiter,
               
               Created in th'Idean hill. Betwixt his iaw and eare
               The dart stucke fast, and loosde his soule; sad mists of Hate and Feare
               Inuading him. Anchises sonne, dispatcht a brazen lance
               At bold Meriones; and hop't, to make an equall chance
               On him, with bold 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     ; though vnder his broade shield
               He lay so close. But he discern'd, and made his bodie yeeld,
               So low, that ouer him it flew, and, trembling tooke the ground;
               With which, Mars made it quench his thirst; and since the head could wound
               No better bodie; and yet throwne, from nere the worse a hand;
               It turnd from earth, and lookt awrie. Aeneas let it stand,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Much angrie at the vaine euent; and told Meriones,
               
               He scap't but hardly; nor had cause, to hope for such successe
               Another time; though well he knew, his dancing facultie,
               By whose agilitie he scap't; for had his dart gone by
               With any least touch, instantly, he had bene euer slaine.
            
            
               He answerd: Though thy strength be good, it cannot render vaine
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               The strength of others with thy iests; nor art thou so diuine,
               But when my lance shall touch at thee, with equall sp
                     •…
                  d to thine,
               Death will share with it, thy lifes powres; thy confidence can shun
               No more then mine, what his right claimes. Men
                        •…
                     tius noble sonne
               Rebuk't Meriones, and said: What needst thou vse this speech?
               Nor thy strength is approu'd with words, (good friend) nor can we reach
               The bodie, nor make th'enemie yeeld, with these our counterbraues;
               We must enforce the binding earth, to hold them in her graues.
               If you will warre, Fight; will you speake? giue counsell; counsell, blowes
               Are th'ends of warres, and words; talke here, the time in vaine bestowes.
            
            
               He said, and led, and nothing lesse, for any thing he said,
               (His speech being season'd with such right) the Worthy seconded.
               And then, as in a sounding vale, (neare neighbour to a hill)Simile.
               
               Wood-fellers make a farre-heard noise, with chopping, chopping still,
               And laying on, on blocks and trees: so they, on men laid lode,
               And beate like noises into aire, both as they strooke and trod.
               But (past their noise) so full of bloud, of dust, of darts, lay smit
               Diuine Sarpedon, that a man, must haue an excellent wit,
               That could but know him; and might faile: so from his vtmost head,
               Euen to the low plants of his feete, his forme was altered.
               All thrusting neare it euery way, as thicke as flies in spring,
               That in a sheepe-cote (when new milke, assembles them) make wing,
               And buzze about the top-full pailes: nor euer was the eve
               Of Ioue auerted from the fight; he viewd, thought, ceaslesly,
               And diuersly vpon the death, of great Achilles friend:
               If Hector there (to wreake his sonne) should with his iauelin end
               His life, and force away his armes, o
                     •…
                   still augment the field;
               He then concluded, that the flight, of much more soule, should yeeld
               
                  
                  Achilles good friend more renowne; and that, euen to their gates
               He should driue Hector and his host: and so disanimates
               The mind of Hector, that he mounts, his chariot, and takes Flight
               
               Vp with him, tempting all to her; affirming, his insight
               Knew euidently, that the beame, of Ioues all-ordering scoles,
               Was then in sinking on their side, surcharg'd with flockes of soules.
            
            
               Then, not the noble Lycians staid, but left their slaughterd Lord
               Amongst the corses common heape; for many more were pour'd
               About, and on him; while Ioues hand, held out the bitter broile.
               And now they spoil'd Sarpedons armes; and to the ships the spoile
               Was sent by Menaetiades. Then Ioue, thus charg'd the Sunne:
            
            
               Haste, honor'd Phoebus, let no more, Greeke violence be doneIou
                        •…
                      to Ph
                        •…
                     bus.
               
               To my Sarpedon; but his corse, of all the sable bloud
               And iauelins purg'd; then carry him, farre hence to some cleare floud,
               With whose waues wash, and then embalme, each thorough-cl
                     •…
                  nsed lim,
               With our Ambrosia; which perform'd, diuine weeds put on him:
               And then to those swift mates, and twins, sweete Sleepe and Death commit
               His princely person, that with speed, they both may carrie it
               To wealthy Lycia; where his friends, and brothers will embrace,
               And tombe it in some monument, as fits a Princes place.
            
            
               Then flew Apollo to the fight, from the Idalian hill,Apollo sends 
                        〈◊〉
                      pedo
                        •…
                     s body by Sleep and Death to Lycl
                        •…
                     .
               
               At all parts putting into act, his great Commanders will:
               Drew all the darts, washt, balm'd the corse; which (deckt with ornament,
               By Sleepe and Death, those featherd twins) he into Lycia sent
            
            
               
                  Patroclus then, Automedon, commands to giue his steeds
               Large raines, and all way to the chace: so madly he exceeds
               The strict commission of his friend; which had he kept, had kept
               A blacke death from him. But Ioues mind, hath euermore outstept
               The mind of man; who both affrights, and takes the victorie
               From any hardiest hand, with ease; which he can iustifie,
               Though he himselfe commands him fight: as now, he put this chace
               In Menaetiades his mind. How much then weighs the grace
               (Patroclus?) that Ioue giues thee now, in scoles put, with thy death?
               Of all these great and famous men, the honorable breath.
            
            
               Of which, Adrestus first he slue, and next Autonous;
               
               
                  Epistor
                        •…
                     , and Perimus; Pylartes, Elasus,
               
               Swift Menalippus, Molius; all these were ouerthrowne
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •…
                     
                     ling the wals of Troy, resisted by Phoebus.
               
               By him, and all else, put in rout; and then proud Ilion
               
               Had stoopt beneath his glorious hand: he rag'd so with his lance,
               If Phoebus had not kept the towre, and helpt the Ilians,
               
               Sustaining ill thoughts gainst the Prince. Thrice to the prominence
               Of Troys steepe wall he brauely leapt: thrice Phoebus thrust him thence:
               Obiecting his all-dazeling shield, with his resistlesse hand.
               But fourthly, when (like one of heauen) he would haue stird his stand,
               
                  Apollo threatned him, and said; Ceasse, it exceeds thy fateApollo threatens P
                        •…
                     traclus.
               
               (Forward Patroclus) to expugne, with thy bold lance, this state;
               Nor vnder great Achilles powres, (to thine superiour farre)
               Lies Troyes graue ruine. When he spake, Patroclus left that warre:
               
                  Leapt farre backe; and his anger shund. Hector detain'd his horse
               Within the Scaean ports, in doubt, to put his personall force
               Amongst the rout, and turne their heads, or shun in Troy the storme.
            
            
               
                  Apollo seeing his suspence, assum'd the goodly forme
               Of Hectors vnkle, Asius, the Phrygian Dymas sonne,Apollo in shape of Asius to Hector.
               
               Who neare the deepe Sangarius, had habitation;
               Being brother to the Troian Queene. His shape Apollo tooke;
               And askt of Hector, why his spirit, so cleare the fight forsooke;
               Affirming twas vnfit for him: and wisht his forces were
               As much aboue his, as they mou'd, in an inferiour sphere:
               He should (with shame to him) be gone; and so bad, driue away
               Against Patroclus, to approue, if he that gaue them day,
               Would giue the glorie of his death, to his preferred lance.
               So left he him; and to the fight, did his bright head aduance,
               Mixt with th
                     •…
                   multitude, and stird, foule Tumult for the foe.
               Then Hector bad Cebriones, put on; himselfe let go
               All other Greeks within his reach, and onely gaue command,
               To front Patroclus. He at him; iumpt downe; his strong left hand
               A Iauelin held; his right, a stone; a marble sharpe; and such
               As his large hand had powre to gripe; and gaue it strength as much
               As he could lie to: nor stood long, in feare of that huge man
               That made against him; but full on, with his huge stone he ran
               Discharg'd, and draue it twixt the browes, of bold Cebriones:
               
               Nor could the thicke bone there prepar'd, extenuate so th'accesse,
               But out it draue his broken eyes, which in the dust fell downe;
               And he diu'd after; which conceit, of diuing, tooke the sonne
               Of old Menatius, who thus plaid, vpon the others bane.
            
            
               O heauens! for truth, this Troian was, a passing actiue man;Patroclus 
                        〈◊〉
                      at t
                        •…
                     e fall of Cebriones.
               
               With what exceeding ease he diues? as if at worke he were
               Within the fishie seas. This man, alone would furnish cheare
               For twentie men; though twere a storme; to leape out of a saile,
               And gather oisters for them all; he does it here as well;
               And there are many such in Troy. Thus iested he so neare
               His owne graue death; and then made in, to spoile the Chariotere,
               With such a Lions force, and fate; as (often ruining,
               Stals of fat oxen) gets at length, a mortall wound to sting
               His soule, out of that rauenous breast, that was so insolent;
               And so his lifes blisse proues his bane: so deadly confident
               Wert thou Patroclus, in pursuite, of good Cebriones,
               
               To whose defence now Hector leapt. The opposite addresse,A simile expressing Patroclus encounter and Hectors.
               
               These masters of the crie in warre, now made, was of the kind
               Of two fierce kings of beasts, opposd, in strife, about a Hind
               Slaine on the forehead of a hill; both sharpe, and hungry set,
               And to the Currie neuer came, but like two Deaths they met:
               Nor these two entertain'd lesse mind, of mutuall preiudice,
               About the bodie; close to which, when each had prest for prise,
               
                  Hector the head laid hand vpon; which once gript, neuer could
               Be forc't from him; Patroclus then, vpon the feete got hold,
               
                  And he pincht with as sure a naile: so both stood 
                     •…
                  ugging there,
               While all the rest, made eager fight, and grappl'd euery where.
               And as the East and South wind striue, to make a loftie woodSimile.
               
               Bow to their greatnesse; barkie Elmes, wild Ashes, Beeches bowd
               Euen with the earth; in whose thicke armes, the mightie vapors lie,
               And tosse by turnes, all, either way; their leaues at randon flie,
               Boughs murmure, and their bodies cracke; and with perpetuall din,
               The Syluans falter, and the stormes, are neuer to begin:
               So rag'd the fight; and all from Flight, pluckt her forgotten wings;
               While some still stucke; still new wingd shafts, flew dancing from their strings;
               Huge stones sent after, that did shake, the shields about the corse,
               Who now (in dusts soft forehead stretcht) forgat his guiding horse.
            
            
               As long as Phoebus turn'd his wheeles, about the midst of heauen,
               So long the touch of eithers darts, the fals of both made euen:
               But when his waine drew neare the West, the Greeks past measure were
               The abler souldiers, and so swept, the Troian tumult cleare
               From off the bodie; out of which, they drew the hurl'd-in darts;
               And from his shoulders stript his armes; and then to more such parts
               
                  Patroclus turn'd his striuing thoughts, to do the Troians ill:
               Thrice, like the god of warre, he charg'd; his voice as horrible:
               And thrice nine those three charges slue; but in the fourth assay,
               O then Patroclus, shew'd thy last; the dreadfull Sunne made way
               Against that on-set; yet the Prince, discern'd no deitie;
               He kept the prease so; and besides, obscur'd his glorious eye
               With such felt darknesse. At his backe, he made a sodaine stand,
               And twixt his necke and shoulders laid, downe-right with either hand,
               A blow so weightie, that his eyes, a giddie darknesse tooke,
               And from his head, his three-plum'd helme, the bounding violence shooke,
               That rung beneath his horses hooues; and like a water-spout,
               Was crusht together with the fall. The plumes that set it out,
               All spatterd with blacke bloud and dust; when euer heretofore
               It was a capitall offence, to haue, or dust, or gore
               Defile a triple-feather'd helme; but on the head diuine,
               And youthfull temples of their Prince, it vsde, vntoucht, to shine.
               Yet now Ioue gaue it Hectors hands; the others death was neare.
               Besides whose lost and filed helme, his huge long weightie speare,
               Well bound with iron, in his hand, was shiuerd, and his shield
               Fell from his shoulders to his feete; the bawdricke strewing the field.
               His Curets left him, like the rest; and all this onely done
               By great Apollo. Then his mind, tooke in confusion;
               The vigorous knittings of his ioynts, dissolu'd; and (thus di
                     •…
                  maid)
               A Dardan (one of Panthus sons, and one that ouerlaid
               All Troians, of his place, with darts, swift footing, skill, and force,
               In noble horsmanship; and one, that tumbl'd from their horse,
               One after other, twentie men: and when he did but learne
               The art of warre; nay when he first, did in the field discerne
               A horse and chariot of his guide: this man, with all these parts
               (His name Euphorbus) comes behind, and twixt the shoulders darts
               
                  Forlorne Patroclus, who yet liu'd, and th'other (getting forth
               His Iauelin) tooke him to his strength; nor durst he stand the worth
               Of thee Patroclus, though disarmd; who yet (discomfited
               By Phoebus, and Euphorbus wound) the red heape of the dead
               He now too late shund, and retir'd. When Hector saw him yeeld,
               And knew he yeelded with a wound, he scour'd the armed field;
               Came close vp to him, and both sides, strooke quite through with his lance;
               He fell, and his most weightie fall, gaue fit tune to his chance.
               For which, all Greece extremely mourn'd. And as a mightie strifeSimile.
               
               About a litle fount, begins, and riseth to the life
               Of some fell Bore, resolu'd to drinke; when likewise to the spring
               A Lion comes, alike disposde; the Bore thirsts, and his King;
               Both proud, and both will first be seru'd; and then the Lion takes
               Aduantage of his soueraigne strength; and th'other (fainting) makes
               Resigne his thirst vp with his bloud: Patroclus (so enforc't
               When he had forc't so much braue life) was, from his owne diuorc't.
               And thus his great Diuorcer brau'd; Patroclus, thy conceit,Hectors insultation ouer Patroclus being woun ded vnder him.
               
               Gaue thee th'euersion of our Troy; and to thy fleete a freight
               Of Troian Ladies, their free liues, put all in bands by thee:
               But (too much priser of thy selfe) all these are propt by me.
               For these, haue my horse stretcht their hoofes, to this so long a warre;
               And I (farre best of Troy in armes) keepe off from Troy as farre;
               Euen to the last beame of my life, their necessary day.
               And here (in place of vs and ours) on thee shall Vultures prey,
               Poore wretch; nor shall thy mightie Friend, affoord thee any aid,
               That gaue thy parting much deepe charge; And this perhaps he said;
               Martiall Patroclus, turne not face, nor see my fleete before
               The curets from great Hectors breast, all guilded with his gore,
               Thou hew'st in peeces: if thus vaine, were his far-stretcht commands;
               As vaine was thy heart to beleeue, his words lay in thy hands.
            
            
               He languishing, replide: This proues, thy glory worse then vaine,Patroclus langu, to Hector.
               
               That when two gods haue giuen thy hands, what their powres did obtaine,
               (They conquering, and they spoiling me, both of my armes and mind,
               It being a worke of ease for them) thy soule should be so blind,
               To ouersee their euident deeds, and take their powres to thee;
               When, if the powres of twentie such, had dar'd t'encounter me,
               My lance had strew'd earth with them all. Thou onely doest obtaine
               A third place in my death; whom first, a harmfull fate hath 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Effected by Latonas sonne; second and first of men,
               
                  Euphorbus. And this one thing more, concernes thee; note it then:
               Thou shalt not long suruiue thy selfe; nay, now Death cals for thee,
               And violent fate; Achilles lance, shall make this good for me.
            
            
               Thus death ioyn'd to his words, his end; his soule tooke instant wing,
               And to the house that hath no lights, descended, sorrowing
               For his sad fate, to leaue him yong, and in his ablest age.
               He dead; yet Hector askt him why, in that prophetique rage,
               He so forespake him? when none knew, but great Achilles might
               Preuent his death; and on his lance, receiue his latest light.
               
                  Thus, setting on his side his foote, he drew out of his wound,
               His brazen lance, and vpwards cast, the body on the ground;
               When quickly, while the dart was hote, he charg'd Autom
                        •…
                     don,
                  Hector charges 
                        〈◊〉
                      Autom
                        •…
                     don for Achilles horses.
               
               (Diuine guide of Achilles steeds) in great contention
               To seise him to: but his so swift, and deathlesse horse, that fetch
               Their gift to Peleus from the gods, soone rap't him, from his reach.
            
            
               COMMENTARIVS.
               
                  a 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. These last verses in the originall, by many 
                     〈◊〉
                   ancients haue suffered expunction; as being vnworthy the mouth of an Heroe, because he 
                     〈◊〉
                   to make such a wish in them: which is as poorely conceipted of the exp
                     •…
                  gers, as the rest of the places in Homer, that haue groned or laughed vnder their 
                     〈◊〉
                  . Achilles not out of his heart (which any true eye may see) wishing it; but out of a 
                     〈◊〉
                   and delightsome humour, being merry with his friend in priuate, which the verse following in part expresseth:
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               Sic hi quidem talia inter se loquebantur. Inter se, intimating the meaning aforesaid. But our diuine Maisters most 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   the life of things, (which is the soule of a Poeme) is neuer respected nor 
                     〈◊〉
                   by his Interpreters onely standing pedantically on the Grammar and words, vtterly ignorant of the sence and grace of him.
               
                  b 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . &c. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. Agnouit autem Aiax in animo inculpato, operadeorum; 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : exhorruitque. Another most ingenious and spritefull imitation of the life, and ridiculous humor os Aiax, I must needs note here, because it flies all his Translators and Interpreters; who take it meerely for serious, when it is apparently scopticall and ridiculous; with which our author would delite his vnderstanding Reader; and mixe mirth with matter. He saith, that Hector cut off the head of Aiax lance, which he seeing, would needs affect a kind of prophetique wisedome (with which he is neuer charged in Homer) and imagined strongly, the cutting off his lances head, cast a figure thus deepe; that as Hector cut off that, Ioue would vtterly cut off the heads of their counsels to that fight, and giue the Troians victory: which to take seriously and grauely, is most dull (and as I may say) Aianticall: the voyce 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   (which they expound praecidebat, and indeed i
                     •…
                   
                  tondebat; 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   signifying most properly tondeo) helping well to decipher the Ironie. But to vnderstand grauely that the cutting off his lances head, argued Ioues intent to cut off their counsels, and to allow the wit of Aiax for his so farre-fetcht apprehension: I suppose no man can make lesse then idle, and witlesse. A plaine continuance therefore it is of Aiax humor, whom in diuers other places he playes vpon: as in 
                     〈◊〉
                   him in the eleuenth booke to a mill Asse, and else where to be noted hereafter.
               
                  c 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ] by Sleepe and Death (which he ingeniously calleth Twins) was the body of Ioues sonne Sarpedon taken from the fight, and borne to Lycia. On which place, Eustathius doubts, whether truly and indeed it was transferd to Lycia: and he makes the cause of his doubt, this: That Death and Sleepe are inania quaedam, things empty and voide; 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , not solid or firme persons, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , but quae nihil ferre possunt. And therefore he thought there was 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  quoddam; that is, some voyde or emptie sepulcher or monument prepared for that Heroe in Lycia, &c. or else makes another strange translation of it, by wonder; which Spondanus thinkes to haue happened truly. But rather would interprete it merely and nakedly apoeticall fiction: his reason I will forbeare to vtter because

it is vnworthy of him. But would not a man wonder that our great and gra
                     •…
                  e Eustathius, would doubt whether Sleepe and Death carried Sarpedons person personally to Lycia: or not rather make no question of the contrary? Homer nor any Poets end in such poeticall relations, being to affirme the truth of things personally done; but to please with the truth of their matchlesse wits, and some worthy doctrine conueyed in it. Nor would Homer haue any one beleeue the personall transportance of Sarpedon by Sleepe and Death, but onely varieth and graceth his Poeme with these Prosopopeiaes, and deliuers vs this most ingenious and graue doctrine in it: that the Heroes body, for which both those mightie Hosts so mightily contended, Sleepe and Death (those same quaedam inania) tooke from all their personall and solid forces. Wherein he would further note to vs, that from all the bitterest and deadliest conflicts and tyrannies of the world, Sleepe and Death, when their worst is done, deliuers and transfers men: a little mocking withall, the vehement, and greedy prosecutions of tyrants, and souldiers against, or for that, which two such deedlesse poore things takes from all their Emperie. And yet, against Eustathius manner of sleighting their powers, what is there of all things belonging to man, so powerfull ouer him as Death and Sleep? And why may not our Homer (whose words I hold with Spondanus ought to be an vndisputable deed and authoritie with vs) as well personate Sleepe and Death, as all men besides personate Loue, Anger, Sloth, &c? Thus onely where the sence and soule of my most worthily reuerenced Author is abused, or not seene, I still insist; and gleane these few poore corne eares after all other mens haruests.
            
            The end of the sixteenth Booke.
         
         
            
            THE XVII. BOOKE OF HOMERS ILIADS.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  
                     A Dreadfull fight, about Patroclus corse.
                  
                     Euphorbus slaine, by Menelaus force.
                  
                     Hector, in th'armour of Aeacides.
                  
                  
                     Antilochus, relating the decease
                  O slaine Patroclus, to faire Thetis sonne.
                  The body from the striuing Toians wonne.
                  Th' Aiaces, making good the after field,
                  Make all the subiect that this booke doth yeeld.
               
            
            
               Another Argument.
               
                  In Rho, the ventrous hosts maintaine
                  A slaughterous conflict, for the slaine.
               
            
            
               
                  NOr could his slaughter rest conceald, from Menelans eare;
               Who flew amongst the formost fights, & with his targe & speare
               Circled the body: as much grieu'd, and with as tender heed
               To keepe it theirs; as any damme, about her first-borne seed;
               Not prouing what the paine of birth, would make the loue before;
               Nor to pursue his first attaint, Euphorbus spirit forbore;
               But seeing Menelaus chiefe, in rescue of the dead,Euphorbu
                        •…
                      to Menelaus. This Euphorbus was he, that in Ouid, Pythagoras saith he was in the wars of Troy.
               
               Assaid him thus: Atrides, ceasse, and leaue the slaughtered
               With his embrew'd spoyle, to the man, that first, of all our state
               And famous succours, in faire fight, made passage to his fate;
               And therefore suffer me to weare, the good name I haue wonne
               Amongst the Troians; lest thy life, repay what his hath done.
            
            
               O Iupiter (said he, incenst) Thou art no honest manMenclaus to Euphorbus.
               
               To baost, so past thy powre to do. Not any Lion can;
               Nor spotted Leopard; nor Bore, (whose mind is mightiest
               In powring furie from his strength) aduance so prowd a crest
               As Panthus fighting progenie. But Hyperenors pride,
               That ioy'd so little time his youth; when he so vilifide
               My force in armes, and cald me worst, of all our cheualrie,
               And stood my worst; might teach ye all, to shun this surcuidrie:
               I thinke he came not safely home, to tell his wife his acts.
               Nor lesse right of thy insolence, my equall fate exacts;
               And will obtaine me, if thou stay'st; retire then, take aduise:
               A foole sees nought, before tis done; and still too late is wise.
            
            
               This mou'd not him, but to the worse; since it renew'd the sting,
               
                  That his slaine brother shot in him; rememberd by the king,
               To whom he answer'd: Thou shalt pay, for all the paines endur'd
               By that slaine brother; all the wounds, sustaind for him, recur'd
               With one, made in thy heart by me. Tis true, thou mad'st his wife
               A heauie wid ow; when her ioyes, of wedlocke scarce had life;
               And hurt'st our parents with his griefe; all which thou gloriest in:
               Forespeaking so, thy death, that now, their griefes end shall begin.
               To Panthus, and the snowy hand, of Phrontes, I will bring
               Those armes, and that proud head of thine; and this laborious thing
               Shall aske no long time to performe: nor be my words alone,
               But their performance; Strength, and Fight, and Terror thus sets on.
            
            
               This said, he strooke his all-round shield; nor shrunke that, but his lanceEuphorbus slain by Menelaus.
               
               That turn'd head in it: then the king, assaid the second chance,
               First praying to the king of gods, and his dart, entrie got
               (The force much driuing backe his foe) in low part of his throte,
               And ranne his necke through. Then fell pride, and he, and all with gore
               His locks, that like the Graces were; and which he euer wore
               In gold and siluer ribands wrapt; were piteously wet.
            
            
               And, when alone, in some choice place, a husband-man hath setSimile▪
                  
               
               The young plant of an Oliue tree, whose roote being euer fed
               With plentie of delicious springs; his branches brauely spred,
               And all his fresh and louely head, growne curld with snowy flowres,
               That dance, and florish with the winds, that are of gentlest powres:
               But when a whi
                     •…
                  lewind (got aloft) stoopes, with a sodaine gale;
               Teares from his head his tender curles, and tosseth there withall
               His fixt roote, from his hollow mines: it well presents the force
               Of Spartas king; and so the Plant, Euphorbus, and his Corse.
            
            
               He slaine; the king stript off his armes, and with their worthy prise,
               (All fearing him) had clearely past: if heauens faire eye, of eyes,
               Had not (in enuy of his acts) to his encounter stird
               The Mars-like Hector; to whose powres, the rescue he preferd
               Of those faire armes: and tooke the shape, of Mentas (Colonell
               Of all the Cicones that neare, the Thracian Hebrus dwell)
               Like him, he thus put forth his voice. Hector, thou scow
                     •…
                  'st the field
               In head strong pursuite of those horse, that hardly are compeld
               To take the draught of chariots, by any mortals hand.
               The great grand child of Aeacus, hath onely their command;Achilles.
               
               Whom an immortall mother bore: while thou attendst on these,
               The young Atrides in defence, of Menatiades,
                  Patroclus, so cal led, of Me
                        •…
                     etius his father.
               
               Hath slaine Euphorbus. Thus the god, tooke troope with men againe,
               And Hector (heartily perplext) lookt round, and saw the slaine,
               Still shedding riuers from his wound: and then tooke enuious view
               Of braue Atrides with his spoyle; in way to whom he flew,
               Like one of Vulcans quenchlesse flames: Atrides heard the crieNote the manly! & wise discourse of Menelaus 
                        〈◊〉
                      himselfe,▪ 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Hector ad. uancing towards him.
               
               That euer vsherd him, and sigh'd, and said: O me, if I
               Should leaue these goodly armes, and him, that here lies dead for me;
               I feare I should offend the Greeks. If I should stay, and be
               Alone with Hector and his men, I may be compast in;
               
                  Some sleight or other they may vse. Many may quickly win
               Their wils of one; and all Troy comes, euer where Hector leades.
               But why (deare mind) dost thou thus talke? when men dare set their heads
               Against the gods, (as sure they do, that fight with men they loue)
               Straight one or other plague ensues: it cannot therefore moue
               The grudge of any Greeke, that sees, I yeeld to Hector; he
               Still fighting with a spirit from heauen. And yet if I could see
               Braue Aiax; he and I, would stand, though gainst a god; and sure
               Tis best I seeke him: and then see, if we two can procure
               This Corses freedome through all these: a little then let rest
               The body, and my mind be still; of two bads chuse the best.
            
            
               In this discourse, the troopes of Troy, were in with him; and he
               Made such a Lionlike retreate; as when the herdsmen see
               The royall sauage; and come on, with men, dogs, cries, and speares,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ▪
                  
               
               To cleare their horned stall; and then, the kingly heart he beares,
               (With all his high disdaine) fals off: so, from this ods of aide
               The golden-haird Atrides fled: and, in his strength, displaid
               Vpon his left hand, him he wisht; extremely busied
               About encouraging his men; to whom, an extreme dread
               
                  Apollo had infusde: the king, reacht Aiax instantly,
               And said; Come friend, let vs two haste, and from the tyrannyMenelaus to 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Of Hector, free Patroclus corse. He strait, and gladly went;
               And then was Hector haling of, the body, with intent
               To spoile the shoulders of the head, and giue the dogs the rest;
               (His armes he hauing prisde before.) When Aiax brought his brest
               To barre all further spoyle; with that, he had sure, Hector thought
               Twas best to satisfie his splene; which temper Aiax wrought
               With his mere sight, and Hector fled: the armes he sent to Troy,
               
               To make his citizens admire, and pray Ioue send him ioy.
            
            
               Then Aiax gatherd to the corse, and hid it with his targe:
               There setting downe as sure a foote, as (in the tender charge
               Of his lou'd whelps) a Lion doth: two hundred hunters neare,Simile.
               
               To giue him onset; their more force, make him the more austere;
               Drownes all their clamors in his 
                     〈◊〉
                  ; darts, dogs, doth all despise,
               And lets his rough browes downe so low, they couer all his eyes.
               So Aiax lookt, and stood, and stayd, for great Priamides.
               
            
            
               When Glaucus Hippol
                        •…
                     chides, saw Aiax thus depresse
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      vp
                     
                        •…
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               The spirit of eHctor: thus he chid; O goodly man at armes;
               In Fght, a Paris; why should Fame, make thee fort gainst our harmes,
               Being such a fugitiue? now marke, how well thy boasts defend,
               Thy citie onely with her owne. Be sure, it shall descend,
               To that proofe wholly. Not a man, of any Lycian ranke;
               Shall strike one stroke more, for thy towne: for no mans gets a thanke,
               Should he ete
                     •…
                  nally fight here: nor any guard of thee.
               How wilt thou (worthlesse that thou art) keepe off an enemie
               From our poore souldiers, when their Prince, Sarpedon, guest and friend
               To thee, (and most deseruedly) thou flew'st from in his end,
               And left'st to all the lust of Greece? O gods, a man that was
               
                  (In life) so huge a good to Troy; and to thee such a grace,
               (In death) not kept by thee from dogs? if my friends wi
                     •…
                  l do well;
               We'le take our shoulders from your walls, and let all sinke to hell:
               As all will, were our faces turn'd. Did such a spirit breath
               In all you Troians, as becomes, all men that fight beneath
               Their countries standerd; you would see, that such as prop your cause
               With like exposure of their liues, haue all the honour'd lawes
               Of such a deare confederacie, kept to them to a thred:
               As now ye might reprise the armes, Sarpedon forfeited,
               By forfeit of your rights to him; would you but lend your hands,
               And force Patroclus to your Troy? Ye know how deare he stands
               In his loue, that of all the Greeks, is (for himselfe) farre best,
               And leades the best, neare-fighting men: and therefore would (at least)
               Redeeme Sarpedons armes: nay him, whom you haue likewise lost.
               This body drawne to Ilion, would after draw, and cost
               A greater ransome, if you pleasd: but Aiax startles you;
               Tis his breast, barres this right to vs. His lookes are darts enow
               To mixe great Hector with his men. And, not to blame ye are,
               You chuse foes vnderneath your strengths; Aiax exceeds ye farre.
            
            
               
                  Hector lookt passing sowre at this; and answerd, why dar'st thou,Hector to Glaucu
                        •…
                     .
               
               (So vnder) talke aboue me so? O friend, I thought till now,
               Thy wisdome was superiour, to all th'inhabitants
               Of gleby Lycia; but now, impute apparent wants
               To that discretion thy words shew; to say I lost my ground
               For A
                        •…
                     ax greatnesse: nor feare I, the field in combats drownd;
               Nor force of chariots: but I feare, a powre much better seene,
               In right of all warre, then all we: I hat god that holds betweene,
               Our victorie and vs, his shield: lets conquest come and go
               At his free pleasure; and with feare, conuerts her changes so
               Vpon the strongest: men must fight, when his iust spirit impels,
               Not their vaine glories. But come on, make thy steps parallels
               To these of mine; and then be iudge, how deepe the worke will draw:
               If then I spend the day in shifts? or thou canst giue such law
               To thy detractiue speeches then? or if the Grecian host,
               Holds any, that in pride of strength, holds vp his spirit most,
               Whom (for the cariage of this Prince, that thou enforcest so)
               I make not stoope in his defence. You, friends? ye heare and know,
               How much it fits ye to make good, this Grecian I haue slaine,
               For ransome of Ioues sonne, our friend; play then the worthy men,
               Till I endue Achilles armes. This said, he left the fight,
               And cald backe those that bore the armes; not yet without his sight,
               In conuoy of them towards Troy. For them, he chang'd his owne;
               Remou'd from where it rained teares, and sent them backe to towne.
            
            
               Then put he on th'eternall armes, that the celestiall states
               Gaue Peleus; Peleus being old, their vse appropriates
               To his Achilles, that (like him) forsooke them not for age.
               When he, whose Empire is in clouds, saw Hector bent to wage
               Warre in diuine Achilles armes; he shooke his head, and said:
               
                  Poore wretch, thy thoughts are farre from death; though he so neare hath laidIoues discourse with himselfe of Hector in the armes of Achilles
               
               His ambush for thee. Thou putst on, those armes (as brauing him)
               Whom others feare; hast slaine his friend, and from his youthfull lim,
               Torne rudely off his heauenly armes; himselfe, being gentle, kind,
               And valiant. Equall measure then, thy life in youth must find.
               Yet since the iustice is so strickt, that not Andromache,
               
               (In thy denied returne from fight) must euer take of thee
               Those armes; in glory of thy acts: thou shalt haue that fraile blaze
               Of excellence, that neighbours death: a strength euen to amaze.
            
            
               To this, his sable browes did bow; and he made fit his lim
               To those great armes; to fill which vp, the Warre god entred him;
               Austere and terrible: his ioynts, and euery part extends
               With strength and fortitude; and thus, to his admiring friends,
               High Clamor brought him. He so shin'd, that all could thinke no lesse,
               But he resembl'd euery way, great-soul'd Aeacides.
               
               Then, euery way he scowr'd the field; his Captaines calling on;
               
                  Asteropaeus, Eunomus, (that foresaw all things done)
               
                  Glaucus, and Medon, Desinor, and strong Thersilochus;
               
               
                  Phorcis, and Mestheies, Chronius, and great Hippothous:
               
               To all these, and their populous troopes; these, his excitements were:Hector to his Captaines and soulders.
               
            
            
               Heare vs, innumerable friends; neare-bordering nations, heare;
               We haue not cald you from our townes, to fill our idle eye
               With number of so many men, (no such vaine Emperie
               Did euer ioy vs;) but to fight, and of our Troian wiues
               With all their children, manfully, to saue the innocent liues.
               In whose cares, we draw all our townes, of aiding souldiers drie,
               With gifts, guards, victuall, all things fit; and hearten their supplieThe secret of Warre.
               
               With all like rights; and therefore now, let all sides set downe this,
               Or liue, or perish: this, of warre, the speciall secret is.
               In which most resolute designe, who euer beares to towne
               
                  Patroclus (laid dead to his hand) by winning the renowne
               Of Aiax slaughter; the halfe spoyle, we wholly will impartThe promise of Hector if Patroclus body could be forced off to their part.
               
               To his free vse; and to our selfe, the other halfe conuert:
               And so the glory shall be shar'd; our selfe will haue no more
               Then he shall shine in. This drew all, to bring abrode their store
               Before the body: euery man, had hope it would be his,
               And forc't from Aiax: Silly fooles, Aiax preuented this,
               By raising rampiers to his friend, with halfe their carkasses.
               And yet his humour was to rore, and feare and now, no lesse
               To startle Spartas king; to whom, he cried out: O my friend!
               O Menelaus! nere more hope, to get off; here's the endAiax to Menelaus.
               
               Of all our labours: not so much, I feare to lose the Corse,
               (For that's sure gone, the fowles of Troy, and dogs, will quickly force
               That peece-meale) as I feare my head, and thine ô Atreus sonne;
               
                  Hector a cloud brings, will hide all; instant destruction
               Grieuous, and heauie comes; ô call, our Peeres to aid vs; flie.
            
            
               He hasted, and vsde all his voice; sent farre, and ne
                     •…
                  e his crie:
               O Princes, chiefe lights of the Greeks; and you that publickly
               
                  Eate with our Generall and me: all men of charge▪ O know,
               
                  Ioue giues both grace, and dignitie, to any that will show
               Good minds, for onely good it selfe; though presently the eye
               Of him that rules discerne him not. Tis hard for me t'espie
               (Through all this smoke of burning fight) each Captaine in his place,
               And call assistance to our need. Be then each others grace,
               And freely follow each his next; disdaine to let the ioy
               Of great Aeacides be forc't, to feed the beasts of Troy.
               
            
            
               His voyce was first heard and obeyd, by swift Oileades.
               
               
                  Idomeneus, and his mate, (renown'd Meriones)
               Were seconds to Oileus sonne: but, of the rest, whose mind
               Can lay vpon his voice the names, that after these combind,
               In settting vp this fight on end? the Troians first gaue on;
               And as into the seas vast mouth, when mightie riuers run,Simile.
               
               Their billowes, and the sea, resound; and all the vtter shore
               Rebellowes (in her angry shocks) the seas repulsiue rore.
               With such sounds gaue the Troians charge; so was their charge represt:
               One mind fild all Greeks; good brasse shields, close coucht to euery brest:
               And on their bright helmes Ioue powr'd downe, a mightie deale of night
               To hide Patroclus. Whom aliue, and when he was the knight
               Of that grand child of Aeacus, Saturnius did not hate;
               Nor dead, would see him dealt to dogs, and so did instigate
               His fellowes, to his worthy guard. At first the Troians draue
               The blacke-ey'd Grecians from the Corse; but not a blow they gaue
               That came at death. A while they hung, about the bodies he
                     •…
                  les,
               The Greekes quite gone. But all that while, did Aiax whet the steeles
               Of all his forces; that cut backe, way to the Corse againe.
               Braue Aiax (that for forme, and fact, past all that did maintaine
               The Grecian fame, next Thetis sonne;) now flew before the first:
               And as a sort of dogs, and youths, are by a Bore disperstSimile.
               
               About a mountaine: so fled these, from mightie Aiax, all
               That stood in conflict for the Corse. Who thought, no chance could fall
               Betwixt them and the prise, at Troy. For bold Hippothous,
               
               (Lethus, Pelasgus famous sonne) was so aduenturous,
               That he would stand, to bore the Corse, about the ankle bone,
               Where all the neruie fiuers meete, and ligaments in one,
               That make the motion of those parts: through which he did conuay
               The thong or bawdricke of his shield; and so was drawing away
               All thanks from Hector, and his friends: but in their steed he drew
               An ill that no man could auert: For Telamonius threw
               A lance that strooke quite through his helme; his braine came leaping out:
               Downe fell Letheides; and with him, the bodies hoisted foote.
               Farre from Larissas soyle he fell; a little time allow'd
               To his industrious spirits, to quit, the benefits bestow'd
               By his kind parents. But his wreake, Priamides assaid,
               And threw at Aiax; but his dart, (discouered) past, and staid
               At Schedius, sonne of Iphitus: a man of ablest hand
               Of all the strong Phocensians; and liu'd with great command,
               
                  In Panopaeus. The fell dart, fell through his channell bone;
               Pierc't through his shoulders vpper part; and set his spirit gone.
               When (after his) another flew; the same hand gluing wing
               To martiall Phorcis startled soule, that was the after spring
               Of Phaenops seed: the iauelin strooke, his curets through, and tore
               The bowels from the bellies midst. His fall made those before
               Giue backe a little: Hectors selfe, enforc't to turne his face.
               And then the Greeks bestow'd their showts, tooke vantage of the chace;
               Drew off, and spoild Hippothous; and Phorcis of their armes;
               And then ascended Ilion, had shaken with alarmes,
               (Discouering th'impotence of Troy) euen past the will of Ioue;
               
               And by the proper force of Greece: had Phoebus faild to moue
               
                  Aeneas, in similitude, of Periphas (the sonne
               Of graue▪ 
                  Epytes) king at armes; and had good seruice done
               To old Anchises; being wise, and euen with him in yeares.Apollo 
                        〈◊〉
                      like 
                        〈◊〉
                      to 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               But (like this man) the farre-seene god, to Venus sonne appeares,
               And askt him how he would maintaine, steepe Ilion in her height,
               In spite of gods (as he presum'd) when men approu'd so sleight,
               All his presumptions? and all theirs, that puft him with that pride,
               Beleeuing in their proper strengths? and generally supplied
               With such vnfrighted multitudes? But he well knew that Ioue,
               
               (Besides their selfe conceipts sustaind, their forces with more loue
               Then theirs of Greece; and yet all that, lackt power to hearten them.
            
            
               
                  Aeneas knew the god, and said; It was a shame extreme
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to the Troia
                        •…
                     .
               
               That those of Greece should beate them so; and by their cowardise,
               Not want of mans aide, nor the gods; and this (before his eyes)
               A deitie stood, euen now, and voucht, affirming Ioue their aide.
               And so bad Hector, and the rest, (to whom all this he said)
               Turne head; and not, in that quicke ease, part with the Corse to Greece.
               
            
            
               This said, before them all he flew; and all (as of a peece)
               Against the Greeks flew. Venus sonne, Leocritus did end,
               Sonne of Arisbas; and had place, of Lycomedes friend;
               Whose fall he friendly pittied: and in reuenge, bestow'd
               A lance, that Apisaon strooke, so sore, that straite he strow'd
               The dustie center; it did sticke, in that congealed blood
               That formes the liuer. Second man, he was of all that stood
               In name for armes, amongst the troope, that from Poeonia came;
               
                  Asteropaeus being the first: who was, in ruth, the same
               That Lycomedes was; like whom, he put forth for the wreake
               Of his slaine friend: but wrought it not, because he could not breake
               That bulwarke made of Grecian shields; and bristl'd wood of speares
               Combin'd about the body slaine. Amongst whom Aiax beares
               The greatest labour; euery way, exhorting to abide,
               And no man flie the Corse a foote; nor breake their rankes in pride
               Of any foremost daring spirit; but each foote hold his stand,Aiax his souldlerly command
               
               And vse the closest fight they could. And this was the command
               Of mightie Aiax: which obseru'd; they steept the earth in blood.
               The Troians and their friends fell thicke. Nor all the Grecians stood
               
                  (Though farre the fewer suffred fate) for euer they had care
               To shun confusion, and the toyle, that still oppreffeth there.
            
            
               So set they all the field on fire; with which you would haue thought,
               The Sunne and Moone had bene put out, in such a smoke they fought
               About the person of the Prince. But all the field beside
               Fought vnderneath a lightsome heauen: the Sun was in his pride,
               And such expansure of his beames, he thrust out of his throne,
               That not a vapour durst appeare, in all that region:
               No, not vpon the highest hill. There fought they still and breathd;
               Shund danger; cast their darts aloofe; and not a sword vnsheathd.
               The other plyde, it and the warre, and Night, plyde them as well:
               The cruell steele afflicting all; the strongest did not dwell
               Vnhurt within their iron roofes. Two men of speciall name,
               
                  Antilochus, and Thrasimed, were yet vnseru'd by Fame
               
               With notice of Patroclus death: they thought him still aliue,
               In foremost tumult: and might well: for (seeing their fellowes thriue
               In no more comfortable sort, then Fight, and Death would yeeld)
               They fought apart; for so their Sire, old Nestor, strictly wild,
               Enioyning fight, more from the fleet: warre here increast his heate
               The whole day long; continually, the labour, and the sweate,
               The knees, calues, feete, hands, faces, smear'd, of men that Mars applide
               About the good Achilles friend. And a as a huge Oxe hide,An imi
                        •…
                     able Simile.
               
               A Currier giues amongst his men, to supple, and extend
               With oyle, till it be drunke withall; they tug, stretch out, and spend
               Their oyle, and licour liberally, and chase the leather so,
               That out they make a vapour breathe; and in their oyle doth go:
               A number of them set on worke, and in an Orbe they pull;
               That all waies, all parts of the hide, they may extend at full:
               So here and there, did both parts hale, the Corse in little place,
               And wrought it, alwaies, with their sweate; the Troians hop't for grace
               To make it reach to Ilion; the Grecians to their fleet:
               A cruell tumult they stird vp, and such, as should Mars see't;
               (That horrid hurrier of men) or she that betters him,
               
                  Minerna, neuer so incenst; they could not disesteeme.
               So banefull a Contention, did Ioue, that day extend
               Of men and horse about the slaine. Of whom, his god-like friend
               Had no instruction. So farre off, and vnderneath the wall
               Of Troy, that conflict was maintaind: which was not thought at all
               By great Achilles; since he charg'd, that hauing set his foote
               Vpon the Ports, he would retire; well knowing Troy no boote
               For his assaults, without himselfe; since not by him, as well,
               He knew, it was to be subdu'd. His mother oft would tell
               The mind of mightie Ioue therein; ofs hearing it in heauen;
               But of that great ill to his friend, was no instruction giuen
               By carefull Thetis: by degrees, must ill euents be knowne.
            
            
               The foes cleft one to other still, about the ouerthrowne.
               His death, with death infected both. Euen priuate Greekes would say
               Either to other; Twere a shame, for vs to go our way;
               
                  And let the Troians beare to Troy, the praise of such a prise:
               Which let the blacke earth gaspe and drinke, our blood for sacrifise,
               Before we suffer: tis an act, much lesse infortunate,
               And then would those of Troy resolue; Though certainly our fate,The co
                        •…
                     mon souldiers resolutions.
               
               Will fell vs altogether here: of all not turne a face.
               Thus either side, his fellowes strength, excited past his place;
               And thus through all th'vnfruitfull air
                     •…
                  , an iron sound ascended
               Vp to the golden firmament; when strange affects contended,
               In these immortall heauen-bred horse, of great Aeacides;
               
               Whom (once remou'd from forth the fight) a sodaine sense did seise
               Of good Patroclus death; whose hands, they oft had vndergone;
               And bitterly they wept for him: nor could Automedon,
               
               With any manage make them stirre; oft vse the scourge to them;
               Oft vse his fairest speech; as oft, threats neuer so extreme;
               They neither to the Hellespont, would beare him; nor the fight:Simil
                        •…
                     .
               
               But still as any tombe-stone layes, his neuer-stirred weight
               On some good man, or womans graue, for rites of funerall:
               So vnremoued stood these steeds; their heads to earth let fall,
               And warme teares gushing from their eyes, with passionate desire,
               Of their kind manager; their manes, that florisht with the fire
               Of endlesse youth allotted them: fell through the yokie sphere,
               Ruthfully rufl'd and defilde. Ioue saw their heauy cheare,
               And (pittying them) spake to his mind; Poore wretched beasts (said he)
               Why gaue we you t'a mortall king? when immortalitie,
               And incapacitie of age, so dignifies your states?Ioues discourse with himselfe of the wretched state of humanitie.
               
               Was it to hast the miseries, pour'd out on humane fates?
               Of all the miserabl'st things that breathe, and creepe on earth,
               No one more wretched is then man. And for your deathlesse birth,
               
                  Hector must faile to make you prise: is't not enough he weares,
               And glories vainly in those armes? your chariots, and rich geares,
               (Besides you) are too much for him. Your knees and spirits againe
               My care of you shall fill with strength; that so ye may sustaine
               
                  Automedon, and beare him off. To Troy I still will giue
               The grace of slaughter, till at fleet, their bloody feete arriue:
               Till Phoebus drinke the Westerne sea; and sacred darknesse throwes,
               Her sable mantle, twixt their points. Thus in the steeds he blowes
               Excessiue spirit; and through the Greeks, and Ilians they rapt
               The whirring chariot; shaking off, the crumbl'd center, wrapt
               Amongst their tresses: and with them, Automedon let flie
               Amongst the Troians; making way, through all as frightfully.
               As through a langling flocke of Geese, a lordly Vulture beats;Simile.
               
               Giuen way with shrikes, by euery Goose, that comes but neare his threats;
               With such state fled he through the preasse, pursuing as he fled;
               But made no slaughter; nor he could: alone being carried
               Vpon the sacred chariot. How could he both works, do,
               Direct his iauelin, and command, his fiery horses too?
            
            
               At length, he came where he beheld, his friend Alcimedon,
               
               That was the good Laercius, the sonne of Aemons sonne;
               
                  Who close came to his chariot side, and askt; What god is he,Alcimedon to Automedon.
               
               That hath so robd thee of thy soule, to runne thus frantickly
               Amongst these forefights, being alone? thy fighter being slaine,
               And Hector glorying in his armes? he gaue these words againe:
            
            
               
                  Alcimedon, what man is he? of all the Argiue race,Automedon to Alcimedon.
               
               So able as thy selfe, to keepe, in vse of preasse, and pace
               These deathlesse horse? himselfe being gone, that like the gods had th'art,
               Of their high manage? therefore take, to thy command his part,
               And ease me of the double charge, which thou hast blam'd with right.
            
            
               He tooke the scourge and reines in hand, Automedon the fight:
               Which Hector seeing, instantly (Aeneas standing neare)Hector to Aeneas
               
               He told him, he discern'd the horse, that mere immortall were,
               Add
                     •…
                  est to fight, with coward guides; and therefore hop't to make
               A rich prise of them; if his mind, would helpe to vndertake:
               For those two could not stand their charge. He granted, and both cast
               Drie solid hides vpon their neckes, exceeding soundly brast;
               And forth they went, associate, with two more god-like men,
               
                  Aretus, and bold Chronius; nor made they question then
               To prise the goodly crested horse, and safely send to hell
               The soules of both their guardians: O fooles, that could not tell,
               They could not worke out their returne, from fierce Automedon
               
               Without the liberall cost of blood; who first made Orizon
               To father Ioue, and then was fild, with fortitude, and strength;
               When (counselling Alcimedon, to keepe at no great length
               The horse from him; but l
                     •…
                  t them breathe, vpon his backe, because
               He saw th'aduance that Hector made; whose furie had no lawes
               Proposd to it, but both their liues, and those horse, made his prise,
               Or his life theirs) he cald to friend, these well-approu'd supplies;
               Th'A
                        •…
                     aces, and the Spartan king: and said, Come, Princes, leaueAutomedon cals for aid to the Aiaces and Menelaus.
               
               A sure guard with the corse; and then, to your kind care receiue
               Our threatned safeties; I discerne, the two chief props of Troy
               
               Prepar'd against vs: But herein, what best men can enioy,
               Lies in the free knees of the gods; my dart shall leade ye all;In the Greeke alwayes this phrase i
                        •…
                      vsed, not in the hands, but 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , in the kne
                        •…
                     s of the gods lies our helps, &c
               
               The sequell, to the care of Ioue, I leaue, what euer fall.
            
            
               All this, spake good Automedon; then, brandishing his lance,
               He threw, and strooke Aretus shield, that gaue it enterance
               Through all the steele, and (by his belt) his bellies inmost part
               It pierc't, and all his trembling lims, gaue life vp to his dart.
               Then Hector at Automedon, a blazing lance let flie,
               Whose flight he saw, and, falling flat, the compasse was too hie,
               And made it sticke beyond in earth, th'extreme part burst, and the
                     •…
                  e
               
                  Mars buried all his violence. The sword then, for the speare,
               Had chang'd the conflict, had not haste, sent both th' Aiaies in,
               (Both seruing close their fellowes call) who, where they did begin
               There drew the end. Priamides, Aeneas, Chronius,
               
               (In doubt of what such aid might worke) left broken hearted thus,
               
                  Aretus to Automedon, who spoild his armes, and said:Automedon insui
                        •…
                     s.
               
               A little this reuiues my life, for him so lately dead,
               
                  (Though by this nothing counteruail'd) And with this litle vent
               Of inward griefe, he tooke the spoile; with which, he made ascent,
               Vp to his Chariot; hands and feete, of bloudie staines so full,
               That Lion-like he lookt, new turn'd, from tearing vp a Bull.
            
            
               And now another bitter fight, about Patroclus grew;
               Teare-thirstie, and of toile enough; which Pallas did renew,
               Descending from the cope of starres, dismist by sharp-eyd Ioue,
               
               To animate the Greeks; for now, inconstant change did moue
               His mind from what he held of late: And as the purple bow,Simile.
               
               
                  Ioue bends at mortals, when of warre, he will the signall show;
               Or make it a presage of cold, in such tempestuous sort,
               That men are of their labours easde, but labouring cattell hurt:
               So Pallas in a purple cloud, inuolu'd her selfe, and went
               Amongst the Grecians; stird vp all; but first encouragement
               She breath'd in Atreus yonger sonne; and (for disguise) made choise
               Of aged Phoenix shape; and spake, with his vnwearied voice.
            
            
               O Menelaus, much defame, and equall heauinesse,Pallas like Ph
                        •…
                     
                     uix to Menela
                        •…
                     .
               
               Will touch at thee; if this true friend, of great Aeacides,
               
               Dogs teare beneath the Troian wals; and therefore beare thee well,
               Toile through the host; and euery man, with all thy spirit, impell.
            
            
               He answerd: O thou long-since borne? O Phoenix? that hast wonneMenelaus to Pallas suppos
                        •…
                     d Ph
                        •…
                     nix.
               
               The honor'd foster-fathers name, of Thetis god-like sonne:
               
                  b I would Minerua would but giue, strength to me; and but keepe
               These busie darts off; I would then, make in indeed, and steepe
               My income in their bloods, in aide, of good Patroclus; much
               His death afflicts me; much: but yet, this Hectors grace is such
               With Ioue; and such a fierie strength, and spirit he has, that still
               His steele is killing, killing still. The kings so royall will,
               
                  Minerua ioy'd to heare; since she, did all the gods outgo
               In his remembrance. For which grace, she kindly did bestow
               Strength on his shoulders, and did fill, his knees as liberally
               With swiftnesse, breathing in his breast, the courage of a flie.
               Which loues to bite so, and doth beare, mans bloud so much good will,
               That still (though beaten from a man) she flies vpon him still:
               With such a courage Pallas fild, the blacke parts neare his hart;
               And then he hasted to the slaine; cast off a shining dart;
               And tooke one Podes, that was heire, to old E
                        •…
                     tion,
               
               A rich man, and a strenuous; and by the people done
               Much honour; and by Hector too, being consort, and his guest;
               And him the yellow-headed king, laid hold on at his waste;
               In offering flight, his iron pile, strooke through him; downe he fell;
               And vp Atrides drew his corse. Then Phoebus did impell
               The spirit of Hector; Phoenops like, surnam'd Asiades,
                  Phoebus like Asiades to Hector.
               
               Whom Hector vsde (of all his guests) with greatest friendlinesse;
               And in Abydus stood his house; in whose forme, thus he spake:
            
            
               
                  Hector? what man of all the Greeks, will any terror make,
               Of meeting thy strength any more; when thou art tertified
               By Menelaus? who before, he slue thy friend, was tried,
               
                  A passing easie souldier; where now (besides his end,
               Imposde by him) he drawes him off (and not a man to friend)
               From all the Troians. This friend is, Podes, E
                        •…
                     tions sonne.
            
            
               This hid him in a cloud of griefe; and set him formost on;
               And then Ioue tooke his Snake-fring'd shield; and Ida couer'd all
               With sulphurie clouds; from whence he let, abhorred lightnings fall,
               And thunderd till the mountaine shooke: and with this dreadfull state,
               He vsherd victorie to Troy; to Argos flight and fate.
               
                  Peneleus Boeotius, was he that formost fled,
               Being wounded in his shoulders height; but there the lances head
               Strooke lightly, glancing to his mouth, because it strooke him neare,
               Throwne from Polydamas: Leitus, next left the fight in feare,
               (Being hurt by Hector, in his hand) because he doubted sore
               His hand, in wished fight with Troy, would hold his lance no more.
            
            
               
                  Idomeneus sent a dart, at Hector (rushing in,Idomeneus at Hector.
               
               And following Leitus) that strooke, his bosome, neare his chin,
               And brake at top; the Ilians, for his escape did shout.
               When Hector, at Deucalides, another lance sent out,
               As in his chariot he stood; it mist him narrowly;
               For (as it fell) Caeranus draue, his speedie chariot by,
               And tooke the Troian lance himselfe; he was the Chariotere
               Of sterne Meriones; and first, on foote did seruice there,
               Which well he left to gouerne horse; for sauing now his king,
               With driuing twixt him and his death; though thence his owne did spring;
               Which kept a mightie victorie, from Troy, in keeping death
               From his great Soueraigne: the fierce dart, did enter him beneath
               His eare, betwixt his iaw and it; draue downe, cut through his tongue,
               And strooke his teeth out; from his hands, the horses raines he flung;
               Which now Meriones receiu'd, as they bestrew'd the field,
               And bad his Soueraigne scourge away; he saw that day would yeeld
               No hope of victorie for them. He fear'd the same, and fled.
            
            
               Nor from the mightie minded sonne, of Telamon, lay hid
               (For all his clouds) high Ioue himselfe; nor from the Spartan king.
               They saw him in the victorie, he still was varying
               For Troy; for which sight, Aiax said: O heauens, what foole is he,
               That sees not Ioues hand in the grace, now done our enemie?
               Not any dart they touch, but takes; from whom soeuer throwne,
               Valiant or coward; what he wants, Ioue addes; not any oneAiax good counsell.
               
               Wants his direction to strike sure; nor ours, to misse, as sure:
               But come, let vs be sure of this, to put the best in vre
               That lies in vs; which two-fold is; both to fetch off our friend,
               And so to fetch him off, as we, may likeliest contend
               To fetch our selues off; that our friends, suruiuing may haue right
               In ioy of our secure retreat; as he that fell in fight,
               Being kept as sure from further wrong: of which perhaps they doubt;
               And looking this way, grieue for vs, not able to worke out
               Or passe from this man-slaughterer, great Hector, and his hands,
               That are too hote for men to touch; but that these thirstie sands,
               
                  Before our fleete will be enforc't, to drinke our headlong death.
               Which to preuent by all fit meanes, I would the parted breath
               Of good Patroclus, to his friend, with speed imparted were
               By some he loues: for I beleeue, no heauie messenger
               Hath yet inform'd him; but alas, I see no man to send;
               Both men and horse are hid in mists, that euery way descend.
               O father Iupiter, do thou, the sonnes of Greece release
               Of this felt darknesse; grace this day, with fit transparences;
               And giue the eyes thou giu'st, their vse; destroy vs in the light,
               And worke thy will with vs, since needs, thou wilt against vs fight.
            
            
               This spake he weeping; and his teares, Saturnius pitie show'd,
               Disperst the darknesse instantly, and drew away the clowd,
               From whence it fell: the Sunne shin'd out, and all the host appear'd;
               And then spake Aiax, (whose heard prayre, his spirits highly chear'd.
            
            
               Braue Menelaus, looke about; and if thou canst descrieAiax to Menelaus.
               
               
                  Nestors Antilochus aliue, incite him instantly,
               To tell Achilles, that his friend, most deare to him, is dead.
            
            
               He said; nor Menelaus stucke, at any thing he said,
               (As loth to do it) but he went; as from a Grasiers stall,
               A Lion goes, when ouerlaid (with men, dogs, darts, and allSimile.
               
               Not easely losing a fat Oxe, but strong watch, all night held)
               His teeth yet watering; oft he comes, and is as oft repeld;
               The aduerse darts so thicke are pour'd, before his brow-hid eyes,
               And burning firebrands; which for all, his great hearts heate, he flies,
               And (grumbling) goes his way betimes: So from Patroclus went
               
                  Atrides, much against his mind; his doubts being vehement,
               Lest (he gone from his guard) the rest, would leaue (for very feare)Another direct scoffe at Menelaus.
               
               The person to the spoile of Greece. And yet his guardians were,
               Th'Aiaces, and Meriones, whom much, his care did presse,
               And thus exhort; Aiaces both, and you Meriones:
                  Menelaus to the Aiaces, like himselfe.
               
               Now let some true friend call to mind, the gentle and sweete nature
               Of poore Patroclus; let him thinke, how kind to euery creature,
               His heart was, liuing, though now dead. Thus vrg'd the faire-hair'd king,
               And parted, casting round his eye. d As when vpon her wingSimile.
               
               An Eagle is, whom men affirme, to haue the sharpest sight
               Of all aires region of fowles; and though of mightie height,
               Sees yet within her leauie forme, of humble shrubs, close laid
               A light-foote Hare, which straight she stoupes, trusses, and strikes her dead:
               So dead thou strook'st thy charge (O king,) through all warres thickets so
               Thou look'dst, and swiftly found'st thy man; exhorting gainst the foe,
               And heartning his plied men to blowes, vsde in the warres left wing:
               To whom thou saidst; Thou god-lou'd man, come here, and heare a thing,
               Which I wish neuer were to heare; I thinke euen thy eye sees
               What a destruction God hath laid, vpon the sonnes of Greece;
               
               And what a conquest he giues Troy; in which, the best of men
               (Patroclus) lies exanimate; whose person, passing faine,
               The Greeks would rescue, and beare home; and therefore giue thy speed
               To his great friend, to proue if he, will do so good a deed,
               
                  To fetch the naked person off; for Hectors shoulders weare
               His prised armes. Antilochus, was highly grieu'd to heareAntilochus grief for Patroclus.
               
               This heauie newes; and stood surprisde, with stupid silence long;
               His faire eyes standing full of teares; his voice so sweete and strong,
               Stucke in his bosome; yet all this, wrought in him no neglect
               Of what Atrides gaue in charge: but for that quicke effect,
               He gaue Laodolus his armes, (his friend that had the guide
               Of his swift horse) and then his knees, were speedily applide
               In his sad message, which his eyes, told all the way in teares.
               Nor would thy generous heart assist, his sore-charg'd souldiersAnother notable Ironi
                        •…
                     , expressing what Homer made of Menelaus.
               
               (O Menelaus) in meane time, though left in much distresse;
               Thou sentst them god-like Thrasimede, and mad'st thy kind regresse
               Backe to Patroclus; where arriu'd, halfe breathlesse thou didst say
               To both th'Aiaces this: I haue sent, this messenger away
               To swift Achilles, who, I feare, will hardly helpe vs now,
               (Though mad with Hector;) without armes, he cannot fight, ye know:
               Let vs then thinke of some best meane, both how we may remoue
               The bodie; and get off our selues, from this vociferous droue,
               And fate of Troians. Brauely spoke, at all parts (A
                        •…
                     x said)
               O glorious sonne of Atreus; take thou then straite the dead,
               And thou Meriones. We two, of one mind, as one name,
               Will backe ye soundly; and on vs, receiue the wild-fire flame,
               That Hectors rage breathes after you, before it come at you.
            
            
               This said, they tooke into their armes, the bodie; all the show
               That might be, made to those of Troy, at armes end bearing it.Menelaus and Meriones beare off the body of Patroclus. Simile.
               
               Out shriekt the Troians, when they saw, the bodie borne to fleete;
               And rusht on: As at any Bore, gasht with the hunters wounds,
               A kennell of the sharpest set, and sorest bitten hounds,
               Before their youthfull huntsmen haste; and eagerly a while
               Pursue, as if they were assur'd, of their affected spoile;
               But when the Sauage (in his strength, as confident as they)
               Turnes head amongst them; backe they flie, and euery one his way:
               So troope-meale Troy pursu'd a while, laying on with swords and darts;
               But when th'Aiaces turn'd on them, and made their stand; their harts
               Drunke from their faces all their blouds; and not a man sustain'd
               The forechace, nor the after fight. And thus Greece nobly gain'd,
               The person towards home: but thus, the changing warte was rackt
               Out to a passing bloudie length: For as once put in act
               A fire inuading citie roofes, is sodainly engrost,Simile.
               
               And made a wondrous mightie flame; in which is quickly lost
               A house, long building; all the while, a boisterous gust of wind
               Lumbring amongst it: So the Greekes (in bearing of their friend)
               More and more foes drew: at their heeles, a tumult thundering still
               Of horse and foote. Yet, as when Mules, in haling from a hillSimile.
               
               A beame or mast, through foule deepe way, well clapt and heartned, close
               Lie to their labour, tug, and sweate, and passing hard it goes:
               (Vrg'd by their driuers, to all hast) So dragg'd they on the corse;
               Still both th'Aiaces at their backs; who backe still turn'd the force;
               
                  Though after, it grew still the more; yet as a syluane hill
               Thrusts backe a torrent, that hath kept, a narrow channell still,Simile, 
                        〈◊〉
                      the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of both the 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Till at his Oken breast it beates; but there a checke it takes,
               That sends it ouer all the vale, with all the stirre it makes;
               Nor can with all the confluence, breake through his rootie sides:
               In no lesse firme and braue repulse, th'Aiaces curb'd the prides
               Of all the Troians: yet all held, the pursuite in his strength;
               Their chiefes being Hector, and the sonne, of Venus, who at length
               Put all the youth of Greece besides, in most amazefull rout;
               Forgetting all their fortitudes, distraught, and shrieking out;
               A number of their rich armes lost, falne from them, here and there
               About, and in the dike; and yet, the warre concludes not here.
            
            
               COMMENTARIVS.
               
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
               
               
                  Thus translated ad verbum by Spondanus:
               
                  Sicut autem quando vir tauri bouis magni pellem
                  Populis dederit distendendam temulentam pinguedine,
                  Accipientes autem vtique hi dispositi extendunt
                  In orbem; statim autem humor exijt, penetratque adeps.
                  Multis trahentibus: tenditur autem tota vndique;
                  Sic hi huc & illuc cadauer paruo in spacio
                  Trahebant vtrique.
               
               Laurent. Valla thus in prose:
               
               Et quemadmodum si quis pinguem Tauri pellem à pluribus extendi iuberet; inter extendendum & humor & pingue desudat. Sic illi huc pa
                     •…
                  o in spacio distrahebant.
               Eobanus thus in verse:
               
               
                  —Ac si quis distendere pellem
                  Taurinam iubeat, crassam pinguedine multa,
                  Multorum manibus, terrae desudet omasum
                  Et liquor omnis humi. Sic ipsum tempore paruo
                  Patroclum in diuersa, manus numerosa, trahebat, &c.
               
               To answer a hote obiection made to me by a great scholler, for not translating Homer word for word, and letter for letter (as out of his heate he strained it,) I am enforced to cite this admirable Simile, (like the other before in my annotations at the end of the fifteenth Booke) and referre it to my iudiciall readers examination, whether such a translation becomes Homer or not; by noting so much as needs to be by one example; whether the two last aboue-said translators, in being so short with our euerlasting master; do him so much right, as my poore conuersion; expressing him by necessary exposition and illustration of his words and meaning, with more words, or not. The reason of his Simile, is to illustrate the strife of both the armies for the body of Patroclus; which it doth performe most inimitably; their toile and sweate about it, being considered (which I must pray you to 
                     〈◊〉
                   to before:) the Simile it selfe yet, I

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  thought not vnfit to insert here, to come vp the closer to them, with whom I am to be compared. My paines and vnder standing conuerting it thus:
               
               
                  —And as a huge oxe hide,
                  A Currier giues amongst his men, to supple and extend
                  With oile, till it be drunke withall: they tug, stretch out, and spend
                  Their oile and licour liberally; and chafe the leather so,
                  They make it breathe a vapour out; and in their licours go,
                  A number of them set a worke; and in an orbe they pull,
                  That all wayes, all parts of the hide, they may extend at full:
                  So here and there did both hosts hale, the corse in litle place;
                  And wrought it all wayes with their sweate, &c.
               
               In which last words of the application considered, lies the life of this illustration. Our Homers diuine inuention wherein, I see not in any of their shorter translations toucht at. But what could expresse more the toile about this body, forcing it this way and that, as the opposite aduantage serued on both sides? An Oxes hide, after the tanning, asking so much labour and oile to supple and extend it,—
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , distendendam, temulentam pinguedine; to be stretcht out, being drunke with tallow, oile, or licour: the word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which signifies temulentam; of 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , signifying ebrius sum, (being a metaphor) and vsed by Homer, I thought fit to expresse so; both because it is Homers, and doth much more illustrate then crassam pinguedine multa, as Eoban▪
                   turnes it. But Valla leaues it clearely out; and with his briefenesse, vtterly maim
                     •…
                  s the Simile; which (to my vnder standing being so excellent) I could not but with thus much repetition and labour inculcate the sence of it; since I see not that any translator hath euer thought of it. And therefore (against the obiector, that would haue no more words then Homer vsed, in his translator) I hope those few words I vse more, being necessarie to expresse such a sence as I vnderstand in Homer, will be at least borne withall; without which, and other such needfull explanations, the most ingenious inuention and sence of so matchlesse a writer, might passe endlesly obscured and vnthought on. My man
                     •…
                  er of translation being partly built on this learned and iudicious authoritie: Est sciti interpretis, non verborum numerum, & ordinem sectari; sed res ipsas, & sententias attentè perpendere; easque verbis, & formulis orationis vestire idoneis, & aptis ei linguae in quam conuertitur.
               
               
                  b—
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                  ▪ &c. Minerua appearing to Menelaus like Phoenix, and encouraging him (as you may reade before) to fight; he speakes as to Phoenix, and wishes Minerua would but put away the force or violence of the darts, and he would aid and fight brauely: which is a continuance of his character, being exprest for the most part by Homer ridiculous and simple. The originall words yet (because neither Eobanus nor Valla vnderstood the character) they vtterly peruert; as if you please to examine them, you may see. The words are these, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which Spondanus truly interprets telorum verò depulerit impetum; 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , being a compound of 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ; signifying arceo, repello, propulso, abigo; and yet they 
                     〈◊〉
                   the words, & telis vim afferret: as if Menelaus wisht that Pallas would giue force to his darts; which Eobanus followes, saying, & tela valentia praestet, most ignorantly and vnsufferably conuerting it; supposing them to be his owne darts he spake of; and would haue blest with Miueruaes addition of vertue and power; where Homers are plaine; he spake of the enemies darts; whose force if she would auer
                     •…
                  , he would fight for Patroclus.
               
               `
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. Et ei Muscae audaciam in pectoribus immisit.

                  Minerua inspired him with the courage of a flie; which all his interpreters very ridiculously laugh at in Homer; as if he heartily intended to praise Menelaus by it▪ not vnderstanding his Ironie here, agreeing with all the other sillinesse noted in his character. Eobanus Hessus, in pitie of Homer, leaues it vtterly out; and Valla comes ouer him with a little salue for the sore disgrace he hath by his ignorant readers laughters; and expounds the words abouesaid thus: Lene namque eius ingenium prudenti audacia impleuit: laying his medicine nothing neare the place. Spondanus (disliking Homer with the rest in this Simile) would not haue Lucian forgotten in his merry Encomium of a Flie; and therefore cites him vpon this place, playing vpon Homer; which, because it is already answered in the Ironie to be vnderstood in Homer, (he laughing at all men so ridiculous) I for beare to repeate; and cite onely Eustathius, that would salue it, with altering the word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which signifies confidentia, or audacia (per Metathesin literae▪) for 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which is temeritas; of which I see not the end: and yet cite all, to shew how s
                     •…
                  ch great Clerks are perplext, and abuse Homer, as not being satis compotes mentis Poeticae; for want of which (which all their reading and language cannot supply) they are thus often graueld and mistaken.
               
                  d
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. Veluti Aquila: The sport Homer makes with Menelaus, is here likewise confirmed and amplified in another Simile, resembling him intentionally to a harefinder, though for colours sake he vseth the word Eagle; as in all other places where he presents him (being so eminent a person) 
                     •…
                  e hides his simplicity with some shadow of glory or other. The circumstances making it cleare; being here, and in diuers other places made a messenger from Aiax, and others, to call such and such to their aid; which was vnfit for a man of his place, if he had bene in magnanimitie and valour equall, or any thing neare it. But to confirme his imperfection therein in diuers other places, he is called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , mollis bellator; and therefore was fittest to be employed to cal vp those that were 
                     •…
                  ardier and abler. In going about which businesse, Homer shewes how he looks about, leering like a hare-finder: for to make it simply a Simile illustrating the state of his addresse in that base affaire, had neither wit nor decorum. Both which being at their height in the other sence (because our Homer was their great master to all accomplishment) let none detract so miserably from him, as to take this otherwise then a continuance of his Ironie.
            
            The end of the seuenteenth Booke.
         
         
            
            THE XVIII. BOOKE OF HOMERS ILIADS.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  
                     AChilles mournes, told of Patroclus end;
                  When Thetis doth from forth the sea asc
                        •…
                     nd,
                  And comfort him; aduising to abstaine
                  From any fight, till her request could gaine
                  Fit armes of Vulcan. Iuno yet commands
                  To shew himselfe. And at the dike he stands
                  In sight of th' enemie; who with his sight
                  Flies; and a number perish in the flight.
                  
                     Patroclus person (safe brought from the warres)
                  His souldiers wash. Vulcan the armes prepares.
               
            
            
               Another Argument.
               
                  
                     Sigma continues the alarmes,
                  And fashions the renowmed armes.
               
            
            
               
                  THey fought still, like the rage of fire. And now Antilochus
               
               Came to Aeacides; whose mind, was much solicitous,
               For that, which (as he fear'd) was falne. He found him neer the fleet
               With vpright saile-yeards, vttering this, to his heroike conceit:
               Ay me; why see the Greeks themselues, thus beaten from the field,
               And routed headlong to their fleet. O let not heauen yeeldAchilles to himselfe concerning Patroclus.
               
               Effect to what my sad soule feares; that (as I was foretold)
               The strongest Myrmidon, (next me) when I should still behold
               The Sunnes faire light, must part with it. Past doubt, Menaetius sonne
               Is he on whom that fate is wrought; O wretch, to leaue vndone
               What I commanded; that the fleete, once freed of hostile fire,
               (Not meeting Hector) instantly, he should his powres retire.
            
            
               As thus his troubl'd mind discourst, Antilochus appear'd,
               And told with teares the sad newes thus: My Lord, that must be heard,Antilochus re
                     
                        •…
                     ates Patroclus death.
               
               Which would to heauen I might not tell; Menaetius sonne lies dead;
               And for his naked corse (his armes alreadie forfeited,
               And worne by Hector) the debate, is now most vehement.
            
            
               This said, Griefe darkned all his powres. With both his hands he rent
               The blacke mould from the forced earth, and pour'd it on his head;Achilles his rage
               
               Smear'd all his louely face; his weeds (diuinely fashioned)
               All filde and mangl'd; and himselfe, he threw vpon the shore;
               Lay, as laid out for funerall. Then tumbl'd round, and tore
               His gracious curles; his Ecstacie, he did so farre extend,
               That all the Ladies wonne by him, and his now slaughterd friend,
               
                  (Afflicted strangely for his plight) came shrieking from the tents,
               And fell about him; beate their breasts; their tender lineaments
               Dissolu'd with sorrow. And with them, wept Nestors warlike sonne,
               Fell by him, holding his faire hands, in feare he would haue done
               His person violence; his heart (extremely streightned) burn'd,
               Beate, sweld, and sighd, as it would burst. So terribly he mourn'd;
               That Thetis sitting in the deepes, of her old fathers seas;
               Heard, and lamented. To her plaints, the bright Nereides
               
               Flockt all; how many those darke gulfes, soeuer comprehend.
               There Glauce and Cymodoce, and Spyo did attend;
               
                  Nesaea and Cymothoa, and calme Amphithoe;
               
               
                  Thalia, Thoa, Panope, and swift Dynanime;
               
               
                  Actaea and Lymnoria; and Halia the faire,
               Fam'd for the beautie of her eyes; Amathia for her haire;
               
                  Iaera, Proto, Clymene, and curl'd Dexamine;
               
               
                  Pherusa, Doris; and with these, the smooth Amphinome;
               
               Chast Galathea so renowm'd; and Callianira came
               With Doto and Orythia, to cheare the mournfull Dame;
               
                  Apseudes likewise visited; and Callianassa gaue
               Her kind attendance; and with her, Agaue grac't the Caue;
               
                  Nemertes, Maera followed; Melita, Ianesse,
               
               With Ianira, and the rest, of those Nereides,
               
               That in the deepe seas make abode; all which together beate
               Their dewie bosomes; and to all, thus Thetis did repeate
               Her cause of mourning: Sisters, heare, how much the sorrowes wey,Th
                        •…
                     u to the N
                        •…
                     reides.
               
               Whose cries, now cald ye: haplesse I, brought forth vnhappily
               The best of all the sonnes of men; who (like a well-set plant,
               In best soiles) grew and flourished; and when his spirit did want
               Employment for his youth and strength: I sent him with a fleete
               To fight at Ilion; from whence, his fate-confined feete
               Passe all my deitie to retire. The court of his high birth,
               The glorious court of Peleus, must entertaine his worth,
               Neuer hereafter. All the life, he hath to liue with me,
               Must wast in sorrowes; and this sonne, I now am bent to see,
               Being now afflicted with some griefe; not vsually graue;
               Whose knowledge and recure I seeke. This said, she left her caue;
               Which all left with her; swimming forth; the greene waues, as they swom,
               Cleft with their bosomes, curld, and gaue, quicke way to Troy. Being come,
               They all ascended; two and two; and trod the honor'd shore,
               Till where the fleete of Myrmidons (drawne vp in heapes) it bore.
               There stayd they at Achilles ship; and there did Thetis layThet is to Achilles.
               
               Her faire hand on her sonnes curl'd head, sigh'd, wept, and bad him say,
               What griefe drew from his eyes those teares? conceale it not (said she)
               Till this houre, thy vplifted hands, haue all things granted thee.
               The Greeks (all thrust vp at their sternes) haue pour'd ont teares enow;
               And in them seene how much they misse, remission of thy vow.Achilles to Thetis.
               
            
            
               He said, Tis true, Olympius, hath done me all that grace:
               But what ioy haue I of it all? when thus, 
                     •…
                  hrusts in the place,
               
                  Losse of my whole selfe, in my friend? whom, when his foe had slaine,
               He spoil'd of those prophaned armes, that Peleus did obtaine
               From heauens high powres, solemnizing, thy sacred nuptiall bands,
               As th'onely present of them all; and fitted well their hands;
               Being louely, radiant, maruellous; O would to heauen thy throne,
               With these faire deities of the sea, thou still hadst sate vpon;
               And Peleus had a mortall wife; since by his meanes is done
               So much wrong to thy grieued mind; my death being set so soone,
               And neuer suffering my returne, to grace of Peleus court;
               Nor do I wish it; nor to liue, in any mans resort;
               But onely that the crying bloud, for vengeance, of my friend,
               Mangl'd by Hector, may be stild; his foes death paying his end.
            
            
               She weeping, said: That houre is neare, and thy deaths houre then nie;
                     
                        •…
                     etis to Achil
                     
                        •…
                     .
               
               Which in thy wish seru'd of thy foe, succeedeth instantly.
            
            
               And instantly it shall succeed, (he answerd) since my fateAchilles to The
                     
                        •…
                     is.
               
               Allow'd not to my will a powre, to rescue (ere the date
               Of his late slaughter) my true friend. Farre from his friends he died;
               Whose wrong therein my eyes had light, and right to see denied.
               Yet now I neither light my selfe, nor haue so spent my light,
               That either this friend or the rest, (in numbers infinite
               Slaughterd by Hector) I can helpe; nor grace, with wisht repaire
               To our deare country; but breathe here, vnprofitable aire,
               And onely liue a lode to earth, with all my st
                     •…
                  ngth, though none
               Of all the Grecians equall it. In counsell, many a one
               Is my superiour; what I haue, no grace gets; what I want,
               Disgraceth all. How then too soone, can hastiest death supplant
               My 
                     〈◊〉
                  -curst life? her instrument, to my indignitie,
               Being that blacke friend Contention; whom, would to God might die
               To gods and men; and Anger too, that kindles tyrannie
               In men most wise; being much more sweete, then 
                     •…
                  quid hony is
               To men of powre, to satiate, their watchfull enmities;
               And like a pliant fume it spreds, through all their breasts; as late
               It stol
                     •…
                   sterne passage thorough mine; which he did instigate,
               That is our Generall. But the fact, so long past, the effect
               Must vanish with it, though both grieu'd; nor must we still respect
               Our soothed humours; Need now takes, the rule of eithers mind.
               And when the loser of my friend, his death in me shall find;
               Let death take all. Send him, ye gods; Ile giue him my embrace;
               Not Hercules himselfe shund death, though dearest in the grace
               Of Iupiter; euen him, Fate stoopt, and I
                        •…
                     s crueltie;
               And if such Fate expect my life; where death strikes, I will lie.
               Meane time I wish a good renowme, that these deepe-brested Dames
               Of 
                     
                        •…
                     ion and Dardania, may, for th'extinguisht flames
               Of their friends liues, with both their hands, wipe miserable teares
               From their so curiously-kept cheekes; and be the officers
               To execute my sighs on Troy; when (seeing my long r
                     •…
                  ate
               But gatherd strength, and giues my charge, an answerable heate)
               They well may know twas I lay still; 
                     〈◊〉
                   that my being away,
               
                  Presented all their happinesse. But any further stay,
               (Which your much loue perhaps may wish) assay not to perswade;
               All vowes are kept; all prayres heard; now, free way for fight is made.
               The siluer-footed Dame replide: It fits thee well, my sonne,Thetis 
                        〈◊〉
                      Achilles.
               
               To keepe destruction from thy friends; but those faire armes are wonne
               And worne by Hector, that should keepe, thy selfe in keeping them,
               Though their fruition be but short; a long death being neare him,
               Whose cruell glorie they are yet: by all meanes then forbeare
               To tread the massacres of warre, till I againe appeare
               From Mulciber with fit new armes; which, when thy eye shall see
               The Sunne next rise, shall enter here, with his first beames and me.
            
            
               Thus to her sisters of the sea, she turn'd, and bad them ope
               The doores and deepes of Nereus; she, in Olympus top
               Must visite Vulcan for new armes, to serue her wreakfull sonne;Thetis and th
                        •…
                      Nymphs 
                        〈◊〉
                      Achill
                        •…
                     .
               
               And bad informe her father so, with all things further done.
            
            
               This said, they vnderwent the sea, her selfe flew vp to heauen;
               In meane space, to the Hellespont, and ships, the Greeks were driuen,
               In shamefull rout; nor could they yet, from rage of Priams sonne,
               Secure the dead of new assaults; both horse and men made on,
               With such impression: thrice the feete, the hands of Hector seasd;
               And thrice th'Aiaces thumpt him off. With whose repulse displeasd,
               He wreakt his wrath vpon the troupes; then to the corse againe,
               Made horrid turnings, crying out, of his rep
                     •…
                  sed men,
               And would not quit him quite for death. A Lion almost steru'd,
               Is not by vpland herdsmen driuen, from vrging to be seru'd
               With more contention, then his strength, by those two of a name;
               And had perhaps his much pr
                     •…
                  sd will; if th'airie-footed dame
               (Swift Iris) had not stoopt in hast, Ambassadresse from heauen,Iris ambass
                        •…
                     
                     dresse to Achilles from 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               To Peleus sonne, to bid him arme; her message being giuen
               By Iuno; kept from all the gods; she thus excited him:
               Rise thou most terrible of men, and saue the precious lim
               Of thy belou'd; in whose behalfe, the conflict now runnes hie
               Before the fleete; the either host, fels other mutually;
               These to retaine, those to obtaine; amongst whom, most of all
               Is Hector prompt; hee's apt to drag, thy friend home; he your pall
               Will make his shoulders; his head forc't; hee'l be most famous; 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               No more lie idle; set the foe, a much more costly prise
               Of thy friends value; then let dogs, make him a monument,
               Where thy name will be grauen. He askt, What deitie hath sent
               Thy presence hither? She repli'd; Saturnia; she alone,
               Not high Ioue knowing; nor one god, that doth inhabite on
               Snowie Olympus. He againe; How shall I set vpon
               The worke of slaughter, when mine armes, are worne by Priams son?
               How will my goddesse mother grieue, that bad I should not arme,
               Till she brought armes from Mulciber? But should I do such harme
               To her and dutie: who is he (but Aiax) that can vant
               The fitting my brest with his armes? and he is conuersant
               Amongst the first, in vse of his; and rampiers of the foe
               
                  (Slaine neare Patroclus) builds to him. All this (said she) we know,
               And wish, thou onely wouldst but show, thy person to the eyes
               Of these hote Ilians, that (afraid, of further enterprise)
               The Greeks may gaine some litle breath. She woo'd, and he was won,
               And straite Minerua honor'd him; who Ioues shield clapt vpon
               His mightie shoulders; and his head, girt with a cloud of gold,
               That cast beames round about his browes. And as when armes enfold
               A citie in an Ile; from thence, a fume at first appeares,Simile.
               
               (Being in the day) but when the Euen, her cloudie forehead reares,
               Thicke show the fires, and vp they cast, their splendor, that men nie
               Seeing their distresse, perhaps may set, ships out to their supply:
               So (to shew such aid) from his head, a light rose, scaling heauen.
               And forth the wall he stept and stood; nor brake the precept giuen
               By his great mother (mixt in fight,) but sent abroad his voice,
               Which Pallas farre off ecchoed; who did betwixt them hoise
               Shrill Tumult to a toplesse height. And as a voice is heardSimile.
               
               With emulous affection, when any towne is spher'd
               With siege of such a foe, as kils, mens minds; and for the towne
               Makes sound his trumpet: so the voice, from Thetis issue throwne,
               Won emulously th'eares of all. His brazen voice once heard,
               The minds of all were startl'd so, they yeelded; and so feard
               The faire-man'd horses, that they flew, backe, and their chariots turn'd,
               Presaging in their augurous hearts, the labours that they mourn'd
               A litle after; and their guides, a repercussiue dread
               Tooke from the horrid radiance, of his refulgent head.
               Which Pallas set on fire with grace. Thrice great Achilles spake;
               And thrice (in heate of all the charge) the Troians started backe.
               Twelue men, of greatest strength in Troy, left with their liues exhald,
               Their chariots and their darts, to death, with his three summons cald.
               And then the Grecians spritefully, drew from the darts the corse,
               And hearst it, bearing it to fleete. His friends, with all remorse
               Marching about it. His great friend, dissoluing then in teares,
               To see his truly-lou'd return'd, so horst vpon an herse,
               Whom with such horse and chariot, he set out safe and whole;
               Now wounded with vnpittying steele, now sent without a soule,
               Neuer againe to be restor'd, neuer receiu'd but so;
               He follow'd mourning bitterly. The Sunne (yet farre to go)
               
                  Iuno commanded to go downe; who in his powres despight,Iuno commands the Sunne to go downe before his time.
               
               Sunke to the Ocean; ouer earth, dispersing sodaine Night.
               And then the Greeks, and Troians both, gaue vp their horse and darts.
               The Troians all to counsell call'd, ere they refresht their hearts
               With any supper; nor would sit; they grew so stiffe with feare,
               To see (so long from heauie fight) Aeacides appeare.
            
            
               
                  Polydam as began to speake, who onely could discerne
               Things future by things past; and was, vow'd friend to Hector; borne
               In one night both; he thus aduisde: Consider well (my friends)Polydamas to Hector and the Troians.
               
               In this so great and sodaine change, that now it selfe extends;
               What change is best for vs t'oppose. To this stands my command;
               
                  Make now the towne our strength; not here, abide lights rosie hand;
               Our wall being farre off, and our foe, (much greater) still as nere.
               Till this foe came, I well was pleasde, to keepe our watches here;
               My fit hope, of the fleetes surprise, enclin'd me so; but now,
               Tis stronglier guarded; and (their strength, increast) we must allow
               Our owne proportionate amends. I doubt exceedingly
               That this indifferencie of fight, twixt vs and th'enemie;
               And these bounds we prefixe to them; will nothing so confine,
               Th'vncurb'd mind of Aeacides. The height of his designe
               Aimes at our citie, and our wiues; and all barres in his way
               (Being backt with lesse then wals) his powre, will scorne to make his stay;
               And ouerrunne, as ouerseene; and not his obiect. Then
               Let Troy be freely our retreate; lest being enforc't, our men
               Twixt this, and that, be taken vp, by Vultures; who by night
               May safe come off; it being a time, vntimely for his might
               To spend at randome; that being sure. If next light shew vs here
               To his assaults, each man will wish, that Troy his refuge were;
               And then feele, what he heares not now. I would to heauen mine eare
               Were free euen now of those complaints, that you must after heare,
               If ye remoue not. If ye yeeld (though wearied with a fight)
               So late and long; we shall haue strength, in counsell, and the night.
               And (where we here haue no more force, then Need will force vs to,
               And which must rise out of our nerues) high ports, towres, walls will do
               What wants in vs. And in the morne, all arm'd vpon our towres;
               We all will stand out to our foe. Twill trouble all his powres,
               To come from fleet, and giue vs charge; when his high-crested horse,
               His rage shall satiate with the toyle, of this, and that wayes course;
               Vaine entrie seeking vnderneath, our well-defended wals;
               And he be glad to turne to fleet, about his funerals.
               For of his entrie here, at home; What mind will serue his thirst?
               Or euer feed him with sackt Troy? the dogs shall eate him first.
            
            
               At this speech, Hector bent his browes; and said, This make not greatHectors angry reply to Polydam
                        •…
                     .
               
               Your grace with me, Polydamas; that argue for retreate
               To Troys old prison; haue we not, enough of those towres yet?
               And is not Troy, yet, charg'd enough, with impositions set
               Vpon her citizens; to keepe, our men from spoyle, without?
               But still we must impose, within? that houses, with our rout,
               As well as purses, may be plagu'd? Before time, Priams towne
               Traffickt with diuers-languag'd men; and all gaue the renowne
               Of rich Troy to it; brasse, and gold, abounding: but her store
               Is now from euery house exhaust; possessions euermore,
               Are sold out into Phrygia, and louely Maeonie;
               
               And haue bene, euer since Ioues wrath. And now his clemencie
               Giues me the meane, to quit our want, with glorie; and conclude
               The Greeks in sea-bords, and our seas; to slacke it, and extrude
               His offerd bountie by our flight. Foole that thou art, be wray
               This counsell to no common eare; for no man shall obay.
               If any will, Ile checke his will. But what our selfe command,
               
                  Let all obserue: take suppers all; keeepe watch of euery hand.
               If any Troian haue some spoyle, that takes his too much care,
               Make him dispose it publickly; tis better any fare
               The better for him, then the Greeks. When light then deckes the skies,
               Let all arme for a fierce assault. If great Achilles rise,
               And will enforce our greater toyle; it may rise so to him;
               On my backe, he shall find no wings; my spirit, shall force my lim
               To stand his worst; and giue, or take; Mars is our common Lord,
               And the desirous sword-mans life; he euer puts to sword.
            
            
               This counsell gat applause of all; so much were all vnwise;
               
                  Minerua robd them of their braines, to like the ill aduice
               The great man gaue; and leaue the good, since by the meaner giuen.
               All tooke their suppers; but the Greeks, spent all the heauy Euen
               About Patroclus mournfull rites; Pelides leading all
               In all the formes of heauinesse: he, by his side did fall;
               And his man-slaughtering hands imposd, into his oft-kist brest;
               Sighes, blew vp sighes: and Lion-like, grac't with a goodly crest,Simile.
               
               That in his absence being robd, by hunters of his whelps,
               Returnes to his so desolate den: and (for his wanted helps)
               Beholding his vnlookt-for wants, flies roring backe againe;
               Hunts the slie hunter; many a vale, resounding his disdaine.
               So mourn'd Pelides, his late losse; so weightie were his mones,
               Which (for their dumbe sounds) now gaue words, to all his Myrmidom.
                  Achilles to his Myrmidons.
               
               O gods (said he) how vaine a vow, I made, (to cheare the mind)
               Of sad Menaetius, when his sonne, his hand to mine resign'd;
               That high-towr'd Opus he should see; and leaue rac't Ilion,
               
               With spoyle, and honor, euen wi
                     •…
                  h me? but Ioue vouchsafes to none,
               Wisht passages to all his vowes; we both were destinate
               To bloody one earth here in Troy; nor any more estate
               In my returne, hath Peleus, or Thetis; but because,
               I, last must vndergo the ground, Ile keepe no funerall lawes
               (O my Patroclus) for thy Corse; before I hither bring,Achilles to Patroclus body.
               
               The armes of Hector, and his head, to thee for offering.
               Twelue youths, the most renown'd of Troy, Ile sacrifise beside,
               Before thy heape of funerall, to thee vnpacifide.
               In meane time, by our crooked sternes, lye drawing teares from me;
               And round about thy honour'd Corse, these dames of Dardanie,
               
               And Ilion, with the ample breasts (whom our long speares, and powres,
               And labours, purchast from the rich, and by-vs-ruind towres,
               And cities strong, and populous, with diuers-languag'd men)
               Shall kneele, and neither, day, nor night, be licenst to abstaine
               From solemne watches; their toil'd eyes, held ope with endlesse teares.
            
            
               This passion past; he gaue command, to his neare souldiers;
               To put a Tripod to the fire, to cleanse the festred gore,
               From off the person. They obeyd, and presently did powre
               Fresh water in it; kindl'd wood, and with an instant flame,
               The belly of the Tripod girt; till fires hote qualitie came
               Vp to the water. Then they washt, and fild the mortall wound
               
                  With wealthy oyle, of nine yeares old; then wrapt the body round,
               In largenesse of a fine white sheete, and put it then in bed,
               When all, watcht all night, with their Lord, and spent sighes on the dead.
            
            
               Then Ioue askt Iuno, if at length, she had suffisde her splene;
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               
                  Achilles being wonne to armes? or if she had not be
                     •…
                  e
               The naturall mother of the Greeks; she did so still preferre
               Their quarrell? She incenst, askt why, he still was tanting her,
               For doing good to those she lou'd? since man to man might show
               Kind offices, though thrall to death; and though they did not know
               Halfe such deepe counsels, as disclosd; beneath her farre-seeing state:
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               She, reigning Queene of goddesses; and being ingenerate
               Of one stocke with himselfe; besides, the state of being his wife;
               And must her wrath, and ill to Troy, continue such a strife
               From time to time, twixt him and her? This priuate speech they had;
               And now the siluer-footed Queene, had her ascension made,The
                        •…
                      enters the Court of Vul
                        •…
                     n.
               
               To that incorruptible house, that starry golden court
               Of fiery Vulcan; beautifull, amongst th'immortall sort.
               Which yet the lame god built himselfe: she found him in a sweate,
               About his bellowes; and in haste, had twentie Tripods beate,
               To set for stooles about the sides, of his well-builded hall.
               To whose feete, little wheeles of gold, he put, to go withall;
               And enter his rich dining roome; alone, their motion free
               And backe againe go out alone, miraculous to see.
               And thus much he had done of them; yet handles were to adde;
               For which he now was making studs. And while their fashion had
               Employment of his skilfull hand; bright Thetis was come neare,
               Whom first, faire well-haird Charis saw, that was the nuptiall fere,
               Of famous Vulcan; who, the hand, of Thetis tooke, and said;
            
            
               Why, faire-train'd, lou'd, and honour'd Dame, are we thus visitedCharis the wife of Vulcan to Thetis.
               
               By your kind presence? You I thinke, were neuer here before;
               Come neare, that I may banquet you, and make you visite more.
            
            
               She led her in, and in a chaire, of siluer (being the fruite
               Of Vulcans hand) she made her sit: a footstoole, of a suite,
               Apposing to her Cristall feete; and cald the god of fire
               For Thetis was arriu'd (she said) and entertain'd desire,
               Of some grace, that his art might grant. Thetis to me (said he)Vulcan to Charis
               
               Is mightie, and most reuerend, as one that nourisht me,
               When Griefe consum'd me; being cast, from heauen, by want of shame
               In my proud mother, who because, she brought me forth so lame,
               Would haue me made away; and then, had I bene much distrest,
               Had Thetis and Eurynome, in eithers siluer breast
               Not rescu'd me. Eurynome, that to her father had
               Reciprocall Oceanus; nine yeares with them I made
               A number of well-arted things; round bracelets, b
                     •…
                  ons braue;
               Whistles, and Carquenets: my forge, stood in a hollow Caue,
               About which (murmuring with fome) th'vnmeasur'd Ocean
               
               Was euer beating; my abode, knowne no
                     •…
                   to god, nor man,
               But Thetis, and Eury
                        •…
                     one, and they would see me still:
               
                  They were my louing guardians: now then the starry hill,
               And our particular roofe thus grac't, with bright-hair'd Thetis here;
               It fits me alwaies to repay, a recompence as deare
               To her thoughts, as my life to me. Haste Charis, and appose
               Some daintie guest-rites to our friend, while I my bellowes lose
               From fire, and lay vp all my tooles. Then from an anuile rose
               Th'vnweildy Monster; halted downe, and all awry he went.
               He tooke his bellowes from the fire, and euery instrument
               Lockt safe vp in a siluer chest. Then with a sponge he drest
               His face all ouer, necke and hands, and all his hairie breast:
               Put on his Cote, his Scepter tooke, and then went halting forth:
               Handmaids of gold, attending him; resembling in all worth,Vulcans attendants.
               
               Liuing yong damzels; fild with minds, and wisedome, and were train'd
               In all immortall ministrie; virtue, and voice contain'd,
               And mou'd with voluntarie powres: and these still waited on
               Their fierie Soueraigne; who (not apt, to walke) sate neare the throne
               Of faire-hair'd Thetis; tooke her hand; and thus he courted her:
            
            
               For what affaire, ô faire-train'd Queene, reuerend to me, and deare,Vulcan to Thetis.
               
               Is our Court honord with thy state? That hast not heretofore
               Perform'd this kindnesse? Speake thy thoughts; thy suite can be no more,
               Then my mind giues me charge to grant; can my powre get it wrought?
               Or that it haue not onely powre, of onely act in thought?
            
            
               She thus: O Vulcan, is there one, of all that are of heauen,Th
                        •…
                     t to Vulcan.
               
               That in her neuer-quiet mind, Saturnius hath giuen
               So much affliction as to me? whom onely he subiects
               (Of all the Sea-Nymphs) to a man; and makes me beare th'affects
               Of his fraile bed: and all against, the freedome of my will.
               And he worne to his roote, with age: from him, another ill,
               Ariseth to me; Iup
                        •…
                     ter, you know, hath giuen a sonne
               (The excellenst of men) to me; whose education,
               On my part, well hath answered, his owne worth; hauing growne,
               As in a fruitfull soyle, a tree, that puts not vp alone,
               His body to a naked height; but ioyntly giues his growth
               A thousand branches; yet to him, so short a life I brought,
               That neuer I shall see him more, return'd to Peleus Court.
               And all that short life he hath spent, in most vnhappy sort.
               For first he wonne a worthy Dame, and had her by the hands
               Of all the Grecians: yet this Dame, Atrides countermands:
               For which, in much disdaine he mourn'd, and almost pin'd away,
               And yet, for this wrong, he receiu'd, some honor, I must say;
               The Greeks being shut vp at their ships; not sufferd to aduance,
               A head out of their batterd sternes; and mightie suppliance,
               By all their graue men hath bene made, gifts, honors, all proposde
               For his reflection; yet he still, kept close, and saw enclosde
               Their whole host, in this generall plague. But now his friend put on
               His armes; being sent by him to field, and many a Myrmidon
               
               In conduct of him; all the day, they fought before the gates
               
                  Of Scaea; and most certainly, that day had seene the dates,
               Of all Troyes honors, in her dust; if Phoebus (hauing done
               Much mischiefe more) the enuyed life, of good Men
                        •…
                     tius sonne,
               Had not with partiall hands enforc't; and all the honor giuen
               To Hector, who hath prisd his armes; and therefore I am driuen,
               T'embrace thy knees, for new defence, to my lou'd sonne: ahlas,
               His life prefixt, so short a date, had need spend that with grace.
               A shield then for him, and a helme, faire greaues, and curets such,
               As may renowne thy workmanship; and honor him as much;
               I sue for, at thy famous hands. Be confident (said he)
               Let these wants breed thy thoughts, no care; I would it lay in me,
               To hide him from his heauy death; when Fate shall seeke for him;Vulcan to 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
               
               As well, as with renowned armes, to fit his goodly limme;
               Which thy hands shall conuey to him; and all eyes shall admire:
               See, and desire againe to see, thy satisfied desire.
            
            
               This said, he left her there; and forth, did to his bellows go,Vulcan 
                        〈◊〉
                      to forge armes for Achille
                        •…
                     .
               
               Apposde them to the fire againe, commanding them to blow.
               Through twenty holes made to his harth, at once blew twenty paire,
               That 
                     •…
                  it'd his coles, sometimes with soft, sometimes with vehement ayre;
               As he will'd, and his worke requir'd. Amids the flame he cast,
               Tin, Siluer, precious Gold, and Brasse; and in the stocke he plac't,
               A mightie anuile; his right hand, a weightie hammer held;
               His left his tongs. And first he forg'd, a strong and spacious shield
               Adornd with twenty seuerall hewes: about whose verge he beate,
               A ring, three-fold and radiant; and on the backe he set,
               A siluer handle; fiue-fold were, the equall lines he drew
               About the whole circumference: in which, his hand did shew,
               (Directed with a knowing mind) a rare varietie:
               For in it he presented earth; in it, the sea, and skie:
               In it, the-neuer-wearied Sunne; the Moone exactly round,
               And all those starres, with which the browes, of ample heauen are crownd;
               
                  Orion, all the Pleiades; and those seuen Atlas got;
               The close-beam'd Hyades. The Beare, surnam'd the Chariot,
               That turnes about heauens axeltree; holds o
                     •…
                  a a constant eye▪
               
               Vpon Orion; and, of all, the Cressets in the skie,
               His golden forehead neuer bowes, to th'Ocean Emperie.
            
            
               Two cities in the spacious shield, he built with goodly state,Two cities forged in Achilles armes
               
               Of diuerse-languag'd men: the one, did nuptials celebrate,
               Obseruing at them, solemne feasts: the Brides from foorth their bowres
               With torches, vsherd through the streets: a world of Paramours
               Excited by them; youths, and maides, in louely circles 
                     〈◊〉
                  :
               To whom the merrie Pipe, and Harpe, the spritely sounds aduanc't;
               The matrones standing in their dores, admiring. Otherwhere,
               A solemne Court of law was kept, were throngs of people were:
               The case in question, was a fine, imposde on one, that slue
               The friend of him that follow'd it, and for the fine did sue;
               Which th'other pleaded he had paide. The aduerse part denied,
               
                  And openly affirm'd he had, no penny satisfied.
               Both put it to arbiterment; the people cryed twas best
               For both parts; and th'Assistants too, gaue their doomes like the rest.
               The Heralds made the people peace: the Seniors then did beare
               The voicefull Heralds scepters; sate, within a sacred sphere
               On polisht stones; and gaue by turnes, their sentence. In the Court
               Two talents gold were cast, for him, that iugd'd in iustest sort.
            
            
               The other citie, other warres, employ'd as busily,The martiall citie in the shield of Achilles.
               
               Two armies glittering in armes, of one confederacie,
               Besieg'd it; and a parle had, with those within the towne;
               Two wayes they stood resolu'd; to see, the citie ouerthrowne:
               Or that the citizens should heape, in two parts all their wealth,
               And giue them halfe. They neither lik't, but arm'd themselues by stealth:
               Left all their old men, wiues, and boyes, behind, to man their wals;
               And stole out to their enemies towne. The Queene of martials,
               And Mars himselfe conducted them; both which being forg'd of gold,
               Must needs haue golden furniture: and men might so behold,
               They were presented deities. The people, Vulcan forg'd
               Of 
                     •…
                  eaner mettall. When they came, where that was to be vrg'd
               For which they went; within a vale, close to a flood, whose streame
               Vsde to giue all their cattell drinke; they there enambusht them:
               And sent two scouts out to descrie, when th'enemies heards, and sheepe
               Were setting out. They strait c
                     •…
                  me forth, with two that vsde to keepe
               Their pass
                     •…
                  ge alwayes; both which pip't, and went on merrily;
               Nor dream'd of Ambuscados there. The Ambush then let flie;
               Slue all their white fleec't sheepe, and neate, and by them laid their guard.
               When those in si
                     •…
                  ge before the towne, so strange an vprore heard,
               Behind, amongst their flocks, and heards; (being then in counsell set)
               They then start vp, tooke horse, and soone, their subtle enemie met;
               Fought with them on the riuers shore, where both gaue mutuall blowes
               With w
                     •…
                  ll pil'd darts. Amongst them all: peruerse Contention rose,
               Amongst them Tumult was enrag'd: amongst them ruinous Fate,
               
               Had her red-finger; some they tooke, in an vnhurt estate;
               Some hurt; yet liuing; some quite slaine: and those they tug'd to them
               By both the feete; strip't off and tooke, their weeds, with all the streame
               Of blood vpon them; that their steeles, had manfully let out.
               They far'd as men aliue indeed, drew dead indeed about.
            
            
               To these, the fierie Artizan, did adde a new-ear'd fieldA new 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      in the shield.
               
               Larg'd and thrice plowd; the soyle being soft, and of a wealthy yeeld,
               And many men at plow he made, that draue earth here and there,
               And turnd vp stitches orderly; at whose end when they were,
               A fellow euer gaue their hands, full cups of luscious wine;
               Which emptied, for another stitch, the earth they vndermine;
               And long till th'vtmost bound be reacht, of all the ample Close:
               The soyle turnd vp behind the plow, all blacke like earth arose,
               Though forg'd of nothing else but gold, and lay in show as light,
               As if it had bene plowd indeed; miraculous to sight.
            
            
               There grew by this, a field of corne, high, ripe; where reapers wrought,A field of cor
                        •…
                     e.
               
               
                  And let thicke handfuls fall to earth; for which, some other brought
               Bands, and made sheaues. Three binders stood, and tooke the handfuls reapt,
               From boyes that gatherd quickly vp; and by them armefuls heapt.
               Amongst these at a 
                     •…
                  urrowes end, the king stood pleasd at heart;
               Said no word, but his scepter shewd. And from him, much apart,
               His haruest Bailiffes, vnderneath, an Oke, a feast prepar'd:
               And hauing kild a mightie Oxe, stood there to see him shar'd;
               Which women, for their haruest folks (then come to sup) had drest;
               And many-white-wheate-cakes bestow'd, to make it vp a feast.
            
            
               He set neare this, a vine of gold; that crackt beneath the weightA 
                        〈◊〉
                      of gold.
               
               Of bunches, blacke with being ripe, to keepe which, at the height,
               A siluer raile ranne all along; and round about it flow'd
               An azure mote; and to this guard, a quick-set was bestow'd
               Of Tin, one onely path to all; by which the pressemen came
               In time of vintage; youths, and maids, that bore not yet the flame
               Of manly Hymen; baskets bore, of grapes, and mellow fruite.
               A lad that sweetly toucht a harpe, to which his voice did suite,
               Centerd the circles of that youth; all whose skill could not do
               The wantons pleasure to their minds, that danc't, sung, whistl'd to.
            
            
               A herd of Oxen then he caru'd, with high raisd heads; forg'd allA heard of oxen
               
               Of Gold and Tin (for colour mixt) and bellowing from their stall,
               Rusht to their pastures, at a flood, that eccho'd all their throtes;
               Exceeding swift, and full of 
                     •…
                  eeds; and all in 
                     •…
                  ellow cotes,
               Foure heardsmen follow'd; after whom, nine Mastiues went. In head
               Of all the heard, vpon a Bull, that deadly bellowed,
               Two horrid Lions rampt, and seisd, and (tugg'd off) bellowing still,
               Both men, and dogs came; yet they tore, the hide, and lapt their fill
               Of blacke blood; and the entrailes eate. In vaine the men assayd,
               To set their dogs on: none durst pinch, but curre-like stood and bayd
               In both the faces of their kings; and all their onsets fled.
            
            
               Then in a passing pleasant vale, the famous Artsman fed,Flocks of sheepe.
               
               (Vpon a goodly pasture ground) rich flocks, of white-fleec't sheepe;
               Built stables, cottages, and cotes; that did the sheapheards keepe
               From winde and weather. Next to these, he cut a dancing place,A labyrinth.
               
               All full of turnings; that was like, the admirable maze
               For faire-hair'd Ariadne made, by cunning Dedalus;
               
               And in it, youths, and virgins danc't; all yong and beautious,
               And glewed in anothers palmes. Weeds that the winde did tosse,
               The virgines wore: the youths, wouen cotes, that cast a faint dimme glosse,
               Like that of oyle. Fresh garlands to, the virgines temples crownd;
               The youths guilt swords wore, at their thighs; with siluer baw dricks bound:
               Sometimes all wound close in a ring; to which as fast they spunne,
               As any wheele a Turner makes, being tried how it will runne,
               While he is set; and out againe, as full of speed, they wound;
               Not one left fast, or breaking hands. A multitude stood round;
               Delighted with their nimble sport: to end which two begun
               (Mids all) a song, and turning sung, the spo
                     •…
                  s conclusion.
               All this he circl'd in the shield, with pouring round about
               
                  (In all his rage) the Ocean, that it might neuer out.
            
            
               This shield thus done, he forg'd for him, such curets, as out shin'd
               The blaze of fire: a helmet then (through which no steele could find
               Forc't passage) he composde, whose hu
                     •…
                  , a hundred colours tooke;
               And in the crest, a plume of gold, that each breath stirr'd, he stucke.
            
            
               All done; he all to Thetis brought, and held all vp to her;
               She tooke them all, and lik't the hawke, (surnam'd the Osspringer)
               From Vulcan to her mightie sonne; with that so glorious show,
               Stoopt from the steepe Olympian hill, hid in eternall snow.
            
            
               COMMENTARIVS.
               
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
               
               
                  Thus turned by Spondanus ad verbum:
               
                  Vt autem cognitu facilis vox est, cum clangit tuba
                  Vrbem obsidentes hostes propter perniciosos:
                  Sic tunc clara vox fuit Aeacid
                           •…
                        ,
                  
                  Hi autem postquam igitur audiuerunt vocem ferream Aeacidae:
                  
                  Omnibus commotus est animus.
               
               Valla thus:
               
               Sicut enim cum obsidentibus saeuis vrbem hostibus, vel clarior vox, vel classicum perstrepit; ita nunc Achilles magna voce inclamauit.—quam cum audirent Troiani, perturbati sunt animis.
               Eobanus Hessus thus:
               
               —Nam sicut ab vrbe Obsessa increpuere tubae, vel classica cantu Ferrea; sic Troas vox perturbabat Achillis.
               
               
                  Mine owne harsh conuersion (in which I will be bold to repeate after these, thus closely for your easier examination) is this; as before,
               
               
                  —And as a voice is heard
                  With emulous attention, when any towne is spher'd
                  With siege of such a foe as kils, mens minds; and for the towne
                  Makes sound his trumpet: so the voice, from Thetis issue throwne,
                  Wonne emulously the eares of all. His brazen voice once heard,
                  The minds of all were startl'd so, they yeelded.
               
               In conference of all our translations, I would gladly learne of my more learned Reader; if the two last conuersions do any thing neare expresse the conceipt of Homer, or if they beare any grace worth the signification of his words, and the sence of his illustration. Whose intent was not to expresse the clearenesse or shrilnesse of his voice in it self; but the enuious terror it wrought in the Troians. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , not signi
                     •…
                  ing in this place clara, or cognitu facilis vox; but emulanda vox. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   signifying, quē valde aemulamur, aut valde aemulandus: though these interpreters would rather receiue it here for 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , verso 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  in 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , vt sit clarus, illustris, &c. But how silly a curiositie is it to alter the word vpon ignorance of the significatiō it hath in his place? the word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   being a compound of 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which signifieth valde, and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which is aemulatio: or of 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   which signifies aemulor? To this effect then (saith Homer in this Simile,) As a voice that workes a terror, carrying an enuy with it, sounds to a

citie besieged when the trumpet of a dreadfull and mind-destroying enemie summons it, (for so 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , signifies, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   signifying animum destruens, being a compound of 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which signifies destruo; and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   which is animus,) that i
                     •…
                  , when the parle comes, after the trumpets sound, vttering the resolution of the dreadfull enemie before it. The further application of this simile is left out by mischance.
            
            The end of the eighteenth Booke.
         
         
            THE XIX. BOOKE OF HOMERS ILIADS.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  
                     THetis, presenting armour to her sonne;
                  He cals a Court, with full reflection
                  Of all his wrath. Takes of the king of men
                  Free-offerd gifts. All take their breakefast then▪
                  
                  He (onely fasting) Armes, and brings abrode,
                  The Grecian host. And (heairng the abode
                  Of his neare death by Xanthus prophecied)
                  The horse, for his so bold presage, doth chide.
               
            
            
               Another Argument.
               
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      giues the anger period
                  And great Achilles comes abrode.
               
            
            
               THe Morne arose, and from the Ocean, in her saffron robe,
               Gaue light to all: as well to gods, as men of th'vnder globe.
               
                  Thetis stoopt home, and found the prostrate person of her sonne,Thetis appeares To Achilles.
               
               About his friend; still pouring out, himselfe in passion:
               A number more, being heauy consorts to him in his cares.
               Amongst them all, Thetis appear'd; and sacred comforters
               Made these short words. Though we must grieue, yet beare it thus; (my son)
               It was no man that prostrated, in this sad fashion
               Thy dearest friend; it was a god, that first laid on his hand;
               Whose will is law: the gods decrees, no humane must withstand.
               Do thou embrace this Fabricke of a god; whose hand, before,
               Nere forg'd the like; and such as yet, no humane shoulder wore.
            
            
               Thus (setting downe;) The precious mettall of the armes was such,
               That all the roome rung with the weight, of euery slendrest touch.
               Cold tremblings tooke the Myrmidons; none durst sustaine, all fear'dAchilles rapture at the sight of his armes.
               
               T'oppose their eyes: Achilles yet, as soone as they appear'd,
               Sterne Anger enterd. From his eyes (as if the day-starre rose)
               A radiance terrifying men, did all the state enclose.
               At length, he tooke into his hands, the rich gift of the god;
               And (much pleasd, to behold the art, that in the shield he show'd)
               He brake forth into this applause; O mother, these, right well,
               Shew an immortall fingers touch; mans hand must neuer deale
               With armes againe. Now I will arme; yet (that no honour make
               My friend forgotten) I much feare, lest with the blowes of flies,
               His brasse-inflicted wounds are filde; life gone; his person lies
               
                  All apt to putrifaction. She bad him, doubt no harme,
               Of those offences: she would care, to keepe the petulant swarme
               Of flies (that vsually taint, the bodies of the slaine)
               From his friends person: though a yeare, the earths top should sustaine
               His slaughterd body, it should still, rest sound, and rather hold
               A better state, then worse; since time, that death first made him cold:
               And so bad call a Councell to, dispose of new alarmes,
               Where (to the king, that was the Pastor of that flocke in armes)
               He should depose all anger and, put on a fortitude
               Fit for his armes. All this, his powres, with dreadfull strength indude.
               She, with her faire hand, still'd into, the nostrils of his friend,
               Red Nectar, and Ambrosia; with which she did defend
               The Corse from putrifaction. He trod along the shore,
               And summon'd all th'Heroique Greekes; with all that spent beforeAchilles 
                        〈◊〉
                      all the Greeks to Counsell.
               
               The time in exercise with him; the Maisters, Pilots to,
               Victlers, and all; all when they saw, Achilles summon so,
               Swarm'd to the Councell, hauing long, left the laborious wars.
               To all these, came two halting kings, true seruitors of Mars,
               
               
                  Tydides, and wise Ithacus, both leaning on their speares:
               Their wounds still painefull; and both these, sat first of all the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪
               
            
            
               The last come, was the king of men, sore wounded with the lance
               Of Coon Antenorides. All set, the first in vtterance,
                     
                        •…
                     hilles 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      in the Councell.
               
               Was Thetis sonne; who rose, and said; Atrides, had not this
               Conferd most profite to vs both? when both our enmities
               Consum'd vs 
                     〈◊〉
                  ? and for a wench? whom, when I chusde for prise,
               (In laying Lyrnessus ruin'd walls, amongst our victories)
               I would to heauen (as first she set, her daintie foote abord)
               
                  Dian as hand had tumbl'd off, and with a iauelin gor'd.
               For then, th'vn measurable earth, had not so thick bene gnawne,
               (In deaths conulsions) by our friends; since my affects were drawne
               To such distemper. To our foe, and to our foes chiefe friend
               Our iarre brought profite: but the Greeks, will neuer giue an end
               To thought of what it preiudic't them. Past things yet, past our aide;
               Fit griefe, for what wrath rulde in them; must make th'amends repaid
               With that necessitie of loue; that now forbids our ir
                     •…
                  ;
               Which I with free affects obey. Tis for the senslesse fire
               Still to be burning, hauing stuffe; but men, must curbe rage still,
               Being fram'd with voluntarie powres, as well to checke the will,
               As giue it raines. Giue you then charge, that for our instant fight,
               The Greeks may follow me to field; to trie if still the Night
               
               Will beare out Troians at our ships. I hope there is some one,
               Amongst their chiefe encouragers, will thanke me to be gone;
               And bring his heart downe to his knees, in that submission.
            
            
               The Greeks reioyc't, to heare the heart, of Peleus mightie sonne,
               So quallified. And then the king (not rising from his throne,
               For his late hurt) to get good 
                     〈◊〉
                  ; thus orderd his 
                     •…
                  plie:
            
            
               Princes of Greece, your states shall suffer no indignitie;
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to the Princes of Greece.
               
               If (being farre off) ye stand and heare; nor fits it such as stand,
               
                  At greater distance, to disturbe, the counsell now in hand,
               By vprore; in their too much care, of hearing. Some, of force,
               Must lose some words: for, hard it is, in such a great concourse,
               (Though hearers eares be nere so sharpe) to touch at all things spoke.
               And in assemblies of such thrust, how can a man prouoke
               Fit powre to heare, or leaue to speake? best auditors may there,
               Lose fittest words; and the most vocall Orator, fit eare.
               My maine end then, to satisfie, Pelides with replie,
               My words shall prosecute. To him, my speech especially
               Shall beare direction. Yet I wish, the court in generall,
               Would giue fit eare; my speech shall need, attention of all.
            
            
               Oft haue our Peeres of Greece, much blam'd, my forcing of the prise,
               Due to Achilles; of which act, not I, but destinies,
               And Ioue himselfe; and blacke Erynnis (that casts false mists still
               Betwixt vs, and our actions done, both by her powre, and will)
               Are authors: what could I do then? The very day, and howre,
               Of our debate, that furie stole, in that act, on my powre.
               And more; All things are done by strife: that ancient seed of Ioue
               
               
                  Ate, that hurts all, perfects all. Her feete, are soft; and moueAte the godde
                        •…
                      of cont
                        •…
                     ion.
               
               Not on the earth; they beare her still, aloft men heads; and there,
               The harmefull hurts them. Nor was I, alone her prisoner;
               
                  Ioue (best of men, and gods) hath bene. Not he himselfe hath gone
               Beyond her fetters: no she made, a woman put them on.
               For when Alcmena was to vent, the force of Hercules,
               
               In well wall'd Thebes: thus Ioue triumpht; Heare gods, and goddesses,
               The words, my ioyes vrg'd: In this day, Lucina (bringing paine,
               To labouring women) shall produce, into the light of men,
               A man, that all his neighbour kings, shall in his Empire hold;
               And vant, that more then manly race, whose honor'd veines enfold
               My eminent blood. Saturnia, conceiu'd a present sleight,
               And vrg'd confirmance of his vant, t'infringe it; her conceipt,
               In this sort vrg'd: Thou wilt not hold, thy word with this rare man;
               Or if thou wilt, confirme it with, the oath Olympian;
               
               That whosoeuer fals this day, betwixt a womans knees,
               Of those mens stockes, that from thy blood, deriue their pedigrees
               Shall all his neighbour townes command. Ioue (ignorant of fraude)Iuno
                        •…
                      deceipt of Iupiter.
               
               Tooke that great oth, which his great ill, gaue little cause t'applaude.
               Downe from Olympus top, she stoopt; and quickly reacht the place
               In Argos, where the famous wife, of Sthenelus (whose race
               He fetch from Ioue, by Perseus) dwelt. She was but seuenths months gone
               With issue; yet she brought it forth; Alcmenas matchlesse sonne
               Delaide from light; Saturnia, represt the teeming throwes
               Of his great mother. Vp to heauen, she mounts againe, and showes,
               (In glorie) her deceipt to Ioue. Bright lightning Ioue (said she)
               Now th' Argiues haue an Emperour; a sonne deriu'd from theeIunos insul
                        •…
                      after her de
                        •…
                     ipt
               
               Is borne to Persean Sthenelus; Eurystheus, his name;
               Noble and worthy of the rule, thou swor'st to him. This came
               Close to the heart of Iupiter; and Ate, that had wrought
               
                  This anger by Saturnia, by her bright-haire he caught;
               Held downe her head, and ouer her, made this infallible vow:
               That neuer to the cope of starres, should reascend that brow,
               Being so infortunate to all. Thus, swinging her about,
               He cast her from the fierie heauen; who euer since thrust out
               Her forkt sting, in th'affaires of men. Ioue euer since did grieue,
               Since his deare issue Hercules, did by his vow atchieue,
               Th'vniust toyles of Eurysteus: thus fares it now with me;
               Since vnder Hectors violence, the Grecian progenie,
               Fell so vnfitly by my splene; whose fals will euer sticke
               In my grieu'd thoughts; my weaknesse yet, (Saturnius making sicke
               The state my mind held) now recur'd; th'amends shall make euen weight
               With my offence: and therefore rouse, thy spirits to the fight,
               With all thy forces; all the gifts, proposde thee, at thy tent,
               (Last day) by royall Ithacus, my officers shall present;
               And (if it like thee) strike no stroke, (though neuer so on thornes
               Thy mind stands to thy friends reuenge) till my command, adornes
               Thy tents, and cofers, with such gifts, as well may let thee know,
               How much I wish thee satisfied. He answerd, let thy vow,Achilles his noble answer of Aga
                        •…
                     non.
               
               (Renown'd Atrides) at thy will, be kept, (as iustice would)
               Or keepe thy gifts, tis all in thee. The counsell now we hold,
               Is for repairing our maine field, with all our fortitude.
               My faire shew made, brookes no retreat; nor must delaies delude
               Our deeds expectance. Yet vndone, the great worke is; all eyes
               Must see Achilles in first fight, depeopling enemies;
               As well as counsell it in court: that euery man set on;
               May chuse his man, to imitate, my exercise vpon.
            
            
               
                  Vlysses answerd, do not yet, (thou man, made like the gods)V
                        •…
                     sses A
                     
                        •…
                     .
               
               Take fasting men to field: suppose, that whatsoeuer ods,
               It brings against them, with full men, thy boundlesse eminence,
               Can amplie answer; yet refraine, to tempt a violence.
               The conflict wearing out our men, was late, and held as long;
               Wherein, though most, Ioue stood for Troy; he yet made our part strong
               To beare that most. But twas to beare, and that breeds little heart.
               Let wine and bread then adde to it: they helpe the twofold part,
               The soule, and body in a man; both force, and fortitude.
               All day men cannot fight, and fast; though neuer so indude
               With minds to fight; for that supposde, there lurks yet secretly,
               Thirst, hunger, in th'oppressed ioynts; which no mind can supply.
               They take away a marchers knees. Mens bodyes throughly fed▪
               
               Their minds share with them in their strength; and (all day combatted)
               One stirres not, till you call off all. Dismisse them then to meate,
               And let Atrides tender here, in sight of all this seate,
               The gifts he promist. Let him sweare, before vs all, and rise
               To that oath; that he neuer toucht, in any wanton wise,
               The Ladie he enforc't. Besides, that he remaines in mind
               As chastly satisfied: not toucht, or priuily enclind
               With future vantages. And last; tis fit he should approue
               
                  All these rites, at a solemne feast, in honour of your loue;
               That so you take no mangl'd law, for merites absolute.
               And thus the honours you receiue, resoluing the pursuite
               Of your friends quarrell, well will quit, your sorrow for your friend.
               And thou Atrides in the tast, of so seuere an end;
               Hereafter may on others hold, a iuster gouernment.
               Nor will it ought empaire a king, to giue a sound content
               To any subiect, soundly wrong'd. I ioy (replide the king)
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               O Laertiades, to heare, thy liberall counselling.
               In which is all decorum kept; nor any point lackes touch,
               That might be thought on, to conclude, a reconcilement, such
               As fits example; and vs two. My mind yet makes me sweare,
               Not your impulsion. And that mind, shall rest so kind and cleare,
               That I will not forsweare to God. Let then Achilles stay,
               (Though neuer so inflam'd for fight) and all men here I pray,
               To stay, till from my tents these gifts, be brought here; and the truce,
               At all parts finisht before all. And thou, of all I chuse,
               (Diuine Vlysses) and command, to chuse of all your host,
               Youths of most honour, to present, to him we honour most,
               The gifts we late vow'd; and the Dames. Meane space, about our tents,
               
                  Talthybius shall prouide a Bore; to crowne these kind euents,
               With thankfull sacrifice to Ioue, and to the God of light.
            
            
               
                  Achilles answerd: These affaires, will shew more requisiteAchilles to Vlysses.
               
               (Great king of men) some other time, when our more free estates
               Yeeld fit cessation from the warre; and when my splene abates.
               But now (to all our shames besides) our friends by Hector slaine,
               (And Ioue to friend) lie vnfetch off. Haste then, and meate your men;
               Though I must still say: My command, would leade them fasting forth,
               And all together feast, at night. Meate will be something worth,
               When stomacks first haue made it way, with venting infamie,
               (And other sorrowes late sustain'd) with long'd for wreakes, that lie
               Heauie vpon them, for rights sake. Before which lode be got
               From off my stomacke; meate nor drinke, I vow, shall downe my throte;
               My friend being dead; who digd with wounds, & bor'd through both his feet,
               Lies in the entrie of my tent; and in the teares doth fleete
               Of his associates. Meate and drinke, haue litle merit then
               To comfort me; but bloud and death, and deadly grones of men.
            
            
               The great in counsels, yet made good, his former counsels thus:Vlysses his r
                        •…
                     ly.
               
               O Peleus sonne, of all the Greeks, by much most valorous;
               Better and mightier then my selfe; no little, with thy lance,
               I yeeld thy worth; in wisedome yet, no lesse I dare aduance
               My right aboue thee; since aboue, in yeares, and knowing more.
               Let then thy mind rest in thy words; we quickly shall haue store,
               And all sacietie of fight; whose steele heapes store of straw,
               And litle corne vpon a floore; when Ioue (that doth withdraw,
               And ioyne all battels) once begins, t'encline his ballances,
               In which he weighs the liues of men. The Greeks you must not presse,
               To mourning with the belly; death, hath nought to do with that,
               
                  In healthfull men, that mourne for friends. His steele we stumble at,
               And fall at, euery day you see, sufficient store, and fast.
               What houre is it that any breathes? we must not vse more hast
               Then speed holds fit for our reuenge: nor should we mourne too much.
               Who dead is, must be buried; mens patience should be such,
               That one dayes mone should serue one man: the dead must end with Death,
               And life last with what strengthens life. All those that held their breath
               From death in fight, the more should eate, that so they may supply
               Their fellowes that haue stucke in field; and fight incessantly.
               Let none expect reply to this, nor stay; for this shall stand,
               Or fall with some offence to him, that lookes for new command;
               Who euer in dislike holds backe. All ioyne then; all things fit,
               Allow'd for all; set on a charge; at all parts answering it.
            
            
               This said, he chusde (for noblest youths, to beare the presents) these,
               The sonnes of Nestor; and with them, renowm'd Meriones.
                  The names of those that caried the presents to Achilles.
               
               
                  Phylidas, Thoas, Lycomed, and Meges, all which went
               (And Menalippus following, Vlysses) to the tent
               Of Agamemnon. He but spake; and with the word, the deed
               Had ioynt effect: the fitnesse well, was answerd in the speed.
            
            
               The presents, added to the Dame, the Generall did enforce,
               Were twentie Caldrons, Tripods seuen, twelue yong and goodly horse:
               Seuen Ladies excellently seene, in all Min
                        •…
                     es skill;The presents.
               
               The eight Brisaeis, who had powre, to rauish euery will.
               Twelue talents of the finest gold; all which Vlysses weyd,
               And caried first; and after him, the other youths conueyd
               The other presents; tenderd all, in face of all the Court.
               Vp rose the King. Talthybius (whose voice had a report
               Like to a god) cald to the rites; there, hauing brought the Bore,
               
                  Atrides with his knife tooke sey, vpon the part before;Agamēnons at
                     
                        •…
                     ation.
               
               And lifting vp his sacred hands, to Ioue, to make his vowes;
               Graue Silence strooke the compleate Court; when (casting his high browes,
               Vp to the broad heauen) thus he spake: Now witnesse Iupiter,
               
               (First, highest, and thou best of gods) thou Earth, that all doest beare;
               Thou Sunne; ye Furies vnder earth, that euery soule torment,
               Whom impious periury distaines; that nought incontinent,
               In bed, or any other act, to any slendrest touch
               Of my light vowes, hath wrong'd the Dame; and let my plagues be such,
               As are inflicted by the gods, in all extremitie
               On whomsoeuer periur'd men, if godlesse periurie
               In least degree dishonor me. This said, the bristl'd throte
               Of the submitted sacrifice, with ruthlesse steele he cut.
               Which straight into the horie sea, Talthybius cast, to feed
               The sea-borne nation. Then stood vp, the halfe-celestiall seed
               Of faire-hair'd Thetis, strengthning thus, Atrides innocence.
            
            
               O father Iupiter, from thee, descends the confluenceAchilles to Iupiter.
               
               Of all mans ill; for now I see, the mightie king of men,
               At no hand forc't away my prise; nor first inflam'd my splene,
               With any set ill in himselfe; but thou, the king of gods,
               
                  (Incenst with Greece) made that the meane to all their periods.
               Which now, amend we, as we may; and giue all suffrages
               To what wise Ithacus aduisde. Take breakfasts, and addresse
               For instant conflict. Thus he raisd, the Court, and all tooke way
               To seuerall ships. The Myrmidons, the presents did conuay
               
                  T'Achilles fleete; and in his tents, disposde them; doing grace,
               Of seate, and all rites to the Dames. The horses put in place,
               With others of Aeacides. When (like Loues golden Queene)
               
                  Brisaeis (all in ghastly wounds) had dead Patroclus seene;
               She fell about him, shrieking ou
                     •…
                  ; and with her white hands tore
               Her haire, breasts, radiant cheekes; and drown'd, in warme teares, did deplore
               His cruell destinie. At length, she gat powre to expresse
               Her violent passion; and thus spake, this-like-the goddesses.
            
            
               O good Patroclus, to my life, the dearest grace, it had;Bri
                        •…
                      complaint ouer the body of 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               I (wretched dame) departing hence, enforc't; and dying sad,
               Left thee aliue, when thou hadst chear'd, my poore captiuitie;
               And now return'd, I find thee dead; misery on miserie,
               Euer increasing with my steps. The Lord to whom my Sire,
               And dearest mother gaue my life, in nuptials; his lifes fire
               I saw before our citie gates, extinguisht; and his fate,
               Three of my worthy brothers liues, in one wombe generate,
               Felt all, in that blake day of death. And when Achilles hand
               Had slaine all these, and rac't the towne, Mynetes did command;
               (All cause of neuer-ending griefes, presented) thou took'st all
               On thy endeuour, to conuert, to ioy as Generall;
               Affirming, he that hurt, should heale; and thou wouldst make thy friend
               (Braue Captaine that thou wert) supply, my vowed husbands end;
               And in rich Phthia celebrate, amongst his Myrmidons,
               
               Our nuptiall banquets; for which grace, with these most worthy mones,
               I neuer shall be satiate; tho
                     •…
                   euer being kind;
               Euer delightsome; one sweete grace, fed still with one sweete mind.
            
            
               Thus spake she weeping; and with her, did th'other Ladies mone,
               
                  Patroclus fortunes in pretext, but in sad truth their owne.
            
            
               About Aeacides himselfe, the kings of Greece were plac't,
               Entreating him to food; and he, entreated them as fast,
               (Still intermixing words and sighes) if any friend were there
               Of all his dearest; they would ceasse, and offer him no cheare,
               But his due sorrowes; for before, the Sunne had left that skie,
               He would not eate; but of that day, sustaine th'extremitie.
            
            
               Thus all the kings (in resolute griefe, and fasting) he dismift;
               But both th' Atrides, Ithacus, and warres *old Martialist,Ne
                        •…
                     or.
               
               
                  Idomenaeus and his friend; and Phoenix; these remain'd
               Endeuoring comfort; but no thought, of his vow'd woe restrain'd.
               Nor could, till that dayes bloudie fight, had calm'd his bloud; he still
               Rememberd something of his friend; whose good, was all his ill.
               Their vrging meate, the diligent fashion of his friend renew'd,
               In that excitement: thou (said he) when this speed was pursu'd
               Against the Troians; euermore, apposedst in my tent,
               
                  A pleasing breakfast; being so free, and sweetly diligent,
               Thou mad'st all meate sweete. Then the warre, was tearefull to our foe,
               But now to me; thy wounds so wound me, and thy ouerthrow.
               For which my readie food I flie, and on thy longings feed.
               Nothing could more afflict me: Fame, relating the foule deed
               Of my deare fathers slaughter; bloud, drawne from my sole sonnes heart,
               No more could wound me. Cursed man, that in this for
                     •…
                  ein part,
               (For hatefull Hellen) my true loue; my countrey, Sire, and son,
               I thus should part with. Scyros now, gi
                     •…
                  es education
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      was an Ile in the sea Aegeum, where Achilles himself was brought vp as well as his so
                        •…
                     
                  
               
               (O Neoptelemus) to thee, (if liuing yet) from whence
               I hop't (deare friend) thy longer life, (safely return'd from hence,
               And my life quitting thine) had powre, to ship him home; and show
               His yong eyes Phthi
                        •…
                     , subiects, court; my father being now
               Dead, or most short-liu'd; troublous age, oppressing him, and feare
               Still of my deaths newes. These sad words, he blew into the eare
               Of euery visitant, with sighs; all eccho'd by the Peares,
               Remembring who they left at home. All whose so humane teares
               
                  Ioue pitied: and since they all, would in the good of one
               Be much reuiu'd; he thus bespake, Minerua: Thetis sonne,Ioue to Minerua
               
               (Now daughter) thou hast quite forgot. O, is Achilles care
               Extinguisht in thee? prostrated, in most extreme ill fare,
               He lies before his high-sail'd fleet, for his dead friend; the rest
               Are strengthning them with meate; but he, lies desperatly opprest
               With heartlesse fasting: Go thy wayes, and to his brest instill
               Red Nectar and Ambrosia; that Fast procure no ill
               To his neare enterprise. This spurre, he added to the free;
               And like a Harpye (with a voice, that shrickes so dreadfully,
               And feathers that like needles prickt) she stoopt through all the starres
               Amongst the Grecians; all whose tents, were now fill'd for the warres.
               Her seres strooke through Achilles tent; and closely she instill'd
               Heauens most-to-be-desired feast, to his great breast; and fill'd
               His sinewes with that sweete supply, for feare vnsauorie Fast
               Should creepe into his knees. Her selfe, the skies againe enchac't.
            
            
               The host set forth; and pour'd his steele waues, farre out of the fleete.The show of the army, setting forth vnder Achilles conduct.
               
               And as from aire; the frostie Northwind blowes a cold thicke sleete,
               That dazels eyes; flakes after flakes, incessantly descending:
               So thicke helmes, curets, ashen darts, and round shields, neuer ending,
               Flow'd from the nauies hollow wombe: their splendors gaue heauens eye,
               His beames againe; Earth laught to see, her face so like the skie.
               Armes shin'd so hote; and she such clouds, made with the dust she cast,
               She thunderd; feete of men and horse, importun'd her so fast.
               In midst of all; diuine Achilles his faire person arm'd;
               His teeth gnasht as he stood; his eyes, so full of fire, they warm'd.
               Vnsufferd griefe and anger at, the Tr
                        •…
                     ians so combin'd.
               His greaues first vsde, his goodly curets on his bosome shin'd;
               His sword, his shield; that cast a brightnesse from it, like the Moone.
               And as from sea, sailers discerne, a harmfull fire, let runne
               By herdsmens faults, till all their stall, flies vp in wrastling flame;
               
                  Which being on hils, is seene farre off; but being alone, none came
               To giue it quench; at shore no neighbours; and at sea, their friends
               Driuen off with tempests; such a fire, from his bright shield extends
               His ominous radiance; and in heauen, imprest his feruent blaze.
               His crested helmet, graue and high, had next triumphant place,
               On his curl'd head: and like a starre, it cast a spurrie ray;
               About which, a bright thickned bush, of golden haire, did play;
               Which Vulcan forg'd him for his plume. Thus compleate arm'd, he 
                     •…
                  ide
               How fit they were: and if his motion could with ease abide
               Their braue instruction; and so farre, they were from hindring it;
               That to it they were nimble wings; and made so light his spirit,
               That from the earth, the princely Captaine they tooke vp to aire.
            
            
               Then from his armoury he drew, his lance, his fathers speare,
               Huge, weightie, firme; that not a Greeke, but he himselfe alone
               Knew how to shake; it grew vpon, the mountaine 
                     
                        •…
                     elion;
               
               From whose height, Chiron hew'd it for, his Sire; and fatall twas
               To great-soul'd men. Of Peleus and Pelion, surnamed Pelias.
               
            
            
               Then from the stable, their bright horse, Automedon withdrawes,
               And Alcymus. Put Poitrils on, and cast vpon their 
                     •…
                  awes,
               Their bridles; hurling backe the raines, and hung them on the seate.
               The faire scourge then Automedon, takes vp, and vp doth get,
               To guide the horse. The fights seate last, Achilles tooke behind;
               Who lookt so arm'd, as if the Sunne, there falne from heauen had shin'd.Achilles to hi
                        •…
                      horses.
               
               And terribly, thus charg'd his steeds. Xanthus, and Balius,
               
               Seed of the Harpye; in the charge, ye vndertake of vs;
               Discharge it not; as when Patroclus ye left dead in field.
               But when with bloud, for this dayes fast obseru'd, Reuenge shall yeeld
               Our heart sacietie; bring vs off. Thus since Achilles spake,
               As if his aw'd steeds vnderstood: twas Iunoes will to make
               Vocall the pallat of the one; who shaking his faire head,
               (Which in his mane (let fall to earth) he almost buried)
               Thus Xanthus spake: Ablest Achilles now (at least) our careXanthus th
                        •…
                      horse of Achi. to Achilles.
               
               Shall bring thee off; but not farre hence, the fatall minutes are,
               Of thy graue ruine. Nor shall we, be then to be reprou'd,
               But mightiest Fate, and the great God. Nor was thy best belou'd
               Spoil'd so of armes by our slow pace; or courages empaire;
               The best of gods, Latonaes sonne, that weares the golden haire,
               Gaue him his deaths wound; though the grace, he gaue to Hectors hand.
               We, like the spirit of the West, that all spirits can command
               For powre of wing, could runne him off: but thou thy selfe must go;
               So Fate ordaines; God and a man, must giue thee ouerthrow.
            
            
               This said, the Furies stopt his voice. Achilles farre in rage,Achilles reply to Xanthus.
               
               Thus answerd him: It fits not thee, thus proudly to presage
               My ouerthrow; I know my selfe, it is my fate to fall
               Thus farre from Phthia; yet that Fate, shall faile to vent her gall,
               Till mine vent thousands. These words vsde, he fell to horrid deeds;
               Gaue dreadfull signall; and forthright, made flie, his one-hou'd steeds.
            
            
               
               COMMENTARIVS.
               
                  • 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. Aprum praeparet mactandum Iouique Solique: He shall prepare a Bore for sacrifice to Ioue and the Sunne. It is the end of Agamemnons speech in this booke before to Vlysses, and promiseth that sacrifice to Ioue and the Sun, at the reconciliation of himselfe and Achilles. Our Commentors (Eustathius and Spondanus, &c.) will by no meanes allow the word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   here for Homers, but an vnskilfulnesse in the diuulger; and will needs haue it 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   or 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ; which Spondanus sayes is altogether here to be vnderstood: as Eustathius words teach; for to offer so fierce a beast to Ioue as a Bore, he sayes is absurd: and cites Natalis lib. 1. cap. 17. where he sayes, Homer in this place makes a tame Sow sacrificed to Ioue; who was as tamely and simply deceiued as the rest. Eustathius reason for it, is, that sus is animal salax; and since the oath Agamemnon takes at this sacrifice to satisfie Achilles (that he hath not toucht Briseis) is concerning a woman, very fitly is a Sow here sacrificed. But this seemes to Spondanus something ridiculous (as I hope you will easily iudge it.) And, as I conceiue, so is his owne opinion to haue the originall word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   altered, and expounded suem. His reason for it, he makes nice to vtter, saying, he knowes what is set downe amongst the learned touching the sacrifice of a Sow. But because it is (he sayes) 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , nihil ad rem, (though as they expound it, tis too much ad rem) he is willing to keepe his opinion in silence; vnlesse you will take it for a splayed or gelded Sow; as if Agamemnon would innuate, that as this Sow (being splayed) is free from Venus, so had he neuer attempted the dishonour of Briseis. And peraduenture (sayes Spondanus) you cannot think of a better exposition: when a worse cannot be coniectured, vnlesse that of Eustathius; as I hope you will cleerly grant me, when you heare but mine. Which is this: The sacrifice is not made by Agamemnon, for any resemblance or reference it hath to the Lady now to be restored, (which since these Clerkes will needs haue it a Sow, in behalfe of Ladies, I disdaine) but onely to the reconciliation of Agamemnon and Achilles; for a sacred signe whereof, and that their wraths were no
                     •…
                   absolutely appeased, Agamemnon thought fit, a Bore (being the most wrathfull of all beasts) should be sacrificed to Ioue; intimating, that in that Bore, they sacrificed their wraths to Iupi
                        •…
                     er, and became friends. And thus is the originall word preserued, which (together with the sacred sence of our Homer) in a thousand other places, suffers most ignorant and barbarous violence. But here (being weary, both with finding faults, and my labour) till a refreshing come, I wil end my poore Comment. Holding it not altogether vnfit with this ridiculous contention of our Commentors, a litle to quicken you, and make it something probable, that their ouersight in this trifle, is accompanied with a thousand other errors in matter of our diuine Homers depth and grauitie. Which will not open it selfe to the curious austeritie of belabouring art, but onely to the naturall and most ingenuous soule of our thrice sacred Poesie.
            
            The end of the nineteenth Booke.
         
         
            
            THE XX. BOOKE OF HOMERS ILIADS.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  
                     BY Ioues permission, all the gods descend
                  To aide on both parts. For the Greekes contend,
                  
                     Iuno, Minerua, Neptune, Mul
                           •…
                        ber,
                  
                  And Mercurie. The de
                        •…
                     ies that prefer
                  The Troian part, are, Phoebus, Cyprides,
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                  
                  
                     Phoebe, Latona, and the foe to Peace;
                  With bright Scamander. Neptune in a mist
                  Preserues Aeneas, (daring to resist
                  
                     Achilles;) by whose hand, much skath is done;
                  Besides the slaughter of old Pria
                           •…
                        s sonne,
                  
                     (Yong Polydor) whose rescue, Hector makes;
                  Him (flying) Phoebus, to his rescue takes,
                  The rest (all shunning their importun'd fates)
                  
                     Achilles beates, euen to the Ilian gates.
               
            
            
               Another Argument.
               
                  In Ypsilon Strife stirres in heauen.
                  The dayes grace, to the Greekes is giuen.
               
            
            
               
                  THe Greeks thus arm'd; and made insatiate, with desire of fight,
               About thee, Peleus sonne; The foe, in ground of greatest height,
               Stood opposite, rang'd. Then Ioue charg'd Themis, frō 
                  Olympus top
               To call a court; she euery way, disperst, and summon'd vpIoue summons all the 
                        •…
                     ties to counsell.
               
               All deities; Not any floud (besides Oceanus)
               But made apparance: not a Nymph (that arbours odorous,
               The heads of flouds, and flowrie medowes make their swee
                     •…
                  e abodes)
               Was absent there; but all at his court that is king of gods,
               Assembl'd; and in lightsome seates, of admirable frame
               (Perform'd for Ioue, by Vulean) sate. Euen angry Neptune came;
               Nor heard the goddesse with vnwilling 
                     •…
                  are; but with the rest,
               Made free ascension from the sea; and did his state inuest
               In midst of all: begun the counsell, and inquir'd of Ioue,
               
               His reason for that session; and on what point did moue
               His high intention for the foes; he thought the heate of warre,
               Was then neare breaking out in flames. To him, the Thunderer:
               Thou know'st this counsell by the rest, of those forepurposes,
               That still inclin'd me; my cares still, must succour the distresse
               Of Troy; though in the mouth of Fa
                     •…
                  e▪ yet vow I, not to stirre
               One step from off this top of heauen; but all th▪affaire referre
               
                  To any one. Here Ile hold state, and freely take the ioy
               Of eithers fate: helpe whom ye please; for tis assur'd, that Tr
                        •…
                     y,
               
               Not one dayes conflict can sustaine, against A Eacides,
               
               If heauen oppose not. His meere lookes, threw darts enow, t'impresse
               Their powres with trembling; but when blowes, sent from his fiery hand,
               (Thrice heat by slaughter of his friend) shall come and countermand
               Their forme
                     •…
                   glories: we haue feare, that though Fate keepe their wall,
               Hee'l ouerturne it. Then descend; and ceasse not till ye all
               Adde all your aides; mixe earth and heauen, together with the fight
               
                  Achilles vrgeth. These his words, did such a warre excite,
               As no mans powre could wrastle downe; the gods with parted harts,
               Departed heauen, and made earth warre. To guide the Grecian da
                     •…
                  s,The names of the gods partakers with either part.
               
               
                  Iuno and Pallas, with the god, that doth the earth embrace,
               And most-for-mans-vse, Mercurie (whom good wise inwards grace)
               Were partially, and all emploid; and with them halted downe
               (Proud of his strength) lame Mulciber; his walkers quite misgrowne,
               But made him tread exceeding sure. To aide the Ilian side,
               The changeable in armes, went (Mars); and him accompanied
               
                  Diana, that delights in shafts; and Phoebus, neuer shorne;
               And Aphrodite, laughter-pleasde; and she, of whom was borne
               Still yong Apollo; and the floud, that runnes on golden sands
               Bright Xanthus. All these aided Troy; and till these lent their hands,
               The Grecians triumpht in the aide, AEacides did adde;
               The Troians trembling with his sight; so gloriously clad,
               He ouershin'd the field; and Mars, no harmfuller then he.
               He bore the iron streame on cleare; but when Ioues high decree
               
                  
                     •…
                  et fall the gods amongst their troupes; the field sweld, and the fight
               Grew fierce and horrible. The* Dame, that armies doth excite,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Thunderd with Clamor; sometimes set, at dike without the wall,
               And sometimes on the bellowing shore. On th'other side, the Call
               Of Mars to fight was terrible; he cried out, like a storme;
               Set on the cities pinnacles; and there he would informe
               Sometimes his heartnings; Other times, where Simois powres on
               His siluer currant, at the foote, of high Callicolon.
               
               And thus the blest gods, both sides vrg'd; they all stood in the mids,
               And brake Contention to the hosts. And ouer all their heads,The state of the preparation to the fight, when the gods were to encounter.
               
               The gods king, in abhorred claps, his thunder rattl'd out.
               Beneath them, Neptune tost the earth; the mountaines round about,
               Bow'd with affright, and shooke their heads: Ioues hill, the earth quake felt;
               (Steepe Ida) trembling at her rootes, and all her fountaines spilt:
               Their browes all crannied. Troy did nod; the Grecian nauie plaid
               (As on the sea): th'infernall king, that all things frayes, was fraid;
               And leapt affrighted from his throne; cried out, lest ouer him
               
                  Neptune should rend in two the earth; and so his house so dim,
               So lothsome, filthy, and abhord, of all the gods beside,
               Should open, both to gods and men. Thus, all things shooke and cri'd,
               When this blacke bartell of the gods, was ioyning; thus arraied:
            
            
               Gainst Neptune, Phoebus with wing'd shafts; gainst Mars the blew-eyd maid:
               
                  Gainst Iuno, Phoebe, whose white hands, bore singing darts of gold;
               Her side arm'd with a sheafe of shafts; and (by the birth twofold
               Of bright Latona) sister twin, to him that shootes so 
                     〈◊〉
                  ;
               Against Latona, Hermes stood (graue guard in peace and warre,
               Of humane beings;) gainst the god, whose Empire is in fire;
               The watry godhead; that great flood, to shew whose powre entire
               In spoile as th'other: all his streame, on lurking 
                     〈◊〉
                   trod;
               
                  Xanthus, by gods; by men Scamander cald. Thus, god gainst god,
               Enterd the field. Aeacides, sustain'd a feruent mind
               To cope with Hector; past all these, his spirit stood enclin'd,
               To glut Mars with the bloud of him. And at Aeacides,
               
               
                  Apollo set Anchises sonne. But first he did impresse,
               A more then naturall strength in him; and made him feele th'excesse,Apollo instigates Aeneas to the encounter of Achilles, in shape of Lyc
                        •…
                     .
               
               Infusde from heauen. Lycaons shape, gaue show to his addresse,
               (Old Priams sonne) and thus he spake: Thou counseller of Troy,
               
               Where now flie out those threats, that late, put all our Peeres in ioy
               Of thy fight with Aeacides? Thy tongue once (steept in wine)
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to Apollo.
               
               Durst vant as much. He answerd him: But why wouldst thou incline
               My powres gainst that proud enemie, and gainst my present heate?
               I meane not now to bid him blowes; that feare sounds my retreate,
               That heretofore discourag'd me: when after he had rac't
               
                  Lyrnesus, and strong Pedasus, his still breath'd furie chac't
               Our oxen from th'Idaean hill, and set on me; but Ioue
               
               Gaue strength and knees, and bore me off, that had not walkt aboue
               This center now, but propt by him. Mineruaes hand (that held
               A light to this her fauorite; whose beames, shew'd, and impeld
               His powres to spoile) had ruin'd me. For these eares heard her crie:
               Kill, kill the seed of Ilion; kill, th'Asian Lelegi.
               
               Meere man then must not fight with him, that still hath gods to friend;
               Auerting death on others darts; and giuing his no end,
               But with the ends of men. If God, like Fortune in the fight,
               Would giue my forces; not with ease, wing'd Victorie should light
               On his proud shoulders; nor he scape, though all of brasse he bosts
               His plight con
                     •…
                  steth. He replide: Pray thou, those gods of hosts,
               Whom he implores, as well as he; and his chance may be thine;
               Thou cam'st of gods like him: the Queene, that reignes in Salamine,
               
               Fame sounds, thy mother; he deriu'd, of lower deitie.
               Old Nereus daughter bearing him; Beare then thy heart as hie,
               And thy vnwearied steele as right; nor vtterly be beate
               With onely crueltie of words; not proofe against a threat.
            
            
               This strengthned him; and forth he rusht; nor could his strengthening flie,
               White-wristed Iuno; nor his drifts. She, euery deitie
               Of th'Achiue faction cald to her; and said: Ye must haue careIuno to the gods of Gr
                        •…
                     ce.
               
               (Neptune and Pallas) for the frame, of this important warre
               Ye vndertake here; Venus sonne (by Phoebus being impeld)
               Runnes on Achilles; turne him backe; or see our friend vpheld
               By one of vs. Let not the spirit of Aeacides,
               
               Be ouer-dar'd; but make him know, the mightiest deities
               
                  Stand kind to him; and that the gods, protectors of these towres
               That fight against Greece; and were here, before our eminent powres,
               Beare no importance. And besides, that all we s
                     •…
                  oope from heauen
               To curbe this fight, that no empaire, be to his person giuen
               By any Troians, nor their aides, while this day beares the Sunne;
               Hereafter, all things that are wrapt, in his birth-threed, and spunne
               By Parcas, (in that point of time, his mother gaue him aire)
               He must sustaine. But if Report, performe not the repaire
               Of all this to him, by the Voice, of some immortall state,
               He may be fearfull, (if some god, should set on him) that Fate,
               Makes him her minister. The gods, when they appeare to men,
               And manifest their proper formes, are passing dreadfull then.
            
            
               
                  Neptune replide: Saturnia, at no time let your CareNeptune to 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
               
               Exceed your Reason; tis not fit. Where onely humanes are,
               We must not mixe the hands of gods; our ods is too extreme.
               Sit we by, in some place of height, where we may see to them,
               And leaue the warres of men, to men. But if we see from thence,
               Or Mars, or Phoebus, enter fight; or offer least offence
               To Thetis sonne; not giuing free way to his conquering rage;
               Then comes the conflict to our cares; we soone shall dis-engage
               
                  Achilles, and send them to heauen, to settle their abode
               With Equals; flying vnder-strifes. This said, the blacke-hair'd god,
               Led to the towre of of Hercules; built circular and hie
               By Pallas and the Ilians, for fit securitie
               To Ioues diuine * sonne, gainst the Whale, that draue him from the shore,Hercules.
               
               To th'ample field. There Neptune sate, and all the gods that bore
               The Greekes good meaning; casting all, thicke mantles made of clouds,
               On their bright shoulders. Th'oppos'd gods, sate hid in other shrouds,
               On top of steepe Callicolon; about thy golden sides,
               O Phoebus, brandisher of darts; and thine, whose rage abides
               No peace in cities. In this state, these gods in counsell sa
                     •…
                  e;
               All lingring purposde fight, to trie, who first would eleuate
               His heauenly weapon. High-thron'd Ioue, cried out, to set them on;
               Said; all the field was full of men; and that the earth did grone▪
                  Ioue sets on the other gods to 
                        •…
                     ight.
               
               With feete of proud encounterers, burn'd with the armes of men,
               And barbed horse. Two champions, for both the armies then,
               Met in their midst, prepar'd for blowes; diuine Aeacides,
               
               And Venus sonne; Aeneas first, stept threatning forth the preasse,
               His high helme nodding; and his breast, bard with a shadie shield,
               And shooke his iauelin. Thetis sonne, did his part to the field,
               As when the harmfull king of beasts, (sore threatn'd to be slaine,Simile.
               
               By all the countrie vp in armes) at first makes coy Disdaine
               
               Prepare resistance; but at last, when any one hath led
               Bold charge vpon him with his dart; he then turnes yawning head;
               Fell Anger lathers in his iawes; his great heart swels; his sterne
               Lasheth his strength vp; fides and thighes, wadl'd with stripes to learne
               Their owne powre; his eyes glow; he rores; and in he leapes, to kill,
               Secure of killing: So his powre, then rowsde vp to his will,
               
                  Matchlesse Achilles, coming on, to mee
                     •…
                  e Anchises sonne.
               Both neare; Achilles thus enquir'd: Why standst thou thus alone,Achilles to AEneas.
               
               Thou sonne of Venus? cals thy heart, to change of blowes with me?
               Sure Troyes whole kingdome is proposde; some one hath promist 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               The throne of 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   for my life; but Priams selfe is wise;
               And (for my slaughter) not so mad, to make his throne thy prise.
               
                  Priam hath sonnes to second him. Is't then some peece of land,
               Past others, fit to set and sow, that thy victo
                     •…
                  ious hand,
               The Ilians offer for my head? I hope that prise will proue
               No easie conquest: once, I thinke, my busie iauelin droue,
               (With terror) those thoughts from your spleene. Retain'st thou not the time,
               When single on th'Idaean hill, I tooke thee with the crime
               Of Run-away? thy Oxen left? and when thou hadst no face,
               That I could see; thy knees bere
                     •…
                  t, it, and Lyrnesus was
               The maske for that. Then that maske too, I opened to the aire,
               (By Ioue and Pallas helpe) and tooke, the free light from the faire;
               Your Ladies bearing prisoners. But Ioue and th'other gods,
               Then saft thee; yet againe I hope, they will not adde their ods,
               To saue thy wants, as thou presum'st; retire then, aime not at
               
                  Troys throne by me; flie ere thy soule, flies; fooles are wise too late.
            
            
               He answerd him: Hope not that words, can child-like terrifieAEneas to Achilles.
               
               My stroke-proofe breast; I well could speake, in this indecencie,
               And vse tart termes; but we know well, what stocke vs both put out;
               Too gentle to beare fruites so rude. Our parents ring about,
               The worlds round bosome; and by fame, their dignities are blowne
               To both our knowledges; by sight; neither, to either knowne;
               Thine, to mine eyes; nor mine to thine. Fame sounds thy worthinesse
               From famous Peleus; the sea Nymph, that hath the louely tresse,
               (Thetis) thy mother; I my selfe, affirme my Sire to be
               Great-soul'd Anchises; she that holds, the Paphian deitie,
               My mother; and of these, this light, is now t'exhale the teares
               For their lou'd issue; thee or me; childish, vnworthy dates,
               Are not enough to part our powres; for if thy spiri
                     •…
                  s want
               Due excitation (by distrust, of that desert I vant)
               To set vp all rests for my life; Ile lineally proue
               (Which many will confirme) my race. First, cloud commanding Ioue
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
               
               Was sire to Dardanus, that built, Dardania; for the wals
               Of sacred Ilion, spred not yet, these fields; those faire-built hals,
               Of diuers▪ languag'd men, not raisd; all then made populous
               The foote of Idaes fountfull hill. This Ioue-got Dardanus,
               
               Begot king Ericthonius; for wealth, past all compares,
               Of liuing mortals; in his fens, he fed three thousand mares,
               All neighing by their tender foles; of which, twice sixe were bred
               By loftie Boreas; their dams, lou'd by him, as they fed;
               He tooke the braue forme of a horse, that shooke an azure mane,
               And slept with them. These twice sixe colts, had pace, so swift they 
                     •…
                  anne
               Vpon the top-ayles of corne-eares; nor bent them any whit.
               And when the brode backe of the sea, their pleasure was to sit,
               
                  The superficies of his waues, they slid vpon; their houes
               Not dipt in danke sweate of his browes. Of Ericthonius loues
               Sprang Tros, the king of Tr
                        •…
                     ans; Tros three yong princes bred,
               
                  Ilus, renowm'd Assaracus, and heauenly G
                        •…
                     nymed,
               
               The fairest youth of all that breath'd; whom (for his beauties loue)
               The gods did rauish, to their state, to beare the cup to Ioue.
               
               
                  Ilus begot Laomedon; god-like Laomedon
               
               Got Titbon, Priam, Clytius, Mars-like Hycetaon,
               
               And Lampus. Great Assaracus, Capys begot; and he,
               
                  Anchises; Prince Anchises, me. King Priam, Hector; we
               Sprang both of one high family. Thus, fortunate men giue birth;
               But Ioue giues vertue; he augments; and he empaires the worth
               Of all men; and his will, their Rule; he strong'st; all strength affoords;
               Why then paint we (like dames) the face, of Conflict with our words?
               Both may giue language, that a ship, driuen with a 
                     •…
                  undred ores,
               Would ouer-burthen: a mans tongue, is voluble, and poures
               Words out, of all sorts; euery way; such as you speake, you heare.
               What then need we vie calumnies, like women that will weare
               Their tongues out, being once incenst; and striue for strife, to part
               (Being on their way) they trauell so: from words, words may auert;
               From vertue, not; it is your steele (diuine Aeacides)
               Must proue my proofe, as mine shall yours. Thus amply did he ease
               His great heart of his pedigree; and sharply sent awayAeneas chargeth Achilles.
               
               A dart, that caught Achilles shield; and rung so, it did fray
               The sonne of Thetis; his faire hand, farre-thrusting out his shield,
               For feare the long lance had driuen through; O foole, to thinke twould yeeld;
               And not to know, the gods firme gifts, want want, to yeeld so soone
               To mens poore powres; the eager lance, had onely conquest wonne
               Of two plates; and the shield had fiue; two forg'd of tin, two brasse,
               One (that was center-plate) of gold, and that forbad the passe
               Of Anchisiades his lance. Then sent Achilles forth
               His lance, that through the first fold strooke; where brasse of litle worth,Achilles at AEneas.
               
               And no great proofe of hides was laid; through all which Pelias ranne
               His iron head; and after it, his ashen body wanne
               Passe to the earth, and there it stucke; his top on th'other side:
               And hung the shield vp; which, hard downe, Aeneas pluckt to hide
               His breast from sword blowes; shrunke vp round, and in his heauie eye,
               Was much griefe shadowed; much afraid, that Pelias stucke 
                     •…
                  o nie.
               Then prompt Achilles rushing in, his sword drew; and the field
               Rung with his voice. Aeneas now, left, and let hang his 
                     •…
                  hield,
               And (all distracted) vp he snatcht, a two mens strength of stone;
               And either, at his shield or caske, he set it 
                     •…
                  udely gone,
               Nor car'd where; so it strooke a place, that put on armes, for death;
               But he (Achilles came so close) had doubtlesse funke beneath,
               His owne death, had not Neptune seene, and interposde the ods
               Of his diuine powre; vttering this, to the Achaian gods:
               I grieue for this great hearted man; he will be sent to hell,Neptune to the other gods of Greece.
               
               Euen instantly, by Peleus sonne, being onely mou'd to deale
               
                  By Phoebus words: What foole is he? Phoebus did neuer meane,
               To adde to his great words, his guard; against the ruine then
               Summon'd against him: and what cause, hath he, to head him on
               To others miseries? He being cleare▪ of any trespasse done
               Against the Grecians? thankfull gifts, he oft hath giuen to vs;
               Let vs then quit him; and withdraw, this combat; for if thus,
               
                  Achilles end him: Ioue will rage; since his escape in fate,
               Is purposde; lest the progenie, of Dardanus take date;
               Whom Ioue, past all his issue, lou'd, begot of mortall dames:
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Proph
                        •…
                     
                     cy of Aene
                        •…
                     , to propagate the Troian race.
               
               All Priams race he hates; and this, must propagate the names
               Of Troians; and their sonnes sonnes rule, to all posteritie.
            
            
               
                  Saturni
                        •…
                     
                   said, make free your pleasure; saue, or let him die;
               
                  Pallas and I haue taken many, and most publique oathes,I
                        •…
                     no to Neptun
                        •…
                     
                  
               
               That th'ill day neuer shall auert, her eye (red with our wroths)
               From hated Troy: No, not when all, in studied fire she flames
               The Greeke rage, blowing her last coale. This nothing turn'd his aimes
               From present rescue: but through all, the whizzing speares he past;
               And came where both were combatting; when instantly he cast,
               A mist before Achilles eyes; drew from the earth, and shield,
               His lance, and laid it at his feete: and then tooke vp, and held
               Aloft, the light Anchises sonne; who past (with Neptunes
                        •…
                     
                   force)
               Whole orders of Heroes heads; and many a troope of horse
               Leapt ouer, till the bounds he reacht, of all the feruent broyle,
               Where all the Caucons quarters lay. Thus (farre freed from the toyle)Neptune to Aeneas.
               
               
                  Neptune had time to vse these words: Aeneas, who was he
               Of all the gods, that did so much, neglect thy good, and thee,
               To vrge thy fight with Thetis sonne? who, in immortall rates,
               Is better, and more deare then thee? Hereafter, lest (past fates)
               Hell be thy headlong home, retire; make bold stand neuer neare,
               Where he aduanceth: but his fate, once satisfied; then beare,
               A free, and full sayle: no Greeke else, shall end thee. This reueald;
               He left him, and disperst the cloud, that all this act conceald
               From vext Achilles: who againe, had cleare light from the skies;
               And (much disdaining the escape) said: O ye gods, mine eyesAchilles admir
                        •…
                     s the scape of Aene
                        •…
                     .
               
               Discouer miracles: my lance, submitted, and he gone
               At whom I sent it, with desire, of his confusion?
               
                  Aeneas sure was lou'd of heauen; I thought his vant from thence,
               Had flow'd from glorie. Let him go, no more experience
               Will his mind long for, of my hands: he flies them now so cleare:
               Cheare then the Greeks, and others trie. Thus rang'd he e
                     •…
                  ery where
               The Grecian orders; euery man, (of which the most lookt on
               To see their fresh Lord shake his lance) he thus put charge vpon:
            
            
               Diuine Greeks, stand not thus at gaze; but man to man apply
               Your seuerall valours: tis a taske, laide too vnequally
               On me, left to so many men; one man, opposde to all.
               Not Mars, immortall and a god, nor warres she Generall;
               A field of so much fight could chace, and worke it out with blowes;
               But what a man may execute, that all lims will expose,
               
                  And all their strength to th'vtmost nerue (though now I lost some play,
               By some strange miracle) no more, shall burne in vaine the day;
               To any least beame; all this host, Ile ransacke, and haue hope,
               Of all; not one (againe) will scape; whoeuer giues such soope
               To his aduenture; and so neare; dares tempt, my angry lance.
            
            
               Thus he excited. Hector then, as much striues to aduance,
               The hearts of his men; adding threates, affirming he would stand,
               In combat with Aeacides. Giue Feare (said he) no hand,Hector to his Ilians.
               
               Of your great hearts, (b
                     •…
                  ue Ilians) for 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   talking Sonne;
               Ile fight with any god with words; but when their speares put on,
               The worke runs high; their strength exceeds, mortalitie so farre.
               And they may make works crowne their words; which holds not in the warre
               
                  Achilles makes; his hands haue bounds; this word he shall make good,
               And leaue another to the field: his worst shall be withstood,
               With sole obiection of my selfe. Though in his hands he beare
               A rage like fire; though fire it selfe, his raging fingers were;
               And burning steele flew in his strength. Thus he incited his;
               And they raisd lances, and to worke, with mixed courages;
               And vp flew Clamor; but the heate, in Hector, Phoebus gauePhebus to Hector.
               
               This temper: Do not meet (said he) in any single braue,
               The man thou threatn'st, but in preasse; and in thy strength impeach
               His violence; for farre off, or neare, his sword, or dart will reach.
            
            
               The gods voice mad
                     •…
                   a difference, in Hectors owne conceipt,
               Betwixt his, and Achilles words; and gaue such ouerweight,
               As weigh'd him backe into his strength, and curb'd his flying out.
               At all threw fierce Aeacides, and gaue a horrid shout.
            
            
               The first of all he put to dart, was fierce Iphition;
                  Iphition slaine by Ach
                        •…
                     es.
               
               Surnam'd Otryntides, whom Nais, the water Nymph made sonne
               To towne-destroyer Otr
                        •…
                     eus. Beneath the snowy hill,
               Of Tmolus, in the wealthie towne, of Ide: at his will,
               Were many able men at armes. He rushing in, tooke full,
               
                  Pelides lance, in his heads midst; that cleft, in two, his skull.
               
                  Achilles knew him, one much fam'd; and thus insulted then:
            
            
               Th'art dead Otryntides, though cald, the terriblest of men;
               Thy race runs at G
                        •…
                     us lake, there thy inheritance lay,
               Neare fishy Hillus; and the gulfs, of H
                        •…
                     us: but this day,
               Remoues it to the fields of Troy. Thus left he Night to sease
               His closed eyes, his body laid, in course of all the prease;
               Which Grecian horse, broke with the strakes, naild to their chariot wheeles.
            
            
               Next (through the temples) the burst eyes, his deadly iauelin steelesDemoleon slaine by Achilles.
               
               Of great-in-Troy Antenors sonne, renown'd Demolcon;
               
               A mightie turner of a field. His ouerthrow, set gone
               
                  Hippodamas, who leapt from horse, and as he fled before
               
                  Aeacides; his turned backe, he made fell P
                        •…
                     lias gore,
               And forth he puft his flying soule; and as a tortur'd Bull;
               (To Neptune brought for sacrifice) a troope of yongsters pullSimile.
               
               Downe to the earth, and dragge him round, about the hallowed shore;
               To please the watry deitie, with forcing him to rore;
               
                  And forth he powres his vtmost throte. So bellow'd this slaine friend,
               Of flying Ilion, with the breath, that gaue his being end.
            
            
               Then rusht he on; and in his eye, had heauenly Polydore,
               
               Old Priams sonne; whom last of all, his fruitfull Princesse bore;
               And for his youth (being deare to him) the king forbad to fight.
               Yet (hote of vnexperienc't blood, to shew how exquisite
               He was of foote: for which of all, the fiftie sonnes he held
               The speciall name.) He flew before, the first heate of the field;Polydore 
                        〈◊〉
                      by Achilles.
               
               Euen till he flew out breath and soule: which, through the backe, the lance
               Of swift Achilles, put in ayre, and did his head aduance
               Out at his nauill: on his knees, the poore Prince crying fell;
               And gatherd with his tender hands, his entrailes; that did swell
               Quite through the wide wound, till a cloud, as blacke as death, conceald
               Their sight, and all the world from him. When Hector had beheld
               His brother tumbl'd so to earth (his entrailes still in hand)
               Darke sorrow ouercast his eyes; nor farre off could he stand
               A minute longer: but like fire, he brake out of the throng;
               Shooke his long lance, at Thetis sonne; And then came he along,Achilles passion at the sight of 
                        •…
                     ctor.
               
               To feed th'encounter: O (said he) here comes the man that most,
               Of all the world destroyes my minde: the man by whom I lost
               My deare Patroclus; now not long, the crooked paths of warre,
               Can yeeld vs any priuie scapes: Come, keepe not off so farre,
               (He cryed to Hector) make the paine, of thy sure death as short,
               As one, so desperate of his life, hath reason. In no sort,
               This frighted Hector, who bore close: and said; Aeacides,
                  Hector to Achi
                        •…
                     .
               
               Leaue threates for children; I haue powre, to thunder calumnies,
               As well as others; and well know, thy strength superiour farre,
               To that my nerues hold; but the gods, (not nerues) determine warre.
               And yet (for nerues) there will be found, a strength of powre in mine,
               To driue a lance home to thy life; my lance, as well as thine
               Hath point, and sharpenesse, and tis this. Thus brandishing his speare,
               He set it flying; which a breath, of Pallas, backe did bearePallas bre
                        •…
                     hes backe Hectors lance throwne at Achilles.
               
               From Thetis sonne, to Hectors selfe; and at his feet it fell.
               
                  Achilles vsde no dart; but close, flew in; and thought to deale
               With no strokes, but of sure dispatch; but what with all his blood
               He labor'd; Phoebus clear'd with ease, as being a god; and stood
               For Hectors guard; as Pallas did, Aeacides for thine.
               He rapt him from him; and a cloud, of much Night cast betweene
               His person, and the point opposde. Achilles then exclaim'd
               O see, yet more gods are at worke; Apollos hand hath fram'dApollo rescues Hector.
               
               (Dog that thou art) thy rescue now: to whom, go, pay the vowes
               Thy safetie owes him; I shall vent, in time, those fatall blowes,
               That yet beate in my heart, on thine; if any god remaine,
               My equall fautor. In meane time, my anger must maintaine
               His fire on other Ilians. Then laid he at his feet,
               Great Demochus, Philetors, sonne; and Dryope did greet
               With like encounter. Dardanus, and strong Laogonus,
               
               (Wise Byas sonnes) he hurld from horse, of one, victorious
               
                  With his close sword; the others life, he conquerd with his lance.
            
            
               Then Tros, Alastors sonne made in, and sought to scape their chance,
               With free submission. Downe he fell, and praid about his knees,
               He would not kill him, but take ruth; as one that Destinies
               Made to that purpose; being a man, borne in the selfe same yeare
               That he himselfe was: O poore foole, to sue to him to beare
               A ruthfull mind; he well might know, he could not fashion him,
               In Ruths soft mould; he had no spirit, to brooke that interim
               In his hote furie: he was none, of these remorsefull men;
               Gentle, and affable: but fierce, at all times, and mad then.
            
            
               He gladly would haue made a prayre, and still so hugg'd his knee,
               He could not quit him: till at last, his sword was faine to free
               His fetterd knees: that made a vent, for his white liuers blood,
               That causd such pittifull affects: of which, it pour'd a flood
               About his bosome; which it fild, euen till it drownd his eyes;
               And all sense faild him. Forth then flew, this Prince of tragedies,
               Who next, stoopt Mulius, euen to death, with his insatiate speare:
               One eare it enterd, and made good, his passe to th'other eare.
            
            
               
                  Echeclus then, (Agenors sonne) he strooke betwixt the browes;
               Whose blood set fire vpon his sword, that coold it till the throwes
               Of his then labouring braine, let out, his soule to fixed fate,
               And gaue cold entrie to blacke death. Deucalion then, had state
               In these mens beings: where the nerues, about the elbow knit,
               Downe to his hand his speares steele pierc't, and brought such paine to it,
               As led Death ioyntly; whom he saw, before his fainting eyes;
               And in his necke felt, with a stroke, laid on so; that off flies
               His head: one of the twise twelue bones, that all the backe bone make,
               Let out his marrow; when the head, he helme and all did take,
               And hurl'd amongst the Ilians; the body stretcht on earth.
            
            
               
                  Rhigmus of fruitfull Thrace, next fell; he was the famous birth
               Of Pireus: his bellies midsts, the lance tooke; whose sterne force,
               Quite tumbl'd him from chariot. In turning backe the horse,
               Their guider Areithous, receiu'd another lance,
               That threw him to his Lord. No end, was put to the mischanceSimile.
               
               
                  Achilles enterd: But, as fire, falne in a flash from heauen;
               Inflames the high-woods of drie hils; and with a storme is driuen,
               Through all the Syluane deepes; and raues, till downe goes euery where
               The smotherd hill: So euery way, Ach
                        •…
                     lles and his speare
               Consum'd the Champaine, the blacke earth, flow'd with the veines he tore.
               And looke how Oxen, (yok't and driuen, about the circular floore,
               Of some faire barne) treade sodainly, the thicke sheaues, thin of corne;
               And all the corne, consum'd with chaffe: so mixt and ouerborne,Simile.
               
               Beneath Achilles one-hou'd horse, shields, speares, and men lay trod;
               His axel-tree, and chariot wheeles, all spatterd with the blood
               Hurl'd from the steeds houes, and the strakes. Thus to be magnified,
               His most inaccessible hands, in humane blood he died.
            
            The end of the twentieth Booke.
         
         
            
            THE XXI. BOOKE OF HOMERS ILIADS.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  IN two parts, Troyes host parted; Thetis sonne;
                  One to Scamander, one to Ilion
                  
                  Pursues. Twelue Lords he takes aliue, to end
                  In sacrifice, for vengeance to his friend.
                  
                     Asteropaeus, dies by his fierc
                        •…
                      hand,
                  And Priams sonne, Lycaon, Ouer land
                  The flood breakes: where, Achilles being engag'd,
                  
                     Vulcan preserues him; and with spirit enrag'd,
                  Sets all the Champaine, and the Flood on fire;
                  
                     Contention then, doth all the gods inspire.
                  
                     Apollo, in Agenors shape, doth stay
                  
                     Achilles furie; and by giuing way,
                  Makes him pursue; till the deceipt giues leaue,
                  That Troy, in safetie, might her freinds receiue.
               
            
            
               Another Argument.
               
                  
                     Phy, at the floods shore, doth expresse
                  The labours of Aeacides.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  ANd now they reacht, the goodly swelling channell of the flood,
               Gulfe-eating Xanthus; whom Ioue mixt, with his immortall brood:
               And there Achilles cleft the host, of Ilion: one side fell
               On Xanthus, th'other on the towne: and that did he impell
               The same way, that the last daies rage, put all the Greeks in rout,
               When Hectors furie reign'd. These now, Achilles powr'd about
               The scatterd field. To stay the flight, Saturnia cast before
               Their hastie feete, a standing fogge; and then Flights violence bore
               The other halfe full on the flood. The siluer-gulphed deepe
               Receiu'd them with a mightie crie: the billowes vast and steepe,
               Ror'd at their armours; which the shores, did round about resound:
               This way, and that, they swum, and shriekt; as in the gulphs they drownd:
               And as in fir'd fields, Locusts rise, as the vnwearied blazeSimile.
               
               Plies still their rising, till in swarmes, all rush as in amaze,
               (For scape) into some neighbour flood: So, th' Achilleian stroke,
               Here draue the foe. The gulfie flood, with men and horse did choke.
            
            
               Then on the shore, the Worthy hid, and left his horrid lance
               Amids the Tamriskes; and spritelike, did with his sword aduance,
               Vp to the riuer; ill affaires, tooke vp his furious braine,
               For Troyes engagements: euery way, he doubl'd s
                     •…
                  aine on slaine.
               
                  A most vnmanly noise was made, with those he put to sword,
               Of grones and outcries; the flood blusht, to be so much engor'd
               With such base soules: And as small fish, the swift-finn'd Dolphin flie,
               Filling the deepe pits in the ports; on whose close strength they lie:Simile.
               
               And there he swallowes them in sholes: So here, to rockes, and holes,
               About the flood, the Troians fled; and there most lost their soules:
               Euen till he tir'd his slaughterous arme. Twelue faire yong Prin
                     •…
                  es then,
               He chusde of all, to take aliue; to haue them freshly slaine
               On that most solemne day of wreake, resolu'd on for his friend.
               These led he trembling forth the flood; as fearefull of their end,
               As any Hinde calues: all their hands, he pinnioned behind
               With their owne girdles; worne vpon, their rich weeds; and resign'd
               Their persons to his Myrmidons, to beare to fleete: and he
               Plung'd in the streame againe; to take, more worke of Tragedie.
               
               He met, then issuing the flood; with all intent of flight,
               
                  Lycaon, (Dardan Priams sonne;) whom lately in the night,
               He had surprisde; as in a wood, of Priams, he had cut,Achilles his stran
                        •…
                      encounter of Lycaon.
               
               The greene armes of a wild figge tree; to make him spokes to put
               In Naues of his new chariot. An ill then, 
                     •…
                  ll vnthought,
               Stole on him in Achilles shape, who tooke him thence, and brought
               To well-built Lemnos, selling him, to famous Iasons sonne:
               From whom, a guest then, in his house; (Imbrius Eetion)
               Redeem'd at high rate, and sent home, t' Ari
                        •…
                     ba; whence he fled,
               And saw againe his fathers court: eleuen daies banquetted,
               Amongst his friends; the twelfth god thrust, his haplesse head againe
               In t'hands of sterne Aeacides; who now must send him slaine,
               To Plutos Court; and gainst his will. Him, when Achilles knew
               Naked of helmet, shield, sword, lance; (all which for ease he th
                     •…
                  ew
               To earth, being ouercome with sweate; and labour wearying
               His flying knees) he storm'd, and said; O heauen, a wondrous thing
               Inuades mine eyes; those Ilians, that heretofore I slue,
               Rise from the darke dead, quicke againe: this man, f
                     •…
                  te makes eschew
               Her owne steele fingers: he was sold, in Lemnos; and the deepe
               Of all Seas, twixt this Troy, and that (that many a man doth keepe
               From his lou'd countrie) barres not him; Come then; he now shall tast
               The head of Pelias; and trie, if st
                     •…
                  le will downe as fast
               As other fortunes; or kind earth, can any surer 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               On his slie person; whose strong armes, haue held downe Hercules.
               
            
            
               His thoughts thus mou'd, while he stood firme; to see if he, he 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,Lyc
                        •…
                     ons feare to be see
                        •…
                      of Achilles.
               
               Would offer flight, (which first he thought) but when he had d
                     •…
                  ride,
               He was d
                     •…
                  scried, and flight was vaine; fearefull, he made more nie,
               With purpose to embrace his knees; and now long'd much to flie
               His blacke fate, and abhorred death, by coming in. His foe
               Obseru'd all this; and vp he raisd, his lance, as he would throw;
               And then Lycaon close ran in; fell on his breast, and tooke
               
                  Achilles knees; whose lance (on earth, now staid) did ouerlooke,
               His 
                     •…
                  il-turn'd backe; with thirst to glut, his sharpe point with the blood,
               That lay so readie; but that thirst, Lycaons thirst withstood;
               
                  To saue his blood, Achilles knee, in his one hand he knit;
               His other held the long lance hard, and would not part with it:
               But thus besought: I kisse thy knees, diuine Aeacides:
               
               Respect me, and my fortunes rue; I now present th'accesseLyc
                        •…
                     s 
                        〈◊〉
                      intercession to Achilles for his life.
               
               Of a poore suppliant, for thy ruth: and I am one that is
               Worthy thy ruth (ô Ioues belou'd.) First houre my miseries
               Fell into any hand, twas thine: I tasted all my bread
               By thy gift since: O since that houre, that thy surprisall led
               From forth the faire wood, my sad feete; farre from my lou'd allies,
               To famous Lemnos, where I found, an hundred Oxens prise
               To make my ransome: for which now, I thrise the worth will raise.
               This day, makes twelue since I arriu'd, in Ilion: many daies
               Being spent before in sufferance: and now a cruell fate,
               Thrusts me againe into thy hands. I should hant Ioue with hate,
               That with such set malignitie, giues thee my life againe.
               There were but two of vs, for whom, Laothoe sufferd paine,
               (Laothoe, old Altes seed; Alte, whose pallace stood
               In height of vpper Pedasus, neare Satnius 
                  
                     •…
                  iluer flood;
               And rulde the warre-like Lelegi. Whose seed (as many more)
               King Priam married, and begot, the godlike Polydor,
               
               And me accurst: thou slaughterdst him: and now thy hand on me
               Will proue as mortall. I did thinke, when here I met with thee,
               I could not scape thee; yet giue eare, and adde thy mind to it;
               I told my birth to intimate, though one sire did beget;
               Yet one wombe brought not into light, Hector (that slue thy friend)
               And me. O do not kill me then; but let the wretched end
               Of Polydor, excuse my life. For halfe our being bred
               Brothers to Hector, he (halfe) paid, no more is forfeited.
            
            
               Thus su'd he humbly; but he heard, with this austere replie:
               Foole, vrge not ruth, no
                     •…
                   price to me; till that solemnitie
               Resolu'd on, for Patroclus death, pay all his rites to fate.
               Till his death, I did grace to Troy; and many liues did rate
               At price of ransome: but none now, of all the brood of Troy,
               
               (Who euer Ioue throwes to my hands) shall any breath enioy,
               That death can beate out; specially, that touch at Primas race.
               Die, die, (my friend) what teares are these? what sad lookes spoile thy face?
               
                  Patroclus died, that farre past thee: nay seest thou not beside,
               My selfe, euen I, a faire yong-man, and rarely magnifide;
               And (to my father, being a king) a mother haue, that sits
               In ranke with goddesses; and yet, when thou hast spent thy spirits,
               
                  Death, and as violent a fate, must ouertake, euen me.
               By twilight, morne-light, day, high noone; when euer Destinie
               
               Sets on her man, to hurle a lance; or knit out of his string,
               An arrow that must reach my life. This said, a languishing
               
                  Lycaons heart bent like his knees; yet left him strength t'aduance
               Both hands for mercie, as he kneeld. His foe yet leaues his lance,
               And forth his sword flies; which he hid, in furrow of a wound
               Driuen through the ioynture of his necke; flat fell he on the ground,
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               Stretcht with deaths pangs; and all the earth, embrew'd with timelesse blood.
               Then gript Aeacides his heele, and to the loftie flood
               Flung (swinging) his vnpitied corse; to see it swim, and tosse
               Vp on the rough waues: and said; Go, feed fat the fish with losse
               Of thy left blood: they cleane will sucke, thy greene wounds; and this saues,
               Thy mother teares vpon thy bed. Deepe Xanthus, on his waues,
               Shall hoyse thee brauely to a tombe, that in her burly breast,
               The sea shall open; where great fish, may keepe thy funerall feast
               With thy white fat: and on the waues, dance at thy wedding fate,
               Clad in blacke horror; keeping close, inaccessible state.
            
            
               So perish Ilians, till we plucke, the browes of Ilion
               
               Downe to her feete, you flying still: I flying still vpon,
               Thus in the rere; and (as my browes, were forckt, with rabid hornes)The word is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , which they translate caedens. but properly signifies dissipans, ut boues infestis cornibus.
                  
               
               Tosse ye together. This braue flood, that strengthens, and adornes
               Your citie with his siluer gulfes; to whom, so many buls,
               Your zeale hath offerd; with blind zeale, his sacred current guls,
               With casting chariots, and horse; quicke to his prayd-for aide;
               Shall nothing profite: perish then, till cruell'st Death hath laide
               All, at the red feet of Reuenge, for my slaine friend; and all
               With whom the absence of my hands, made yours a festiuall.
            
            
               This speech, great Xanthus more enrag'd; and made his spirit contend,
               For meanes to shut vp, the o'pt vaine, against him; and defend
               The Troians in it, from his plague. In meane time Peleus sonne,
               (And now with that long lance he hid) for more blood, set vpon,
               
                  Asteropaeus; the descent, of Pelagon; and he
               Of brode-stream'd Axius, and the dame (of first natiuitie,
               To all the daughters that renown'd, Acesamenus seed)
               Bright Periboea; whom the flood; (arm'd thicke with loftie reed)
               Comprest. At her grandchild now went, Thetis great sonne; whose foe
               Stood arm'd with two darts, being set on, by Xanthus; angerd so
               For those youths blood, shed in his streame, by vengefull Thetis sonne,
               Without all mercie. (Both being neare) great Thetides begunneAchilles to Asteropaeus.
               
               With this high question. Of what race, art thou that dar'st oppose
               Thy powre to mine thus? cursed wombs, they euer did disclose,
               That stood my anger. He reply'd, What makes thy furies heate,Asteropaeus 
                        〈◊〉
                      Achilles.
               
               Talke, and seeke Pedigrees? farre hence, lies my innatiue seate,
               In rich Poeonia. My race, from brode-stream'd Axius, runs;
               
                  Axius, that giues earth purest drinke, of all the watrie sons
               Of great Oceanus; and got, the famous for his speare,
               
                  Pelegonus, that fatherd me; and these Poeonians here,
               Arm'd with long lances, here I leade: and here th'eleuenth faire light
               Shines on vs, since we enterd Troy: Come now, (braue man) lets fight.
            
            
               Thus spake he, threatning; and to him, Pelides made replie,
               With shaken Pelias: but his foe, with two at once let flie;
               (For both his hands were dexterous:) one iauelin strooke the shieldAsteropaeus with two darts at once at Achilles.
               
               Of Thetis sonne; but strooke not through (the gold (gods gift) repeld
               The eager point:) the other lance, fell lightly, on the part
               Of his faire right hands cubit; forth, the blacke blood spunne; the dart
               
                  Glanc't ouer, fastening on the earth, and there his splene was spent,
               That wisht the body. With which wish, Achilles, his lance sent,
               That quite mist, and infixt it selfe, fast, in the steepe-vp shore.
               Euen to the midst, it enterd it; himselfe then, fiercely bore
               Vpon his enemie with his sword. His foe was tugging hard,
               To get his lance out: thrise he pluckt; and thrise, sure Pelias bard
               His wisht euulsion. The fourth plucke; he bow'd, and meant to breake
               The Ashen plant; but (ere that act) Achilles sword, did checke
               His bent powre, and brake out his soule. Full in the nauill stead
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      slaine by Achilles.
               
               He ript his belly vp; and out, his entrailes fell; and dead
               His breathlesse body: whence his armes, Achilles drew, and said:
            
            
               Lie there, and proue it dangerous, to lift vp aduerse head,Achilles to the body of Asterop
                        •…
                     us.
               
               Against Ioues sonnes; although a flood, were Ancetor to thee.
               Thy vants vrg'd him; but I may vant, a higher pedigree,
               (From Ioue himselfe:) king Peleus, was sonne to Aeacus;
               
               Infernall Aeacus, to Ioue; and I, to Peleus.
               
               Thunder-voic't Ioue, farre passeth floods; that onely murmures raise
               With earth and water, as they runne, with tribute to the seas.
               And his seede theirs exceeds as farre. A flood, a mightie flood
               Rag'd nere thee now; but with no aide. Ioue must not be withstood.
               King Achelous, yeelds to him; and great Oceanus;
               
               Whence all floods; all the sea; all founts; wells; all deepes humorous,
               Fetch their beginnings; yet euen he, feares Ioues flash, and the cracke
               His thunder giues; when, out of heauen, it teares atwo his racke.The racks, or motion of the clouds, for the clouds.
               
            
            
               Thus, pluckt he from the shore, his lance; and left the waues to wash
               The waue-sprung entrailes; about which, Fausens, and other fish,
               Did shole, to nibble at the fat, which his sweet kidneyes 
                     •…
                  id.
               This for himselfe; now to his men, (the-well-rode Peons) did
               His rage contend. All which, cold Feare, shooke into flight, to see
               Their Captaine slaine: at whose mazde flight (as much enrag'd) flew he.
               And then fell all these, Thrasius, Mydon, Astypilus,
               
               Great Ophelestes, Aenius, Mnesus, Thersilochus.
               
               And on these, many more had falne; vnlesse the angry flood,Xanthus out of a whirlepit to Achilles.
               
               Had tooke the figure of a man; and in a whirlepit stood,
               Thus speaking to Aeacides. Past all, powre feeds thy will,
               (Thou great grandchild of Aeacus) and past all, th'art in ill.
               And gods themselues, confederates; and Ioue (the best of gods)
               All deaths giues thee: all places, not. Make my shores periods
               To all shore seruice. In the field, let thy field acts run hie,
               Not in my waters. My sweet streames, choake with mortalitie
               Of men, slaine by thee. Carkasses, so glut me, that I faile
               To powre into the sacred sea, my waues; yet still assaile
               Thy cruell forces. Ceasse; amaze, affects me with thy rage,
               Prince of the people. He reply'd; Shall thy command asswage
                     
                        •…
                     chilles to Xanthus.
               
               (Gulfe-fed Scamander) my free wrath? Ile neuer leaue pursude
               Prowd Ilions slaughters; till this hand, in her fild walls conclude
               Her flying forces; and hath tried, in single fight, the chance
               Of warre with Hector; whose euent, with starke death, shall aduance
               
                  One of our conquests. Thus againe, he like a Furie flew
               Vpon the Troians: when the flood, his sad plaint did pursue,
               To bright Apollo; telling him, he was too negligentXanth
                        •…
                      compla
                        •…
                     ns to Apollo.
               
               Of Ioues high charge; importuning, by all meanes vehement,
               His helpe of Troy; till latest Euen, should her blacke shadowes poure,
               On earths brode breast. In all his worst, Achilles yet from shore,
               Leapt to his middest. Then sweld his waues, then rag'd, then boyld againe,
               Against Achilles: vp flew all, and all the bodies slaine,
               In all his deeps; (of which the heapes, made bridges, to his waues)
               He belcht out; roring like a Bull. The vnslaine, yet he saues.
               In his blacke whirlepits, vast and deepe. A horrid b
                     •…
                  low stood
               About Achilles. On his shield, the violence of the flood
               Beate so; it draue him backe, and tooke, his feet vp; his faire palme,
               Enforc't to catcht into his stay, a brode, and loftie Elme,
               Whose roots he tost vp with his hold; and tore vp all the shore,Note the continued height, and 
                        〈◊〉
                      expres
                     
                        •…
                      of Achilles glorie.
               
               With this then, he repeld the waues; and those thicke armes it bore,
               He made a bridge to beare him off; (for all fell in) when he,
               Forth from the channell threw himselfe. The rage did terrifie,
               Euen his great spirit, and made him adde, wings to his swiftest feet,
               And treade the land. And yet not there, the flood l
                     •…
                  ft his reueate,
               But thrust his billowes after him; and blackt them all at top,
               To make him feare, and flie his charge; and set the brode field ope
               For Troy to scape in. He sprong out, a darts cast; but came on
               Againe with a redoubl'd force: As when the swiftest flowne,
               And strong'st of all fowles, (Ioues blacke Hawke) the huntresse stoopes vpon
               A much lou'd Quarrie: So charg'd he; his armes with horror rung,
               Against the blacke waues: yet againe, he was so vrg'd, he flung
               His body from the flood, and fled. And after him againe,
               The waues flew roring: As a man, that finds a water vaine;Simile.
               
               And from some blacke fount is to bring, his streames through plants & groues;
               Goes with his Mattocke, and all checks, set to his course, remoues;
               When that runnes freely: vnder it, the pibbles all giue way,
               And where it finds a fall, runnes swift: nor can the leader stay
               His current then: Before himselfe, full pac't, it murmures on.
               So, of Achilles, euermore, the strong flood vantage wonne;
               (Though most deliuer) gods are still, aboue the powres of men.
            
            
               As oft, as th'able godlike man, endeuour'd to maintaine
               His charge on them, that kept the flood; (and charg'd as he would trie,
               If all the gods, inhabiting, the brode vnreached skie,
               Could dant his spirit,) so oft, still, the rude waues charg'd him round;
               Rampt on his shoulders; from whose depth, his strength, & spirit would bound
               Vp to the free aire, vext in soule. And now the vehement flood,
               Made faint his knees: so ouerthwart, his waues were, they withstood
               All the denyed dust, which he wisht; and now, was faine to crie;
               Casting his eyes, to that brode heauen, that late he long'd to trie:
               And said, O Ioue, how am I left? No god vouchsafes to freeAchilles com
                     
                        •…
                      to the gods in 
                        〈◊〉
                      ex
                     
                        •…
                     .
               
               Me, miserable man; helpe now, and after torture me,
               With any outrage. Would to heauen, Hector, (the mightiest
               
                  Bred in this region) had imbrew'd, his iauelin in my breast;
               That strong might fall by strong. Where now, weake waters luxurie,
               Must make my death blush: one, heauen-borne, shall like a hog-herd die,
               Drown'd in a durtie torrents rage. Yet none of you in heauen,
               I blame for this: but she alone, by whom this life was giuen,
               That now must die thus. She would still, delude me with her tales,
               Affirming Phoebus shafts should end, within the Troian walls
               My curst beginning. In this straight, Neptune and Pallas flew
               To fetch him off. In mens shapes Both, close to his danger drew:
               And, taking both, both hands, thus spake, the shaker of the world:
            
            
               
                  Pelides, do not stirre a foot; nor these waues, prowdly curldNeptune to Achilles.
               
               Against thy bold breast, feare a iote; thou hast vs two thy friends,Pallas and he rescuing him.
               
               (Neptune and Pallas) Ioue himselfe, approuing th'aide we lend.
               Tis nothing, as thou fearst with fate; she will not see thee drown'd:
               This height shall soone downe; thine owne eyes, shall see it set aground.
               Be rulde then, weele aduise thee well; take not thy hand away,
               From putting all, indifferently, to all, that it can lay
               Vpon the Troians; till the walles, of haughtie Ilion
               
               Conclude all in a desperate flight: and when thou hast set gone,
               The soule of Hector, turne to fleet: our hands shall plant a wreath
               Of endlesse glorie, on thy browes. Thus, to the free from death,
               Both made retreate. He (much impeld, by charge, the godheads gaue)
               The field, that now was ouercome, with many a boundlesse waue,
               He ouercame: on their wild breasts, they tost the carkasses,
               And armes of many a slaughterd man. And now the winged knees,
               Of this great Captaine, bore aloft: against the flood he flies
               With full assault: nor could that god, make shrinke his rescu'd thies.
               Nor shrunke the flood; but as his foe, grew powrefull, he grew mad:Xanthus to Simois.
               
               Thrust vp a billow to the skie, and cristall Simois bad
               To his assistance: Simois, Hoe, brother, (out he cried)
               Come, adde thy current, and resist, this man halfe deified;
               Or Ilion he will pul downe straite; the Troians cannot stand
               A minute longer. Come, assist; and instantly command
               All fountaines in thy rule to rise; all torrents to make in,
               And stuffe thy billowes; with whose height, engender such a din,
               (With trees torne vp, and iustling stones) as so immane a man,
               May shrinke beneath vs: whose powre thriues, do my powre all it can:
               He dares things fitter for a god. But, nor his forme, nor force,
               Nor glorious armes shall profit him: all which, and his dead corse,
               I vow to rowle vp in my hands: Nay, burie in my mud:
               Nay, in the very sincks of Troy: that, pour'd into my flood,
               Shall make him drowning worke enough: and being drown'd, Ile set
               A fort of such strong filth on him; that Greece shall neuer get
               His bones from it. There, there shall stand, Achilles sepulcher;
               And saue a buriall for his friends. This Furie did transferre
               His high-ridg'd billowes on the Prince; roring with blood, and fome,
               And carkasses. The crimson streame, did snatch into her wombe,
               Surprisd Achilles; and her height, stood, held vp by the hand
               
                  Of Ioue himselfe. Then Iuno cried, and cald (to countermand
               This watry Deitie) the god, that holds command in fire;
               Affraid lest that gulf-stomackt flood, would satiate his desire
               On great Achilles: Mulciber? my best-lou'd sonne? (she cried)Iuno to Vul
                        •…
                     an.
               
               Rouse thee: for all the gods conceiue, this flood thus amplified,
               Is raisd at thee; and shewes as if, his waues would drowne the skie,
               And put out all the sphere of fire; haste, helpe thy Emperie:
               Light flames, deepe as his pits. Our selfe, the West wind, and the South,
               Will call out of the sea; and breathe, in eithers full-charg'd mouth
               A storme, t'enrage thy fires gainst Troy; which shall (in one exhal'd)
               Blow flames of sweate about their browes; and make their armors sk
                     •…
                  d.
               Go thou then, and (gainst these winds rise) make worke on Xanthus shore,
               With setting all his trees on fire: and in his owne breast poure,
               A feruor that shall make it burne; nor let faire words or threats
               Auert thy furie, till I speake; and then, subdue the heates
               Of all thy Blazes. Mulciber; prepar'd, a mightie fire,
               First, in the field vsde: burning vp, the bodies, that the ire
               Of great Achilles reft of soules: the quite-drown'd field it dried;
               And shrunke the flood vp. And as fields, that haue bene long time cloide
               With catching wether; when their corne, lies on the gauill heape;
               Are with a constant North wind dried; with which for comfort leapeSimil
                        •…
                     .
               
               Their hearts that sow'd them: So this field, was dride; the bodies burn'd;
               And euen the flood into a fire, as bright as day was turn'd.
               Elmes, willowes, tamrisks, were enflam'd; the lote trees; sea-grasse reeds,
               And rushes, with the galingale rootes (of which abundance breeds
               About the sweet flood) all were fir'd: the gliding fishes flew
               Vpwards, in flames: the groueling Eeeles, crept vpright; all which slew
               Wise Vulcans vnresisted spirit. The flood out of a flame,
               Cried to him; Ceasse, ô Mulciber; no deitie can tameXanthus out of a flaming whirlepit to Vulcan.
               
               Thy matchlesse virtue: nor would I, (since thou art thus hote) striue.
               Ceasse then thy strife; let Thetis sonne, with all thy wisht hast, driue
               Euen to their gates these Ilians; what toucheth me their aide,
               Or this Contention? Thus in flames, the burning riuer prayde:
               And as a Caldron, vnderput, with store of fire; and wrought
               With boyling of a well-fed Brawne, vp leapes his waue aloft;Simile.
               
               Bauins of sere wood vrging it, and spending flames apace,
               Till all the Caldron be engirt, with a consuming blaze.
               So round this flood burn'd; and so sod, his sweete, and tortur'd streames;
               Nor could flow forth, bound in the fumes, of Vulcans fierie beames.
               Who (then not mou'd) his mothers ruth, by all his meanes he craues;
               And askt, why Vulcan should inuade, and so torment his waues,
               Past other floods? when his offence, rose not to such degree,
               As that of other gods, for Troy: and that himselfe would free,
               Her wrath to it, if she were pleasde; and prayd her, that her sonne
               Might be reflected: adding this, that he would nere be wonne,
               To helpe keepe off the ruinous day, in which all Troy should burne,
               Fir'd by the Grecians. This vow heard; she charg'd her sonne to turne
               His fierie spirits to their homes: and said, it was not fit,
               
                  A god should suffer so, for men. Then Vulcan did remit
               His so vnmeasur'd violence; and backe the pleasant 
                     •…
                  ood
               Ranne to his channell. Thus these gods, she made friends; th'other 
                     •…
                  tood
               At weightie difference; both sides ranne, together with a sound,
               That Earth resounded; and great heauen, about did surrebound.
            
            
               
                  Ioue heard it, sitting on his hill; and laught to see the gods,
               Buckle to armes like angry men: and (he pleasde with their ods)
               They laid it freely. Of them all, thump-buckler Mars began;Mars against Minerua.
               
               And at Minerua with a lance, of brasse he headlong ran;
               These vile words vshering his blowes: Thou, dog-flie, what's the cause,
               Thou mak'st gods fight thus? thy huge heart, breakes all our peacefull lawes,
               With thy insatiate shamelesnesse. Rememberst thou the houre,
               When Diomed charg'd me? and by thee? and thou with all thy powre,
               Took'st lance thy selfe; and in all sights, rusht on me with a wound?
               Now vengeance fals on thee for all. This said, the shield fring'd round
               With fighting Adders, borne by Ioue, that not to thunder yeelds,
               He clapt his lance on; and this god, that with the bloud of fields,
               Pollutes his godhead; that shield pierst, and hurt the armed Maid:
               But backe she leapt; and with her strong, hand rapt a huge stone, laid
               Aboue the Champaine; blacke and sharpe, that did in old time breake
               Partitions to mens lands; And that, she dusted in the necke
               Of that impetuous challenger. Downe to the earth he swayd,
               And ouerlaid seuen Acres land: his haire was all berayd
               With dust, and bloud mixt; and his armes, rung out. Minerua laught,
               And thus insulted: O thou foole, yet hast thou not bene taughtMinerua insults ouer Mars.
               
               To know mine eminence? thy strength, opposest thou to mine?
               So pay thy mothers furies then; who for these aides of thine,
               (Euer affoorded periur'd Troy; Greece euer left) takes spleene,
               And vowes thee mischiefe. Thus she turn'd, her blew eyes, when Loues Queen
               The hand of Mars tooke; and from earth, raisd him with thick-drawne breath,
               His spirits not yet got vp againe. But from the prease of death,
               Kind* Aphrodite was his guide. Which, Iuno seeing, exclam'd:Venus.
               
               
                  Pallas; see, Mars is helpt from field? Dog, flie, his rude tongue nam'd
               Thy selfe euen now; but that his loue, that dog-flie will not leaue,
               Her old consort. Vpon her; flie. Minerua did receaue
               This excitation ioyfully; and at the Cyprian flew;
               Strooke with her hard hand, her soft breast, a blow that ouerthrewMars and Venus ouerthrowne by Pallas.
               
               Both her and Mars; and there, both lay together in broad field.
               When thus she triumpht. So lie all, that any succours yeeld
               To these false Troians, against the Greeks; so bold, and patient,
               As Venus, (shunning charge of me); and no lesse impotent
               Be all their aides, then hers to Mars: so short worke would be made
               In our depopulating Troy (this hardiest to inuade,
               Of all earths cities). At this wish, white-wristed Iuno 
                  
                     •…
                  mil'd.
               Next, Neptune and Apollo stood, vpon the point of field;
               And thus spake Neptune: Phoebus! come; why, at the lances end
               Stand we two thus? twill be a shame, for vs to re-ascend
               
                  Ioues golden house, being thus in field; and not to 
                     •…
                  ight. Begin;
               
                  For tis no gracefull worke for me: thou hast the yonger chin;
               I older, and know more. O foole! what a forgetfull heart
               Thou bear'st about thee? to stand here, prest to take th'Ilian part,
               And fight with me? Forgetst thou then, what we two; we alone
               (Of all the gods) haue sufferd here? when proud Laomedon,
               
               Enioyd our seruice, a whole yeare, for our agreed reward?
               
                  Ioue, in his sway would haue it so; and in that yeare I rear'd
               This broad braue wall about this towne; that (being a worke of mine)
               It might be inexpugnable. This seruice then, was thine,
               In Ida (that so many hils, and curld-head forrests crowne)
               To feed his oxen; crooked shankt, and headed like the Moone.
               But when the much-ioy-bringing houres, brought terme for our reward;
               The terrible Laomedon, dismist vs both, and scard
               Our high deseruings; not alone, to hold our promist fee,
               But giue vs threats too. Hands and feete, he swore to fetter thee,
               And sell thee as a slaue; dismist, farre hence to forreine Iles;
               Nay more, he would haue both our eares. His vowes breach, and reuiles,
               Made vs part angry with him than; and doest thou gratulate now,
               Such a kings subiects? or with vs, not their destruction vow,
               Euen to their chast wiues, and their babes? He answerd, 
                     •…
                  e might hold
               His wisedome litle; if with him (a god); for men he wouldApollo to Neptune.
               
               Maintaine contention: wretched men, that flourish for a time,
               Like leaues; eate some of that, Earth yeelds; and giue Earth, in their prime,
               Their whole selues for it. Quickly then, let vs flie fight for them;
               Nor shew it offerd: let themselues, beare out their owne extreme.
            
            
               Thus he retir'd, and fear'd to change, blowes with his vnkles hands;
               His sister thererefore chid him much, (the goddesse that commandsDiana reproues Apollo for leauing the Troians
               
               In games of hunting) and thus spake: Fliest thou? and leau'st the field
               To Neptunes glorie? and no blowes? O foole! why doest thou wield
               Thy idle bow? no more my eares, shall heare thee vant in skies,
               Dares to meete Neptune; but Ile tell, thy cowards tongue, it lies.
            
            
               He answerd nothing; yet Ioues wife, could put on no such raines;
               But spake thus loosly: How dar'st thou, dog, whom no feares containes,I
                        •…
                     no to Diana.
               
               Encounter me? twill proue a match, of hard condition:
               Though the great Ladie of the bow; and Ioue hath set thee downe,
               For Lion of thy sexe; with gift, to slaughter any Dame
               Thy proud will enuies; yet some Dames, will proue, th'hadst better tame
               Wilde Lions vpon hils, then them. But if this question rests
               Yet vnder iudgement, in thy thoughts; and that thy mind contests;
               Ile make thee know it. Sodainly, with her left hand she catcht
               Both Cynthias palmes, lockt fingers fast; and with her right, she snatcht
               From her faire shoulders, her guilt bow; and (laughing) laid it on,
               About her eares; and euery way, her turnings seisd vpon,
               Till all her arrowes scatterd out; her quiuer emptied quite.
               And as a Doue, that (flying a Hauke) takes to some rocke her flight;Simile.
               
               And in his hollow breasts sits safe; her fate, not yet to die:
               So fled she mourning; and her bow, left there. Then Mercurie,
               
               His opposite, thus vndertooke: Latona, at no hand,
               
                  Will I bide combat; tis a worke, right dangerous to stand,
               At difference with the wiues of Ioue; Go therefore, freely vant
               Amongst the deities, th'hast subdu'd, and made thy combattant
               Yeeld with plaine powre. She answer'd not, but gather'd vp the bow
               And shafts falne from her daughters side, retiring. Vp did go
               
                  Diana to Ioues starrie hall; her incorrupted vaile
               Trembling about her; so she shooke. Phoebus (lest Troy should faile
               Before her Fate) flew to her wals; the other deities flew
               Vp to Olympus; some enrag'd, some glad. Achilles slew
               Both men and horse of Ilion. And as a citie fir'd,
               Casts vp a heate, that purples heauen; Clamors and shriekes expir'dSimil
                        •…
                     .
               
               In euery corner; toile to all; to many, miserie;
               Which fire, th'incensed gods let fall; Achilles so let flie,
               Rage on the Troians; toiles and shriekes, as much by him imposde.
               Old Priam in his sacred towre, stood; and the flight disclosde,
               Of his forc't people; all in rout, and not a stroke return'd,
               By fled Resistance. His eyes saw, in what a furie burnd
               The sonne of Peleus; and downe, went weeping from the towre,Priams amaze at Achilles.
               
               To all the port-guards; and their Chiefes, told of his flying powre,
               Commanding th'opening of the ports; but not to let their hands
               Stirre from them; for Aeacides, would poure in with his bands.
               
                  Destruction comes; O shut them straight; when we are in (he praid);
               For, not our walls I feare, will checke, this violent man. This said,
               Off lifted they the barres; the ports, hal'd open; and they gaue
               
                  Safetie her entrie, with the host; which yet they could not saue,
               Had not Apollo sallied out, and strooke Destruction
               
               (Brought by Achilles in their neckes) backe; when they, right vpon
               The ports bore all, drie, dustie, spent; and on their shoulders rode
               Rabide Achilles with his lance; still Glorie being the gode
               That prickt his Furie. Then the Greeks, high-ported Ilion
               
               Had seiz'd; had not Apollo stird, Antenors famous sonne,
               Diuine Agenor; and cast in, an vndertaking spiritAgenor spirited by Apollo.
               
               To his bold bosome; and himselfe, stood by to strengthen it,
               And keepe the heauie hand of death, from breaking in. The god
               Stood by him, leaning on a beach, and couer'd his abode
               With night-like darknesse; yet for all, the spirit he inspir'd;
               When that great citie-racers force, his thoughts strooke, he retir'd;
               Stood, and went on; A world of doubts, still falling in his way,
               When (angry with himselfe) he said: Why suffer I this stay,
               In this so strong need to go on? If, like the rest, I flie;
               Tis his best weapon to giue chace, being swift; and I should dieAgenors 
                        •…
                     scourse with himselfe.
               
               Like to a coward. If I stand, I fall too. These two wayes,
               Please not my purpose; I would liue. What if I suffer these,
               Still to be routed? and (my feete, affoording further length)
               Passe all these fields of Ilion, till Idas syluane strength,
               And steepe heights shroud me; and at Euen, refresh me in the flood,
               And turne to Ilion? O my soule, why drown'st thou in the blood
               Of these discourses? If this course, that talkes of further flight,
               
                  I giue my feete; his feete more swift, haue more ods. Get he sight
               Of that passe; I passe least; for pace, and length of pace, his thies
               Will stand out all men. Meete him then; my steele hath faculties
               Of powre to pierce him; his great breast, but one soule holds; and that
               Death claimes his right in (all men say); but he holds speciall state
               In Ioues high bountie: that's past man, that euery way will hold;Io
                        •…
                     es bountie serues all men all wayes.
               
               And that serues all men, euery way. This last heart, made him bold,
               To stand Achilles; and stird vp, a mightie mind to blowes.
               And as a Panther (hauing heard, the hounds traile) doth discloseSimile.
               
               Her freckl'd forhead; and stares forth, from out some deepe-growne wood,
               To trie what strength dares her abroad; and when her fierie blood
               The hounds haue kindl'd; no quench serues, of loue to liue, or fea
                     •…
                  e;
               Though strooke, though wounded; though quite through, she feels the mortal speare;
               But till the mans close strength she tries, or strowes earth with his dart;
               She puts her strength out: So it far'd, with braue Agenors hart;
               And till Achilles he had prou'd; no thoughts, no deeds, once stird
               His fixed foote. To his broad breast, his round shield he preferd,
               And vp his arme went, with his aime; his voice out, with this crie:
               Thy hope is too great (Peleus sonne), this day to shew thine eye
               
                  Troys Ilion at thy foote; O foole! the Greeks with much more woes,Agenor to Achilles.
               
               More then are sufferd yet, must buy, great Ilions ouerthrowes.
               We are within her many strong, that for our parents sakes,
               Our wiues and children, will saue Troy; and thou (though he that makes
               Thy name so terrible) shalt make, a sacrifice to her,
               With thine owne ruines. Thus he threw; nor did his iauelin erre;
               But strooke his foes leg, neare his knee; the feruent steele did ring
               Against his tin greaues, and leapt backe. The fires strong-handed king,
               Gaue vertue of repulse; and then, Aeacides assail'd
               Diuine Agenor; but in vaine; Apollos powre preuail'd,
               And rapt Agenor from his reach; whom quietly he plac't
               Without the skirmish; casting mists, to saue from being chac't,
               His tenderd person; and (he gone) to giue his souldiers scape;
               The deitie turn'd Achilles still, by putting on the shape
               Of him he thirsted; euermore, he fed his eye, and fled;
               And he with all his knees pursu'd. So cunningly he led;
               That still he would be neare his reach, to draw his rage, with hope,
               Farre from the conflict; To the flood, maintaining still the scope
               Of his attraction. In meane time, the other frighted powres,
               Came to the citie, comforted, when Troy, and all her towres,
               Strooted with fillers; none would stand, to see who staid without,
               Who scapt, and who came short; the ports, cleft to receiue the rout,
               That pour'd it selfe in. Euery man, was for himselfe; Most fleete,
               Most fortunate; who euer scapt, his head might thanke his feete.
            
            The end of the one and twentieth Booke.
         
         
            
            THE XXII. BOOKE OF HOMERS ILIADS.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  ALl Troians housd but Hector; onely he,
                  Keepes field, and vndergoes th'extremitie.
                  
                     Aeacides assaulting; Hector flies.
                  
                     Minerua stayes him: he resists, and dies.
                  
                     Achilles to his chariot doth enforce;
                  And to the nauall station, drags his corse.
               
            
            
               Another Argument.
               
                  
                     Hector (in Chi) to death is done,
                  By powre of Peleus angry sonn
                        •…
                     .
               
            
            
               
                  THus (chac't like Hinds) the Ilians, tooke time to drinke and eate,
               And to refresh them; getting off, the mingl'd dust and sweate;
               And good strōg rāpires on in stead. The Greeks thē cast their shields
               Aloft their shoulders; and now Fate, their neare inuasion yeelds
               Of those tough wals. Her deadly hand, compelling Hectors stay
               Before Troy at the Scaean ports. Achilles still made way
               At Phoebus; who, his bright head turn'd; and askt: Why (Peleus sonne)Apollo to Achilles.
               
               Pursu'st thou (being a man) a god? thy rage hath neuer done.
               Acknowledge not thine eyes my state? esteemes thy mind no more
               Thy honor in the chase of Troy; but puts my chace before
               Their vtter conquest? they are all, now housde in Ilion,
               
               While thou hunt'st me. What wishest thou? my bloud will neuer runne
               On thy proud iauelin. It is thou (repli'd Aeacides)
               That putst dishonor thus on me, (thou worst of deities)Achilles to Apollo.
               
               Thou turndst me from the walls, whose ports, had neuer entertaind
               Numbers now enter'd; ouer whom, thy sauing hand hath raign'd,
               And robd my honor. And all is, since all thy actions stand,
               Past feare of reckoning: but held I, the measure in my hand,
               It should affoord thee deare-bought fcapes. Thus with elated spirits,
               (Steed-like, that at Olympus games, weares garlands for his merits,
               And rattles home his chariot, extending all his pride)
               
                  Achilles so parts with the god. When aged Priam spide
               The great Greek come, (sphear'd round with beames, and show'ng as if the star,
               Surnam'd Orions hound; that springs, in Autumne, and sends farre
               His radiance through a world of starres; of all whose beames, his owne
               Cast greatest splendor: the midnight, that renders them most showne,
               Then being their foile; and on their points; cure-passing Feuers then,
               
                  Come shaking downe, into the ioynts, of miserable men:
               As this were falne to earth; and shot, along the field his raies,
               Now towards Priam (when he saw, in great Aeacides)Priams fright at the sight of Achilles.
               
               Out flew his tender voice in shriekes; and with raisde hands he smit
               His reuerend head; then vp to heauen, he cast them; shewing it,
               What plagues it sent him; Downe againe, then threw them to his sonne,
               To make him shun them. He now stood, without steepe Ilion,
               
               Thirsting the combat; and to him, thus miserably cride
               The kind old king: O Hector! flie, this man, this homicide,Priam to Hector
               
               That strait will stroy thee. Hee's too strong; and would to heauen he were,
               As strong in heauens loue as in mine; Vultures and dogs should teare
               His prostrate carkasse; all my woes, quencht with his bloudy spirits.
               He has robd me of many sonnes; and worthy; and their merits
               Sold to farre Ilands. Two of them (aye me) I misse but now;
               They are not enterd; nor stay here; Laothoe, O twas thou,
               (O Queene of women) from whose wombe, they breath'd: O did the tents
               Detaine them onely; brasse and gold, would purschase safe euents,
               To their sad durance: tis within. Old Altes (yong in fame)
               Gaue plentie for his daughters dowre; but if they fed the flame
               Of this mans furie, woe is me; woe to my wretched Queene.
               But in our states woe, their two deaths, will nought at all be seene;
               So thy life quit them: take the towne; retire (deare sonne) and saue
               
                  Troys husbands and her wiues; nor giue, thine owne life to the graue,
               For this mans glorie: pitie me; me, wretch, so long aliue;
               Whom in the doore of Age, Ioue keepes; that so he may depriue
               My being, in Fortunes vtmost curse; to see the blackest thred
               Of this lifes miseries; my sonnes slaine; my daughters rauished;
               Their resting chambers sackt; their babes, torne from them, on their knees
               Pleading for mercie; themselues dragd, to Grecian slaueries,
               (And all this drawne through my red eyes.) Then last of all kneele I,
               Alone, all helplesse, at my gates, before my enemie,
               That (ruthlesse) giues me to my dogs: all the deformitie
               Of age discouer'd; and all this, thy death (sought wilfully)
               Will poure on me. A faire yong man, at all parts it beseemes,
               (Being brauely slaine) to lie all gasht; and weare 
                     •…
                  he worst extremes
               Of warres most crueltie; no wound, of whatsoeuer ruth,
               But is his ornament: but I, a man so farre from youth;
               White head, white bearded, wrinkl'd, pin'd; all shames must shew the eye:
               Liue; preuent this then; this most shame, of all mans miserie.
            
            
               Thus wept the old king, and tore off, his white haire; yet all these
               Retir'd not Hector. Hecuba, then fell vpon her knees;
               Stript nak't her bosome, shew'd her breasts, and bad him reuerence them,
               And pitie her: if euer she, had quieted his exclaime,
               He would ceasse hers, and take the towne; not tempting the rude field,
               When all had left it: thinke (said she) I gaue thee life to yeeld
               My life recomfort; thy rich wife, shall haue no rites of thee,
               Nor do thee rites: our teares shall pay, thy corse no obsequie,
               Being rauisht from vs; Grecian dogs, nourisht, with what I n
                     •…
                  rst.
            
            
               
                  Thus wept both these; and to his ruth, proposde the vtmost worst,
               Of what could chance them; yet he staid. And now drew deadly neare,
               Mightie Achilles; yet he still, kept deadly station there.
               Looke how a Dragon, when she sees, a traueller bent vponA Simile expressing how Hector stood Achilles.
               
               Her breeding den; her bosome fed, with fell contagion,
               Gathers her forces, sits him firme, and at his nearest pace,
               Wraps all her Cauerne in her folds, and thrusts a horrid face
               Out at his entrie: Hector so, with vnextinguisht spirit,
               Stood great Achilles; stird no foote; but at the prominent turret,
               Bent to his bright shield, and resolu'd, to beare falne heauen on it.
               Yet all this resolute abode, did not so truly fit
               His free election; but he felt, a much more galling spurre
               To the performance, with conceit, of what he should incurre,
               Entring, like others; for this cause; to which, he thus gaue way.
            
            
               O me, if I shall take the towne, Polydamas will lay
               This flight, and all this death on me; who counseld me to leadeHectors discourse
               
               My powres to Troy: this last blacke night, when so I saw make head,
               Incenst Achilles; I yet staid; though (past all doubt) that course
               Had much more profited then mine; which, (being by so much worse,
               As comes to all our flight, and death) my folly now I feare,
               Hath bred this scandall; all our towne, now burnes my ominous ear
                     •…
                  
               
               With whispering: Hectors selfe conceit, hath cast away his host.
               
               And (this true) this extremitie, that I relie on most,
               Is best for me; stay, and retire, with this mans life; or die
               Here for our citi
                     •…
                   with renowme; since all else fled, but I.
               And yet one way, cuts both these wayes; what if I hang my shield,
               My helme and lance here, on these wals; and meete in humble field,
               Renowm'd Achilles, offering him, Hellen, and all the wealth,
               What euer in his hollow keeles, bore Alexanders stealth
               For both th' Atrides? For the rest; what euer is possest
               In all this citie, knowne, or hid, by oath shall be confest
               Of all our citizens; of which, one halfe the Greeks shall haue;
               One halfe themselues. But why (lou'd soule) would these suggestions saue
               Thy state still in me? Ile not sue; nor would he grant; but I,
               (Mine armes cast off) should be assur'd, a womans death to die.
               To men of oke and rocke, no words; virgins and youths talke thus;
               Virgins and youths, that loue, and wooe; there's other warre with vs:
               What blowes and conflicts vrge, we crie; hates and defiances;
               And with the garlands these trees beare, trie which hand Ioue will blesse.
            
            
               These thoughts emploid his stay; and now, Achilles comes; now neareAchilles dreadfull approch to Hector.
               
               His Mars-like presence, terribly, came brandishing his speare;
               His right arme shooke it; his bright armes, like day came glittering on,
               Like fire-light, or the light of heauen, shot from the rising Sun.
               This sight outwrought discourse; cold Feare, shooke Hector from his stand;
               No more stay now; all ports were left; he fled in feare the hand
               Of that Feare-master, who hauk-like, aires swiftest passenger,
               That holds a timorous Doue in chace; and with command doth 
                     •…
                  are
               His fierie onse
                     •…
                   the Doue hasts; the Hauke comes whizzing on;
               
                  This way, and that, he turnes, and winds, and cuffes the Pigeon;
               And till he trusse it, his great spirit, layes hote charge on his wing:
               So vrg'd Achilles, Hectors flight; so still, Feares point did sting
               His troubl'd spirit; his knees wrought hard; along the wall he flew;
               In that faire chariot way, that runnes, beneath the towre of view,
               And Troys wilde fig-tree; till they reacht, where those two mother springs,
               Of deepe Scamander, pour'd abroad, their siluer murmurings.The 
                        〈◊〉
                      description of two springs vnder the walls of Troy
               
               One warme, and casts out fumes, as fire; the other, cold as snow,
               Or haile dissolu'd. And when the Sunne, made ardent sommer glow,
               There waters concrete cristall shin'd; neare which, were cisternes made,
               All pau'd, and cleare; where Troian wiues, and their fai
                     •…
                  e daughters had
               Landrie for their fine linnen weeds; in times of cleanly Peace,
               
               Before the Grecians brought their siege. These Captaines noted these;
               One flying; th'other in pursuite; a strong man flew before;
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      from Achilles, and his chace of 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               A stronger follow'd him by farre, and close vp to him bore.
               Both did their best; for neither now, ranne for a sacrifice;
               Or for the sacrificers hide, (our runners vsuall prise)
               These ranne for tame-horse Hectors soule. And as two running Steeds,
               Backt in some set race for a game, that tries their swi
                     •…
                  est speeds,
               (A tripod, or a woman giuen, for some mans funerals):
               Such speed made these men; and on foote, ranneVp and downe the wals, it is to be vnderstood. 
                        〈◊〉
                      griefe for Hector. thrice about the wals.
            
            
               The gods beheld them; all much mou'd; and Ioue said: O ill sight!
               A man I loue much, I see forc't, in most vnworthy flight
               About great Ilion; my heart grieues; he paid so many vowes,
               With thighes of sacrificed beeues; both on the loftie browes
               Of Id
                        •…
                     , and in Ilions height. Consult we; shall we free
               His life from death? or giue it now, t'Achilles victorie?
            
            
               
                  Minerua answer'd: Alter Fate? one, long since markt for death,Pall
                        •…
                      against Hectors preser
                     
                        •…
                     .
               
               Now take from death? do thou; but know, he still shall runne beneath,
               Our other censures. Be it then, (replide the Thunderer)
               My lou'd Tritonia, at thy will; in this I will preferre
               Thy free intention; worke it all. Then stoopt she from the skie,
               To
                     •…
                   his great combat. Peleus sonne, pursu'd incessantly
               Still-flying Hector: As a Hound, that hauing rouz'd a Hart,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Although he tappish ne're so oft; and euery shrubbie part,
               Attempts for strength, and trembles in; the Hound doth still pursue
               So close, that not a foote he failes; but hunts it still at view:
               So plied Achilles, Hectors steps; as oft as he assail'd
               The Dardan ports and towres for strength, (to fetch from thence s
                     •…
                  me aid,
               With winged shafts) so oft forc't he, amends of pace; and 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Twixt him and all his hopes; and still, vpon the field he kept
               His vtmost turnings to the towne. And yet, as in a dreame,A most 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , vsed (
                        〈◊〉
                      all our Homer besides) by Virgil, but this as a translator meerly.
               
               One thinkes he giues another chace; when such a fain'd extreame
               Possesseth both; that he in chace, the chacer cannot flie;
               Nor can the chacer get to hand, his flying enemie:
               So, nor Achilles chace could reach, the flight of Hector
                        •…
                     
                   pace;
               Nor Hectors flight enlarge it selfe, of swift Achilles chace.
            
            
               But how chanc't this? how, all this time, could Hector beare the knees
               
                  Of fierce Achilles, with his owne; and keepe off Destinies,
               
               If Phoebus (for his last and best) through all that course had fail'd,
               To adde his succours to his nerues? And (as his foe assail'd)
               Neare, and within him, fed his scape. Achilles yet well knew,
               His knees would fetch him; and gaue signes, to some friends (making shew
               Of shooting at him) to forbeare, lest they detracted so
               From his full glorie; in first wounds; and in the ouerthrow,
               Make his hand last. But when they reacht, the fourth time, the two founts;
               Then Ioue, his golden skoles weigh'd vp; and tooke the last accounts
               Of Fate for Hector; putting in, for him, and Peleus sonne,
               Two fates of bitter death; of which, high heauen receiu'd the one,
               The other hell: so low declin'd, the light of Hectors life.
               Then Phoebus left him, when warres Queene, came to resolue the strife,Pallas to Achilles.
               
               In th'others knowledge: Now (said she) Ioue-lou'd Aeacides,
               
               I hope at last to make Renowme, performe a braue accesse
               To all the Grecians; we shall now, lay low this champions height;
               Though neuer so insatiate, was his great heart of fight.
               Nor must he scape our pursuite still; though all the feete of Ioue,
               
               
                  Apollo bowes into a sphere, soliciting more loue,
               To his most fauour'd. Breath thee then, stand firme; my selfe will hast,
               And hearten Hector to change blowes. She went, and he stood fast;
               Lean'd on his lance; and much was ioy'd, that single strokes should trie
               This fadging conflict. Then came close, the changed deitie,Pallas like Deiphobus to Hector
               
               To Hector, like Deiphobus, in shape, and voice; and said:
            
            
               O brother, thou art too much vrg'd, to be thus combatted
               About our owne wals; let vs stand, and force to a retreat
               Th'insulting Chaser. Hector ioy'd, at this so kind deceit;
               And said: O good Deiphobus, thy loue was most beforeHector to Pallas for Deiphobus.
               
               (Of all my brothers) deare to me; but now, exceeding more
               It costs me honor; that thus vrg'd, thou com'st to part the charge
               Of my last fortunes; other friends, keepe towne, and leaue at large
               My rackt endeuours. She replide: Good brother, tis most true;
               One after other, King and Queene; and all our friends did sue
               (Euen on their knees) to stay me there; such tremblings shake them all,
               With this mans terror: but my mind, so grieu'd to see our wall
               Girt with thy chases; that to death, I long'd to vrge thy stay.
               Come, fight we, thirstie of his bloud; no more let's feare to lay
               Cost on our lan
                     •…
                  es; but approue, if bloudied with our spoiles,
               He can beare gl
                     •…
                  tie to their fleete, or shut vp all their toiles,
               In his one suffe
                     •…
                  ce on thy lance. With this deceit, she led;
               And (both come neare) thus Hector spake: Thrice I haue compassedHector to Achil
                     
                        •…
                     .
               
               This great towne (Peleus sonne) in flight, with auersation,
               That out of Fate put off my steps; but now, all flight is flowne;
               The short course set vp; death or life. Our resolutions yet,
               Must shun all rudenesse; and the gods, before our valour set,
               For vse of victorie; and they, being worthiest witnesses
               Of all vowes; since they keepe vowes best; before their deities,
               Let vowes of fit respect, passe both; when Conquest hath bestow'd
               
                  Her wreath on either. Here I vow, no furie shall be show'd,
               That is not manly, on thy corse; but, hauing spoil'd thy armes,
               Resigne thy person; which sweare thou. These faire and temperate termes,
               Farre fled Achilles; his browes bent; and out flew this reply.
            
            
               
                  Hector, thou onely pestilence, in all mortalitie,Achilles sterne reply to Hector.
               
               To my sere spirits; neuer set, the point twixt thee and me
               Any conditions; but as farre, as men and Lions flie,
               All termes of couenant; lambes and wolues: in so farre opposite state,
               (Impossible for loue t'attone) stand we; till our soules satiate
               The god of souldiers; do not dreame, that our disiunction can
               Endure condition. Therefore now, all worth that fits a man,
               Call to thee; all particular parts, that fit a souldier;
               And they, all this include, (besides, the skill, and spirit of warre)
               Hunger for slaughter; and a hate, that eates thy heart, to eate
               Thy foes heart. This stirs; this supplies, in death, the killing heate;
               And all this needst thou. No more flight; Pallas Athenia
               
               Will quickly cast thee to my lance; now, now together draw
               All griefes for vengeance; both in me, and all my friends late dead
               That bled thee; raging with thy lance. This said, he brandished
               His long lance; and away it sung: which, Hector giuing view,Achilles first encounter with Hector.
               
               Stoupt low, stood firme, (foreseeing it best) and quite it ouerflew,
               Fastening on earth.Pallas. 
                  Athenia, drew it, and gaue her friend,
               Vnseene of Hector. Hector then, thus spake: Thou want'st thy end,
               (God-like Achilles:) now I see, thou hast not learn'd my fate,
               Of Ioue at all; as thy high words, would brauely intimate;
               Much tongue affects thee; cunning words, well serue thee to prepare
               Thy blowes with threats, that mine might faint, with want of spirit to dare;
               But my backe neuer turnes with breath; it was not borne to beare
               Burthens of wounds; strike home, before; driue at my breast thy speare,
               As mine at thine shall; and trie then, if heauens will fauor thee
               With scape of my lance; O would Ioue, would take it after me,
               And make thy bosome take it all; an easie end would crowne
               Our difficult warres, were thy soule fled; thou most bane of our towne.
            
            
               Thus flew his dart, toucht at the midst, of his vast shield, and flewHector at Achilles.
               
               A huge way from it; but his heart, wrath enterd with the view
               Of that hard scape; and heauie thoughts, strooke through him, when he spide
               His brother vanisht; and no lance, beside left; out he cride,
               
                  Deiphobus! another lance. Lance, nor Deiphobus
                  H
                        •…
                     ctors amaze with the deceit of Pallas.
               
               Stood neare his call. And then his mind, saw all things ominous,
               And thus suggested: Woe is me; the gods haue cald, and I
               Must meete Death here; Deiphobus, I well hop't had bene by,
               With his white shield; but our strong wals, shield him; and this deceit
               Flowes from Minerua; now, ô now, ill death comes; no more flight,
               No more recouerie: O Ioue, this hath bene otherwise;
               Thy bright sonne, and thy selfe, haue set, the Greeks a greater prise
               Of Hectors bloud then now; of which, (euen iealous) you had care;
               But Fate now conquers; I am hers; and yet, not she shall share
               In my renowme; that life is left, to euery noble spirit;
               
                  And that, some great deed shall beget; that all liues shall inherit.
            
            
               Thus, forth his sword flew, sharpe and broad, and bor
                     •…
                   a deadly weight;The last encounter of Achilles and Hector.
               
               With which, he rusht in: And looke how, an Eagle from her height,
               Stoopes to the rapture of a Lambe; or cuffes a timorous Hare:
               So fell in Hector; and at him, Achilles; his minds 
                     •…
                  are,
               Was fierce and mightie: his shield cast, a Sun-like radian
                     •…
                  ;
               Helme nodded; and his foure plumes shooke; and when he raisde his lance,
               Vp Hesperus rose, amongst th'euening starres. His bright and sparliling 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Lookt through the body of his foe; and sought through all that prise,
               The next way to his thirsted life. Of all wayes, onely one
               Appear'd to him; and thas was, where, th'vnequall winding bone,
               That ioynes the shoulders and the necke, had place; and where there lay
               The speeding way to death: and there, his quicke eye could display
               The place it sought; euen through those armes, his friend Patr
                        •…
                     lus wore,
               When Hector slue him. There he aim'd, and there his iauelin tore
               Sterne passage quite through Hectors necke; yet mist it so his throte,
               It gaue him powre to change some words; but downe to earth it gotH
                        •…
                     ctor wounded to death.
               
               His fainting bodie. Then triumpht, diuine Aeacides;
               
               
                  Hector, (said he) thy heart supposde, that in my friends deceasse,Achilles insultation.
               
               Thy life was safe; my absent arme, not car'd for: Foole! he left
               One at the fleete, that better'd him; and he it is that re
                     •…
                  t
               Thy strong knees thus; and now the dogs, and fowles, in foulest vse
               Shall teare thee vp; thy corse exposde, to all the Greeks abuse.
            
            
               He, fainting, said: Let me implore, euen by thy knees, and soule,H
                        •…
                     ctors d
                        •…
                     ing request to Achilles.
               
               And thy great parents; do not see, a crueltie so foule
               Inflicted on me; brasse and gold, receiue at any rate,
               And quit my person; that the Peeres, and Ladies of our state,
               May tombe it; and to sacred fire, turne thy prophane decrees.
            
            
               Dog, (he replied) vrge not my ruth, by parents, 
                     •…
                  oule, nor knees;Achill
                        •…
                      infle
                        •…
                     
                     bilitie.
               
               I would to God that any rage, would let me eate 
                     〈◊〉
                   raw,
               Slic't into peeces; so beyond, the right of any law,
               I tast thy merits; and beleeue, it flies the force of man,
               To rescue thy head from the dogs. Giue all the gold they can;
               If ten or twentie times so much, as friends would rate thy price,
               Were tenderd here, with vowes of more; to buy the cruel
                     •…
                  es
               I here haue vow'd; and after that, thy father with his gold
               Would free thy selfe; all that should faile, to let 
                     •…
                  hy mother hold
               Solemnities of death with thee; and do thee such a grace,
               To mourne thy whole corse on a bed; which 
                     〈◊〉
                   Ile de
                     •…
                  ce
               With fowles and dogs. He (dying) said: I (k
                     •…
                  owing th
                     •…
                   well) 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Thy now tried tyrannie; nor hop
                     •…
                  , for any other 
                     •…
                  aw,
               Of nature, or of nations: and that feare, fore't much more
               Then death, my flight; which neuer toucht, at Hect
                        •…
                     s 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   before.Hectors prophecy of Achilles de
                        •…
                     h
               
               A soule of iron informes thee; marke, what 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Will giue me of thee, for this rage; when in the Sc
                     •…
                  ri gates,
               
                  Phoebus and Paris meete with thee. Thus death
                     •…
                   hand 
                     〈◊〉
                   his eyes;
               His soule flying his 
                     •…
                  aire 
                     •…
                  ms, to hell; mourning 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               To part so with his youth and strength. Th
                     •…
                   d
                     •…
                  d▪ thus T
                        •…
                     is sonne,
               
                  His prophecie answer'd: Die thou now; when my short thred is spunne,
               Ile beare it as the will of Ioue. This said, his brazen speare,
               He drew, and stucke by: then his armes (that all embrewed were)
               He spoil'd his shoulders off. Then all, the Greeks ran in to him,
               To see his person; and admir'd, his terror-stirring lim:The Greeks ad
                     
                        •…
                     ration of Hectors person being slaine.
               
               Yet none stood by, that gaue no wound, to his so goodly forme;
               When each to other said: O Ioue, he is not in the storme,
               He came to fleete in, with his fire; he handles now more soft.
            
            
               O friends, (said sterne Aeacides) now that the gods haue broughtAchilles to the Grecians.
               
               This man thus downe; Ile freely say, he brought more bane to Greece,
               
               Then all his aiders. Trie we then, (thus arm'd at euery peece,
               And girding all Troy with our host) if now their hearts will leaue
               Their citie cleare; her cleare stay slaine; and all their liues receaue;
               Or hold yet, Hector being no more. But why vse I a word
               Of any act, but what concernes, my friend? dead, vndeplor'd,
               Vnsepulcherd; he lies at fleete, vnthought on; neuer houre
               Shall make his dead state, while the quicke, enioyes me; and this powre,
               To moue these mouers. Though in hell, men say, that such as die,
               
                  Obliuion seiseth; yet in hell, in me shall Memorie
               
               Hold all her formes still, of my friend. Now, (youths of Greece) to fleete
               Beare we this body; Paeans sing; and all our nauie greete
               With endlesse honor; we haue slaine, Hector, the period
               Of all Troys glorie; to whose worth, all vow'd, as to a god.
            
            
               This said; a worke, not worthy him, he set to: of both feete,Achilles tyranny to Hectors person, which we lay on his fury, and l
                        •…
                     e to his slaine friend, for whom himselfe liuing, sufferd so much.
               
               He bor'd the nerues through, from the heele, to th'ankle; and then knit
               Both to his chariot, with a thong, of whitleather; his head
               Trailing the center. Vp he got, to chariot; where he laid
               The armes repurchac't; and scourg'd on, his horse, that freely flew.
               A whirlewind made of startl'd dust, draue with them, as they drew;
               With which were all his black-browne curls, knotted in heapes, and fil'd.
               And there lay Troys late Gracious; by Iupiter exil'd
               To all disgrace, in his owne land, and by his parents seene.
            
            
               When (like her sonnes head) all with dust, Troys miserable Queene,
               Distain'd her temples; plucking off, her honor'd haire; and tore
               Her royall garments, shrieking out. In like kind, Pri
                        •…
                     
                   bore
               His sacred person; like a wretch, that neuer saw good day,
               Broken, with outcries. About both, the people pros
                     •…
                  ate lay;
               Held downe with Clamor; all the towne, vail'd with a cloud of teares.Priam and Hecubas miserable plight for Hector
               
               
                  Ilion, with all his tops on fire, and all the massacres,
               Left for the Greeks, could put on lookes, of no more ouerthrow
               Then now fraid life. And yet the king, did all their lookes outshow.
               The wretched people could not beare, his soueraign
                     •…
                   wretchednesse,
               Plaguing himselfe so; thrusting out, and praying all the preasse
               To open him the Dardan po
                     •…
                  ; that he alone might fetcht
               His dearest sonne in; and (all fil'd, with 
                     •…
                  bling) did beseech
               Each man by name, thus: Loued friends, be you co
                     •…
                  ent; let mePriam to his friend.
               
               (Though much ye grieue) be that poo
                     •…
                   meane, to ou
                     •…
                   sad remedie,
               Now in our wishes; I will go, and pray this impious man,
               
                  (Author of horrors) making proofe, if ages reuerence can
               Excite his pitie. His owne sire, is old like me; and he,
               That got him to our giefes; perhaps, may (for my likenesse) be
               Meane for our ruth to him. Ahlas, you haue no cause of cares,
               Compar'd with me; I, many sonnes, grac't, with their freshest yeares
               Haue lost by him: and all their deaths, in slaughter of this one,
               (Afflicted man) are doubl'd: this, will bitterly set gone
               My soule to hell. O would to heauen, I could but hold him dead
               In these pin'd armes: then teares, on teares, might fall, till all were shed
               In common fortune. Now amaze, their naturall course doth stop,
               And pricks a mad veine. Thus he mourn'd; and with him, all brake ope
               Their store of sorrowes. The poore Queene, amongst the women wept,
                     
                        •…
                     bas complaint for Hector.
               
               Turn'd into anguish: O my sonne, (she cried out) why, still kept,
               Patient of horrors, is my life, when thine is vanished?
               My dayes thou glorifiedst; my nights, rung of some honour'd deed,
               Done by thy virtues: ioy to me, profite to all our care.
               All made a god of thee; and thou, mad'st them, all that they are.
               Now vnder fate, now dead. These two, thus vented as they could,
               Their sorrowes furnace. Hectors wife, not hauing yet bene told
               So much, as of his stay without. She in her chamber close,
               Sate at her Loome: a peece of worke, grac't with a both sides glosse,
               Strew'd curiously with varied flowres, her pleasure was; her care,
               To heate a Caldron for her Lord, to bath him, turn'd from warre:
               Of which, she chiefe charge gaue her maides. Poore Dame, she little knew
               How much her cares lackt of his case. But now the Clamor flew
               Vp to her turret: then she shooke; her worke fell from her hand,
               And vp she started, cald her maides; she needs must vnderstand
               That ominous outcrie. Come (said she) I heare through all this crie
               My mothers voyce shrieke; to my throte, my heart bounds; Ecstasie
               V
                     •…
                  terly alters me: some fate, is neare the haplesse sonnes
               Of fading Priam: would to god, my words suspicions
               No eare had heard yet: O I feare, and that most heartily;
               That with some stratageme, the sonne, of Peleus hath put by
               The wall of Ilion, my Lord; and (trusty of his feet)
               Obtaind the chase of him alone; and now the curious heate
               Of his still desperate spirit is cool'd. It let him neuer keep
               In guard of others; before all, his violent foote must step,
               Or his place, for
                     •…
                  eited he held. Thus furie like she went,
               Two women (as she will'd) at hand; and made her quicke a
                     •…
                  nt
               Vp to the towre, and preasse of men; her spirit in vprore. Round
               She cast her greedy eye, and saw, her Hector slaine, and bound
               T'Achilles chariot; manlesly, dragg'd to the Grecian fleet.
               Blacke night strooke through her; vnder her, Tr
                        •…
                     
                   
                  
                     •…
                  ke away her feet,
               And backe she shrunke, with such a sway; that off her head-tire flew;
               Her Coronet, Call, Ribands, Vaile, that golden Venus threw
               On her white shoulders; that high day, when warre-like Hector wonne
               Her hand in nuptials, in the Court, of king Eetion;
               
               And that great dowre, then giuen with her. About her, on their kn
                     •…
                  s,
               
                  Her husbands sisters, brothers wiues, 
                     •…
                  ell round, and by degrees
               Recouerd her. Then, when againe, her respirations found
               Free passe, (her mind and spirit met) these thoughts her words did sound.
            
            
               O Hector, O me cursed dame; both borne beneath one fate:Andromaches complaint for Hector.
               
               Thou here, I in Cilician Thebes; where Placus doth elate,
               His shadie forehead, in the Court, where king Eetion,
               
               (Haplesse) begot vnhappy me; which would he had not done,
               To liue past thee: thou now art di
                     •…
                  'd, to Putos gloomie throne,
               Sunke through the couerts of the earth: I, in a hell of mone,
               Left here thy widdow: one poore babe, borne to vnhappy both,
               Whom thou leau'st helplesse, as he thee; he borne to all the wroth
               Of woe, and labour. Lands left him, will others 
                     •…
                  se vpon:
               The Orphan day, of all friends helps, robs euery mothers son.
               An Orphan, all men suffer sad; his eyes stand still with teares.
               Need tries his fathers friends; and failes. Of all his fauourers
               If one the cup giues, tis not long; the wine he finds in it,
               Scarce moists his palate: if he chance, to gaine the grace, to sit;
               Suruiuing fathers sonnes repine; vse contumelies, strike,
               Bid, leaue vs; where's thy fathers place? He (weeping with dislike)
               Retires to me. To me, ahlas, Astyanax is he
               Borne to these miseries. He that late, fed on his fathers knee,
               To whom all knees bow'd; daintiest fare, apposde him; and when Sleepe
               
               Lay on his temples, his cries still'd (his heart, euen laid in steepe,
               Of all things precious) a soft bed; a carefull nur
                     •…
                  s armes
               Tooke him to guardiance; but now, as huge a world of harmes,
               Lies on his suffrance; now thou wantst, thy fathers hand to friend:
               O my Astyanax, O my Lord; thy hand that did defend,
               These gates of Ilion: these long walls, by thy arme, measur'd still,
               Amply, and onely: yet at fleete, thy naked corse must 
                     •…
                  ll
               Vile wormes, when dogs are fatiate; farre from thy parents care;
               Farre from those funerall ornaments; that thy mind would prepare,
               (So sodaine being the chance of armes) euer expecting death.Andromache wrought many funerall ornaments for Hector before his death.
               
               Which taske (though my heart would not serue, t'employ my hands beneath)
               I made my women yet performe. Many, and much in price
               Were those integuments they wrought, t'adorne thy Exequies:
               Which, since they flie thy vse, thy Corse, not laid in their attire;
               Thy sacrifice they shall be made; these hands in mischieuous fire
               Shall vent their vanities. And yet, (being consecrate to thee)
               They shall be kept for citizens; and their faire wiues, to see.
            
            
               Thus spake shee weeping; all the dames, endeuouring to cheare
               Her desert state; (fearing their owne) wept with her teare for teare.
            
            The end of the two and twentieth Booke.
         
         
            
            THE XXIII. BOOKE OF HOMERS ILIADS.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  
                     A Chilles orders Iusts of exequies
                  For his Patroclus; and doth sacrifise
                  Twelue Troian Princes; most lou'd hounds and horse;
                  And other offerings, to the honour'd Corse.
                  He institutes, besides, a funerall game;
                  Where Diomed, for horse-race, wins the fame▪
                  
                  For foote, Vlysses; others otherwise
                  Striue, and obtaine: and end the exequies.
               
            
            
               Another Argument.
               
                  
                     Psi, sings the rites of the decease
                  Ordaind by great Aeacides.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  THus mourn'd all Troy: but when at fleet, and Hellespontus shore,
               The Greeks arriu'd, each to his ship: onely the Conqueror
               Kept vndisperst his Myrmidons: and 
                     •…
                  aid, Lou'd countrimen,Achilles to his Myrmidons.
               
               Disioyne not we, chariots, and horse: but (bearing hard our reine)
               With state of both; march soft, and close, and mourne about the corse:
               Tis proper honour to the dead. Then take we out our horse;
               When with our friends kinds woe, our hearts, haue felt delight to do
               A virtuous soule right, and then sup. This said, all full of woe,
               Circl'd the Corse. Achilles led, and thrise about him, close
               All bore their goodly coted horse. Amongst all, Thetis rose,
               And stirr'd vp a delight, in griefe; till all their armes with teares
               And all the sands, were wet: so much, they lou'd that Lord of Feares.
               
               Then to the center fell the Prince; and (putting in the breast)
               Of his slaine friend, his slaughtring hands;) began to all the rest
               Words to their teares. Reioyce (said he) O my Patroclus: ThouAchilles to the person of Patro
                     
                        •…
                     lus.
               
               Courted by Dis now: now I pay, to thy late ouerthrow,
               All my reuenges vow'd before; Hector lies slaughterd here
               Dragd at my chariot; and our dogs, shall all in peeces teare
               His hated lims. Twelue Troian youths, borne of their noblest straines,
               I tooke aliue: and (yet enrag'd) will emptie all their vaines
               Of vitall spirits; sacrifisde, before thy heape of fire.
            
            
               This said, a worke vnworthy him, he put vpon his ire,
               And trampl'd Hector vnder foote, at his friends feet. The rest
               Disarm'd; tooke horse from chariot, and all to sleepe addrest,
               At his blacke vessell. Infinite, were those that rested there.
            
            
               
                  Himselfe yet sleepes not; now his spirits, were wrought about the chere,
               Fit for so high a funerall. About the steele vsde then,
               Oxen in heapes lay bellowing; preparing food for men.
               Bleating of sheepe, and goates, fild aire; numbers of white-tooth'd swine,
               (Swimming in fat) lay sindging there: the person of the slaine
               Was girt with slaughter. All this done, all the Greeke kings conuaid
               
                  Achilles to the king of men; his rage, not yet allaid,
               For his Patroclus. Being arriu'd, at Agamemnons tent;
               Himselfe bad Heralds put to fire, a Caldron; and present
               The seruice of it to the Prince; to trie if they could win
               His pleasure, to admit their paines, to cleanse the blood sok't in
               About his conquering hands, and browes. Not, by the king of heauen
               (He swore). The lawes of friendship damne, this false-heart licence giuenAchilles ouerhearing, vsed this abruption.
               
               To men that lose friends: not a drop, shall touch me till I put
               
                  Patroclus in the funerall pile; before these curles be cut;
               His tombe erected. Tis the last, of all care, I shall take,
               While I consort the carefull: yet, for your entreaties sake,
               (And though I lothe food) I will eate: but early in the morne,
               
                  Atrides, vse your strict command, that lodes of wood be borne
               To our design'd place; all that fits, to light home such a one,
               As is to passe the shades of Death; that fire enough, set gone
               His person quickly from our eyes; and our diuerted men
               May plie their businesse. This all eares, did freely entertaine,
               And found obseruance. Then they supt, with all things fit; and all
               Repair'd to tents and rest. The friend, the shores maritimall,
               Sought for his bed, and found a place, faire, and vpon which plaideAchilles retreate from company to the seas short.
               
               The murmuring billowes. There, his lims, to rest, not sseepe, he laid,
               Heauily sighing. Round about (silent, and not too neare)
               Stood all his Myrmidons; when straite, (so ouer-labour'd were
               His goodly lineaments, with chace, of Hector; that beyond
               His resolution not to sleepe:) Sleepe cast his fodaine bond
               Ouer his sense, and losde his care. Then, of his wretched friend,
               The soule appear'd; at euery part, the forme did comprehendPatroclus appeares to Achilles sleeping.
               
               His likenesse; his faire eyes, his voice, his stature; euery weed
               His person wore, it fantased; and stood aboue his head,
               This sad speech vttering: Dost thou sleepe? Aeacides, am I
               Forgotten of thee? Being aliue, I found thy memorie
               Euer respectfull: but now dead, thy dying loue abates.
               Interre me quickly; enter me, in Plutoes iron gates;
               For now, the soules (the shades) of men, fled from this being, beate
               My spirit from rest; and stay, my much desir'd receipt
               Amongst soules, plac't beyond the flood. Now euery way I erre
               About this brode-dor'd ho
                     •…
                  se of Dis. O helpe then, to preferre
               My soule yet further; here I mourne: but had the funerall fire
               Consum'd my bodie; neuer more, my spirit should retire
               From hels low region: from thence, soules neuer are retriu'd
               To talke with friends here; nor shall I; a hatefull fate depriu'd
               My being here; that at my birth, was fixt; and to such fate,
               
                  Euen thou, ô god-like man, art markt; the deadly Ilion gate,
               Must entertaine thy death. O then, I charge thee now, take care
               That our bones part not: but as life, combinde in equall fare,
               Our louing beings; so let Death. When, from Opuntas towres,
               My father brought me, to your roofes, (since (gainst my will) my powres
               Incenst, and indiscreet, at dice, slue faire Amphidamas)
               Then Peleus entertaind me well; then in thy charge I was
               By his iniunction, and thy loue: and therein, let me still
               Receiue protection. Both our bones, prouide, in thy last Will,
               That one Vrne may containe; and make, that vessell all of gold,
               That Thetis gaue thee; that rich Vrne. This said; Sleepe ceast to holdAchilles waking to the shade of 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               
                  Achilles temples; and the shade, thus he receiu'd: O friend,
               What needed these commands? my care, before, meant to commend
               My bones to thine, and in that Vrne. Be sure, thy will is done.
               A little stay yet, lets delight, with some full passion
               Of woe enough; eithers affects, embrace we. Opening thus
               His greedie armes; he felt no friend: like matter vaporous
               The spirit vanisht vnder earth, and murmur'd in his stoope.
               
                  Achilles started; both his hands, he clapt, and lifted vp,
               In this sort wondring; O ye gods, I see we haue a soule
               In th'vnderdwellings; and a kind, of man-resembling idole:Achi
                        •…
                     s his discourse with him selfe about the apparition of 
                        〈◊〉
                      shade.
               
               The soules seate yet, all matter felt, staies with the carkasse here.
               O friends, haplesse Patroclus soule, did all this night appeare,
               Weeping, and making mone to me; commanding euery thing
               That I intended towards him; so truly figuring
               Himselfe at all parts, as was strange. This accident did turne
               To much more sorrow; and begat, a greedinesse to mourne
               In all that heard. When mourning thus, the rosie morne arose:The morning.
               
               And Agamemnon, through the tents, wak't all; and did dispose,
               Both men and Mules for cariage, of matter for the fire.Agamemnon sends out companies to fetch fewell for the funerall heape, of which company Meriones was Capta
                        •…
                     .
               
               Of all which worke, Meriones, (the Cretan soueraigns squire)
               Was Captaine, and abrode they went. Wood-cutting tooles they bore;
               Of all hands, and well-twisted cords. The Mules marcht all before.
               Vp hill, and downe hill; ouerthwarts, and breake-necke clifts they past:
               But when the fountfull Idas tops, they scal'd, with vtmost haste,
               All fell vpon the high-hair'd Okes; and downe their curled browes
               Fell busling to the earth: and vp, went all the boles and bowes,
               Bound to the Mules; and backe againe, they parted the harsh way
               Amongst them, through the tangling shrubs; and long they thought the day,
               Till in the plaine field all arriu'd: for all the woodmen bore
               Logs on their neckes; Meriones, would haue it so: the shore
               At last they reacht yet; and then, downe, their cariages they cast,
               And sat vpon them; where the sonne, of Peleus had plac't,
               The ground for his great sepulcher, and for his friends, in one,
            
            
               They raisd a huge pile; and to armes, went euery Myrmidon,
               
               Charg'd by Achilles; chariots, and horse were harnessed;
               Fighters and charitoters got vp; and they, the sad march led:
               A cloude of infinite foote behind. In midst of all was borne
               
                  
                  Patroclus person, by his Peeres: on him, were all heads shorne;
               Euen till they couer'd him with curles. Next to him, marcht his friend
               Embracing his cold necke, all sad; since now he was to send,
               His dearest, to his endlesse home. Arrin'd all, where the wood,
               Was heapt for funerall, they set downe. Apart Achilles stood;
               And when enough wood was heapt on, he cut his golden haire;Achilles cuts his haire ouer his friends body.
               
               Long kept, for Sperchius, the flood; in hope of safe repaire
               To Ph
                        •…
                     hi
                        •…
                     , by that riuers powre, but now, left hopelesse thus,
               (Enrag'd, and looking on the sea) he cried out: Sperchius;
               
               In vaine, my fathers pietie, vow'd; (at my implor'd returne,
               To my lou'd countrie) that these curls, should on thy shores be shorne.
               Besides a sacred Hecatombe; and sacrifice beside,
               Of fiftie Weathers; at those founts, where men haue edifide
               A loftie temple; and perfum'd, an altar to thy name.
               There vow'd he all these offerings; but fate preuents thy fame;
               His hopes not suffering satisfied: and since, I neuer more
               Shall see my lou'd soyle; my friends hands, shall to the Stygian shore
               Conuey these Tresses. Thus he put, in his friends hands the haire.
               And this bred fresh desire of mone; and in that sad affaire,
               The Sunne had set amongst them all; had Thetis sonne not spoke
               Thus to Atrides: King of men, thy aide I still inuoke,Achilles to Agamemnon.
               
               Since thy Command, all men still heare; dismisse thy souldiers now,
               And let them victle; they haue mourn'd, sufficient; tis we owe
               The dead this honour; and with vs, let all the Captaines stay.
            
            
               This heard; Atrides instantly, the souldiers sent away;
               The funerall officers remain'd, and heapt on matter still,
               Till, of an hundred foote about, they made the funerall pile:
               In whose hote height, they cast the Corse; and then they pour'd on teares.
               Numbers of fat sheepe, and like store, of crooked-going steres,
               They slue before the solemne fire: stript off their hides and drest.
               Of which, Achilles tooke the fat; and couer'd the deceast
               From head to foote: and round about, he made the officers pile
               The beasts nak't bodyes; vessels full, of honey, and of oyle,
               Pour'd in them, laide vpon a bere; and cast into the fire.
               Foure goodly horse; and of nine hounds, two most in the desire
               Of that great Prince, and trencher-fed; all fed that hungry flame.
            
            
               Twelue Troian Princes last stood foorth; yong, and of toward fame:Twelue Princes sacrifised on the funerall pile of Patroclus.
               
               All which, (set on with wicked spirits) there strooke he, there he slew.
               And to the iron strength of fire, their noble lims he threw.
            
            
               Then breath'd his last sighes, and these words: Againe reioyce my friend,
               Euen in the ioylesse depth of hell: now giue I complete end
               To all my vowes. Alone thy life, sustain'd not violence;
               Twelue Troian Princes waite on thee, and labour to incense
               Thy glorious heape of funerall. Great Hector Ile excuse,
               The dogs shall eate him. These high threates, perform'd not their abuse;
               
                  Ioues daughter, Venus, tooke the guard, of noble Hectors Corse,
               And kept the dogs off: night, and day, applying soueraigne force
               Of rosie balmes; that to the dogs, were horrible in tast:
               
                  And with which she the body fild. Renowm'd Apollo cast
               A cloude from heauen; lest with the Sunne, the nerues and lineaments
               Might drie, and putrifie. And now, some powres deni
                     •…
                  e consents
               To this solemnitie: the fire, (for all the oyly fewell
               It had iniected) would not burne; and then the louing Cruell
               Studied for helpe, and standing off; inuokt the two faire winds
               (Zephyr and Boreas) to affoord, the rage of both their kinds,
               To aid his outrage. Precious gifts, his earnest zeale did vow,
               Powr'd from a golden bowle much wine; and prayde them both to blow
               That quickly, his friends Corse might burne; and that heapes sturdy breast
               Embrace Consumption. Iris heard; The winds were at a feast;
               All in the Court of Zephyrus (that boisterous blowing aire)Iris to the winds.
               
               Gather'd together. She that weares, the thousand-colourd haire,
               Flew thither, standing in the porch. They (seeing her) all arose;
               Cald to her; euery one desir'd: she would a while repose,
               And eate with them. She answerd; No, no place of feate is here;
               Retreate cals to the Ocean, and Aethiopia; where
               A Hecatombe is offering now, to heauen: and there must I
               Partake the feast of sacrifise; I come to signifie
               That Thetis sonne implores your aides (Princes of North and West)
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      North and West wind flie to incense the f
                        •…
                     
                     nerall pile.
               
               With vowes of much faire sacrifise; if each, will set his breast
               Against his heape of funerall, and make it quickly burne;
               
                  Patroclus lies there; whose deceasse, all the Achaīans mourne.
            
            
               She said, and parted; and out rusht, with an vnmeasur'd rore,
               Those two winds, tumbling clouds in heapes; vshers to eithers blore.
               And instantly they reacht the sea. Vp flew the waues; the gale
               Was strong; reacht fruitfull Troy; and full, vpon the fire they fall.
               The huge heape thunderd. All night long, from his chok't breast they blew
               A liberall flame vp; and all night, swift-foote Achilles threw
               Wine from a golden bowle, on earth; and steept the soyle in wine,
               Still calling on Patroclus soule. No father could incline
               More to a sonne most deare; nor more, mourne at his burned bones,
               Then did the great Prince, to his friend, at his combustions;
               Still creeping neare and neare the heape; still sighing, weeping still:
               But when the day starre look't abrode, and promist from his hillThe morning.
               
               Light, which the saffron morne made good, and sprinkl'd on the seas;
               Then languisht the great pile; then sunke, the flames; and then calme Peace
               
               Turn'd backe the rough winds to their homes, the Thra
                        •…
                     
                   billow rings
               Their high retreate; rufl'd with cuffes, of their triumphant wings.
            
            
               
                  Pelides then forsooke the pile; and to his tired limme
               Chusd place of rest; where laide, sweete sleepe, fell to his wish on him.
               When all the kings guard (waiting then, perceiuing will to rise
               In that great Session,) hurried in, and op't againe his eyes
               With tumult of their troope, and haste. A little then he rear'd
               His troubled person; sitting vp, and this affaire referd,
               To wisht commandment of the kings; Atrides, and the rest
               Of our Commanders generall, vouchsafe me this requestAchilles to Agamemnon and the other kings.
               
               Before your parting: Giue in charge, the quenching with blacke w
                     •…
                  e,
               
                  Of this heapes reliques; euery brand, the yellow fire made shine.
               And then, let search Patroclus bones, distinguishing them well;
               As well ye may; they kept the midst: therest, at randome fell,
               About th'extreme part of the pile; Mens bones, and horses mixt.
               Being found, Ile finde an vrne of gold, t'enclose them; and betwixt
               The aire and them; two kels of fat, lay on them; and to Rest
               
               Commit them, till mine owne bones seale, our loue; my soule deceast.
               The sepulcher, I haue not charg'd, to make of too much state;
               But of a modell something meane: that you of younger Fate,
               (When I am gone) may amplifie; with such a bredth and height,
               As fits your iudgements, and our worths. This charge receiu'd his weight
               In all obseruance: first they quencht, with sable wine, the heape,
               As farre as it had fed the flame. The ash fell wondrous deepe,
               In which, his consorts, that his life, religiously lou'd,
               Searcht, weeping, for his bones; which found, they conscionably prou'd
               His will, made to Aeacides; and what his loue did adde.
               A golden vessell, double fat, containd them; all which (clad
               In vailes of linnen, pure and rich) were solemnly conuaid
               T' Achilles tent. The platforme then, about the pile they laid,
               Of his fit sepulcher; and raisd, a heape of earth; and then
               Offerd departure. But the Prince, retaind there still his men;
               Employing them to fetch from fleete, rich Tripods for his games,
               Caldrons, Horse, Mules, brode-headed Beeues, bright steele, & brighter dames.
            
            
               The best at horse race, he ordain'd, a Lady for his prise,
               Generally praisefull; faire, and yong, and skild in house wiferies,The 
                        •…
                     ames for Patroclus funerall.
               
               Of all kinds fitting; and withall, a Triuet, that enclosde
               Twentie two measures roome, with eares. The next prise he proposde,
               Was (that, which then had high respect) a mare of sixe yeares old,
               Vnhandl'd; horsed with a mule: and readie to haue foald.
               The third game, was a Caldron, new, faire, bright, and could for sise
               Containe two measures. For the fourth, two talents quantities,
               Of finest gold. The fift game was, a great new standing boule,
               To set downe both waies. These brought in, Achilles then stood vp,
               And said; Atrides, and my Lords, chiefe horsemen of our host,
               These games expect ye. If my selfe, should interpose my most,Achilles to the Grecian kings.
               
               For our horse race; I make no doubt, but I should take againe
               These gifts proposde. Ye all know well, of how diuine a straine
               My horse are, and how eminent. Of Neptunes gift they a
                     •…
                  e
               To Peleus; and of his to me. My selfe then, will not share
               In gifts giuen others; nor my steeds, breathe any spirit to shake
               Their airie pasterns; so they mourne, for their kind guiders sake,
               Late lost; that vsde with humorous oyle, to slick their loftie manes;
               Cleare water hauing cleansd them first: and (his bane, being their banes)
               Those loftie manes now strew the earth; their heads held shaken downe.
               You then, that trust in chariots, and hope with horse to crowne
               Your conquering temples; gird your selues; now fame and prise stretch for,
               All that haue spirits. This fir'd all; the first competitor
               Was king Eumelus; whom the Art, of horsemanship did grace,
               
                  Sonne to Admetus. Next to him, rose Diomed to the race,
               That vnder reines rul'd Troian horse; of late, forc't from the sonne
               Of Lord Anchises; himselfe freed, of neare confusion
               By Phoebus. Next to him set foorth, the yellow-headed king
               Of Laced
                        •…
                     mon, Ioues high seed; and in his managing,
               
                  Podargus, and swift Aethe trod, steeds to the king of men.
               
                  Aethe, giuen by Echepolus; the Anchisiaden,
               
               As bribe to free him from the warre, resolu'd for Ilion.
               
               So Delicacie feasted him; whom Ioue bestow'd vpon
               A mightie wealth; his dwelling was, in brode Sicyone.
               
               Old Nestors sonne, Antilochus, was fourth for chiualrie
               In this Contention: his faire horse, were of the Pylian breed,
               And his old father (coming neare) inform'd him (for good speed)
               With good Race notes; in which himselfe, could good instruction giue.
            
            
               
                  Antilochus, though yong thou art; yet thy graue virtues liueNestor to his son Antilochus giues instructions for the race with chariots.
               
               Belou'd of Neptune, and of Ioue: their spirits haue taught thee all
               The art of horsemanship; for which, the lesse thy merits fall
               In need of doctrine. Well thy skill, can wield a chariot
               In all fit turnings; yet thy horse, their slow feet handle not,
               As fits thy manage; which makes me, cast doubts of thy successe.
               I well know, all these are not seene, in art of this addresse,
               More then thy selfe: their horses yet, superior are to thine,
               For their parts: thine want speed to make, discharge of a designe
               To please an Artist. But go on, shew but thy art and hart
               At all points; and set them against, their horses, heart, and art;
               Good Iudges will not see thee lose. A Carpenters desert
               Stands more in cunning then in powre. A Pylote doth auert
               His vessell from the rocke, and wracke, tost with the churlish winds,
               By skill, not strength: so sorts it here; One chariotere that finds
               Want of anothers powre in horse, must in his owne skill set
               An ouerplus of that, to that; and so the proofe will get
               Skill, that still rests within a man, more grace, then powre without.
               He that in horse and chariots trusts, is often hurl'd about,
               This way, and that, vnhandsomely; all heauen wide of his end.
               He better skild, that rules worse horse, will all obseruance bend,
               Right on the scope still of a Race; beare neare; know euer when to reine,
               When giue reine, as his foe before, (well noted in his veine,
               Of manage, and his steeds estate) presents occasion.
               Ile giue thee instance now, as plaine, as if thou saw'st it done.
               Here stands a drie stub of some tree, a cubite from the ground;
               (Suppose the stub of Oake, or Larch; for either are so sound
               That neither rots with wet) two stones, white (marke you) white for viewA Cōment might well be bestowed vpon this speech of Nestor.
               
               Parted on either side the stub; and these lay where they drew
               The way into a streight; the Race, betwixt both lying cleare.
               Imagine them some monument, of one long since tomb'd there;
               Or that they had bene lists of race, for men of former yeares;
               As now the lists Achilles sets, may serue for charioteres
               Many yeares hence. When neare to these, the race growes; then as right,
               
                  Driue on them as thy eye can iudge; then lay thy bridles weight
               Most of thy left side: thy right horse, then 
                     •…
                  witching; all thy throte
               (Spent in encouragments) giue him; and all the reine let flote
               About his shoulders: thy neare horse, will yet be he that gaue
               Thy skill the prise; and him reine 
                     •…
                  o, his head may touch the Naue
               Of thy left wheele: but then take care, thou runst not on the stone,
               (With wracke of horse and chariot) which so thou bear'st vpon.
               Shipwracke within the hauen auoide, by all meanes; that will breed
               Others delight, and thee a shame. Be wise then, and take heed
               (My lou'd sonne) get but to be first, at turning in the course;
               He liues not that can cote thee then: not if he backt the horse
               The gods bred, and Adrastus ow'd. Diuine Arions speed,
               Could not outpace thee; or the horse, Laomedon did breed;
               Whose race is famous, and fed here. Thus sat Nele
                        •…
                     es,
               
               When all that could be said, was said. And then Meriones
                  Nestors aged loue of speech, was here briefly noted.
               
               Set fiftly forth his faire-man'd horse. All leapt to chariot;
               And euery man then for the start, cast in, his proper lot.
               
                  Achilles drew; Antilochus, the lot set foremost foorth;
               
                  Eumelus next; Atrides third; Meriones the fourth.
               The fifth and last, was Diomed; farre first in excellence.
               All stood in order, and the lists, Achilles fixt farre thence
               In plaine field; and a seate ordain'd, fast by. In which he set
               Renowmed Phoenix, that in grace, of Peleus was so great;Phoenix chiefe iudge of the best deseruers in the race.
               
               To see the race, and giue a truth, of all their passages.
               All start together, scourg'd, and cried; and gaue their businesse
               Study and order. Through the field, they held a winged pace.
               Beneath the bosome of their steeds, a dust so dim'd the race:
               It stood aboue their heads in clowds; or like to stormes amaz'd.
               Manes flew like ensignes with the wind; the chariots sometime graz'd▪
               
               And sometimes iumpt vp to the aire; yet still sat fast the men:
               Their spirits euen panting in their breasts, with feruour to obtaine.
               But when they turn'd to fleet againe: then all mens skils were tride;
               Then stretcht the pasternes of their steeds. Eumelus horse in pride
               Still bore their Soueraigne. After them, came Diomeds coursers close,
               Still apt to leape their chariot, and ready to repose
               Vpon the shoulders of their king, their heads. His backe euen burn'd
               With fire, that from their nostrils flew. And then, their Lord had turn'd
               The race for him, or giuen it doubt, if Phoebus had not smit
               The scourge out of his hands; and teares, of helplesse wrath with it,
               From forth his eyes; to see his horse, for want of scourge, made slow;
               And th'others (by Apollos helpe) with much more swiftnesse go.
            
            
               
                  Apollos spite, Pallas discern'd, and flew to Tydeus sonne;
               His scourge reacht, and his horse made fresh. Then tooke her angry runne
               At king Eumelus; brake his geres; his mares on both sides flew;
               His draught tree fell to earth; and him, the tost vp chariot threw
               Downe to the earth; his elbowes torne; his forehead, all his face
               Strooke at the center; his speech lost. And then the turned race
               Fell to Tydides: before all, his conquering horse he draue:
               
                  And first he glitter'd in the race: diuine Athenia gaue
               Strength to his horse, and fame to him. Next him, draue Spartas king.
               
                  Antilochus, his fathers horse, then vrg'd, with all his sting
               Of scourge and voice. Runne low (said he) stretch out your lims, and flie.Antilochus to his steeds.
               
               With Diomeds horse, I bid not striue; nor with himselfe striue I.
               
                  Athenia wings his horse, and him, renowmes. Atrides steeds
               Are they ye must not faile but reach; and soone, lest soone succeeds
               The blot of all your fames: to yeeld, in swiftnesse to a mare:
               To femall Aethe. Whats the cause (ye best that euer were)
               That thus ye faile vs? Be assur'd, that Nestors loue ye lose
               For euer if ye faile his sonne: through both your both sides goes
               His hote steele, if ye suffer me, to bring the last prise home.
               Haste, ouertake them instantly; we needs must ouercome.
               This harsh way next vs: this my mind, will take; this I despise
               For perill; this Ile creepe through; hard, the way to honor lies.
               And that take I, and that shall yeeld. His horse by all this knew
               He was not pleasde, and fear'd his voice; and for a while, they flew:
               But straite, more cleare, appear'd the streight, Antilochus foresaw;
               It was a gaspe the earth gaue, forc't, by humours, cold and raw,
               Pour'd out of Winters watrie breast; met there, and cleauing deepe
               All that neare passage to the lists. This Nestors sonne would keepe,
               And left the rode way, being about; Atrides fear'd, and cride:Menelaus in feare to follow Antilochus, who ye may see playd vpon 
                        •…
                     im.
               
               
                  Antilochus! thy course is mad; containe thy horse; we ride
               A way most dangerous; turne head, betime take larger field,
               We shall be splitted. Nestors sonne, with much more scourge impeld
               His horse, for this; as if not heard; and got as farre before,
               As any youth can cast a quoyte; Atrides would no more;
               He backe againe, for feare himselfe, his goodly chariot,
               And horse together, strew'd the dust; in being so dustie hote,
               Of thirsted conquest. But he chid, at parting, passing sore:
            
            
               
                  Antilochus (said he) a worse, then thee, earth neuer bore:Menelaus chid
                        •…
                     s Antilochus.
               
               Farewell; we neuer thought thee wise, that were wise; but not so
               Without othes, shall the wreath (be sure) crowne thy mad temples, Go.
            
            
               Yet he bethought him, and went too; thus stirring vp his steeds:
               Leaue me not last thus, nor stand vext; let these faile in the speeds
               Of feet and knees; not you: shall these, these old iades, (past the flowre
               Of youth, that you haue) passe you? This, the horse fear'd, and more powre
               Put to their knees; straite getting ground. Both flew, and so the rest;
               All came in smokes, like spirits; the Greeks, (set to see who did best,
               Without the race, aloft:) now made, a new discouerie,
               Other then that they made at first; Idomeneus eye
               Distinguisht all; he knew the voice, of Diomed; seeing a horse
               Of speciall marke, of colour bay, and was the first in course;
               His forehead putting forth a starre, round, like the Moone, and white.
               Vp stood the Cretan, vttering this; Is it alone my sight,Idomenaeus the king of Crete first discouers the runners.
               
               (Princes, and Captaines) that discernes, another leade the race,
               With other horse, then led of late? Eumelus made most pace,
               With his fleete mares; and he began, the flexure, as we thought.
               
                  Now all the field I search, and find, no where his view; hath nought
               Befalne amisse to him? perhaps, he hath not with successe
               Perform'd his flexure: his reines lost, or seate, or with the tresse
               His chariot faild him; and his mares, haue outraid with affright:
               Stand vp, trie you your eyes; for mine, hold with the second sight.
               This seemes to me, th'Etolian king; the Tydean Diomed.
               
            
            
               To you it seemes so, (rustickly) Aiax Oileus said;Aiax Oileus angry with Idomene
                        •…
                     .
               
               Your words are suited to your eyes. Those mares leade still, that led;
               
                  Eumelus owes them: and he still, holds reines and place that did;
               Not falne as you hop't: you must prate, before vs all, though last
               In iudgement of all: y'are too old, your tongue goes still too fast;
               You must not talke so. Here are those, that better thee, and looke
               For first place in the censure. This, Idomeneus tooke
               In much disdaine; and thus replide: Thou best, in speeches worst;Idomeneus to Aiax.
               
               Barbarous languag'd; others here, might haue reprou'd me first:
               Not thou, vnfitst of all. I hold, a Tripode with thee here,
               Or Caldron; and our Generall make, our equall arbiter,
               Those horse are first; that when thou paist, thou then maist know. This fir'd
               
                  Oileades more; and more then words, this quarell had inspir'd,
               Had not Achilles rose; and vsde, this pacifying speech.
            
            
               No more: away with words in warre, it toucheth both with breachAchilles pacifies Idomeneus and Aiax.
               
               Of that which fits ye; your deserts, should others reprehend,
               That giue such foule termes: sit ye still, the men themselues will end
               The strife betwixt you instantly; and eithers owne lode beare,
               On his owne shoulders. Then to both, the first horse will appeare,
               And which is second. These words vsde, Tydides was at hand;
               His horse ranne high, glanc't on the way, and vp they tost the sand,
               Thicke on their Coachman; on their pace, their chariot deckt with gold
               Swiftly attended; no wheele 
                     •…
                  eene, nor wheeles print in the mould
               Imprest behind them. These horse flew, a flight; not ranne a race.
            
            
               Arriu'd; amids the lists they stood; sweate trickling downe apace
               Their high manes, and their prominent breasts; and downe iumpt Diomed,
                  The runners arriue at the races end.
               
               Laid vp his scorge aloft the seate; and straite his prise was led
               Home to his tent: rough Sthenelus, laid quicke hand on the dame,
               And handled Triuet, and sent both, home by his men. Next came
               
                  Antilochus, that wonne with wiles, not swiftnesse of his horse,
               Precedence of the gold-lockt king; who yet maintaind the course
               So close, that not the kings owne horse, gat more before the wheele
               Of his rich chariot; that might still, the insecution feele
               With the extreme haires of his taile: (and that sufficient close
               Held to his leader: no great space, it let him interpose,
               Considerd in so great a field.) Then Nestors wilie sonne
               Gate of the king: now at his heeles, though at the breach he wonne
               A quoytes cast of him; which the king, againe, at th'instant gaind.
               
                  Aethe, Agamemnonides, that was so richly maind,
               Gat strength still, as she spent; which words, her worth had prou'd with deeds,
               Had more ground bene allow'd the race; and coted farre, his steeds,
               No question leauing for the prise. And now Meriones,
               
               
                  A darts cast came behind the king; his horse of speed much lesse;
               Himselfe lesse skild t'importune them; and giue a chariot wing.
               
                  Admetus sonne was last; whose plight, Achilles pittying,
               Thus spake: Best man comes last; yet Right, must see his prise not least;Achilles sentence.
               
               The second, his deserts must beare; and Diomed the best.
            
            
               He said, and all allow'd; and sure, the mare had bene his owne,
               Had not Antilochus stood forth; and in his answer showne,Antilochus to Achilles.
               
               Good reason for his interest. Achilles, (he replied)
               I should be angry with you much, to see this ratified.
               Ought you to take from me my right? because his horse had wrong,
               Himselfe being good? he should haue vsde (as good men do) his tongue,
               In prayre to their powres that blesse good (not trusting to his owne)
               Not to haue bene in this good, last. His chariot ouerthrowne,
               O'rethrew not me; who's last? who's first? mens goodnesse, without these
               Is not our question. If his good, you pitie yet; and please,
               Princely to grace it; your tents hold, a goodly deale of gold,
               Brasse, horse, sheepe, women; out of these, your bountie may be bold
               To take a much more worthy prise, then my poore merit seekes,
               And giue it here, before my face, and all these; that the Greekes
               
               May glorifie your liberall hands. This prise, I will not yeeld;
               Who beares this (whatsoeuer man) he beares a tried field.
               His hand and mine must change some blowes. Achilles laught, and said:
            
            
               If thy will be (Antilochus) Ile see Eumelus paid,
               Out of my tents; Ile giue him th'armes, which late I conquerd in
               
                  Asteropaeus; forg'd of brasse, and wau'd about with tin;
               Twill be a present worthy him. This said, Automedon,
               
               He sent for them. He went; and brought; and to Admetus sonne,
               
                  Achilles gaue them. He, well pleasde, receiu'd them. Then arose,
               Wrong'd Menelaus, much incenst, with yong Antilochus.
               
               He, bent to speake; a herald tooke, his Scepter, and gaue charge
               Of silence to the other Greeks; then did the king enlarge
               The spleene he prisoned; vttering this: Antilochus? till now,Note Menelaus ridiculous speech for conclusion of his character.
               
               We grant thee wise; but in this act, what wisedome vtter'st thou?
               Thou hast disgrac't my vertue; wrong'd, my horse; preferring thine,
               Much their inferiors; but go to, Princes; nor his, nor mine,
               Iudge of with fauour; him, nor me; lest any Grecian vse
               This scandall; Menelaus wonne, with Nestors sonnes abuse,
               The prise in question; his horse worst; himselfe yet wanne the best,
               By powre and greatnesse. Yet because, I would not thus contest,
               To make parts taking; Ile be iudge; and I suppose, none here
               Will blame my iudgement; Ile do right; Antilochus, come neare;
               Come (noble gentleman) tis your place; sweare by th'earth circling god,
               (Standing before your chariot, and horse; and that selfe rod,
               With which you scourg'd them, in your hand) if both with will and wile,
               You did not crosse my chariot. He thus did reconcileAntilo
                        •…
                     us his ironicall reply.
               
               Grace with his disgrace; and with wit, restor'd him to his wit;
               Now craue I patience: ô king, what euer was vnfit,
               Ascribe to much more youth in me, then you; you more in age,
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               And more in excellence; know well, the outraies that engage
               All yong mens actions; sharper wits, but duller wisedomes still
               From vs flow, then from you; for which, curbe with your wisedome, will.
               The prise I thought mine, I yeeld yours; and (if you please) a prise
               Of greater value; to my tent, Ile send for, and suffise
               Your will at full, and instantly; for in this point of time,
               I rather wish to be enioyn'd, your fauors top to clime,
               Then to be falling all my time, from height of such a grace;Iro
                        •…
                     .
               
               (O Ioue-lou'd king) and of the gods, receiue a curse in place.
            
            
               This said; he fetcht the prise to him; and it reioyc't him so;This Simile like
                     
                        •…
                     se is meerly 
                        •…
                     nicall.
               
               That as corne-eares shine with the dew; yet hauing time to grow;
               When fields set all their bristles vp: in such a ruffe wert thou,
               (O Menelaus) answering thus; Antilochus, I now,
               (Though I were angry) yeeld to thee; because I see th'hadst wit,
               When I thought nor; thy youth hath got, the mastery of thy spirit.
               And yet for all this, tis more safe, not to abuse at all,
               Great men; then (ventring) trust to wit, to take vp what may fall.M
                        •…
                      to Ant
                        •…
                     .
               
               For no man in our host beside, had easely calm'd my spleene,
               Stird with like temp
                     •…
                  st. But thy selfe, hast a sustainer bene
               Of much affliction in my cause: so thy good father too,
               And so thy brother, at thy suite; I therefore let all go;
               Giue thee the game here, though mine owne; that all these may discerne,
               King Menelaus beares a mind, at no part, proud, or sterne.
            
            
               The king thus calm'd, Antilochus, receiu'd; and gaue the steed
               To lou'd Noemon, to leade thenc
                     •…
                  ; and then receiu'd beside
               The caldron. Next, M
                        •…
                     ones, for fourth game, was to haue
               Two talents, gold. The fift (vnwonne) renowm'd Ac
                        •…
                     lles gaue
               To reuerend Nestor; being a boule, to set on either end,
               Which through the preasse he caried him; Receiue (said he) old friend,Achilles his gift to Nestor.
               
               This gift, as funerall monument, of my deare friend deceast,
               Whom neuer you must see againe; I make it his bequest
               To you; as without any strife, obtaining it from all.
               Your shoulders must not vndergo, the churlish whoorlbats fall;
               Wrastling is past you; strife in da
                     •…
                  s; the footes celeritie;
               Harsh age in his yeares fetters you; and honor sets you free.
            
            
               Thus gaue he it; he tooke, and ioyd; but ere he thankt, he said;
               Now sure my honorable sonne, in all points thou hast plaidN
                        •…
                      glorie in the gift of A
                     
                        •…
                     lles.
               
               The comely Orator; no more, must I contend with nerues;
               Feete faile, and hands; armes want that strength, that this, and that swinge serues
               Vnder your shoulders. Would to heauen, I were so yong chind now,
               And strength threw such a many of bones, to celebrate this show;
               As when the Epi
                        •…
                     s brought to fire (actiuely honoring thus)
               King 
                     
                        •…
                     marynceas funerals, in faire Buprasius.
               
               His sonnes put prises downe for him; where, not a man matcht me,
               Of all the Epians; or the sonnes, of great-soul'd Aetolie;
               
               No nor the Pilians themselues, my countrimen. I beate
               Great Clydomedeus, E
                        •…
                     ops sonne, at buffets; at the feate
               Of wrastling, I laid vnder me; one that against me rose,
               
                  
                  Anc
                        •…
                     s cald Pl
                        •…
                     ius. I made Ipiclus lose
               The foot-game to me. At the speare, I conquer'd P
                        •…
                     e,
               
               And strong Phyleus. Actors sonnes, (of all men) onely bore
               The palme at horse race; conquering, with lashing on more horse,
               And enuying my victorie; because (before their course)
               All the best games were gone with me. These men were twins; one was
               A most sure guide; a most sure guide. The other gaue the passe
               With rod and mettle. This was then. But now, yong men must wage
               These workes; and my ioynts vndergo, the sad defects of age.
               Though then I was another man; His desire of praise pants still. at that time I exceld
               Amongst th'heroes. But forth now, let th'other rites be held
               For thy deceast friend: this thy gift, in all kind part I take;
               And much it ioyes my heart, that still, for my true kindnesse sake,
               You giue me memorie. You perceiue, in what fit grace I stand
               Amongst the Grecians; and to theirs, you set your gracefull hand.
               The gods giue ample recompence, of grace againe to thee,
               For this, and all thy fauors. Thus, backe through the thrust draue he,Another note of Nestors humor, not so much being to be plainly obserued in all these Iliads as in this booke.
               
               When he had staid out all the praise, of old Neleides.
               
            
            
               And now for buffets (that rough game) he orderd passages;
               Proposing a laborious Mule, of sixe yeares old, v
                     •…
                  'd,
               And fierce in handling; brought, and bound, in that place where they gam'd:
               And to the conquerd, a round cup; both which, h
                     •…
                   thus proclames.
            
            
               
                  Atrides, and all friends of Greece, two men, for these two games;Achilles proposes the game for buffets.
               
               I bid stand forth; who best can strike, with high ▪contracted fists,
               (Apollo giuing him the wreath) know all about these lists,
               Shall winne a Mule, patient of 
                     •…
                  oyle? the vanquisht, this round cup.
            
            
               This vtterd; Panop
                        •…
                     s sonne, Epeus, straight stood vp;
               A tall huge man; that to the naile, knew that rude sport of hand;
               And (
                     •…
                  ng the tough mule) thus spake: Now let some other standNote the sharpnes of wit in our Homer, if where you looke not for 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ▪ you can find it
               
               Forth for the cup; this Mule is mine; at cuffes I bost me best;
               I
                     •…
                   not enough I am no souldier? who is worthiest▪
               
               At all workes? none; not possible. At this yet, this I say,
               And will performe this; who stands forth; Ile burst him; I will bray
               His bones as in a mortar; fetch, s
                     •…
                  rgeons enow, to take
               His corse from vnder me. This speech, did all men silent make;
               At last stood forth Euryalus; a man, god-like, and sonne
               To king Mecisteus; the grand child, of honor'd Talaon.
               
               He was so strong, that (coming once to Thebes, when Oedipus
               
               Had like rites solemniz'd for him) he went victorious
               From all the Thebanes. This rare man, Tydides would prepare;
               Put on his girdle; oxehide cords, faire wrought; and spent much care,
               That he might conquer; heartned him; and taught him trickes. Both drest
               Fit for th'affaire; both forth were brought; then breast opposde to breast;
               Fists against fists rose; and they ioynd; ratling of iawes was there;
               Gnashing of teeth; and heauie blowes, dasht bloud out euery where.
               At length, Epeus spide cleare way; rusht in; and such a blow
               Draue vnderneath the others eare; that his neate lims did strow
               The knockt earth; no more legs had he; But as a huge fish laid
               
                  Neare to the cold-weed-gathering shore, is with a North flaw fraid;
               Shootes backe; and in the blacke deepe hides: So sent against the ground,
               Was foyl'd E
                        •…
                     yalus; his strength, so hid in more profound
               Deepes of Epeus; who tooke vp, th'intranc't Competitor;
               About whom rusht a crowd of friends, that through the clusters bore
               His faltring knees; he spitting vp, thicke clods of bloud; his head
               Totterd of one side; his sence gone. When (to a by-place led)Achilles 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      for 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Thither they brought him the round cup. Pelides then set forth
               Prise for a wrastling; to the best, a triuet, that was worth
               Twelue oxen, great, and fit for fire; the conquer'd was t'obtaine
               A woman excellent in workes; her beautie, and her gaine,
               Prisde at foure oxen. Vp he stood, and thus proclaim'd: Arise
               You wrastlers, that will proue for these. Out stept the ample sise
               Of mightie Aiax, huge in strength; to him, Laertes sonne,Vlysses and Aiax wrastle.
               
               That craftie one, as huge in sleight. Their ceremonie done,
               Of making readie; forth they stept; catch elbowes with strong hands;Simile.
               
               And as the beames of some high house, cracke with a storme, yet stands
               The house, being built by well-skild men: So crackt their backe bones wrincht
               With horrid twitches. In their sides, armes, shoulders (all bepincht)
               Ran thicke the wals, red with the bloud, ready to start out; both
               Long'd for the conquest, and the prise; yet shewd no play; being loth
               To lose both; nor could Ithacus, stirre Aiax; nor could he
               Hale downe Vlysses; being more strong, then with mere strength to be
               H
                     •…
                  rl'd from all vantage of his sleight. Tir'd then, with tugging play;
               Great Aiax Telamonius said: Thou wisest man; or layAiax to Vlysses.
               
               My face vp, or let me lay thine; let Ioue take care for these.
               This said, he hoist him vp to aire, when L
                        •…
                     rtiades
               
               His wiles forgat not; Aiax thigh, he strooke behind; and flat
               He on his backe fell; on his breast, Vlysses. Wonderd at
               Was this of all; all stood amaz'd. Then the-much-suffering-man
               (Diuine Vlysses) at next close; the Telamonian
               
               A litle raisde from earth; not quite; but with his knee implide
               Lockt legs; and downe fell both on earth, close by each others side;
               Both fil'd with dust; but starting vp, the third close they had made,
               Had not Achilles selfe stood vp; restraining them, and bad;
               No more tug one another thus, nor moyle your selues; receiueAchilles parts Vlysses and Aiax.
               
               Prise equall; conquest crownes ye both; the lists to others leaue.
            
            
               They heard and yeelded willingly; brusht off the dust; and onPrises for runners.
               
               Put other vests. Pelides then, to those that swiftest runne,
               Proposde another prise; a boule, beyond comparison
               (Both for the sise and workmanship) past all the boules of earth;
               It held sixe measures; siluer all; but had his speciall worth,
               For workmanship; receiuing forme, from those ingenious men
               Of Sydon: the Phoenicians, made choise; and brought it then,
               Along the greene sea; giuing it, to Thoas; by degrees
               It came t'Eunaeus, Iasons sonne; who, yong Priamides,
               
               (Lycaon) of Achilles friend, bought with it; and this, here,
               
                  Achilles made best game, for him, that best his feete could beare.
               
                  For second, he proposde an Oxe; a huge one, and a fat;
               And halfe a talent gold for last. These, thus he set them at.
            
            
               Rise, you that will assay for these; forth stept Oileades;
               
               
                  Vlysses answerd; and the third, was one, esteem'd past theseVlysses, 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      and Antilochus for the Foot-race.
               
               For footmanship; Antilochus. All rankt; Achilles show'd
               The race-scope. From the start, they glid; Oileades bestow'd
               His feete the swiftest; close to him, flew god-like Ithacus;
               
               And as a Ladie at her loome, being yong and beauteous,Simile.
               
               Her silke-shittle close to her breast (with grace that doth inflame,
               And her white hand) lifts quicke, and oft, in drawing from her frame
               Her gentle thred; which she vnwinds, with euer at her brest,
               Gracing her faire hand: So close still, and with such interest,
               In all mens likings, Ithacus, vnwound, and spent the race
               By him before; tooke out his steps, with putting in their place,
               Promptly and gracefully his owne; sprinkl'd the dust before;
               And clouded with his breath his head: so facilie he bore
               His royall person, that he strooke, shoutes from the Greekes, with thirst,
               That he should conquer; though he flew; yet come, come, ô come first,
               Euer they cried to him; and this, euen his wise breast did moue,Vlysses prayes to Minerua for speed.
               
               To more desire of victorie; it made him pray, and proue,
               
                  Mineruas aide (his fautresse still): O goddesse, heare (said he)
               And to my feete stoope with thy helpe; now happie Fautresse be.
            
            
               She was; and light made all his lims; and now (both neare their crowne)
               
                  Minerua tript vp Aiax heeles, and headlong he fell downe,
               Amids the ordure of the beasts, there negligently left,
               Since they were slaine there; and by this, Mineruas friend bereft
               
                  Oileades of that rich bowle; and left his lips, nose, eyes,
               Ruthfully smer'd. The fat oxe yet, he seisd for second prise,
               Held by the horne, spit out the taile; and thus spake, all besmear'd:
            
            
               O villanous chance! this Ithacus, so highly is indear'dAiax Oileus 
                        〈◊〉
                      out his fall to the Greekes.
               
               To his Minerua; that her hand, is euer in his deeds:
               She, like his mother, nestles him; for from her it proceeds,
               (I know) that I am vsde thus. This, all in light laughter cast;
               Amongst whom, quicke Antilochus, laught out his coming last,
               Thus wittily: Know, all my friends, that all times past, and now,Antilochus likewise helpes out his coming last.
               
               The gods most honour, most-liu'd men; Oileades ye know,
               More old then I; but Ithacus, is of the formost race;
               First generation of men. Giue the old man his grace;
               They count him of the greene-hair'd eld; they may, or in his flowre;
               For not our greatest flourisher, can equall him in powre,
               Of foote-strife, but Aeacides. Thus sooth'd he Thetis sonne;
               Who thus accepted it: Well youth, your praises shall not runne,Achilles to Antilochus.
               
               With vnrewarded feete, on mine; your halfe a talents prise,
               Ile make a whole one: take you sir. He tooke, and ioy'd. Then 
                     •…
                  lies
               Another game forth; Thetis sonne, set in the lists, a lance,
               A shield, and helmet; being th'armes, Sarpedon did aduance
               Against Patroclus; and he prisde. And thus he nam'd th'addresse:
            
            
               Stand forth, two the most excellent, arm'd; and before all these,Prise for the fighters armed.
               
               
                  Giue mutuall onset, to the touch, and wound of eithers flesh;
               Who first shall wound, through others armes, his blood appearing fresh;
               Shall win this sword, siluerd, and hatcht; the blade is right of Thrace;
               
               
                  Asterop
                        •…
                     us yeelded it. These arm
                     •…
                  hall part their grace,
               With eithers valour; and the men, Ile liberally feast
               At my pauilion. To this game, the first man that addrest,
               Was Aiax Tel
                        •…
                     monius; to him, king Di
                        •…
                     med;
                  Di
                        •…
                     ed and Aiax combat.
               
               Both, in opposde parts of the preasse, full arm'd; both entered
               The lists amids the multitude; put lookes on so austere,
               And ioyn'd so roughly; that amaze, surprisde the Greeks, in feare
               Of eithers mischiefe. Thrice they threw, their fierce darts; and closde thrice.
               Then Aiax strooke through Diomeds shield, but did no preiudice;
               His curets saft him. Diomeds dart, still ouer shoulders flew;
               Still mounting with the spirit it bore. And now rough Ai
                        •…
                     x grew
               So violent, that the Greeks cried: Hold; no more; let them no more
               Giue equall prise to either; yet, the sword, proposde before,
               For him did best; Achilles gaue, to Diomed. Then a stone,Achilles proposes a game for hur
                     
                        •…
                     ing of the stone or b
                        •…
                     le.
               
               (In fashion of a sphere) he show'd; of no inuention,
               But naturall; onely melted through, with iron. T was the boule,
               That king Eetion vsde to hurle: but he, bereft of soule,
               By great Achilles; to the fleete, with store of other prise,
               He brought it; and proposde it now; both for the exercise,
               And prise it selfe. He stood, and said: Rise you that will approue
               Your armes strengths now, in this braue strife: his vigor that can moue
               This furthest; needs no game but this; for reach he nere so farre,
               With large fields of his owne, in Greece; (and so needs for his Carre,
               His Plow, or other tooles of thrift, much iron) Ile able this
               For fiue reuolued yeares; no need, shall vse his messages
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               To any towne, to furnish him; this onely boule shall yeeld
               Iron enough, for all affaires. This said; to trie this field,
               First Polypaetes issued; next Leontaeus; third
               Great Aiax; huge Epeus fourth. Yet he was first that stird
               That myne of iron. Vp it went; and vp he tost it so,
               That laughter tooke vp all the field. The next man that did throw,
               Was Leonteus; Aiax third; who gaue it such a hand,
               That farre past both their markes it flew. But now twas to be mann'd
               By Polypetes; and as farre, as at an Oxe that strayes,
               A herdsman can swing out his goade: so farre did he outraise
               The stone past all men; all the field, rose in a shout to see't.
               About him flockt his friends; and bore, the royall game to fleete.
            
            
               For Archerie, he then set forth, ten axes, edg'd two waies;Another ga
                        •…
                     .
               
               And ten of one edge. On the shore, farre off, he causd to raise
               A ship-mast; to whose top they tied, a fearfull Doue by th'foote;
               At which, all shot; the game put thus: He that the Doue could shoote,
               Nor touch the string that fastn'd her; the two-edg'd tooles should beare
               All to the fleete. Who toucht the string, and mist the Doue, should share
               The one-edg'd axes. This proposde; king Teucer force arose;
               And with him rose Meriones; and now lots must dispose
               
                  Their shooting first; both which, let fall, into a helme of brasse;
               First Teucers came; and first he shot; and his crosse fortune was,
               To shoote the string; the Doue vntoucht: Apollo did enuie
               His skill; since not to him he vow'd (being god of archerie)
               A first falne Lambe. The bitter shaft, yet cut in two the cord,
               That downe fell; and the Doue aloft, vp to the Welkin soar'd.
               The Greeks gaue shouts; Meriones, first made a hear
                     •…
                  ie vow,
               To sacrifice a first falne Lambe, to him that rules the Bow;
               And then fell to his aime; his shaft, being ready nockt before.
               He spide her in the clouds, that here, there, euery where did soare;
               Yet at her height he reacht her side, strooke her quite through, and downe
               The shaft fell at his feete; the Doue, the mast againe did crowne;
               There hung the head; and all her plumes, were ruffl'd; she starke dead;
               And there (farre off from him) she fell. The people wondered,
               And stood astonisht. Th'Archer pleasd. Aeacides then shewes
               A long lance, and a caldron, new, engrail'd with twentie hewes;
               Prisde at an Oxe. These games were shew'd, for men at darts; and then
               Vp rose the Generall of all; vp rose the king of men:
               Vp rose late-crown'd Meriones. Achilles (seeing the king
               Do him this grace) preuents more deed; his royall offering
               Thus interrupting; King of men, we well conceiue how farre
               Thy worth, superiour is to all; how much most singular,
               Thy powre is, and thy skill in darts; accept then this poore prise,
               Without contention; and (your will, pleasde with what I aduise)
               Affoord Meriones the lance. The king was nothing slow
               To that fit grace; Achilles then, the brasse lance did bestow
               On good Meriones. The king, his present would not saue;
               But to renowm'd Talthybius, the goodly Caldron gaue.
            
            The end of the three and twentieth Booke.
         
         
            
            THE XXIIII. BOOKE OF HOMERS ILIADS.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  
                     IOue, entertaining care of Hectors corse;
                  Sends Thetis to her sonne, for his re
                        •…
                     rse;
                  And fit dismission of it. Iris then,
                  He sends to Priam; willing him to gaine
                  His sonne for ransome. He, by Hermes led,
                  Gets through Achilles guards; sleepes deepe, and dead,
                  Cast on them by his guide. When, with accesse,
                  And humble sute, made to AEacides,
                  
                  He gaines the bodie; which, to Troy he beares,
                  And buries it with fea
                        •…
                     s, buried in teares.
               
            
            
               Another Argument.
               
                  Ωmega sings the exequies,
                  And Hectors redemptorie prise.
               
            
            
               
                  THe games perform'd; the souldiers, wholly disperst to fleete;
               Supper and sleepe, their onely care. Constant Achilles yet,
               Wept for his friend; nor sleepe it selfe, that all things doth subdue,
               Could touch at him. This way, and that, he turn'd, and did renue
               His friends deare memorie; his grace, in managing his strength;
               And his strengths g
                     •…
                  eatnesle. How life rackt, into their vtmost length,
               Griefes, battels, and the wraths of seas, in their ioynt sufferance.
               Each thought of which, turn'd to a teare. Sometimes he would aduance
               (In tumbling on the shore) his side; sometimes his face; then turn
                     •…
                  
               
               Flat on his bosome; start vpright. Although he saw the morne
               Shew sea and shore his extasie; he left not, till at last
               
                  Rage varied his distraction. Horse, chariot, in hast
               He cald for; and (those ioyn'd) the corse, was to his chariot tide;
               And thrice about the sepulcher, he made his Furie ride;
               Dragging the person. All this past; in his pauilion
               Rest seisd him; but with Hectors corse, his rage had neuer done;
               Still suffering it t'oppresse the dust. Apollo yet, euen dead,
               Pitied the Prince; and would not see, inhumane tyrannie 
                     •…
                  ed,
               With more pollution of his lims; and therefore couerd round
               His person with his golden shield; that rude dogs might not wound
               His manly lin
                     •…
                  aments (which threat, Achilles cruelly
               Had vsde in furie). But now heauen, let fall a generall eye
               Of pitie on him; the blest gods, perswaded Mercurie
               
               (Their good obseruer) to his stealth; and euery deitie
               
                  Stood pleasd with it, Iuno except; Greene Nep
                        •…
                     , and the Maide
               Grac't with the blew eyes; all their hearts, stood ha
                     •…
                  lly appaid,
               Long since; and held it, as at first, to Priam, Ilion,
               
               And all his subiects, for the rape, of his licentious sonne,
               Proud Paris, that despisde these dames, in their diuine accesse,
               Made to his cottage; and praisd her, that his sad wantonnesse,
               So costly nourisht. The twelfth morne, now shin'd on the delay
               Of Hectors rescue; and then spake, the deitie of the day,Apollo to the other gods.
               
               Thus to th'immortals: Shamelesse gods; authors of ill ye are,
               To suffer ill. Hath Hectors life, at all times show'd his care
               Of all your rights; in burning thighs, of Beeues and Goates to you,
               And are your cares no more of him? vouchsafe ye not euen now
               (Euen dead) to keepe him? that his wife, his mother, and his sonne,
               Father and subiects may be mou'd, to those deeds he hath done,
               See'ng you preserue him that seru'd you; and sending to their hands
               His person for the rites of fire? Achilles, that withstands
               All helpe to others, you can helpe; one that hath neither hart
               Nor soule within him, that will moue, or yeeld to any part,
               That fits a man; but Lion-like; vplandish, and meere wilde;
               Slaue to his pride; and all his nerues, being naturally compil'd
               Of eminent strength; stalkes out and preyes, vpon a silly sheepe:
               And so fares this man. That fit ruth, that now should draw so deepe
               In all the world; being lost in him. And Shame (a qualitieShame a quality that hurts and helpes men exceedingly.
               
               Of so much weight; that both it helpes, and hurts excessiuely,
               Men in their manners) is not knowne; nor hath the powre to be
               In this mans being. Other men, a greater losse then he,
               Haue vndergone; a sonne, suppose, or brother of one wombe;
               Yet, after dues of woes and teares, they bury in his tombe
               All their deplorings. Fates haue giuen, to all that are true men,
               True manly patience; but this man, so soothes his bloudy veine,
               That no bloud serues it; he must haue, diuine-soul'd Hector bound
               To his proud chariot; and danc't, in a most barbarous round,
               About his lou'd friends sepulcher, when he is slaine: Tis vile,
               And drawes no profit after it. But let him now awhile
               Marke but our angers; his is spent; let all his strength take heed,
               It tempts not our wraths; he begets, in this outragious deed,
               The dull earth, with his furies hate. White-wristed Iuno said,
               (Being much incenst) This doome is one, that thou wouldst haue obaid,
               Thou bearer of the siluer bow) that we, in equall care
               And honour should hold Hectors worth, with him that claimes a share
               In our deseruings? Hector suckt, a mortall womans brest;
               
                  Aeacides a goddesses? our selfe had interest,
               Both in his infant nourishment, and bringing vp with state;
               And to the humane Pel
                        •…
                     s, we gaue his bridall mate,
               Because he had th'immortals loue. To celebrate the feast
               Of their high nuptials; euery god, was glad to be a guest;
               And thou fedst of his fathers cates; touching thy harpe, in grace
               Of that beginning of our friend; whom thy perfidious face,
               
                  (In his perfection) blusheth not, to match with Pri
                        •…
                     m sonne;
               O thou, that to betray, and shame, art still companion.
            
            
               
                  I
                        •…
                     e thus receiu'd her: Neuer giue, these brode termes to a god.I
                        •…
                     e to 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               Those two men shall not be compar'd; and yet, of all that trod
               The well-pau'd Ili
                        •…
                     ; none so deare, to all the deities,
               As Hector was, at least to me. For offrings most of prise,
               His hands would neuer pretermit. Our altars euer stood,
               Furnisht with banquets fitting vs; odors, and euery good,
               Smokt in our temples; and for this, (foreseeing it) his fate,
               We markt with honour, which must stand: but to giue stealth, estate,
               In his deliuerance; shun we that; nor must we fauour one,
               To shame another. Priuily, with wrong to Thetis sonne,
               We must not worke out Hectors right. There is a ransome due,
               And open course, by lawes of armes: in which, must humbly sue,
               The friends of Hector. Which iust meane, if any god would stay,
               And vse the other, twould not serue; for Thetis, night and day,
               Is guardian to him. But would one, call Iris hither; I
               Would giue directions, that for gifts, the Tr
                        •…
                     n king should buy
               His Hectors body; which the sonne, of Thetis shall resigne.
            
            
               This said, his will was done; the Dame, that doth in vapours shine,
               Dewie and thin, footed with stormes; iumpt to the sable seas
               Twixt Samos, and sharpe Imbers cliffes; the lake gron'd with the presse
               Of her rough feete; and (plummet-like, put in an oxes horne
               That beares death to the raw-fed fish) she diu'd, and found forlorne
               
                  Thetis, lamenting her sonnes fate; who was in Troy to haueIris to Thetis.
               
               (Farre from his countrey) his death seru'd. Close to her Iris stood,
               And said; Rise Thetis: prudent Ioue (whose counsels thirst not blood)
               Cals for thee. Thetis answerd her, with asking; Whats the cause
               The great god cals? my sad powres fear'd, to breake th'immortall lawes,
               In going, fil'd with griefes, to heauen. But he sets snares for none
               With colourd counsels; not a word, of him, but shall be done.
            
            
               She said, and tooke a sable vaile; a blacker neuer wore
               A heauenly shoulder; and gaue way. Swift Iris swum before;
               About both rowld the brackish waues. They tooke their banks and flew
               Vp to Olympus, where they found, Sat
                        •…
                     nius (farre-of-view)
               Spher'd with heauens-euerbeing states. Minerua rose, and gaue
               Her place to Thetis, neare to Ioue; and I
                        •…
                     no did receiue
               Her entry with a cup of gold; in which she dranke to her,
               Grac't her with comfort; and the cup, to her hand did referre.
               She dranke, resigning it. And then, the sire of men and gods,
               Thus entertain'd her; Com'st thou vp, to these our blest abodes,
               (Faire goddesse Thetis) yet art sad? and that in so high kind,
               As passeth suffrance? this I know; and try'd thee, and now find
               Thy will by mine rulde; which is rule, to all worlds gouernment.
               Besides this triall yet; this cause, sent downe for thy ascent;
               Nine dayes Contention hath bene held, amongst th'immortals here,
               For Hectors person, and thy sonne; and some aduices were,
               To haue our good spie Mercurie, steale from thy sonne the Corse:
               
                  But that reproch I kept farre off; to keepe in future force,
               Thy former loue, and reuerence. Haste then, and tell thy sonne,
               The gods are angrie; and my selfe, take that wrong he hath done
               To Hector, in worst part of all: the rather, since he still
               Detaines his person. Charge him then, if he respect my will,
               For any reason; to resigne, slaine Hector; I will send
               
                  Iris to Priam, to redeeme, his sonne; and recommend
               Fit ransome to Achilles grace; in which right, he may ioy,
               And end his vaine griefe. To this charge, bright Thetis did employ
               Instant endeuour. From heauens tops, she reacht Achilles tent;
               Found him still sighing; and some friends, with all their complements
               Soothing his humour: othersome, with all contention
               Dressing his dinner: all their paines, and skils consum'd vponThetis to Achilles.
               
               A huge wooll-bearer, slaughterd there. His reuerend mother then,
               Came neare, tooke kindly his faire hand; and askt him: Deare sonne, when
               Will sorrow leaue thee? How long time, wilt thou thus eate thy heart?
               Fed with no other food, nor rest? twere good thou wouldst diuert
               Thy friends loue, to some Ladie; cheare, thy spirits with such kind parts
               As she can quit thy grace withall: the ioy of thy deserts,
               I shall not long haue; death is neare, and thy all-conquering fate,
               Whose haste thou must not haste with griefe; but vnderstand the state,
               Of things belonging to thy life, which quickly order. I
               Am s
                     •…
                  nt from Ioue t'aduertise thee, that euery deitie
               Is angry with thee, himselfe most; that rage, thus reigns in thee,
               Still to keepe Hector. Quit him then; and for fit ransome free
               His iniur'd person. He replied; Let him come that shall giue
               The ransome; and the person take. Ioues pleasure must depriue
               Men of all pleasures. This good speech, and many more, the sonne,
               And mother vsde, in eare of all, the nauall Station.
               
            
            And now to holy Ilion, Saturnius, Iris sent:
            
               Go swiftfoote Iris, bid Troys king, beare fit gifts, and contentIoues s
                        •…
                     ds Iris to Priam.
               
               
                  Achilles for his sonnes release; but let him greet alone
               The Grecian nauie; not a man, excepting such a one,
               As may his horse and chariot guide: a herald, or one old,
               Attending him; and let him take, his Hector. Be he bold,
               Discourag'd, nor with death, nor feare; wise Mercurie shall guide
               His passage, till the Prince be neare. And (he gone) let him ride
               Resolu'd, euen in Achilles tent. He shall not touch the state
               Of his high person; nor admit, the deadliest desperate
               Of all about him. For (though fierce) he is not yet vnwise,
               Nor inconsiderate; nor a man, past awe of deities:
               But passing free, and curious, to do a suppliant grace.
            
            
               This said, the Rainbow to her feet, tied whirlewinds, and the place
               Reacht instantly: the heauie Court, Clamor, and Mourning fill'd.
               The sonnes all set about the sire; and there stood Griefe, and still'd
               Teares on their garments. In the midst, the old king 
                     •…
                  ate: his weed
               All wrinkl'd; head, and necke dust fil'd; the Princesses, his feed;
               The Princesses, his sonnes faire wiues, all mourning by; the thought
               
                  Of friends so many, and so good, (being turn'd so soone to nought
               By Grecian hands) consum'd their youth; rain'd beautie from their eyes.
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        •…
                     ris came neare the king; her sight, shooke all his faculties;
               And therefore spake she soft, and said; Be glad Dard
                        •…
                     ides;
                  Iri
                        •…
                      to Pri
                        •…
                     .
               
               Of good occurrents, and none ill, am I Ambassadresse.
               
                  I
                        •…
                     e greets thee; who, in care (as much, as he is distant) daines
               Eye to thy sorrowes, pitying thee. My ambassie containes
               This charge to thee, from him; he wills, thou shouldst redeeme thy sonne;
               Beare gifts t'Achilles, cheare him so: but visite him alone;
               None but some herald let attend; thy mules and chariot,
               To manage for thee. Feare, nor death, let dant thee; Ioue hath got
               
                  Hermes to guide thee; who as neare, to Thetis sonne as needs,
               Shall guard thee: and being once with him; nor his, nor others deeds,
               Stand toucht with, he will all containe. Not is he mad, nor vaine,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      witnesse of Achilles.
               
               Nor impious; but with all his nerues, studious to entertaine,
               One that submits, with all fit grace. Thus vanisht she like wind.
            
            
               He mules and chariot cals: his sonnes, bids see them ioynd, and bind
               A trunke behind it; he himselfe, downe to his wardrobe goes,
               Built all of Cedar; highly rooft, and odoriferous;
               That much stuffe, worth the sight containd. To him he cald his Queene,
               Thus greeting her: Come, haplesse dame; an Angell I haue seene,Priam to Hecuba.
               
               Sent downe from Ioue; that bad me free, our deare sonne from the fleet,
               With ransome pleasing to our foe; what holds thy iudgement meet?
               My strength, and spirit, layes high charge, on all my being, to beare
               The Greeks worst, ventring through their host. The Queene cried out to heareHecuba to Pri
                        •…
                     .
               
               His ventrous purpose; and replyed: O whither now is fled,
               The late discretion that renown'd, thy graue, and knowing head,
               In forreine; and thine owne rulde realmes? that thus thou dar'st assay,
               Sight of that man? in whose browes sticks, the horrible decay
               Of sonnes so many, and so strong? thy heart is iron I thinke.
               If this sterne man (whose thirst of blood, makes crueltie his drinke)
               Take, or but see thee, thou art dead. He nothing pities woe,
               No
                     •…
                   honours age. Without his sight, we haue enough to do,
               To mourne with thought of him: keepe we, our Pallace, weepe we here;
               Our sonne is past our helpes. Those throwes, that my deliuerers were,
               Of his vnhappy lineaments; told me they should be torne
               With blacke foote dogs. Almightie fate, that blacke howre he was borne
               Spunne, in his springing thred that end; farre from his parents reach.
               This bloodie fellow, then ordain'd, to be their meane: this wretch,
               Whose stony liuer, would to heauen, I might deuoure; my teeth,
               My sonnes Reuengers made. Curst Greeke, he gaue him not his death
               Doing an ill worke; he alone, fought for his countrie; he
               Fled not, nor fear'd, but stood his worst; and cursed policie
               Was his vndoing. He replied, What euer was his end,
               Is not our question; we must now, vse all meanes to defend
               His end from scandall: from which act, disswade not my iust will;
               Nor let me nourish in my house, a bird presaging ill
               To my good actions: tis in vaine. Had any earthly spirit
               
                  Giuen this suggestion: if our Priests, or Soothsayers, challenging merit
               Of Prophets, I might hold it false; and be the rather mou'd
               To keepe my Pallace; but these eares; and these selfe eyes approu'd
               It was a goddesse, I will go; for not a word she spake,
               I know was idle. If it were; and that my fate will make,
               Quicke riddance of me at the fleet; kill me Achilles; Come;
               When, getting to thee, I shall find, a happy dying roome,
               On Hectors bosome; when enough, thirst of my teares finds there,
               Quench to his feruour. This resolu'd, the works most faire, and deare,
               Of his rich screenes, he brought abrode; twelue veiles wrought curiously;
               Twelue plaine gownes; and as many suits, of wealthy tapistry;
               As many mantles; horsemens coates; ten talents of fine gold;
               Two Tripods; Caldrons foure; a bowle, whose value he did hold
               Beyond all price; presented by, th'Ambassadors of Thrace.
               
               The old king, nothing held too deare, to rescue from disgrace,
               His gracio
                     •…
                  s Hector. Forth he came. At entry of his Court,
               The Troian citizens so prest; that this opprobrious sort,
               Of checke he vsde; Hence cast-awayes; away ye impious crew;Pri
                        •…
                      
                     
                        •…
                     aged against his citizens.
               
               Are not your griefes enough at home? what come ye here to view?
               Care ye for my griefes? would ye see, how miserable I am?
               Ist not enough, imagine ye? ye might know ere ye came,
               What such a sonnes losse weigh'd with me. But know this for your paines,
               Your houses haue the weaker doores: the Greeks, will find their gaines
               The easier for his losse, be sure: but ô Troy, ere I see
               Thy ruine; let the doores of hell, receiue, and ruine me.
            
            
               Thus, with his scepter set he on, the crowding citizens;
               Who gaue backe, seeing him so vrge. And now he entertaines
               His sonnes as roughly; Hellenus, Paris, Hippothous,
               
               
                  Pammon, diuine Agathones, renowm'd Deiphobus,
               
               
                  Agauus, and Antiphonus; and last, not least in armes,
               The strong Polites. These nine sonnes, the violence of his harmes,
               Helpt him to vent, in these sharpe termes: Haste you infamous brood,Priam en
                        •…
                     ged against his sons.
               
               And get my chariot; would to heauen, that all the abiect blood,
               In all your veines, had Hector scusde: O me, accursed man,
               All my good sonnes are gone; my light, the shades Cimmerian
               
               Haue swallow'd from me: I haue lost, Mestor, surnam'd the faire;
               
                  Troilus, that readie knight at armes; that made his field repaire,
               Euer so prompt and ioyfully. And Hector, amongst men,
               Esteem'd a god; not from a mortals seed; but of th'eternall straine
               He seem'd to all eyes. These are gone; you that suruiue, are base;
               Liers, and common free-boo
                     •…
                  ers: all faultie, not a grace
               But in your heeles, in all your parts; dancing companions,
               Ye all are excellent: Hence ye brats: loue ye to heare my mones?
               Will ye not get my chariot? command it quickly; flie,
               That I may perfect this deare worke. This all did terrifie;
               And straite his mule-drawne chariot came, to which they fast did bind
               The trunke with gifts: and then came forth, with an afflicted mind,
               Old Hecuba. In her right hand, a bowle of gold she bore,
               
                  With sweet wine crown'd; stood neare, and said; Receiue this, and implore
               (With sacrificing it to Ioue) thy safe returne. I see
               Thy mind likes still to go; though mine, dislikes it vtterly.
               Pray to the blacke-cloud-gathering god, (Idaean Ioue) that viewes
               All Troy, and all her miseries; that he will deine to vse,
               His most lou'd bird, to ratifie, thy hopes; that her brode wing,
               Spred on thy right hand; thou maist know, thy zealous offering
               Accepted; and thy safe returne, confirm'd; but if he faile;
               Faile thy intent, though neuer so, it labours to preuaile.
            
            
               This I refuse not (he replide) for no faith is so great,
               In Io
                        •…
                     s high fauour; but it must, with held vp hands intreate.
            
            
               This said; the chamber▪ maid that held, the Ewre, and Basin by,
               He bad powre water on his hands; when looking to the skie,
               He tooke the bowle; did sacrifice, and thus implor'd: O Ioue,
               
               From Ida vsing thy commands, in all deserts abouePri
                        •…
                     s prayer to I
                        •…
                     e.
               
               All other gods; vouchsafe me safe; and pitie in the sight
               Of great Achilles: and for trust, to that wisht grace; excite
               Thy swift-wing'd messenger, most strong; most of aires region lou'd,
               To sore on my right hand; which fight, may firmely see approu'd
               Thy former summons, and my speed. He prayd, and heauens king heard;
               And instantly, cast from his fist, aires all commanding bird;
               The blacke wing'd huntresse, perfectest, of all fowles; which gods call
               
                  Perc
                        •…
                     s; the Eagle. And how brode, the chamber nuptiall
               Of any mightie man, hath dores; such breadth cast either wing;Io
                        •…
                     e to Mer
                        •…
                     ry
               
               Which now she vsde; and spred them wide, on right hand of the king.
               All saw it, and reioyc't; and vp, to chariot he arose;
               Draue foorth: the Portall, and the Porch, resounding as he goes.
               His friends all follow'd him, and mourn'd; as if he went to die:
               And bringing him past towne, to field; all left him: and the eye
               Of I
                        •…
                     piter was then his guard; who pi
                     •…
                  ied him, and vsde
               These words to Hermes: Mercurit, thy helpe hath bene profusde,
               Euer, with most grace, in consorts, of trauailers distrest;
               Now consort Pri
                        •…
                     
                   to the fleet: but so, that not the least
               Suspicion of him be attaind, till at Ac
                        •…
                     illes tent,
               Thy co
                     •…
                  uoy hath arriu'd him safe. This charge incontinent,
               He put in practise. To his feete, his featherd shoes he tide,
               Immortall, and made all of gold; with which he vsde to ride
               The rough sea; and th'vnmeasur'd earth; and equald in his pace,
               The pufts of wind. Then tooke he v
                     •…
                  , his rod, that hath the grace
               To shut what eyes he lists, with 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪ 
                  
                     •…
                  nd 
                     •…
                  pen them againe
               In strongest trances. This he held; flew forth, and did attaine
               To Troy, and Hellespontus straite: then, like a faire yong Prince,
               First-downe chinn'd; and of such a grace, as makes his lookes conuince
               Contending eyes to view him: forth, he went to meete the king.
               He, hauing past the mightie tombe, of Ilus; watering
               His Mules in 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     ; the darke Euen, fell on the earth; and then
               
                  Idaeu
                        •…
                     
                   (guider of the Mules) discern'd this Grace of men;
               And spake affraide to Pri
                        •…
                     ; Beware 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
               
               
                  Our states aske counsell: I discerne, the dangerous accesse
               Of some man neare vs; Now I feare, we perish. Is it best
               To flie? or kisse his knees, and aske, his ruth of men distrest?
            
            
               Confusion strooke the king, cold Feare, extremely quencht his vaines;
               Vpright, vpon his languishing head, his haire stood; and the chaines
               Of strong Amaze, bound all his powres. To both which, then came nearePriams amaze
               
               The Prince-turn'd Deitie; tooke his hand, and thus bespake the Peere:
            
            
               To what place (father) driu'st thou out, through solitarie Night,
                  Mercurie appeares to him.
               
               When others sleepe? giue not the Greeks, sufficient cause of fright,
               To these late trauailes? being so neare, and such vow'd enemies?
               Of all which; if with all this lode; any should cast his eyes
               On thy aduentures; what would then, thy minde esteeme thy state?
               Thy selfe old; and thy follower old? Resistance could not rate
               At any value: As for me; be sure, I mind no harme
               To thy graue person; but against, the hurt of others arme.
               Mine owne lou'd father did not get, a greater loue in me
               To his good; then thou dost to thine. He answerd: The degreePriam to Mercurie.
               
               Of danger in my course (faire sonne) is nothing lesse then that
               Thou vrgest; but some gods faire hand, puts in, for my safe state,
               That sends so sweete a Guardian, in this so sterne a Time
               Of night, and danger, as thy selfe; that all grace in his prime,
               Of body, and of beautie shew'st: all answerd with a mind
               So knowing; that it cannot be, but of some blessed kind,
               Thou art descended. Not vntrue (said Hermes) thy conceipt
               In all this holds; but further truth, relate, if of such weight
               As I conceiue thy cariage be? and that thy care conuaies
               Thy goods of most price, to more guard? or go ye all your waies,
               Frighted from holy Ilion? So excellent a sonne
               As thou had'st, (being your speciall strength) falne to Destruction;
               
               Whom no Greeke betterd for his fight? O what art thou (said he)
               (Most worthy youth?) of what race borne? that thus recountst to me,
               My wretched sonnes death with such truth? Now father (he replide)
               You tempt me farre, in wondering how, the death was signifide
               Of your diuine sonne, to a man, so mere a stranger here,
               As you hold me: but I am one, that oft haue seene him beare
               His person like a god, in field; and when in heapes he slew,
               The Greeks, all routed to their fleet: his so victorious view,
               Made me admire; not feele his hand; because Aeacides
               
               (Incenst) admitted not our fight; my selfe being of accesse
               To his high person, seruing him; a
                     •…
                  d bo
                     •…
                   to Ilion
               
               In one ship saild. Besides, by birth, I breathe a Myrmidon;
               
               
                  Polystor (cald the rich) my sire; declin'd with age like you.
               Sixe sonnes he hath; and me a seuenth; and all those sixe liue now
               In Phthia; since all casting lots, my chance did onely fall,
               To follow hither. Now for walke, I left my Generall.
               To morrow all the Sunne-burn'd Greeks, will circle Troy with armes;
               The Princes rage to be withheld, so idlely; your alarmes
               Not giuen halfe hote enough they thinke; and can containe no more.
               
                  He answerd; If you serue the Prince, let me be bold t'implore
               This grace of thee; and tell me true, lies Hector here at fleet,
               Or haue the dogs his flesh? He said, Nor dogs, nor fowle haue yet
               Toucht at his person: still he lies, at fleet, and in the tentMer
                        •…
                     rie to Priam.
               
               Of our great Captaine; who indeed, is much too negligent
               Of his fit vsage: but though now, twelue dayes haue spent their heate
               On his cold body; neither wormes, with any taint haue eate,
               Nor putrifaction perisht it: yet euer when the Morne
               Lifts her diuine light from the sea; vnmercifully borne
               About Patroclus sepulcher; it beares his friends disdaine,
               Bound to his chariot; but no Fits, of further outrage, raigne
               In his distemper: you would muse, to see how deepe a dew,
               Euen steepes the body, all the blood, washt off, no slenderst shew
               Of gore, or quitture; but his wounds, all closde; though many were
               Opened about him. Such a loue, the blest immortals beare,
               Euen dead to thy deare sonne; because, his life shew'd loue to them.
            
            
               He ioyfull answerd; O my sonne, it is a grace supreme,Priam to 
                        •…
                     
                     curie.
               
               In any man, to serue the gods. And I must needs say this;
               For no cause (hauing season fit) my Hectors hands would misse
               Aduancement to the gods with gifts; and therefore do not they
               Misse his remembrance after death. Now let an old man pray
               Thy graces to receiue this cup, and keepe it for my loue;
               Not leaue me till the gods and thee, haue made my prayres approue
               
                  Achilles pitie; by thy guide, brought to his Princely tent.
            
            
               
                  Hermes replid
                     •…
                  ; You tempt me now, (old king) to a consent,
               Farre from me; though youth aptly erres. I secretly receiueHermes againe to Pr
                        •…
                     am.
               
               Gifts, that I cannot brodely vouch? take graces that will giue
               My Lord dishonour? or what he, knowes not? or will esteeme
               Perhaps vnfit? such briberies, perhaps at first may seeme
               Sweet, and secure; but futurely, they still proue sowre; and breed
               Both feare, and danger. I could wish, thy graue affaires did need
               My guide to Argos; either shipt, or lackying by thy side;
               And would be studious in thy guard; so nothing could be tride,
               But care in me, to keepe thee safe; for that I could excuse,
               And vouch to all men. These words past, he put the deeds in vse,
               For which Ioue sent him; vp he leapt, to Priams chariot,
               Tooke scourge and reines, and blew in strength, to his free steeds; and got
               The nauall towres and deepe dike strait. The guards were all at meat,
               Those he enslumberd; op't the ports, and in he safely let
               Old Priam, with his wealthy prise. Forthwith they reacht the Tent
               Of great Achilles. Large, and high; and in his most ascent
               A shaggie roofe of seedy reeds, mowne f
                     •…
                  om the meades; a hall
               Of state they made their king in it, and strengthned it withall,
               Thicke with firre rafters; whose approch, was let in, by a dore
               That had but one barre; but so bigge, that three men euermore
               Raisd it, to shut; three fresh take downe: which yet Aeacides
               
               Would shut and ope himselfe. And this with farre more ease
               
                  Hermes set ope, entring the king; then leapt from horse, and said:
            
            
               
                  Now know (old king) that, Mercurie (a god) hath giuen this aid
               To thy endeuour, sent by Ioue; and now, away must I:
               For men would enuy thy estate, to see a Deitie
               Affect a man thus: enter thou, embrace Achilles knee;
               And by his sire, sonne, mother pray, his ruth, and grace to thee.
            
            
               This said; he high Olympus reacht, the king then left his coach
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               To graue Idaeus, and went on; made his resolu'd approach:
               And enterd in a goodly roome; where, with his Princes sate
               
                  Ioue-lou'd Achilles, at their feast; two onely kept the state
               Of his attendance, Alcymus, and Lord Automedon.
               
               At Priams entrie; a great time, Achilles gaz'd vpon
               His wonderd at approch; nor eate: the rest did nothing see,
               While close he came vp; with his hands, fast holding the bent knee
               Of Hectors conqueror; and kist, that large man-slaughtring hand,
               That much blood from his sonnes had drawne; And as in some strange land,
               And great mans house; a man is driuen, (with that abhor
                     •…
                  'd dismay,Simile.
               
               That followes wilfull bloodshed still; his fortune being to slay
               One, whose blood cries alowde for his) to pleade protection
               In such a miserable plight, as frights the lookers on:
               In such a stupefied estate, Achilles sate to see,
               So vnexpected, so in night, and so incrediblie,
               Old Priams entrie; all his friends, one on another star'd,
               To see his strange lookes, seeing no cause. Thus Priam then prepar'dPriam to Achill
                        •…
                     .
               
               His sonnes redemption: See in me, O godlike Thetis sonne,
               Thy aged father; and perhaps, euen now being outrunne
               With some of my woes; neighbour foes, (thou absent) taking time
               To do him mischiefe; no meane left, to terrifie the crime
               Of his oppression; yet he heares, thy graces still suruiue,
               And ioyes to heare it; hoping still, to see thee safe arriue,
               From ruin'd Troy: but I (curst man) of all my race, shall liue
               To see none liuing. Fiftie sonnes, the Deities did giue,
               My hopes to liue in; all aliue, when neare our trembling shore
               The Greeke ships harbor'd; and one wombe, nineteene of those sons bore.
               Now Mars, a number of their knees, hath strengthlesse left; and he
               That was (of all) my onely ioy, and Troyes sole guard; by thee
               (Late fighting for his countrey) slaine; whose tenderd person, now
               I come to ransome. Infinite, is that I offer you,
               My selfe conferring it; exposde, alone to all your oddes:
               Onely imploring right of armes. Achilles, feare the gods,
               Pitie an old man, like thy 
                     •…
                  ire; different in onely this,
               That I am wretcheder; and beare, that weight of miseries
               That neuer man did: my curst lips, enforc't to kisse that hand
               That slue my children. This mou'd teares; his fathers name did stand
               (Mention'd by Priam) in much helpe, to his compasfion;
               And mou'd Aeacides so much, he could not looke vpon
               The weeping father. With his hand, he gently put away
               His graue face; calme remission now, did mutually display
               Her powre in eithers heauinesse; old Priam, to record
               
                  His sonnes death; and his deaths man see, his teares, and bosome pour'd
               Before Achilles. At his feete, he laid his reuerend head.
               
                  Achilles thoughts, now with his sire, now with his friend, were fed.
               Betwixt both, Sorrow fild the the tent. But now Aeacides,
               
               (Satiate at all parts, with the ruth, of their calamities)Achilles remorse of Pria
                        •…
                     .
               
               Start vp, and vp he raisd the king. His milke-white head and beard,
               With pittie he beheld, and said; Poore man, thy mind is scar'd,
               With much affliction; how durst, thy person thus alone,
               Venture on his sight, that hath 
                     •…
                  aine, so many a worthy sonne,
               And so deare to thee? thy old heart, is made of iron; sit
               And settle we our woes, though huge; for nothing profits it.
               Cold mourning wastes but our liues heates. The gods haue destinate,
               That wretched mortals must liue sad. Tis the immortall state
               Of Deitie, that liues secure. Two Tunnes of gifts there lie
               In Ioues gate; one of good, one ill, that our mortalitie,
               Maintaine, spoile, order: which when Ioue, doth mixe to any man;
               One while he frolicks, one while mourns. If of his mournfull Kan
               A man drinks onely; onely wrongs, he doth expose him to.
               Sad hunger, in th'abundant earth, doth tosse him to and froe,
               Respected, nor of gods, nor men. The mixt cup Peleus dranke,
               Euen from hi
                     •…
                   birth, heauen bl
                     •…
                  st his life; he liu'd not that could thanke
               The gods for such rare benefits, as set foorth his estate.
               He reign'd among his Myrmidons, most rich, most fortunate.
               And (though a mortall) had his bed, deckt with a deathlesse Dame.
               And yet with all this good, one ill, god mixt, that takes all name
               From all that goodnesse; his Name now, (whose preseruation here,
               Men count the crowne of their most good) not blest with powre to beare
               One blossome, but my selfe: and I, shaken as soone as blowne.
               Nor shall I liue to cheare his age, and giue nutrition
               To him that nourisht me. Farre off, my rest is set in Troy,
               
               To leaue thee restlesse, and thy seed. Thy selfe, that did enioy,
               (As we haue heard) a happie life: what Lesbos doth containe,
               (In times past being a blest mans seate:) what the vnmeasur'd maine
               Of Hell
                        •…
                     spontus, Phrygi
                        •…
                     
                   holds; are all said to adorne
               Thy Empire; wealth, and sonnes enow: but when the gods did turne
               Thy blest state to partake with bane; warre, and the bloods of men,
               Circl'd thy citie, neuer cleare. Sit downe and suffer then;
               Mourne not ineuitable things; thy teares can spring no deeds
               To helpe theee, nor recall thy sonne: impacience euer breeds
               Ill vpon ill; mak
                     •…
                  s worst things worse; and therefore sit. He said,
               Giue me no seate (great seed of Ioue) when yet vnransomed,Priam to A
                     
                        •…
                     .
               
               
                  Hector lies ritelesse in thy tents: but daigne with vtmost speed
               His resignation, that these eyes, may see his person freed;
               And thy grace satisfied with gifts. Accept what I haue brought,
               And turne to Phthia; tis enough, thy conquering hand hath fought,
               Till Hector faltred vnder it; and Hectors father stood
               With free humanitie safe. He frown'd, and said; Giue not my bloodAchilles angry with Pri
                        •…
                     .
               
               Fresh cause of furie; I know well, I must r
                     •…
                  signe thy sonne;
               
                  
                  Ioue by my mother vtterd it; and what besides is done,
               I know as amply; and thy selfe, (old Priam) I know too.
               Some god hath brought thee: for no man, durst vse a thought to go
               On such a seruice; I haue guards; and I haue gates to stay
               Easie accesses; do not then, presume thy will can sway,
               Like Ioues will; and incense againe, my quencht blood; lest nor thou,
               Nor Ioue gets the command of me. This made the old king bow,
               And downe he sate in feare; the Prince, leapt like a Lion forth;
               
                  Automedon, and Alcymus, attending; all the worth
               Brought for the body, they tooke downe, and brought in; and with it,
               
                  Idaeus (herald to the king,) a cote embroderd yet,
               And two rich cloakes, they left to hide, the person. Thetis sonne
               Cald out his women, to annoint; and quickly ouerrunne
               The Corse with water; lifting it, in priuate, to the coach;
               Lest Priam saw; and his cold blood, embrac't a fierie touch,
               Of anger, at the turpitude, prophaning it; and blew
               Againe his wraths fire to his death. This done; his women threw
               The cote and cloake on; but the Corse, Achilles owne hand laide
               Vpon a bed; and with his friends; to chariot it conuaide.
               For which forc't grace (abhorring so, from his free mind) he wept;
               Cried out for anger, and thus praide: O friend, do not except
               Against this fauour to our foe (if in the deepe thou heare)
               And that I giue him to his Sire; he gaue faire ransome; deare
               In my obseruance, is Ioues will; and whatsoeuer part
               Of all these gifts, by any meane, I fitly may conuert
               To thy renowne here; and will there; it shall be pour'd vpon
               Thy honour'd sepulcher. This said, he went, and what was done,
               Told Priam, saying: Father, now, thy wils fit rites are paide,
               Thy sonne is giuen vp; in the morne, thine eyes shall see him laid
               Deckt in thy chariot, on his bed; in meane space, let vs eate.
               The rich-hair'd Niobe, found thoughts, that made her take her meate;
               Though twelue deare children she saw slaine: sixe daughters, sixe yong sons.
               The sonnes, incenst Apollo slue: the maides confusions
               
                  Diana wrought; since Niobe, her merits durst compare
               With great Latona
                        •…
                     ; arguing, that she did onely beare
               Two children; and her selfe had twelue; For which, those onely two
               Slue all her twelue; nine dayes they lay, steept in their blood: her woe
               Found no friend, to afford them fire; Saturnius had turnd
               Humanes to stones. The tenth day yet; the good celestials burnd
               The trunkes themselues; and Niobe, when she was tyr'd with teares,
               Fell to her foode; and now with rockes; and wilde hils mixt she beares
               (In Sypilus) the gods wraths still; in that place, where tis said,
               The Goddesse Fairies vse to dance, about the funerall bed
               Of Achelous; where (though turn'd, with cold griefe, to a stone)
               Heauen giues her heate enough to feele, what plague comparison
               With his powers (made by earth) deserues: affect not then too farre
               Without griefe, like a god, being a man; but for a mans life care,
               And take fit foode: thou shalt haue time, beside to mourne thy sonne;
               
                  He shall be tearefull; thou being full; not here, but Ilion
               
               Shall finde thee weeping roomes enow. He said, and so arose;
               And causd a siluer-fleec't sheepe, kill'd; his friends skils did dispose
               The fleaing, cutting of it vp; and cookely spitted it;
               Rosted; and drew it artfully. Automedon as fit
               Was for the reuerend Sewers place; and all the browne ioynts seru'd
               On wicker vessell to the boord; Achilles owne hands keru'd;
               And close they fell too. Hunger stancht; talke, and obseruing timeTheir mutuall obseruation of eithers fashion at the table.
               
               Was vsde, of all hands; Priam sate, amaz'd to see the prime
               Of Thetis sonne; accomplisht so, with stature, lookes, and grace;
               In which, the fashion of a god, he thought had chang'd his place.
               
                  Achilles fell to him as fast; admir'd as much his yeares;
               (Told, in his graue, and good aspect;) his speech euen charm'd his eares:
               So orderd; so materiall. With this food feasted too,
               Old Priam spake thus: Now (Ioues seed) command that I may go,Priam to Achilles.
               
               And adde to this feast grace of rest: these lids nere closde mine eyes
               Since vnder thy hands fled th
                     •…
                   soule, of my deare sonne; sighes, cries,
               And woes; all vse from food, and sleepe, haue taken: the base courts
               Of my sad Pallace, made my beds; where all the abiect sorts
               Of sorrow, I haue varied; tumbl'd in dust, and hid;
               No bit, no drop of sustenance toucht. Then did Achilles bid
               His men and women see his bed, laid downe, and couered
               With purple Blankets; and on them, an Arras Couerlid;
               Wast costs of silke plush laying by. The women straite tooke lights,
               And two beds made, with vtmost speed; and all the other rites
               Their Lord nam'd, vsde; who pleasantly, the king in hand thus bore:
            
            
               Good father, you must sleepe without; lest any CounsellorAchilles to Priam.
               
               Make his accesse in depth of night; as oft their industrie
               Brings them t'impart our warre-affaires; of whom should any eye
               Discerne your presence, his next steps, to Agamemnon flie;
               And then shall I lose all these gifts. But go to, signifie,
               (And that with truth) how many daies, you meane to keepe the state
               Of Hectors funerals: because, so long would I rebate
               Mine owne edge, set to sacke your towne; and all our host containe
               From interruption of your rites. He answerd; If you meane
            
            
               To suffer such rites to my sonne; you shall performe a part
               Of most grace to me. But you know, with how dismaid a heart,
               Our host tooke Troy; and how much Feare, will therefore apprehend
               Their spirits to make out againe, so farre as we must send
               For wood, to raise our heape of death; vnlesse I may assure,
               That this your high grace will stand good; and make their passe secure;
               Which if you seriously confirme; nine daies I meane to mourne;
               The tenth, keepe funerall and feast: th'eleuenth raise, and adorne
               My sonnes fit Sepulcher. The twelfth (if we must needs) weele fight.
            
            
               Be it (replyed Aeacides) do Hector all this right;
               Ile hold warre backe those whole twelue daies: of which, to free all feare,
               Take this my right hand. This confirm'd, the old king rested there.
               His Herald lodg'd by him; and both, in forepart of the tent;
               
                  
                  Achilles in an in most roome, of wondrous ornament;
               Whose side, bright-cheekt Briseis warm'd. Soft Sleepe tam'd gods and men;
               All, but most vsefull Mercurie; Sleepe could not lay one chaine
               On his quicke temples; taking care, for getting off againe
               Engaged Priam, vndiscern'd, of those that did maintaine
               The sacred watch. Aboue his head, he stood with this demand.
            
            
               O father, sleep'st thou so secure, still lying in the handMercurie appeares to Priam in his sleepe.
               
               Of so much ill? and being dismist, by great Aeacides?
               
               Tis true, thou hast redeem'd the dead; but for thy lifes release
               (Should Agamemnon heare thee here) three times the price now paide,
               Thy sonnes hands must repay for thee. This said; the king (affraid)
               Start from his sleepe; Idaeus cald; and (for both) Mercurie
               
               The horse, and mules, (before losde) ioyn'd, so soft and curiously,
               That no eare heard; and through the host, draue; but when they drew
               To gulphy Xanthus bright-wau'd streame, vp to Olympus flew
               Industrious Mercurie. And now, the saffron morning rose;
               Spreading her white robe ouer all, the world. When (full of woes)
               They scourg'd on, with the Corse to Troy; from whence, no eye had seene
               (Before Cassandra) their returne. She, (like loues golden Queene,
               Ascending Pergamus) discern'd, her fathers person nie;
               His Herald, and her brothers Corse; and then she cast this crie
               Round about Troy; O Troians, if euerye did greet
               
                  Hector, return'd from fight aliue; now, looke ye out, and meetCassandra to the Tr
                        •…
                     ians.
               
               His ransom'd person. Then his worth, was all your cities ioy;
               Now do it honour. Out all rusht; woman, nor man, in Troy
               
               Was left: a most vnmeasur'd crie, tooke vp their voices. Close
               To Scaeas Ports they met the Corse; and to it, headlong goes
               The reuerend mother; the deare wife; vpon it, strowe their haire,
               And lie entranced. Round about, the people broke the aire
               In lamentations; and all day, had staid the people there;
               If Priam had not cryed; Giue way, giue me but leaue to beare
               The body home; and mourne your fils. Then cleft the preasse; and gaue
               Way to the chariot. To the Court, Herald Idaeus draue,
               Where on a rich bed they bestow'd, the honor'd person; round
               Girt it with Singers; that the woe, with skillfull voices crownd.
               A wofull Elegie they sung, wept singing, and the dames,
               Sigh'd, as they sung: Andromache, the downeright prose exclamesAndromaches lamentation for her husband.
               
               Began to all; she on the necke, of slaughterd Hector fell
               And cried out: O my husband! thou, in youth badst youth farewell,
               Left'st me a widdow: thy sole sonne, an infant; our selues curst
               In our birth, made him right our child; for all my care, that nurst
               His infancie, will neuer giue, life to his youth; ere that,
               
                  Troy from her top, will be destroy'd; thou guardian of our state;
               Thou euen of all her strength, the strength; thou that in care wert past
               Her carefull mothers of their babes, being gone; how can she last?
               Soone will the swolne fleete fill her wombe, with all their seruitude,
               My selfe with them, and thou with me (deare sonne) in labours rude,
               Shalt be emploid; sternely suruaid, by cruell Conquerors;
               
                  Or rage not (suffering life so long;) some one, whose hate abhorres
               Thy presence; (putting him in mind, of his sire slaine by thine;Andromaches lamentation for Hector.
               
               His brother, sonne, or friend) shall worke, thy ruine before mine;
               Tost from some towre; for many Greeks, haue eate earth from the hand
               Of thy strong father: In sad fight, his spirit was too much mann'd;
               And therefore mourne his people; we; thy Parents (my deare Lord)
               For that, thou mak'st endure a woe; blacke, and to be abhorr'd.
               Of all yet, thou hast left me worst; not dying in thy bed;
               And reaching me thy last-raisd hand: in nothing counselled;
               Nothing commanded by that powre, thou hadst of me; to do
               Some deed for thy sake: O for these; neuer will end my woe;
               Neuer my teares ceasse. Thus wept she; and all the Ladies closde,
               Her passion with a generall shrieke. Then Hecuba disposde,
               Her thoughts in like words: O my sonne, of all mine, much most deare;Hecubas lamentation.
               
               Deare, while thou liu'dst too, euen to gods: and after death they were
               Carefull to saue thee. Being best; thou most wer't enuied;
               My other sonnes, Achilles sold; but thee, he left not dead.
               
                  Imber and Samos; the false Ports, of Lemnos entertain'd
               Their persons; thine, no Port but death; nor there, in rest remain'd,
               Thy violated Corse; the Tombe, of his great friend was spher'd
               With thy dragg'd person; yet from death, he was not therefore rer'd.
               But (all his rage vsde) so the gods, haue tenderd thy dead state;
               Thou liest as liuing; sweete and fresh, as he that felt the Fate
               Of Phoebus holy shafts. These words, the Queene vsde for her mone;
               And next her; Hellen held that state; of speech and passion.
            
            
               O Hector, All my brothers more, were not so lou'd of me,Hellens lamentation.
               
               As thy most vertues. Not my Lord, I held so deare as thee;
               That brought me hither; before which, I would I had bene brought
               To ruine; for, what breeds that wish (which is the mischiefe wrought
               By my accesse) yet neuer found, one harsh taunt; one words ill
               From thy sweet cariage. Twenty yeares, do now their circles 
                     •…
                  ill,
               Since my arriuall; all which time, thou didst not onely beare
               Thy selfe without checke; But all else, that my Lords brothers were;
               Their sisters Lords; sisters themselues; the Queen my mother in law;
               (The king being neuer but most milde) when thy mans spirits saw
               Sowre, and reprochfull; it would still, reproue their bitternesse
               With sweet words. And thy gentle soule. And therefore thy deceasse,
               I truly mourne for; and my selfe, curse, as the wretched cause;
               All brode Troy yeelding me not one; that any humane lawes
               Of pitie, or forgiuenesse mou'd, t'entreate me humanely,
               But onely thee; all else abhorr'd, me for my destinie.
            
            
               These words, made euen the cōmons mourn; to whom the king said, Friends,Priam to the Troians.
               
               Now fetch wood for our funerall fire; nor feare the foe intends
               Ambush, or any violence; Achilles gaue his word,
               At my dismission; that twelue dayes, he would keepe sheath'd his sword,
               And all mens else. Thus oxen, mules, in chariots straite they put;
               Went forth; and an vnmeasur'd pile, of Syluane matter cut;
               Nine daies emploide in cariage; but when the tenth morne shinde
               
                  On wretched mortals; then they brought, the-fit-to-be-diuin'd,
               Forth to be burn'd: Troy swum in teares. Vpon the piles most height
               They laid the person, and gaue fire; all day it burn'd; all night.
               But when th'eleuenth morne let on earth, her rosie fingers shine,
               The people flockt about the pile; and first, with blackish wine
               Quencht all the flames. His brothers then, and friends, the snowy bones
               Gatherd into an vrne of gold; still powring on their mones.
               Then wrapt they in soft purple veiles, the rich vrne; digg'd a pit;
               Grau'd it; ramb'd vp the graue with stones, and quickly built to it
               A sepulcher. But while that worke, and all the funerall rites
               Were in performance, guards were held, at all parts, dayes and nights,
               For feare of false surprise before, they had imposde the crowne
               To these solemnities. The tombe, aduanc't once, all the towne,
               In Ioue-nurst Priams Court partooke, a passing sumptuous feast;
               And so horse-taming Hectors rites, gaue vp his soule to Rest.
               
            
            
               Thus farre the Ilian Ruines I haue laid
               Open to English eyes. In which (repaid
               With thine owne value;) go vnualu'd Booke
               Liue, and be lou'd. If any enuious looke
               Hurt thy cleare fame; learne that no state more hie
               Attends on vertue, then pin'd Enuies eye.
               Would thou wert worth it, that the best doth wound;
               Which this Age feedes, and which the last shall bound.
            
            
               THus with labour enough (though with more comfort in the merits of my diuine Author) I haue brought my translation of his Iliads to an end. If either therein, or in the harsh vtterance, or matter of my Comment before; I haue, for haste, scatterd with my burthen (lesse then fifteene weekes being the whole time, that the last twelue bookes translation stood me in) I desire my present will, and (I doubt not) hability (if God giue life) to reforme and perfect all heareafter, may be ingenuouslly accepted for the absolute worke. The rather, considering the most learned (with all their helpes and time) haue bene so often and vnanswerably, miserably taken halting. In the meane time; that most assistfull and vnspeakeable spirit, by whose thrice sacred conduct and inspiration, I haue finished this labour, diffuse the fruitfull horne of his blessings through these goodnesse-thirsting watchings; without which, vtterly dry and bloodlesse is whatsoeuer Mortality soweth.
               But where our most diligent Spondanus ends his worke with a prayer to be taken out of these Maeanders; and Euripian riuers (as he termes them) of Ethnicke, and prophane writers (being quite contrarie to himselfe at the beginning) I thrice humbly beseech the most deare and diuine mercie (euer most incomparably preferring the great light of his truth in his direct, and infallible Scriptures) I may euer be enabled, by resting wondring in his right comfortable shadowes in these; to magnifie the clearenesse of his almighty apparance in the other.
               And with this salutation of Poe
                     •…
                  ie giuen by our Spondanus in his Preface to these Iliads. (All haile Saint-sacred Poesie; that vnder so much gall of fictio
                     •…
                  , such abundance of honey doctrine hast hidden; not reuealing them to the vnworthy worldly; wouldst thou but so much make me, that amongst thy N
                     •…
                  uices I might be

numbred; no time should euer come neare my life, that could make me forsake thee.) I will conclude with this my daily and nightly prayer; learn'd of the most learned Symplicius.
               
               Supplico tibi Domine, Pater, & Dux rationis nostrae; vt nostrae nobilitatis recordemur qua tu nos ornasti; & vt tu nobis praestò sis, vt ijs qui per sese mouentur: vt & à corporis contagio, brutorumque affectuum repurgemur, eosque superemus, & regamus, &, sicut decet, pro instrumentis ijs vtamur. Deinde vt nobis adiumento sis, ad accuratam rationis nostrae correctionem; & coniunctionem cum ijs quae verè sunt, per lucem veritatis. Et tertium, Saluatori supplex oro; vt ab oculis animorum nostrorum caliginem prorsus abstergas, vt (quod apud Homerum est) Norimus bene qui Deus, aut mortalis habendus.
               Amen.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            TO THE RIGHT GRACIOVS and worthy, the Duke of LENNOX.
            
               
                  AMongst th'Heroes of the VVorlds prime years,
               Stand here, great Duke, & see thē shine about you:
               Informe your princely minde and spirit by theirs,
               And then, like them, liue euer; looke without you,
               For subiects fit to vse your place, and grace:
               VVhich throw about you, as the Sunne, his Raies;
               In quickning, with their power, the dying Race
               Offriendlesse Vertue; since they thus can raise
               Their honor'd Raisers, to Eternitie.
               
               None euer liu'd by Selfe-loue: Others good
               Is th'obiect of our owne. They (liuing) die,
               That burie in them selues their fortunes brood.
               To this soule, then, your gracious count'nance giue;
               That gaue, to such as you, such meanes to liue.
            
         
         
            TO THE MOST GRAVE AND honored Temperer of Law, and Equitie, the Lord CHANCELOR, &c.
            
            
               
                  THat Poesie is not so remou'd a thing
               From graue administry of publike weales,
               As these times take it; heare this Poet sing,
               Most iudging Lord: and see how he reueales
               The mysteries of Rule, and rules to guide
               The life of Man, through all his choicest waies.
               Nor be your timely paines the lesse applyed
               For Poesies idle name; because her Raies
               Haue shin'd through greatest Counsellors, and Kings.
               Heare Royall Hermes sing th'Egyptian Lawes;
               How Solon, Draco, Zoroastes sings
               Their Lawes in verse: and let their iust applause
               (By all the world giuen) yours (by vs) allow;
               That, since you grace all vertue, honour you.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE MOST WORTHIE Earle, Lord Treasurer, and Treasure of our Countrey, the Earle of SALISBVRY, &c.
            
            
               
                  VOuchsafe, great Treasurer, to turne your eye,
               And see the opening of a Grecian Mine;
               VVhich, VVisedome long since made her Treasury;
               And now her title doth to you resigne.
               VVherein as th'Ocean walks not, with such waues,
               The Round of this Realme, as your VVisedomes seas;
               Nor, with his great eye, sees; his Marble, saues
               Our State, like your Vlyssian policies:
               So, none like HOMER hath the VVorld enspher'd;
               Earth, Seas, & heauen, fixt in his verse, and mouing;
               VVhom all times wisest Men, haue held vnper'de;
               And therefore would conclude with your approuing.
               Then grace his spirit, that all wise men hath grac't,
               And made things euer flitting, euer last.
            
            
               An Anagram.
               Robert Cecyl, Earle of Salisburye.
               Curbfoes; thy care, is all our erly Be.
            
         
         
            TO THE MOST HONOR'DRE
               storer of ancient Nobilitie, both in blood and vertue, the Earle of SVFFOLKE, &c.
            
            
               
                  IOine, Noblest Earle, in giuing worthy grace,
               To this great gracer of Nobilitie:
               See here what sort of men, your honor'd place
               Doth properly command; if Poesie
               (Profest by them) were worthily exprest.
               The grauest, wisest, greatest, need not, then,
               Account that part of your command the least;
               Nor them such idle, needlesse, worthlesse Men.
               VVho can be worthier Men in publique weales,
               Then those (at all parts) that prescrib'd the best?
               That stird vp noblest vertues, holiest zeales;
               And euermore haue liu'd as they profest?
               A world of worthiest Men, see one create,
               (Great Earle); whom no man since could imitate.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE MOST NOBLE AND learned Earle, the Earle of NORTHAMTON, &c.
            
            
               
                  TO you, most learned Earle, whose learning can
               Reiect vnlearned Custome, and Embrace
               The reall vertues of a worthie Man,
               I prostrate this great Worthie, for your grace;
               And pray that Poesies well-deseru'd ill Name
               (Being such, as many moderne Poets make her)
               May nought eclipse her cleare essentiall flame:
               But as she shines here, so refuse or take her.
               Nor do I hope; but euen your high affaires
               May suffer intermixture with her view;
               VVhere Wisedome fits her for the highest chaires;
               And mindes, growne old, with cares of State, renew:
               You then (great Earle) that in his owne tongue know
               This king of Poets; see his English show.
            
         
         
            TO THE MOST NOBLE, MY singular good Lord, the Earle of Arundell.
            
            
               
                  STand by your noblest stocke; and euer grow
               In loue, and grace of vertue most admir'd;
               And we will pay the sacrifice we owe
               Of prayre and honour, with all good desir'd
               To your diuine soule; that shall euer liue
               In height of all blisse prepar'd here beneath,
               In that ingenuous and free grace you giue
               To knowledge; onely Bulwarke against Death.
               VVhose rare sustainers here, her powres sustaine
               Hereafter. Such reciprocall effects
               Meete in her vertues. VVhere the loue doth raigne,
               The Act of knowledge crownes our intellects.
               VVhere th'Act, nor Loue is, there, like beasts men die:
               Not Life, but Time is their Eternitie.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE LEARNED AND most noble Patrone of learning the Earle of PEMBROOKE, &c.
            
            
               
                  ABoue all others may your Honor shine;
               As, past all others, your ingenuous beames
               Exhale into your grace the forme diuine
               Of godlike Learning; whose exiled streames
               Runne to your succour, charg'd with all the wracke
               Of sacred Vertue. Now the barbarous witch
               (Foule Ignorance) sits charming of them backe
               To their first Fountaine, in the great and rich;
               Though our great Soueraigne counter-checke her charmes
               (VVho in all learning, reignes so past example)
               Yet (with her) Turkish Policie puts on armes,
               To raze all knowledge in mans Christian Temple.
               (You following yet our king) your guard redouble:
               Pure are those streames, that these times cannot trouble.
            
         
         
            TO THE RIGHT GRACIOVS Illustrator of vertue, and worthy of the fauour Royall, the Earle of MONTGOMRIE.
            
               
                  THere runs a blood, faire Earle, through your cleare vains
               That well entitles you to all things Noble;
               VVhich still the liuing Sydnian soule maintaines,
               And your Names ancient Noblesse doth redouble:
               For which I needs must tender to your Graces
               This noblest worke of Man; as made your Right.
               And though Ignoblesse, all such workes defaces
               As tend to Learning, and the soules delight:
               Yet since the sacred Penne doth testifie,
               That Wisedome (which is Learnings naturall birth)
               Is the cleare Mirror of Gods Maiestie,
               And Image of his goodnesse here in earth;
               If you the Daughter wish, respect the Mother:
               
               One cannot be obtain'd, without the other.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE MOST LEARNED and Noble Concluder of the Warres Arte, and the Muses, the Lord LISLE, &c.
            
            
               
                  NOr let my paines herein (long honor'd Lord)
               Faile of your ancient Nobly-good respects;
               Though obscure Fortune neuer would afford
               My seruice show, till these thus late effects.
               And though my poore deserts weigh'd neuer more
               Then might keepe downe their worthlesse memorie
               From your high thoughts (enricht with better store)
               Yet yours, in me, are fixt eternally;
               VVhich all my fit occasions well shall proue.
               Meane space (with your most Noble Nephewes) daine
               To shew your free and honorable loue
               To this Greeke Poet, in his English vaine.
               You cannot more the point of death controule;
               Then to stand close by such a liuing soule.
            
         
         
            TO THE GREAT AND VER
               tuous, the Countesse of MONTGOMRIE.
            
               
                  YOur Fame (great Lady) is so lowd resounded,
               By your free Trumpet, my right worthy frend;
               That, with it, all my forces stand confounded,
               Arm'd, and disarm'd at once, to one iust end;
               To honor and describe the blest consent
               Twixt your high blood and soule, in vertues rare.
               Of which, my friends praise is so eminent,
               That I shall hardly like his Echo fare,
               To render onely th'ends of his shrill Verse.
               Besides; my Bounds are short; and I must, me
                     •…
                  rely,
               My will to honour your rare parts, rehearse;
               VVith more time, singing your renowme more clearely.
               Meane-time, take Homer for my wants supply:
               To whom adioyn'd, your Name shall neuer die.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE HAPPY STARRE, DI
               scouered in our Sydneian Asterisme; comfort of learning, Sphere of all the vertues, the Lady VVROTHE.
            
               
                  WHen all our other Starres set (in their skies)
               To Vertue, and all honor of her kind;
               That you (rare Lady) should so clearely rise,
               Makes all the vertuous glorifie your mind.
               And let true Reason, and Religion trie,
               If it be Fancie, not iudiciall Right,
               In you t'oppose the times Apostasie,
               To take the soules part, and her sauing Light,
               VVhile others blinde and burie both in Sense;
               VVhen, tis the onely end, for which all liue.
               And, could those soules, in whom it dies, dispense
               As much with their Religion; they would giue
               That as small grace. Then shun their course, faire Starre;
               And still keepe your way, pure, and circular.
            
         
         
            TO THE RIGHT NOBLE PA
               tronesse and Grace of Uertue, the Countesse of BEDFORD.
            
               
                  TO you, faire Patronesse, and Muse to Learning;
               The Fount of learning and the Muses sends
               This Cordiall for your vertues; and forewarning
               To leaue no good, for th'ill the world commends.
               Custome seduceth but the vulgar sort:
               VVith whom, when Noblesse mixeth, she is vulgare;
               The truly-Noble, still repaire their Fort,
               VVith gracing good excitements, and gifts rare;
               In which the narrow path, to Happinesse,
               Is onely beaten. Vulgar pleasure sets
               Nets for her selfe, in swinge of her excesse;
               And beates her selfe there dead, ere free she gets.
               Since pleasure then with pleasure still doth waste;
               Still please with vertue Madame: That will last.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE RIGHT VALOROVS and virtuous Lord, the Earle of SOVTH-HAMTON, &c.
            
            
               
                  IN Choice of all our Countries Noblest spirits
               (Borne slauisher barbarisme to conuin
                     •…
                  )
               I could not but in uoke your ho or'd Merits,
               To follow the swift vertue of our Prince.
               The cries of Vertue, and her Fortresse, Learning,
               
               Brake earth, and to Elysium did descend,
               To call vp Homer: who therein discerning
               That his excitements, to their good, had end
               (As being a Grecian) puts-on English armes;
               And to the hardie Natures in these climes
               Stikes-vp his high and spiritfull alarmes,
               That they may cleare earth of those impious Crimes
               VVhose conquest (though most faintly all apply)
               You know (learn'd Earle) all liue for, and should die.
            
         
         
            TO MY EXCEEDING GOOD Lord, the Earle of SVSSEX: with duty alwaies remembred to his honor'd Countesse.
            
            
               
                  YOu that haue made, in our great Princes Name
               (At his high birth) his holy Christian vowes;
               May witnesse now (to his eternall Fame)
               How he performes them thus far: & stil growes
               Aboue his birth in vertue; past his yeares,
               In strength of Bountie, and great Fortitude.
               Amongst this traine, then, of our choicest Peeres,
               That follow him in chace of vices rude,
               Summon'd by his great Herald Homers voice;
               March you; and euer let your Familie
               (In your vowes made for such a Prince) reioyce.
               Your seruice to his State shall neuer die.
               And, for my true obseruance, let this show,
               No meanes escapes when I may honour you.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE RIGHT NOBLE AND Heroicall, my singular good Lord, the Lord of VVALDEN, &c.
            
            
               
                  NOr let the vulgar sway Opinion beares
               (Rare Lord) that Poesies fauor shewes men vaine,
               Ranke you amongst her sterne disfauourers;
               She all things worthy fauour doth maintaine.
               Vertue, in all things else, at best she betters;
               Honour she heightens, and giues Life in Death;
               She is the ornament, and soule of letters:
               The worlds deceipt before her vanisheth.
               Simple she is as Doues, like Serpents wise;
               Sharpe, graue, and sacred: nought but things diuine,
               And things diuining, fit her faculties;
               (Accepting her as she is genuine.)
               If she be vaine then, all things else are vile;
               If vertuous, still be Patrone of her stile.
            
         
         
            TO THE MOST TRVLY-NO
               ble and Uertue-gracing Knight Sir Thomas HOVVARD.
            
               
                  THe true, and nothing-lesse-then sacred spirit
               That moues your feete so farre from the prophane;
               In skorne of Pride, and grace of humblest merit,
               Shall fill your Names sphere; neuer seeing it wane.
               It is so rare, in blood so high as yours
               To entertaine the humble skill of Truth;
               And put a vertuous end to all your powres;
               That th'honor Age askes, we giue you in youth.
               Your Youth hath wonne the maistrie of your Mind;
               As Homer sings of his Antilochus,
               
               The parallell of you in euery kind,
               Valiant, and milde, and most ingenious.
               Go on in Vertue, after Death and grow,
               And shine like Ledas twins; my Lord and you.
            
            
               Euer most humbly and faithfully deuoted to you, and all the rare Patrons of diuine Homer. Geo. Chapman.
            
            
         
      
   