
      
         
            
            
            THE
STRANGE,
VVONDERFVLL,
and bloudy Battell betweene
Frogs and Miſe:
            
            The occaſion of their falling out:
            Their preparation, munition, and reſolution
for the watres: The ſeuerall combats of euery
perſon of worth; with many other memorable
accidents.
            
            Interlaced with diuers pithy and morall ſentences,
no leſſe pleaſant to be read, then profitable
to be obſerued.
            
            Couertly decyphering the eſtate
of theſe times.
            
            Paraphraſtically done into Engliſh Heroycall
verſe by W. F. C. C. C.
            
            LONDON
Imprinted by S. S. for Iohn Bayly: and are
to be ſold at his ſhop in Chauncery lane,
neere to the Office of the ſixe
Clarkes. 1603.
         
         
            
            
               Perlege Maeonio cantatas carmine Ranas,
Et frontem nugis ſoluere diſce meis.
               Martialis in Xenia, 183.
            
            
            To the vertuous, courteous, and worſhipfull
Gentleman, Maſter Robert Greenewood of
Weſterton, health, with the happineſſe of both worlds.
            
               
                  SVch louing fauours from your ſonne I found,
               So kind affection at your Worſhips hand,
               Though vndeſerued, that I ſtill am bound,
               And vnto you and yours obliged ſtand:
               And though that Greene braunch, which ay-ſpringing ſtood,
               As chiefeſt crowne or garland to your wood,
               
               Be by the ſtroke of Fate quite cut away,
               Ne're ſhall a thankleſſe nature in me ſway.
               No loftie Cedar, though in height he paſſe
               Eche ſeu'rall plant which deſert forreſts yeeld;
               No Laurell, though Apollo's tree it was;
               No Pine for ſhippes, no Oke ordayn'd to build,
               Nor any ſhrub was halfe ſo deare to me,
               As was that braunch falne from the Greenewoods tree:
               Which though, as dead, entomb'd in earth it lyes,
               A day will come, we hope, to ſee it riſe.
            
            
               Here (worthy Sir) doe I preſent to you.
               The timely Buds of my froſt-bitten Spring,
               And though this trifle not deſerue your view,
               Yet ſuch a trifle once did Homer ſing,
               Adorn'd with robes, ſpun from the wooll of Greece,
               
               Homely by me now clad in Engliſh fleece:
               Albeit no pleaſure in this toy you take,
               Yet deigne a kind aſpect for Hargreues ſake,
            
            
               The vnworthy wel-willer of your Worſhips
wel-fare, William Fowldes.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader in generall.
            
               HAuing of late, for mine owne exerciſe at vacant
howres, conſummated the tranſlation
of this little Booke, I now boldly aduenture
to commit it to the Preſſe, being the rather
induced thereunto by the incouragement of
certaine of mine acquaintance: not that I ſeeke hereby to
winne praiſe, or publiſh this for any deuotion in print, ſince
I am verily perſwaded, it deſerues not the leaſt title of commendation:
and I hold it as a maxime with Lylie, that he
which commeth in print, becauſe hee would bee knowne, is
like the foole that goeth into the market, becauſe hee would
be ſeene. Onely I hope, that this my ſimple labour will be a
ſpurre to the riper wits of our time, that the golden works of
this & other famous Poets, may not ſtill lie hidden, as vnder
a vaile or myſterie, from the weake capacitie of meaner
iudgements. Concerning my tranſlation, as I cannot altogether
commend it: for quando
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   bonus dormitat
Homerus: ſo neither will I wholly diſcommend it; in the
one I might ſeeme arrogant; in the other be accounted fooliſh:
and therefore puto rectius eſſe, vt ſint mediocria
omnia. If one write neuer ſo well, he ſhall not pleaſe all; if
neuer ſo ill, he ſhall pleaſe ſome: a dog will barke, though he
lack his teeth; and a dolt wil cenſure, though he want iudgement.
I knowe, to ſome curious heads it will bee thought amiſſe,
that euery verſe anſweres not their expectation, becauſe
I haue not word for word concurd with the Author
in my tranſlation: yet if they will but looke a little into the
difficulty of this thing, conſidering the kind of verſe which
I haue vſed, I hope they will reſt ſatiſfied. I only wil anſwere
them out of Horace, Non verbum verbo curabis reddere,

fidus interpres. And furthermore (beſides the diuerſitie
betweene a conſtruction & a translation) they may
know▪ that there are many myſteries in this writer, which
vttered in Engliſh, would ſhew little pleaſure, and in mine
opinion, are better to bee vntouched, then to diminiſh the
grace of the reſt with tediouſnes & obſcuritie: I haue therefore
followed the counſell of the aforeſaid Horace, teaching
the duty of a good Interpreter, qui, quae deſperat tractata
niteſcere poſſe, relinquit. By which occaſion, ſome
fewe ſentences I haue in places omitted, ſomewhat added,
ſome what altered, and ſomewhat expounded: that which I
haue added, you ſhall find quoted in the margent. The ſignifications
of the names (being indeede no names, but onely
wordes correſpondent to the nature of Frogs and Miſe)
ne quis in ijs haereat, leſt any ſhould therewith be troubled,
I haue engliſhed and inſerted them in the verſe, that
the inferiour Readers ſhould not bee wearied with looking
in the margent▪ as for the learned, they need not be inſtructed.
I meane not be a preiudice to any that can do finer; only
I would deſire them to beare with this my ſimple labour,
and to accept it as a thing roughly begun, rather then polliſhed.
And if any with this will not bee contented, let him
take in hand, and doe it anew himſelfe, and I doubt not, but
he ſhal find it an eaſier thing to controll a line or two, then
to amend the whole of this interpretation. Farewell.
            
               W. F.
            
         
         
            
            To the captious company of carping
Readers.
            
               
                  SPurne not the ſtudy of my nouice Muſe,
               though but a toy;
               Who ſcornes to reade this trifle, let him chuſe,
               though ne're ſo coy:
               Yet no baſe trifle: for by Homers quill
               The ſubiect was contriu'd, if good or ill.
            
            
               If then the ſubiect was of Homers worth,
               from Homers brayne,
               What ſhould affray my Muſe to ſet this forth,
               and ſcorne diſdayne?
               For he which ſcoffes this Poeme in his pride,
               If that he durſt, great Homer would deride.
            
            
               Let addle heads by idle humours guiſe,
               ybent to ſtray,
               Ieſt at this battell of the Frogs and Miſe,
               
               Ile not diſmay,
               Since Homer ſtands as bulwarke on my part,
               T' award the ſcornfull termes that fooles will dart.
            
            
               The babbling prayſes of the vulgar vayne
               I nought eſteeme,
               Nor how the curious, through fantaſtick braine,
               my labours deeme.
               As one to eu'ry trifle giues applauſe,
               So th' other, all condemnes, without iuſt cauſe.
            
            
               And yet the cenſure of the meaneſt wit
               I nill refuſe:
               For ſlender iudgements beſt I thinke befit
               my ſimple Muſe:
               Onely I wiſh, that he which reads this booke,
               His praiſe or diſpraiſe may to reaſon looke.
               
                  Nil moror vlterius.
               
            
         
         
            
            In commendation of Poetry.
            
               
                  AMong the diuers currents that do flow
               Frōth' euer-ſpringing fountain of all art,
               The perled Nectar moſt contēt doth ſhow,
               Which Poetry full ſweetly doth impart,
               VVhoſe hunny'd vapour comforteth the heart,Aut prodeſſe volu
                        •
                     t, aut delect are Poc
                        ••
                     , aut ſimul.
               
               And vnder vailed fancies that doth ſing,
               Which doth much profit with great pleaſure bring
            
            
               For cert's the truth (though truth no colours need
               To men of vnderſtanding and ripe yeeres)
               VVhen she is masked in a ſeemely weed,
               More faire, more ſweet, and beautifull appeares,
               Her tale contents the mind, and glads the eares,
               And makes men more attentiue to her ſtory,
               That truth may ſtill preuayle with greater glory:
            
            
               For as an Image drawne in white and black,
               Though it be well proportioned with care,
               If it do other comely colours lack,
               To beautify the members, head, and haire,
               Vnto the eye appeares not halfe ſo faire;
               Nor with ſo much content doth fill the mind,
               As that pourtrayd with colours in his kind:
            
            
               Eu'n ſo a naked ſtorie ſimply told,
               Though cauſe be true and worthy due regard,Vt pictura Poeſis erit.
               
               Doth not mens hearts with ſuch affection hold,
               
                  
Nor hath the outward ſences ſo in gard,
               As doth that matter which is well declar'd,
               Adorned pleaſantly with termes and arte,
               Which pearcing th'row the eares, doth moue the
heart.
            
            
               This knew the learned Poets all of yore,
               This knew th' immortall Sages long agone,
               VVhoſe works the wiſeſt of our age adore,
               Such ſtore of wiſdome in their bookes is ſhone,
               Such pleaſure vnto all, offence to none,
               Such graue precepts hid vnder fine deuice,
               As eares and heart with wonderment ſurpriſe.
            
            
               No fable ſweet Philoſophy contaynes,
               VVithin the ſacred volumes of her cell,
               Dipt in the fount, which fromA hill cōſecrate to the Muſes. 
                  Pernaſſus ſtraynes,
               Whereas the thrice three Nymphes are ſaid to dwel,
               That Barbariſme and ignorance expell:
               But vnder vaile deepe ſecrets doth vnfold,
               Though bnt a tale by wanton Ouid told.
            
            
               By wanton Ouid? heauenly Poeſie
               Pardon the raſhneſſe of my infant Muſe,
               That I, a client to thy myſterie,
               Should vnaduiſed by that word abuſe,Vita verecunda eſt, Muſa iocoſa mea.
               
               And terme him wanton, did no folly vſe:
               For though his Muſe was wanton, as he playned,
               Yet Ouids life was chaſte, and neuer ſtayned.
               
                  
Nor ſung he alwayes in a wanton lay,
               And penned pleaſing ditties of blind fire:
               Of deeper matters much could Ouid ſay,
               As he whoſe ſoaring ſpirit mounted higher,
               Than euer Poet after could aſpire.
               And ſaue the famous Homer chiefe of all,
               
                  Semper Virgilium excipio, The Prince of Poets may we Ouid call.
            
            
               But neyther Homer, Ouid, nor the reſt,
               That euer taſtedA fountayne of the Muſes. 
                  Aganippes ſpring,
               Though but to write of fables they addreſt,
               VVhich to th'vnskilfull no contentment bring,
               But with ſuch arte and knowledge did them ſing,
               That in their volumes ſcarce appeares one lyne,
               VVhich to the learned doth not ſeeme diuine.
            
            
               No vice of youth, no villayny of age,
               No lewd behauiour of each degree,
               But in the ſecret myſt'ries of the ſage,
               And graue inſtructions of Philoſophy,Ficta quidem narratione, ſed verac
                        •
                      ſignificatione haec dicuntur.
               
               Clad in the habit of ſweet Poeſie,
               Is aptly cowched in ſome prety fable,
               As well the learned to diſcuſſe are able.
            
            
               And not alone are vices ſet to view,
               And horrid plagues attending wickedneſſe:
               But bleſſed vertue with the heauenly crew,
               VVhich euer wayt vpon her worthyneſſe,
               
                  
By them are pourtrayd forth with comlineſſe:
               The meaneſt fable Poet e're did make,
               May ſtand as mirrour for example ſake.
            
            
               For proofe whereof read but this little booke,
               VVith vnderſtanding, knowledge, care and skill,
               And thou ſhalt find preſented to thy looke,
               Such wit and learning from the Authours quill,
               VVhich vnder fine inuentions meet thee ſtill;
               So pleaſant obiects that occurre thineThe eyes of thy mind eyes,
               As will thy ſoule with wonderment ſurpriſe.
            
            
               And not alone ſhall pleaſure thee awate,
               As thou peruſeſt what I now preſent;
               Here thou ſhalt haue fit matter for eche ſtate,
               If thou conſider what hereby is ment.
               Then thinke thy time herein not idly ſpent:
               Ponder with iudgemēt what thou read'ſt at leaſure;
               So may thy profit equallize thy pleaſure.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Batrachomyomachia:
            Or,
The Battell betweene
Frogs and Miſe.
            
               
                  YE thrice three daughters of immortall Ioue,
                  The nine Muſes.
               
               
                  Boeotian Nimphs of Helicons ſweet ſpring,
               Bright lamps of honor ſhining frō aboue,
               Where ſtil ye ſit ſecure from enuies ſting,
               Guiding the ſterne of learnings ſacred lore,
               Vouchſafe to guide my pen, I you implore;
               Your ſweet conſent conforme my tender breſt,
               While I adorne my verſe, as likes you beſt.
            
            
               Deigne from your pleaſant fountaynes of delight,
               And euer-running Riuers of true skill,
               Now to infuſe ſweet drops into my ſpright,
               And heau'nly Nectar on my plants diſtill:
               That they may grow like Bay, which euer ſprings,
               To bud the battels of two mighty Kings,
               And all the world may know how ſtrife did rife,
               Betweene renowned Frogs and gallant Miſe.
               
            
            
               The antique deedes,Si paruis componere magnal
                        •
                     
                     cebit. which wanton Ouid told,
               To be perform'd by Gyants long agone,
               When mighty hils together they inrold,
               Thinking to pull the Thundrer from his throne,
               Compared to theſe battels cannot be,
               No more then brambles to the Caedar tree,
               Whoſe lofty top dare check theThe Sun heau'ns fayre eye,
               When at midday he ſits in maieſtie.
            
            
            
               In theſe approued ſouldiers of ſterne Mars,
               
               Manhood, or Mars himſelfe, may ſeeme to dwell:
               For with ſuch valour they endur'd the warres,
               That horrid death their courage could not quell.
               Stout reſolution in their foreheads ſtood,
               Fighting like valiant hearts amid their blood.
               And this,Hic noſtri ſurgit origo mali. alas, did cauſe the mortall ſtrife,
               Whereby ſo many gallants loſt their life.
            
            
               The Kings owne ſonne, a Mouſe of royall ſtate,
               Next heire by birth apparent to the Crowne,
               Toyled with trauell, flying from the Cat,
               
               Vnto a pleaſant brooke to drinke came downe,
               Where couching low his body on the banke,
               With great delight cold water there he dranke.
               For though that gorged ſtomacks lothe ſtrong drink,
               Thirſt makes the King cold water
wine to thinke.
            
            
               But while the gentle and debonayre Mouſe,
               
               Bathed his lips within the chanell cleare,
               Quaffing moſt neatly many a ſweet carouſe,
               Along the gliding current did appeare
               *A gallant Frog,
                  This was the King of Frogs. whoſe port and mounting pace,
               Show'd him to be chiefe ruler in that place.
               For as quicke ſparkes diſcloſe the fire to be,
               So doth mans geſture ſhow his maieſtie.
            
            
            
               From forth the riuer, like to liquid glaſſe,
               The Frog aſcends vpon the waters brim,
               And ſeeing where the Mouſe lay on the graſſe,
               With nimble ioynts he leapeth towards him;
               And bending downe his fayre and yellow breſt,
               With kind ſalutes he welcomes this new gheſt,
               Beſeeming well a Kings hye dignitie.
               And thus he ſpoke with ſolemne maieſty:
            
            
               Since that thou art a ſtranger, gentle Mouſe,
               
               From whome doſt thou deriue thy pedigree?
               Declare to me thy parents and the houſe,
               Which haue conceiued ſuch a progenie,
               That, if thy worth deſerue, with greater ſway,
               Vnto my pallace thee I might conuay:
               VVhere I with kingly preſents will thee grace,
               As ſhall befit thy vertues, and my place.
            
            
               And doubt not but we can confirme our word:
               For know it's ſpoken by a mighty King,
               The onely Monarch of this running ford,
               VVhich all the Frogs to my ſubiection bring.
               My promiſe to performe I want no ſtore,
               My kingdom ſtretcheth out from ſhore to ſhore.An neſ as long as regibus eſſe manus?
               
               Scarce he deſerues the title of a king,
               That wanteth meanes t'acompliſh any thing.
            
            
            
               By birth I am a King, borne to the Crowne,
               And hold by right my ruſhie chayre of ſtate,
               
                  Peleus my durty Sire, great in renowne,
               
                  Of Queene Hydromeduſa me begate.
               
               She at the floud of Padus did me beare,
               Whoſe head and cheeks did put her in great feare.
               And that my name and perſon might agree,Conueniunt rebus nomina ſaepe ſuis.
               
               Blowne-cheeke Phyſignathus ſhe cleaped mee.
               
            
            
               But ſince that valour in thy lookes doth dwell,
               And * Mars hath his abiding in thy face:The God of warre.
               
               I thinke thy birth doth common Miſe excell,
               And thee deſcended from a higher place.
               For maieſtie attends vpon eſtate,
               It cannot masked be, nor change his gate.
               Thy Lordly lookes, thy royall birth proclaime;
               Tell me thy countrey, kindred, and thy name.
            
            
               The Mouſe ariſing from the riuers brim,
               Hearing the Frog ſpeake with ſuch Maieſtie,
               With haughtie courage reſaluteth him,
               And thus replies with great audacitie:
               *Wherefore deſireſt thou to know our birth,A bold anſwer to a King.
               
               Famous to gods aboue, and men on earth?
               The greateſt Keſar, and the countrey ſwayne,
               Of our exployts and ſtratagems complayne.
            
            
            
               I am the PrincePrince Eateerumme. 
                  Pſicharpax, which in field
               Dare meet a thouſand crummes within the face,
               All them encounter without ſpeare or ſhield,
               And brauely eate them vp in little ſpace,
               Borne ofKing Eatebread, 
                  Troxarta that redoubted king,
               Of whoſe heroick acts the world doth ring;
               Both rich and poore my valiant father dread,
               With ſo great courage he deuoures their bread.
            
            
               Lick-meale Lichomile, a royall Mouſe,
               My faire Queene-mother me conceiu'd hereby,
               Vnder a pile of wood, behind a houſe:
               (For at that preſent there the Court did lye)
               Where like the child of Ioue,
                  The court then lay at woodſtack. within her lap,
               I ſuckt ſweet Nectar from her downe-ſoft pap,
               Neatly ſhe fed me in my yonger yeares
               With milk, cheeſ-curds, nuts, apples, figs & peares
            
            
               In vayne you wiſh our honour ſhould deſcend
               (Becauſe our birth is of no ſmall regard)
               To taſte the pleaſures that your Palace lend,
               With ſtore of iuncats and delights prepar'd:
               For they whoſe liues and natures diſagree,
               Do hardly brooke to ioyne in companie.
               Like will to like, thoſe birds conſort together,
               Whoſe wings are like in colour, and of feather.
            
            
            
               You ſimple Frogs liue in the running mayne,
               In brookes, in ditches, and the watrie Fen.
               Vpon the drie land we, braue Miſe, remayne,
               Where we enioy the company of men:
               We feed vpon their dainties at our eaſe,
               Eate vp their bread and victuals when we pleaſe;
               We paſſe not for their locks, nor ſtrength of place,
               Both locks and ſtrength doth policie deface.
            
            
               Yet though, when hunger moues an appetite,
               We ſometimes skirmiſh with the Kitchins ſtore,
               And here and there a little morſell bite,
               And where we find it fatter, eate the more:
               For I haue heard my father ſay of old,A good axiome.
               
               Which as a Maxime we Miſe doe hold,
               Fatter the better (ſure 'tis worth repeating)
               A fat ſweet modicum deſerues the eating.
            
            
               And though ſometimes (too ſeldome I confeſſe)
               We light vpon a Capon by the way;
               Or fortune with a Rabbit doth vs bleſſe,
               Which is a dainty morſell at this day;
               Or other pretie iuncate which we find,
               And eate ſome part according to our kind:
               Yet are we not ſo greedie, as ſome ſay,
               Which blame braue Miſe, yet take the meat away:
            
            
            
               For oft the greedie all-deuouring Cat,
               
               Which would be thought a ſafegard to the meat▪
               
               Doth vnder colour of her inward hate,
               That aye betweene vs two is wondrous great,
               Forrage the cupbords, kitchin, and the houſe▪
               
               Pretending hatred to the harmeleſſe Mouſe:
                  Too many of theſe Cats.
               
               But cert's let all beware of this deuice,
               One greedy Cat is worſe then many Miſe.
               
            
            
               Oft, when a Pigeon, or ſome dainty bit,
               Chiefly for maſter or the miſtris dreſt;
               If any parcell be reſeru'd of it,
               To cloſe their ſtomack at another feaſt,
               No ſooner comes the morſell from the hall,
               But ſeruants take a part, or eate it all;
               And when enquiry for this thing is made,
               Still on the guiltleſſe Mouſe the fault is layd.
            
            
               Surely I graunt, it grieues me to the heart,
               To beare theſe ſlaunders and inceſſant wrong,
               VVhich ſtill they lay vnto the Mouſes part,
               By their falſe lying and deceitfull toung,
               But in my ſprite I ſcorne the vayne ſurmiſes,Infirmi eſt animi, exigui
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      voluptas vltio.
               
               Which eu'ry cogging mate by craft deuiſes;
               Yet ſmile to ſee the miſtris of the houſe,
               Vpon her ſeruants ſhoulders beat the Mouſe.
               
            
            
            
               Nethleſſe they cannot ſay but we will take
               A dire reuenge vpon them for the lie;The world is growne into a ſwaggering vayne: for not a Mouſe will now put vp the lye.
               
               And ſince no conſcience in a lie they make,
               Their lie ſhall proue a truth, or we will die:
               For not a hole or corner ſhall be free,
               Where any ſcraps or broken meat we ſee;
               But whatſoe're we find, without delay
               Weele quickly eate it vp, or beare away.
            
            
               And yet thinke not (Sir Frog) we gallants liue
               Vpon the refuſe ſcraps or broken meat;
               Or feed on fragments which foule trenchers giue,
               When greazy ſcullions make them cleane and neat.
               Farre be it from a lordly Mouſes tooth,
               To taſte the traſh that eu'ry Peſant doth;
               Well knowes a diſcreet Mouſe to chuſe the beſt,
               Though he for anger often eate the reſt.
            
            
               Nor are we ſo faynt-hearted, if we chaunce
               To meet a pye or paſtie by the way,
               Which like a Caſtle doth her ſelfe aduaunce,
               Scorning the battrie of our braue array;
               But ſtreight couragiouſly her wals we ſcale,
               Or vndermine them for to make her quaile:
               If valour will not bring our wiſh to paſſe,
               Our teeth ſhall pearce her cruſt as hard as braſſe.
            
            
               
               Sweet cakes, fat puddings, curdes, creame, are our meate,
               With bacon-flitches hanging in the houſe,
               Delicious hony-ſops which gods do eate,
               Are victuals onely for the gallant Mouſe.
               
               No pleaſant iuncates, no tooth-tempting fare,
               Which huſwiues locke vp with no ſlender care,
               
                  Yet oft more bold then welcome. Yea, no delights the kitchen doth contayne,
               But in the danger of our teeth remayne.
            
            
               Pale feare of death could neuer make me flye,
               Nor ſafegard of my life to leaue the fight.
               True valour will with honour rather dye,
               Then like a coward liue and take his flight.
               But like a Souldier ſtout, and Captayne bold,
               Still in the formoſt ranke my place I hold,
               Where I enact ſuch wonders with my blade,Et coelum territat armis.
               
               That troupes I ſend to death and dusky ſhade.
            
            
               The might of bourly man I do not dread,
               Though other creatures liue within his feare:
               Oft dare I bite his hand, and ſcratch his head,
               When he the ſilent night in ſleepe doth weare.
               
                  Caſibus inſultas quos potes ipſe pati. I ſcorne his gins and his alluring bayt,
               Set to intrap vs cloſely by deceyt:
               Yet if therein the baſeſt Mouſe do fall,
               In our reuenge his meate ſhall pay for all.
            
            
            
               Onely the Owle I dread, and eye-bright Cat,
               
               Two curſed murdrers in the diſmall night,
               Whoſe monſtrous iawes ſpare neither Mouſe nor Rat,
               
               But quicke deuoure vs without law or right:
               Yet chiefly of the Cat I ſtand in feare,
               Whoſe puling voyce I neuer loue to heare;
               A hel-bred Harpie ranging round about,
               Watching our comming in and going out.
            
            
               I tell thee,Satietas nauſeam parit. 
                  Frog, I lothe to liue on weedes,
               Rootes, coleworts, garlick, or the fooliſh beet,
               Or ſtinking muſhroms, growing with the reedes:
               Such vulgar diet for baſe Frogs is meet:
               Meat fit for Frogs which haunt the watry Fen,
               Not for the gallant Mouſe that feeds with men.
               And heere abruptly ending in diſdayne,
               Thus ſmilingly the Frog replyde againe:
            
            
               Stoutly thou brag'ſt vpon thy coſtly cheare,
               Thy dainty diſhes and thy kingly fare;
               Much honour to thy belly thou doeſt beare,
               Vaunting what pleaſures fall vnto thy ſhare,
               And what a warlike heart in thee doth dwell,
               Which pale-fac'd feare of death could neuer quel:
               But reaſon ſhewes by dayly practiſe found,
               That empty veſſels yeeld the greateſt ſound.
            
            
               
               And yet ſeeme not to ſcorne our ruſhy chayre,
               Becauſe your belly-pleaſures doe abound:
               With our delights no ſolace may compare,
               That can among poore ſtarued Miſe be found.
               Vpon the land we daunce and ſport our fill,
               In water bathe our lymmes (ſo Ioue doth will)
               Our cates are conſonant vnto our ſtate,Nulla aconita bibuntur fictilibus.
               
               Not mixt with poyſon or deceitfull bayt.
            
            
               And if the knowledge of the truth did moue,
               Or breed in thee a liking and delight,
               Like to the radiant ſonne of mightie Ioue,
               
               When riding in his Carre he giues vs light,
               I to my palace will thee ſafely bring,
               Sitting vpon the ſhoulders of a king:Credito, credenti nulla procella nocet.
               
               Leape on my neck, feare not the running mayne,
               I beare thee hence, I bring thee backe againe.
            
            
               He had no ſooner ſayd, but bending downe
               His back; though rare it is to ſee Kings bow;
               The lieger Mouſe, lighter then thiſtle downe,
               And ſwift as wind, which from the Eaſt doth blow,
               Vpon his ſhoulders nimbly leaps in haſt,
               And vawlting to his neck, doth there hold faſt,
               Proud of his ſtately Porter, as he might:
               For whome Kings beare, they may be proud by right.
            
            
               
               Boldly the Frog doth launch out from the brim,
               Into the current of the water cleare:
               The Mouſe reioycing for to ſee him ſwim,
               Vpon his backe like * Neptune doth appeare,Neptune the god of the ſea
               
               When mounted on a Dolphin in his pride,
               Vpon the toſsing billowes he doth ride:
               Or like the Sunne, clad in his morning weeds,
               Drawne in his fiery waggon by his Steeds:
            
            
               With ſo great port and princely maieſty
               The little Mouſe vpon the Frog did ſtand,Maior ſum quā cui poſsit fortuna nocere.
               
               Proudly triumphing while the ſhore was nye,
               And that he could at pleaſure skip to land.
               Such great delights in water he did ſee,
               Welneere he could deſire a Frog to be.
               But as no ſtate can ſtable ſtand for aye:
               So euery pleaſure hath his ending day.
            
            
               For when he ſaw the ſurging billowes riſe,
               And on the ſudden fall as low as hell,
               Such ſtore of teares did trickle from his eyes,
               That their abundance made the water ſwell.
               And now the waues be daſh him more and more,
               Toſſing his corpes amid their watry ſtore,
               With grief he wrings his hands, & teares his skin:
               Such wofull plight pale feare had put him in.
            
            
               
               Now doth he wiſh,Galeatū ſero duelli poen
                        ••
                     e
                        •
                     
                   though wiſhes take no place,
               That on firme land he were arriu'd againe;
               He curſeth Neptune and his trident Mace,
               The troubled waters and the running maine:
               Now, but too late (alas) doth he repent
               His fooliſh raſhneſſe, cauſe of this euent.
               But after-wit is like a ſhowre of rayne,
               That falles vntimely on the ripened grayne.
            
            
               His feet vnto his belly doth he ſhrinke,
               And on the Frog his back doth cloſely ſit,
               Vſing his nimble tayle, when he did ſinke,
               In ſtead of oare. Pale feare did learne him wit.
               The flowing billowes mount aboue his head,
               Speachleſſe for ſorrow, and for griefe halfe dead:
               Yet death is not ſo bitter as cold feare,
               Which makes things greater, then they are, appeare.
            
            
               Sorrow tryumpheth in the Mouſe his breſt,Heu, quid agat?
               
               Deſpayre doth ſit as Marſhall in his mind,
               Danger and death on eu'ry ſide are preſt,
               Still to receyue him at eche puffe of wind:
               But danger can the heart of pride ne're breake;
               When feare hath ſtaid the toung, yet pride will ſpeake.
               And though the waters waſh the outward skin,
               They cannot waſh preſumption within.
            
            
               
               For thus he ſighing ſayd, The gentleIupiter when hee ſtole away Europa. 
                  Bull,
               
               Which Ouid doth applaud for knauery,
               Did not conuay to Creete his prety trull
               Vpon his necke with ſo great brauery,
               As King of Frogs doth beare the gallant Mouſe,
               
               To ſee the pompe and pleaſure of his houſe,
               Plunging his lymmes amid the water cleare,
               Such confidence to ſwimming he doth beare.
            
            
               He this no ſooner ſayd, but ſudden feare
               Did ſtop the paſſage of his further prate:
               For loe, a water-Serpent did appeare,
               A helliſh torment to the Frogs eſtate,
               Which cutting through the running ſtreame that way,
               Winding himſelfe to find ſome floting pray,
               The Frog eſpide: What cannot feare deſcry,
               Which ioyn'd with care, preuents ſad deſtiny?
            
            
               For hee no ſooner did the Snake behold,
               Gaping like Cerberus three-headed dog,Cerberus is ſayd to haue three heads, & to be porter of hell
               
               Ruffling his ſcaly neck which ſhone like gold,
               But into water diues the wily Frog,
               
               Leauing the Mouſe, his friend, in ſad lament,
               Set forth to danger, death, and dire euent:
               For he which makes a friend of euery ſtranger,
               Diſcards him not againe without ſome danger.
            
            
               
               The ſilly Mouſe diſtreſſed and forlorne,
               Left to the mercy of the running mayne,
               Vnto the bottome head-long downe is borne,
               Where he, poore ſoule, in ſecret doth complayne,
               Plunging with hands aloft now doth he fleet,
               Then ſinking downe againe he ſtrikes with feet:
               But when grim deſtiny doth once aſſayle,
               No might, no ſhift, no force can then preuayle.
            
            
               When therefore to approch he knew his death,
               And that his wet haires furthered his woe,
               Fate ſtill attendant for to ſtop his breath,
               And death at hand to worke his ouerthrow,
               Weeping for ſorrow, voyd of all reliefe,
               Thus with himſelfe he ſigh'd to eaſe his griefe:
               For teares and ſighes, ſad orators of ſmart,
               Though they releaſe not,Fſt quaedam flere voiuptas. yet they eaſe the heart.
            
            
               Perfidious Frog, procurer of my wrack,
               Accurſed Traytor to my fathers Crowne,
               Thinke not though vèngeance for a time be ſlack,
               That thundring Ioue, to whō all things are knowne,
               Will be forgetfull of thy trechery,
               Through whoſe deceit I dye in miſery,
               Which from thy back, as off a rock I ſtood,
               Haſt thrown me, periur'd wretch, amid the flood.
            
            
               
               Well thou perceiu'dſt my valour and my might,
               My worth, my courage, and agilitie,
               Which like a daſtard and faint-hearted wight,
               At vnawares haſt wrought my tragedie.
               By craft I dye in water, though on land
               Thou durſt not once attempt it with thy hand:
               But God, whoſe dwelling is the ſtarres among,
               He knowes thy craft, & will reuenge my wrong.
            
            
               The Miſe,
                  Interdum lacrymae pondera vocis habent. braue Miſe, ſterne ſoldiers of ſtout Mars,
               
               In troupes ſhall march againſt thy damned crue,
               And ſhall purſue thee with ſuch bloudie wars,
               That Frogs vnborne yet ſhall haue cauſe to rue.
               Such balefull ſtratagems that day ſhall be,
               As neuer curſed traytrous Frog did ſee:
               For ne're ſhall murder vnreuenged boaſt.
               And with thoſe words he yeelded vp the ghoſt.
            
            
               Lichopinax Lick-trencher, of great blood,
               
               Sitting vpon the graſsie waters ſide,
               Saw when the Mouſe was drowned in the flood:
               For murder by ſome chaunce will be eſpide;
               And greatly weeping for the Princes fall,
               Amayne he poſteth to the Kings neate hall;
               Where, to his Grace ſitting with Lords of ſtate,
               He tels with griefe his ſonnes vnhappie fate.
            
            
               
               When as his Maieſtie this newes did heare,
               Sadly he tooke the Princes ouerthrow,
               Downe from his throne he fell with heauy cheare,
               And ſwooned in the place for griefe and woe.
               His Nobles take him vp without delay,
               And on a royall pallet doe him lay,
               Where he for ſorrow ſick, was like to dye:
               For childrens hurt neere fathers heart doth lye.
            
            
               But all the Lords, though they were male-content,
               Grieu'd for his death which was their Kings ſole care,
               Yet like fell Lions vnto anger bent,
               A black reuenge within their minds they ſware.
               With comfortable words they cheare their King,
               Which ſomewhat did abate his ſorrowing.
               Hope of reuenge did ſo his ſtomacke pricke,
               Now he is ſtrong againe,Minuit vindicta dolorem. which erſt was ſicke.
            
            
               His meſſengers diſpatched are apace,
               To all the hungrie corners in his land,
               Commaunding all his ſubiects in ſhort ſpace,
               At Court before his Maieſtie to ſtand,
               To learne his pleaſure for his wofull ſonne,
               Whō the proud King of Frogs to death had don.
               Whoſe corps lie buried in the rolling waue,
               Wanting a royall Hearſe as Princes haue.
            
            
               
               The time no ſooner came,The dutifulneſſe of the Miſe. when eu'ry Mouſe,
               
               Of any office, calling, or degree,
               In his owne perſon at the kings great Houſe,
               Before his Maieſtie ſhould preſent be:
               But all the Lords, knights, ſquires & gentle Miſe
               
               Reſort to Court, before the ſunne did riſe,
               The baſeſt Mouſe that had a tayle behinde,
               Poſted apace to know his Graces minde.
            
            
               Within the Court aſſembled were the States,
               And each one ſeated in his due degree,
               The Commons ſtayed at the Palace gates,
               Yet where they might the King both heare and ſee.
               Then preſently his Maieſtie came downe,
               Clad like a mourner in a murry gowne,
               And from his throne, though grief had made him weake,
               Yet angry for his ſonne, thus did he ſpeake:
            
            
               Stout Peeres,The Oration of the King of Miſe. braue Nobles, and my Captaines tall,
               And you kinde ſubiects to your louing King,
               Though to my part theſe miſchiefes onely fall,
               Which from my drearie eyes ſad teares do bring:
               Yet to you all this dammage doth belong,
               For Kings miſhap to ſubiects is a wrong.
               I like a father, you like friends complaine,
               Since curſed Frogs, my ſonne, your Prince, haue ſlaine.
            
            
               
               Great are the cares attend vpon a throne,Tenet auratum limen erinnys.
               
               And moſt misfortunes ſit in Caeſars lap:
               Then who ſo wretched as poore I alone,
               Predeſtinate to nothing but miſhap?
               Once happie in three children borne to me,
               As pretty Miſe as euer man did ſee.
               But Fortune glad to tryumph in my woe,
               Hath brought my ſorrow with their ouerthrow.
            
            
               For firſt, the eldeſt ſcarce was two months old,
               When playing like a wanton vp and downe,
               A griefly Cat the yong Mouſe did behold,
               And quickly caught him by the tender crowne.
               Betweene whoſe cruell iawes my ſonne did die,
               Without remorſe deuoured traytrouſly.
               A Stygian Butcher, knowne vnto you all,
               Whoſe teeth aſunder teare both great and ſmall.
            
            
               My ſonne next him, a litle noble Mouſe,
               
               Too ventrous far to liue (O griefe to tell)
               Hunting for food within a Farmers houſe,
               Into an engyne made of wood he fell,Fraude perit virtus.
               
               Inuented by mans arte and policie,
               To cruſh and murther all our Progenie;
               There (louing Subiects) dy'de my ſecond child,
               With rigour maſſacred, with craft beguild.
            
            
               
               And now my third, my laſt beloued ſonne,
               But beſt beloued ſonne of all the three,
               With whom my ioyes do end, my life is done,
               Moſt deare to his Queene-mother and to me;
               In whom decayes the iſſue of my blood,
               Ay me,Hinc illae lachrymae. lies buried in the raging flood,
               Betrayd and drowned by the Frogs fell King,
               To whom my ſword ſad elegies ſhall ſing.
            
            
               Then quickly arme your ſelues, to armes, he cries,
               Fight for your King and Countrey without feare,
               Purſue the Frogs your curſed enemies,
               And gard your ſelues with helmet, ſhield and ſpeare;
               With courage ſhew your valour and your might,
               The day is ours: for Iove ſtill aydes the right:
               Braue Lords, kind ſubiects, fight couragiouſly,
               God and SaintShe is holden patroneſſe ouer Miſe. 
                  Gertrude graunt vs victory.
            
            
               The King in anger here did make an end,
               And preſently diſmiſſed all the crue,
               Which all their ſtudie and endeuours bend,
               That black reuenge and battell might enſue.
               The Kings ſad wordes did ſtirre them vp ſo farre,
               That nought they talke of now but bloudie war.
               And euery Mouſe from greateſt to the leaſt,
               Prepares ſuch weapons as will 
                     〈◊〉
                   them beſt.
            
            
               
               And firſt,The armes and weapons of the Miſe. for legs, theſe neuer daunted Miſe,
               
               Warlike habiliments in haſte prouide,
               Garded with huskes of peaſe (O rare deuice!)
               As though with boots or ſtart-vps they would ride:
               Whoſe policie if this our age would trie,
               So many maymed ſoldiers ſhould not die:
               For they which loſe their legges, doe lack their might,
               Nor can they fly, nor ſtoutly ſtand to fight.
            
            
               Next with a corſlet they defend the heart,
               Not made of ſteele, but of an old ſtraw-hat,
               With which before they did award that part,
               Againſt the forces of the greedy Cat:
               
               A piece of leather on their backe they don,
               Which ſerues in ſtead of an habergion:
               The bottome of a candleſtick doth ſtand,
               For target or a buckler in their hand:
            
            
               Small brazen pinnes they brandiſh like a ſpeare,Gerimus quae poſſumus arma.
               
               And toſſe their needles like ſtrong pikes about;
               A walnut ſhell for helmet they doe beare,
               After that they had eate the kernell out.
               And thus they march to fight that bloudy fray,
               Vaunting in armour and their proud array:
               For weapons vnto force freſh courage bring.
               A Mouſe in armes doth thinke himſelfe a king.
            
            
               
               But when the trumpe of iron-winged Fame
               Had ſounded to the Frogs this bad report,Res animos incognita turbat.
               
               Out of the water in great troopes they came,
               And on the ſhore together do reſort,
               There to determine what the cauſe ſhould be,
               Of theſe ſtrange warres and ſudden mutinie:
               Their dread encreaſeth by each brute they heare:
               For feare of vnknown things breeds greater feare.
            
            
               Whiles thus they ſtand perplexed and afraid,
               A Herald bold of Armes they might deſcry,Herald Eatecheeſe.
               
               
                  Eat-cheeſe Tyroglyphus, which not diſmaid,
               Dare ſtoutly to their face the Frogs defie,
               Whom noble Embaſichytros begot,
               That ſlily creepeth into eu'ry pot.
               He bearing in his hand a regall mace,
               Thus to the Frogs did ſpeake in great diſgrace:
            
            
               To you diſloyall Frogs that hunt for blood,
               And to your King that wrought our Princes fall,
               Drowning his body in the raging flood,
               Whoſe death to heauen doth for vengeance call,
               To you I come ſad meſſenger of woe
               From angry Miſe, which wiſh your ouerthrow:
               And here, in all their names, and from our King,
               A flat defiance to baſe Frogs I bring.
            
            
               
               Warres,Ingentes parturit ira minas hoſtile warres, accurſed traytrous Frogs,
               
               Heere I denounce, and ſpit within your face.
               Damned deceitfull wretches from your bogs
               We will aboliſh your deteſted race:
               Then arme your ſelues, for vengeance we wil take
               Vpon all Frogs for our braue princes ſake.
               If courage in your crauen hearts doth dwell
               Meet vs in open field: and ſo farewell.
            
            
               When he had ſaid theſe words, as in diſdayne
               Scorning an anſwere from the Frogs to beare,
               Forthwith he poſted to the Miſe againe,
               Whoſe meſſage put the Frogs in mighty feare:
               Yet feare breeds wrath, wrath kindles courage more.
               That now windes rage which erſt were calme before.
               The King then riſing frō his chaire of ſtate,
               Grauely their valours thus did animate:
            
            
               Lords,The Oration of the King of Frogs. Nobles, gallant Frogs, and all the Trayne,
               Which heere attend to know our royall will,
               Subiects, nay, more then Subiects in our raigne,
               For we are fellowes and compartners ſtill:
               Vexe not your mindes, all clouds do beare no raine,
               Nor in proud brags true valour doth remaine.
               Theſe are but words, fit bugs to ſcarre the crowes:
               And cowards brags do ſeldom end with blowes.
            
            
               
               But if their meaning with their words agree,
               Then doe they ſeeke to vndermine our Crowne,
               A forged quarrell they impoſe on me,
               That I a proud audacious Mouſe ſhould drowne:
               And vnder this falſe colour they deuiſe,Accipe Danaum inſidias, & crimine ab uno diſc
                        •
                      omnes.
               
               To cloke the treaſons of their enterpriſe.
               Eche foole can find a ſtaffe to beate a dog.
               He muſt haue both his eyes that blinds a Frog.
               
            
            
               Heauen and earth to witneſſe I doe call,
               And all the golden Planets of the skie,
               That I attempted not the Mouſes fall,
               Nor once remember I did ſee him die:
               But this I thinke, that, playing on the brim,
               Seeing the gallant Frogs ſo brauely ſwim,
               He thought to doe the like, and leaped in,
               Where he was iuſtly plagued for his ſinne.
            
            
               And now theſe lurking creatures, hungry Miſe,
               
               Which ſcarce dare ſhew their faces in the light,
               A crue of greedy vermine, which deuiſe
               Nothing but ſtealth and rapine in the night:
               Theſe doe vniuſtly charge me with his death,
               Becauſe within our reigne he loſt his breath:
               But I will teach theſe proud audacious fooles,
               Not ieſt with kings, nor meddle with edge-tooles.
            
            
               
               Then friends,Si tamen horteris, fortius ibit equus kind friends, & fellowes to your king▪
               
               Plucke vp your ſpirits, baniſh lauiſh feares;
               For in this warre, whence terrour ſeemes to ſpring,
               Me thinkes great ioy and comfort ſtill appeares,
               Since gallant Frogs, whome nothing terrifies,
               Fight with a ſtarued troupe of hungry Miſe.
               
               Courage, braue mates, take weapons, and to fight:
               Fortune defends true valour in his right.
            
            
               But ſince men may in warre ſometimes preuayle,Vis conſilii expers mole ruit ſuae.
               
               As much by policy, as power or might,
               And that where ſtrength and proweſſe often fayle,
               Wit doth at length giue ſuccour to the right
               I wiſh you arme your ſelues with ſpeare & ſhield,
               And march along the ſhore vnto the field,A rare policy of the Frogs.
               
               VVhere, on a hill which ouer-lookes the flood,
               VVe will incampe our ſelues as in a wood.
            
            
               VVhen to this place theſe crauen Miſe conuay
               Their fearefull ſouldiers, like a flocke of ſheepe,
               And to beſiedge our fortreſſe ſhall aſſay,
               VVhere we vpon the hill our forces keepe:
               If any boaſting Mouſe vpon the banke
               Dare but aſcend one foote before his ranke,
               Him we will all aſſayle in furious mood,
               And caſt his body headlong in the flood.
            
            
               
               By this rare ſtratagem and braue deuiſe,
               We ſhall their malice and great pride abate:
               Thus ſhall we conquer corner-creeping Miſe,
               
               Which would annoy our peace and quiet ſtate.
               And thus,Addidit inualida robur facundia cauſa. with trophies and triumphing play,
               We will like victors crowne our heads with bay.
               Thē arme your ſelues, braue mates, with ſpeare & ſhield.
               God, and great Neptune grant vs winne
the field.
            
            
               Here did he end,The armour and weapons of the Frogs. and ſcarce he made an end,
               But all the Frogs, from greateſt to the leaſt,
               For theſe enſuing warres their ſtudies bend
               To get ſuch weapons as befit them beſt:
               Firſt to their thighs greene Malows they do wrap,
               Which hang downe like a bag or butchers flap.
               Beetes, like a cloke, vpon their backe they don,
               Which ſerues for breſt-plate and habergion.
            
            
               A Cockles ſhell for ſallet they prepare,
               T' award their heads from blowes amid the field:
               In their left hands theſe water-ſouldiers bare
               A leafe of Colewort for a truſty ſhield,
               And in their right (for all parts armed were)
               They toſſe a bulruſh for a pike or ſpeare.
               Along the ſhore they march in this aray,
               Mad with fell rage, yet glad to ſee this day.
            
            
               
               Thus whil'ſt both armies did prepare to fight,A counſel aſſembled in heauen.
               
               Almighty Ioue, eternall, without end,
               Inuites the gods into his palace bright,
               Whence ratling thunder & bright flames deſcend:
               And pointing with his finger downe below,
               To them theſe puiſſant warriours doth he ſhow,
               Stout as the Centaures or the Gyants great,
               Which once aſſai'd to pull Ioue from his ſeat.
            
            
               Whom when the gods together did behold,Aſpiciunt oculis ſuperi mortalia iuſtis.
               
               Marching like Pigmie-Braggarts in aray,
               And ſternly ſhake their ſpeares like champions bold,
               As though no terror could their hearts diſmay,
               They made the court of heau'n with laughter ring;
               Such pleaſure and delight the ſight did bring.
               Then ſmiling Ioue (deep ſilence kept a ſpace)
               Lift vp his voice, and ſpoke with royall grace:
            
            
               If Frogs and Miſe (quoth he) their patrons haue,
               Chaſt daughter Pallas,
                  Goddeſſe of warre. my Bellona deere,
               Tell vs which ſide thou wilt protect and ſaue,
               Shall not the gallant Miſe be victors heere?
               Great ſtore of them within thy temples dwell,
               Allured thither by the tempting ſmell,
               Which ſtill amounteth from thy ſacrifice.
               
                  Pallas againe did anſwere in this wiſe:
            
            
               
               Great Lord of heau'n and earth, beloued Sire,
               If you commaund, your daughter muſt obay,
               My will ſubiected is to your deſire,
               For children cannot fathers heſts denay:
               Yet force me not, kind father, once to ſhield
               Theſe hunger-ſtarued pyrats in the field,
               Falſe lurking creatures, greedy theeuiſh Miſe,
               
               Whoſe teeth pollute my ſweete fat ſacrifice.
            
            
               Great are the wrongs and miſchiefes I abide,Quaelibet extinctos iniuria ſuſcitat ignes.
               
               By theſe deteſted vermine day and night,
               Much they impayre my worſhip and my pride:
               And ſhall I then defend them in this right?
               The hallow'd oyle, which ſacred fire doth ſtay
               Within my lamps, they ſteale and licke away:
               MyCrownes of victory crowns they gnaw, but theſe are loſſes ſmall,
               This is the hurt moleſts me moſt of all:
            
            
               My braue enſigne embrodered all with gold,
               Neuer braue enſigne was ſo rich of price,
               Wherein my acts and triumphs were enrold,
               Is eaten, torne, and ſpoyled by theſe Mice.
               
               This is my hurt ſurpaſsing all the reſt,
               For this cauſe chiefly I theſe Miſe deteſt:
               And ſhall I, father, ſeeme to patroniſe
               My foes, my wrongers, and ſworne enemies?
            
            
               
               Ne're theſe accurſed beaſts will I defend:
               Command ought elſe, great Ioue, but pardon this:
               Nor durtie Frogs Bellona will befrend,
               Whoſe ioy and pleaſure in fowle puddles is.
               For as I loath the Miſe for ſundry wrongs:
               So I deteſt baſe Frogs for croking ſongs,Hoc illis garrula lingua dedit.
               
               Whoſe harſh vnpleaſant voices in the night
               Breed nought but terror to each mortall wight.
            
            
               When I returne oft ſweating from the warres,
               And after fainting trauell thinke to ſleepe,
               With their ſeditious brawles, and croking iarres,
               Which in the filthy mariſhes they keepe,
               Awake I lye, till mornings trumpeter
               Giues warning for the day-ſtarre to appeare,
               And cheerfull Cock chants forth his wonted lay,
               To ſhew the dawning of the ioyfull day.
            
            
               Though we are gods, yet let vs all beware
               To ſuccour in our perſon either part:In audaces non eſt audacia tuta.
               
               For if theſe meete the gods, they will not ſpare
               To ſtrike them with their iauelings to the hart:
               But let vs rather ioy to ſee this fray,
               Where we behold their ruine and decay.Quos oderit quiſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      periſſe cupit.
               
               Thus Pallas ſaid. To whom incontinent
               The heauenly Senate gaue a full conſent.
            
            
            
               Meane while both armies muſtred on the plaine,The battell.
               
               And place their wings and ſquadrons in aray,
               From either part a Herald doth againe
               Giue ſigne for battell and the bloudie day.
               The buzzing Flies, becauſe they were of skil,
               A blow aloud their hornes and trumpets ſhrill,
               A harſh tantarra ſound vnto the fight,
               Which lends more courage to their wonted might.
            
            
               Heauen and earth doth thunder with the cry,
               When front to front theſe noble armies meete,
               Looſe wauing in the wind their enſignes flie,
               With wounds and fatall blowes eche other greete.
               The Miſe aſſaile, the Frogs the fight accept,
               In combat cloſe each hoſt to other ſtept:
               For now the wings had skirmiſh hot begun,
               And with their battels forth like Lyons run.
            
            
               But who was firſt amid this bloody fight,
               That gaue the onſet firſt, firſt wanne renowne?
               
                  Croaking Hypſiboas, firſt like a knight,
               
                  Lick-taile Lichenor brauely tumbled downe,
               Into his paunch ſo ſtrong he thruſt his ſpeare,
               That forth his backe behind it did appeare,
               Groueling the Mouſe fell on the ſandy plaine,
               By this audacious Frog with valour ſlaine.
            
            
               
               Next him Troglodytes, which not afraid,
               Each ſecret hole and corner creepeth in,
               
                  Gaue Pelion the Frog, with aurt berayd,
               A deadly foile with his ſmall brazen pin:
               Within the wound the iaueling ſticketh ſore,
               And frō the veines forth ſtreams the purple gore.
               Thus to his end pale death this Frog did bring,
               Which kils the caitife with the crowned king.Tendi
                        •
                     
                     mus huc omnes,
               
            
            
               Pot-creeping Embaſichytros, of late
               
               Whoſe valiant ſonne did all the Frogs defie,
               Now quite confounded by diſaſtrous fate,
               Deuoid of life thy headles truncke doth lie
               At hardy Seutl
                        •
                     ns his crooked feet,
               
                  A Frog which feeds on nothing but the beete.
               And clam rous Polyphon there lyes thou dead,
               Slayne by Artophagus which eateth bread.
               
            
            
               But when Limnocharis their deaths beheld,
               Which in the mariſh hath his whole delight,
               The angry Frog, by loue and ire compeld,
               To ſad reuenge his pow'r and forces dight:
               Life muſt be payd with life, the Frog did cry,Mors morte piandae eſt.
               
               Their deaths I will reuenge, or with them dye.
               Thus when true loue, & valour guide the heart,
               A cowards hand will play a ſouldiers part.
            
            
               
               And from the ground a milſtone in great haſt
               He raught:Quaelibet iratis ipſe dat arma furor. ſtrange wonders courage doth enact:
               And with great violence the ſame he caſt
               At proud Troglodites as one diſtract:
               In middle of his necke the ſtone did light,
               Whereby he ſleepeth in eternall night:
               Thus bruſed with the fall, this Mouſe did lye,
               Suffring the torments of deaths tyranny.
            
            
               Yong Lichenor, his ſonne that firſt was ſlaine,
               A gallant Mouſe, which did no colours feare,
               Deſirous, though with death, renowne to gaine,
               That his exploits enſuing times might heare,
               Fierce butcher like Limnocharis eſpide,Eſt vindicta bonum, vita incūdius ipſa.
               
               Whoſe weapons were with bloud in ſcarlet dide:
               To whom he ſaid, Fight, coward, or elſe flie,
               Thou or Lichenor here ſhall ſurely die.
            
            
               And with thoſe words, ayming his heart to hit,
               Strongly his iaueling at the Frog he threw,
               It pearſt his ſide,Ipſa manus fortunaiu. his breſt and bowels ſplit,
               His vitall ſpirits from his body flew;
               Dead lay Limnocharis vpon the playne,
               The braueſt ſouldier in the warrie trayne.
               For death impartiall doth with one ſelfe hand,
               Cut off the ſtrong & weak at heauens cōmand.
            
            
               
               Crambophagus, Eat-Colewort, which of late
               
               Baſely his armes and weapons caſt away,
               Thinking by flight to flie the ſtroke of fate,
               Ran to the water from the mortall fray:
               Whom Lichenor more ſwift then he purſude,
               And in his harts warm bloud his ſpeare imbru'd:
               Vpon the ſhore the daſtard Frog was ſlaine,
               Ere he could leape into the running maine.
            
            
               
                  Heroicall Limneſus, Fennie Lord,
               Incenſed by mad rage, blacke furies brand,
               The bold Tyroglyphus ſlew with the ſword,
               A great commander in the Mouſes band.
               Deepe holes and hollow caues he vſde to delue
               Among the Cheeſes lying on the ſhelue.
               His head the Frog doth from his necke aduance,
               And in great triumph beares it on his lance.
            
            
               Faint-heartedSo called of the herbe Calamint. 
                  Calaminthius in great feare,
               Little in ſtature, and of courage ſmall,
               Beholding vaſt Pternoglyphus appeare,
               A Mouſe exceeding great, ſtrong, bourly, tall,
               
                  And which in bacon flitches holes doth make,
               He doth his weapons with the field forſake,Pedibus timor addidit alas
               
               And crauen-like fled to the durty bogs,
               Euen as the feareful Hare purſude with dogs.
            
            
               
               
                  But bold Hydrocharis, that loues the floud,
               Famous for deeds of armes would neuer flie,
               The furious Mouſe this peereleſſe Frog withſtood,
               Nor would he ſhun a foot though he ſhould die:
               Lately Pternophagon this gallant killed,
               Which oft with Bacon hath his belly filled:
               Now with a ſtone Pternoglyphus he ſlew,
               Whoſe cloddred braines the crymſon field imbrew.
            
            
               
                  Lichopinax, which firſt told to the king
               The balefull newes of his ſonnes tragedy,
               At Borborocaetes did his darts ſtill fling:
               
                  A valiant Frog, though in the durt he lye.
               Proſtrate he fell vpon the ſandy ground,
               The Mouſes dart had made a mortall wound:
               Wherat pale death ſent forth his fainting ſpright,
               To ſleepe in darknes and eternall night.
            
            
               When this the Frog Praſſophagus beheld,
               Eat-Leeke Praſſophagus, ſwift as the Hynde,
               He ranne with mighty ſtowre along the field,
               And taking Gniſſodioctes neat behind,Quam ferus & veré ferreus ille fuit?
               
               From off his feet the little Mouſe he flong,
               Into the ſtreaming current all along,
               Nor there he left him, till with raging mood
               He had his foe eſtrangled in the flood.
            
            
               
               
                  Eat-crumme Pſicharpax which was neere allide
               Vnto the kings yong ſonne that earſt was down'd,
               In ſuccour of his friends the Frogs defide,
               And to the battell made him ready bound,
               
                  Durtie Peluſus in the paunch he thruſt,
               Faintly the Frog ſunke downe into the duſt,
               Whoſe fluttring ſpirit did her paſſage make,
               Downe toIt is taken for the entry into hell. 
                  Auernus that vnpleaſant lake.
            
            
               Pelobates, which loues to treade the myre,
               Saw when his friend and fellow ſouldier fell,
               And adding fuell to the ſmoking fire,
               His furie into burning flames gan ſwell:
               For filling both his hands with durtapace,
               He caſt it fiercely in Pſicharpax face,
               Which much beſmeard his viſage with diſguiſe,Hoc virtutis opus
               
               And almoſt blinded and put out his eyes:
            
            
               But he the ſtrong Pſicharpax mou'd with ſpleene,
               And iuſtly angrie at this beaſtly wrong,
               Tooke vp a mighty ſtone which there had beene
               A bound or landmark tweene two neighbors long,
               And hurling it with vigour and great power,
               He burſt his knee aſunder in that ſtower,
               The right leg fell diſmembred from his thie,
               And not once mouing on the ground doth lie.
            
            
               
               Ne there he thought to leaue him in ſad plight,
               But with a iaueling would haue reft his life,
               Had not Craugaſides, that croaking wight,
               Whoſe chiefeſt pleaſure is in brawling ſtrife,
               Kept off the blow, and with a ſudden puſh,
               Thruſt through the Mouſe his belly with a ruſh,
               Vpon the ground his bowels guſhed forth:Mars dubius omnis, quoſque 
                        •
                     eges vnquam poſſe iacere cadunt.
               
               Thus di'de this martial hart, & Mouſe of worth.
            
            
               
                  Which when Eat-corne Sitophagus eſpide,
               
               That erſt was maymed of two legs in fight,
               Waſhing his wounds along the water ſide,
               And ſore amazed at this rufull ſight,
               He dared not aduenture forth agayne
               Into the field, for feare he ſhould be ſlayne:
               But leapt into the ſtrong entrenched fort,Stultus, qui cum diſcedere poſsit, pugnat.
               
               Where he receiued was in ioyfull ſort.
            
            
               Nethleſſe the warlike troopes of eyther band,
               Perſiſted ſtill with courage in the field,
               Great ſtore lye ſlayne vpon the drenched ſand,
               Yet not, for thy, a ſouldier ſeemes to yeeld:
               Now fury roares, ire threats, & woe complains,
               One weepes, another cryes, he ſighes for paynes.
               The hoſts both clad in blood, in duſt and myre,
               Had chang'd their cheare, their pryde, their rich attyre.
            
            
               
               Thus whiles the conqueſt was to neither bent,
               But poizd in ballance betweene hope and feare,
               Thoſe two which hold the ſupreme gouernment
               O're both the armies which in battell were,The conflict of the two kings
               
               The Kings of Frogs and Miſe together meete,
               Where they with mortal blows each other greet:
               But cowards often faintly ſtep aſide,
               When manhood is by reſolution tride.
            
            
               For ſcarce they had encountred in the fight,
               And lent ſome equall ſtrokes on either ſide,
               When king of Miſe thinking his foe to ſmite
               Vpon the head, his ſword to ground did glide,
               But yet his foot it wounded when it fell,
               Which blow did much his haughty courage quell:
               For he which erſt was author of this ſtrife,
               Now ſeekes the bogs for ſafe gard of his life.
            
            
               The valourous incenſed king of Miſe,
               
               Seeing the Frogs proud king ſo baſely fly,
               Which was of late ſo reſolute and wiſe,
               To vaunt of trophees e're he blowes did try,
               Calling his ſouldiers on with cheerefull hue,
               His fainting weary foe he doth purſue,
               Stil hoping (ſince his woūd had made him ſlow)
               To ouertake him with a fatall blow.
            
            
               
               And but, that neuer-daunted Captaine brought,
               
                  Captaine Praſſaus, greene as garden-Leeke,
               A troope of gallants which nould flie for ought,
               To aide the king, his life had beene to ſeeke,
               Which preſſing through the middle of the fray,
               Reſcude their wounded king which fled away.Ipſa dies quando
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      parens, quando
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      
                     
                        •
                     ouerca.
               
               And with their darts beat backe the Miſe a ſpace,
               Till forth of daunger they had rid his grace.
            
            
               Greatly the Miſe were daunted with their blowes,
               So thicke they fell and forcibly were ſent,
               That they were forc'd from daunger of the throwes,
               Backe to retire and ſomewhat to relent,
               Vntill their rage and furie were o'repaſt,Incerti fallax fiducia Martis,
               
               Through want of breath: then they againe as faſt
               The Frogs aſſaile and mightily amate,
               As forward earſt, now backward to retraite.
            
            
               Among the ſquadrons of the Mouſes band,
               One Mouſe there was more gallant then the reſt,
               A brauer ſouldier was not in the land,
               Nor ſtouter Captaine euer wars profeſt:
               For though ſterne Mars his manhood liſt to trie,
               
                  Mars could not force this daring Mouſe to flie:
               But when in armes this warriour is yclad,
               He rather is of Mars to be ydrad.
            
            
               
               This was the ſonne of Artepibulus,
               
               Which doth for bread in wait and ambuſh lie,
               Of loftie heart and magnanimious,
               A worthy ſire to ſuch a progenie,
               Whom mighty Meridarpa
                        •
                     
                   he did call,
               
                  That eats the crummes which vnder table fall:
               Was neuer Mouſe which vnder hean'n doth liue,
               That durſt aduenture with him for to ſtriue.
            
            
               Like to a Gyant ſtood this champion bold,
               Vpon the ſhore neere to the riuers ſide,Dii precor a ranis omen remouete ſiniſtrū.
               
               Vaunting his might and proweſſe, as he would
               Haue pull'd the throne of Ioue downe in his pride.
               And holding vp his bourly armes to heauen,
               Swore by the Sunne, the Moone, and Planets ſeuen,
               That e're bright Phoebus lighted from his wayne,Dii prohibete minas, Dii talem auertite peſtem.
               
               One crauen Frog ſhould not aliue remaine.
            
            
               For by this hand, quoth he, by this right hand,
               (Scarce would a man beleeue it though he ſweare)
               Though not a Mouſe will venture them withſtand,
               But flie the field for cowardiſe and feare:
               Yet I, behold, I, will ſo threſh theſe Frogs,
               
               That with their corſes I will fill the bogs:
               Or they, or I, by Ioue this vow I make,
               This night will lodge beyond theA riuer in hell, ouer which ſoules do paſſe to all places. 
                  Stygian lake.
            
            
               
               And cert's, theſe words had not bene ſpoke in vaine,
               He had perform'd his vow: (though ſhame to tell)
               If that the Father of the heau'nly trayne,
               The king of men, and Lord of deepeſt hell,
               Great Ioue, had not beheld from ſtarry skyes
               His dire complots and bloudy enterpriſe,
               And taking pitie of the Frogs eſtate,
               To Mars and all the reſt thus gan relate:
            
            
               Ye Gods, which here behold this diſmal day,
               And ſee the ſlaughters of the cruell fight,
               What braggard Mouſe is this that beares ſuch ſway
               Neere to the riuer, vaunting of his might?
               How bold he looks, how proud he bears his head,
               As though the Frogs lay all before him dead,
               Deeply proteſting on the parched ſand,
               Not one poore Frog ſhal ſcape his murdring hād.
            
            
               Diuine inhabitants of heau'n, behold,
               Behold,Miſeris miſerentur num̄ina. I ſay, alas, the wretched caſe,
               And great miſhap which doth poore Frogs enfold,
               Now preſt to ſuffer ruine and diſgrace:
               Vnleſſe you deigne to ſaue them at this hower,
               And ſend in ayde ſome number of your power,
               To quel the daring courage of the Miſe,
               
               And ſtop proud Meridarpax enterpriſe.
            
            
               
               If that diſpleaſe, then let vs Pallas ſend
               T'aſſwage the furie of this cruell fone:
               Or thou ſterne Mars haſte thither for to wend,
               Yelad in armes of Adamantine ſtone;
               That this fellMeridarpax. 
                  Tyger, greedy of his pray,
               E're he annoy the Frogs, may runne away.
               Heere Ioue did end: But Mars of viſage grim,
               Ariſing from his ſeat, replide to him:
            
            
               Beloued Father, Lord of heau'n and hell,
               To your beheſt all pow'rs ſubiected ſtand,
               Which doe in heau'n or lower regions dwell,
               None may or dare deny when you command:
               Then think, ſweet Father, Mars accounteth ſtill
               Your word for right, as law your only wil.
               Kings men cōmaund on earth, why ſhould not Ioue,
               
               The King of Kings, command the gods aboue?
            
            
               Speake but the word, great Mars is alwayes preſt,
               At Ioues appoynt, in armes to enter field;
               And for ſtout Pallas, at your leaſt requeſt,
               I know my ſiſter willingly will yeeld:
               But neither I,Quid Mars ad multitudinem? though I be god of warres,
               Nor Pallas, whoſe renown doth reach the ſtarres,
               Now are of force the falling Frogs to ſtay,
               Or them preſerue from imminent decay.
            
            
               
               No, rather ſend the gods, ſend all the power,
               That higheſt heauenly Hierarchies can make,
               Or on their heads lightning with thunder ſhower,
               (That all their armie may with terrour quake)
               With which thou ſlew'ſt the Giants long agone,
               
                  A great Giant, which Iupiter ſlew with lightning. Enceladus, and proud
                  Phaeton, he was ſlayne with thunder. Apolloes ſonne.
               
               Thus ended frowning Mars. To whoſe beheſt
               Great Ioue gaue full conſent, with all the reſt.
            
            
               And preſently aſcending vp the tower,
               Where ſulphrous brands, with ſtony darts of fire,
               And all the weapons of his might and power,
               Are kept, to plague proud rebels in his ire:
               Firſt, there he cauſ'd great gaſtly flames ariſe,
               And thunder-claps, that ſeem'd to rend the skies,
               And ſtill among this hideous roaring ſound,
               He darted burning bolts the Miſe to wound.
            
            
               Pale feare aſſayled both the Frogs and Miſe,
               
               When firſt on ſudden they the thunder heard,Plus valet humanis viribus ira Dei.
               
               So great a terrour in their minds did riſe,
               As though with ſpirits they had bene askard:
               For who in's breſt ſo ſtout a heart doth beare,
               That when heau'ns thunder, doth not quake for
feare,
               And ſtand amaz'd to view with mortall eyes,
               When angry Ioue darts lightning from theſ kies?
            
            
               
               Nethleſſe, although the Miſe were much diſmayd,
               To heare the ſound, and ſee the fearefull ſight,
               Yet left they not the battell as afrayd,
               But ſtood with greater courage to the fight.
               Certes,Apparet virtus, arguitur
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      malis. true valour may recoyle a ſpace,
               Yet ſtill her force renues with greater grace.
               Fiercer they rage than earſt they did before:
               Such heapes of Frogs lye ſlayne vpon the ſhore.
            
            
               When angry Ioue beheld with rufull eye,
               For all his care, the Frogs ſtill goe to wracke,
               And ſee the Miſe more deſperate hereby,
               Scorning his lightnings and harſh thunder-cracke,
               He wept to view their ſlaughter and decay:
               And now he thought to trie a ſurer way,
               By other meanes the Frogs from death to ſhend:
               For whom God loues, he fauours to the end.
            
            
               From forth the Ceſterne of the Ocean deepe,
               Whence riuers both their ſpring and tydes renue,
               An vgly ſwarme of filthy monſters creepe,
               A foule infernall and ill-fauour'd crue,
               Which ſtill goe backward with a ſquinting eye,The deſcription of the Crabs.
               
               To ſee before their footſteps what doth lye:
               For thus doth mother nature alwayes ayme,
               For eche defect a remedy to frame.
            
            
               
               Exceeding were their ſhoulders out of ſquare,
               So broad, ſo great, as irkes my muſe to tell:
               Their bald blue backe withouten ſkin or haire,
               Was all o'rewhelmed with a coſtiue ſhell,
               As hard as Iron, or the flinty ſtones.
               Their bodies wholly were compact of bones.
               Before their vgly face two clawes beare ſway,
               With which they wont to grope & feele their way.
            
            
               On eyther ſide of their deformed breſt,
               Foure crooked legs their grieuous burden beare:
               Two ſterne grim lowring eyes by natures heſt,
               In middle of their belly did appeare.
               Their grieſly crownes ſeem'd clouen into three;
               On two whereof like helmets you might ſee.
               So vile a brood of fell misſhapen Snakes
               Ne're could be found, but in th'infernall lakes.
            
            
               Theſe monſtrous vgly Crabs (for Crabs they were)
               Crawling along the ſpacious continent,Quaſlibet, ad poenas, res capit ira Iouis.
               
               When Ioue beheld from out his Palace cleare,
               Which lyes beyond the ſpangled firmament,
               He ſent the hel-bred band vnto the fray,
               To kill the Miſe, or make them runne away.
               The Crabs obeyd, nor take they care for armes;
               Their ſhels wil keep them ſafe frō greateſt harms.
            
            
               
               No ſooner were they come vnto the fight,
               Where warlike Miſe their enemies aſſayle,
               But all at once the Crabs vpon them light,
               Aſunder breake their legs, bite off their tayle,
               Their iauelings pluck away, & pinch their hands,
               Nothing their ſauage cruelty withſtands:
               So Tiger-like vpon the Miſe they pray,
               As would perforce the ſtouteſt heart afray.
            
            
               But when the Miſe beheld theſe monſters rage,
               So dire and bloudy as doth grieue me tell,
               Their haughty courage ſomedeale gan aſſwage,Rara quidem eſt virtus, quā non fortuna gubernat
               
               Their hearts from wonted reſolution fell;
               Their armes they throw away, the field forſake,
               And to their heeles for ſafegard them betake:
               For if both heauen and hell conſpire decay,
               No maruell though poore Miſe do runne away.
            
            
               Thus by the ſuccour of the Crabs that day,
               The Miſe were forced to a ſhamefull flight,Pugna ſuam finem, cum fugit hoſtis, habet
               
               The Frogs preſeru'd from imminent decay,
               Which elſe had ſlept in death and endleſſe night.
               And now the welked Phoebus gan to reſt
               His wearied waggon in the ſcarlet Weſt,
               When ſullen night prepar'd her courſe to runne,
               Seal'd vp the battell with the ſetting Sunne.
            
         
         
            
            The concluſion of the
Tranſlator.
            LOe, in a vaile preſented to thine eye,
            Among more leſſons worthy due regard,
            Of trifling iarres and fooliſh enmity,
            The ominous ſucceſſe and iuſt reward.
            See then from ſtrife and diſcord thou refrayne,
            Leſt ſad repentance breed thy further payne:
            For ifHodie ſub hominum ſpecie, Cancri cauſas agunt. blacke Crabs do chance to part the fray,
            Small is their gayne that beare the beſt away.
            Et facit ad mores ars quo
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                noſtra bonos.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               ❧ To his Couſin, Mr. Ambroſe
Hargroues health.
            
               
                  WHether a ſecret influence from aboue,
               Or ſupernaturall motion of the mind,
               May ſeeme good-liking, and affection moue,
               Among thoſe men whom kinred hath combind▪
               
               Or whether nature, Couſin, vs inclin'd,
               So highly to eſteeme affinitie,
               I cannot eaſly iudge, nor cauſes find,
               Why we ſo fauour conſanguinitie:
               But cert's the worke is from diuinitie.
            
            
               And whence this inward motion doth ariſe,
               Is for my purpoſe needleſſe to decide,
               Sithence we find it true, whom bloud alies,
               In league of friendſhip commonly abide,
               And in the band of loue are nearer ty'de:
               Nethleſſe when other cauſe beare a ſway,
               To moue goodwill,E multis riuulis ſurgit ingeni aequor. it cannot be denide,
               But then it is more firme, as is the day
               Brighter when Phoebus doth his beames diſplay.
            
            
               Yet ſince firſt kinred doth commaund as due,
               An interchange of amity and loue,
               Much, I confeſſe, for this I fauour you,
               In whom the gifts of wit and learning moue,
               Which more confirme what here I ſeeke to proue:
               But that you liue old Hargreues onely ſonne,
               Whoſe bleſsed ſoule reſts in the armes of Ioue,
               
               And in the boſome of the Holy one;
               This hath the key of my affection.
            
            
               
               This hath the greateſt intreſt in my heart,
               And deeper ſtands infixed in my breſt,
               Then eyther kinred, or the gifts of arte,
               Or what blind Nature doth eſteeme as beſt:
               For though I held him deare, I doe proteſt,
               Before his paſſage from this vale of woe,
               Yet now enthron'd in euerlaſting reſt,Virtutem amiſſam quaerimus inuidi.
               
               Much more I loue: we ſeldome fully know
               True Vertues worth, till Vertue we forgoe.
            
            
               Gone is the ſtarre, whoſe luſtre beautifide
               Eche twinkling light that Northren climats bred,
               Yet though that clowdes obſcure Apollo's pride,
               With greater glory ſoone he ſhewes his head:
               So though we thinke renowned Hargreue dead,
               His life eclipſed by the clouds of fate,
               No myst or darkneſſe can ſo ouerſpread
               His liues true honour, or his praiſe abate,
               But still it ſhines abroad in freſher ſtate.
            
            
               What ſhould I thinke to ſet his praiſes forth,
               Which farre exceeds the compaſſe of my brayne?
               Too lofty ſubiect for my ſimple worth,
               Nor can I eaſly reach ſo high a ſtrayne,
               VVhich neuer taſted that immortall vayne,
               Flowing with Necter downe the ſacred hill,
               VVhere thoſe nyne virgin-Muſes aye remayne,
               VVhich learned heads with heauenly fury fill,
               And drop artes drearyment into their quill.
            
            
               
               Nethleſſe, although ſo many tongues I had,
               AsA Giant with a hundred hands. 
                  Briareus had hands great Homer ſayes,
               In habit of ſweet eloquence yclad,
               To blazon to the world his vertuous dayes,
               I ſhould but giue an Eccho to his praiſe,
               And much abbridge the volume of his ſtory:
               
                  Vertue is beſt to crowne herſelfe with Bayes,
               
               And Hargreues worth to register his glorie,
               Which ſtill ſuruiues, though life be tranſitorie.
            
            
               
                  In ſpite of enuy, ſlaunder, death and hell,
               
                  Hargreue reuiues from priſon of the graue;
                  Nunquā Stygias fertur ad vmbras inclyta virtus.
               
               Aboue the banks of Fame his praiſes ſwell,
               Since hisſſing Serpents ſought him to deparue.
               When Vertue moſt in ſpurn'd, ſhe growes moſt braue,
               Yet he which in his life was vnreuil'd,
               In whom vile Malice could no vantage haue,
               After his death by ſlaunder is defil'd:
               But Vertues meed hath Infamy beguild:
            
            
               For forth the aſhes of foule Obloquie,
               
               Burn'd with the firie brands of ſlaundrous lyes,Effugiunt ſtructos nomen honoſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      rogos.
               
               This peereleſse Phoenix, crown'd with victorie,
               Still doth renue himſelfe and neuer dyes,
               And on the wings of Honour mounts the ſkyes,
               Whereas his ſoule reſts in Iehoua's arme,
               Scorning the checks of dunghill Scarabies,
               
               And all the bitings of that viprous ſwarme,
               Whoſe tongues are euer preſt to worke his harme.
            
            
               
               
                  Couſin, me thinks, the myſterie is deepe,
               That they which Shepherds doe in ſhew appeare,
               Clad in the habite of a ſimple ſheepe,
               
               Whom neither pride nor enuy commeth neere,
               Should be tranſformed to an vgly Beare,
               
               And play and Woolfe ſo fitly in the end,Paſcitur in viuis liuor, poſt fata quieſcit.
               
               As a dead man aſunder for to teare,
               Whom in their life they neuer durſt offend,
               Prouing aſauage Vulture to their friend.
               
            
            
               Yet thus, we ſee, ſome Cookes are wont to vſe
               The ſilly ſheep, which whil'ſt he breathes the ayre,
               They neuer dare aduenture to abuſe,
               Or ſeeke the harmleſse creature to impayre:
               But when the bloudy Butcher doth not ſpare
               Within his throte to ſheath the murdring blade,
               
               They ſtreight diſioynt his members without care,
               And cut and mangle him before them layd,
               More cruell then the Butcher by their trade.
            
            
               Needleſſe it is my meaning to vnfold:
               Your Eagles eyes will quickly ſee the Sunne;
               
               All that ſhewes fayre,
                  Impia ſub dulcimelle venena latent. is not refined gold;
               
               Nor all pure veſtals which in cloyſters wonne:
               Sometimes a wolfe a ſhepherds weed will don:
               And ſtarued Snakes, as Aeſope wiſely told,
               Preſeru'd through pity from deſtruction,
               
               When fire hath freed their ioynts benum'd with cold,
               Will hiſſe their friend, like Serpents from his hold.
               
            
            
               
               Pardon me, Couſin, though I ſeeme too bold,
               T'vnrip the Cankers of a feſtrea ſore,
               
               Too much I grieue to heare him thus controld,
               And falſely ſlaundred by a grunting Bore,
               
               And by a heard of swyne, which earſt before,
               When famous Hargreue liu'd, like dogs did flatter:
               Yet heau'n, I hope, which iudgements hath in ſtore,
               Will firſt or laſt reward them for this matter:
               And turne the caſe on ſhore when tydes want water.
            
            
               Longer I will not agrauate their ſhame,
               
                  Broaching the caske of their vnnat'rall ſinne:
               Well can the world teſtify the ſame,
               How thankleſſe and vngratefull they haue bin,
               And how iniurious ſtill they dealt herein:
               But ſince the world neglects a dead mans wrong,
               My Muſe, alb'it ſhee be both bare and thin,
               Is not afrayd, though enuies part be ſtrong,
               To let them know th'abuſes of their toung.
               
            
            
               But let the wicked band themſelues in one,
               To worke true vertues ruine and decay:
               Tread you the path your father earſt hath gone,
               And feare not what the proud can doe or ſay:
               For though ambition ſeeme to beare a ſway,
               And enuies sting procure the iuſt mans ſmart,
               
                  Truth will aduaunce her cauſe as cleare as day,
               And turne the ſcandale of detractions dart,
               Vpon themſelues, with ſhame and griefe of heart.
            
            
               
               Well could you beate (I know) the billowes backe,
               Which ſeeke t'o'rewhelme the Barke of Hargreues name:
               But neuer tempeſt can his veſſell cracke,
               Since Vertue ſerues as Anker to his fame:
               Deigne therefore, Couſin, to protect from blame
               This ſimple worke, that like as Hargreues friend
               Stands in the front to patronize the ſame;
               So Hargreues ſonne in fine will it defend,
               Leſt Curres do bite behind what I haue pend.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   