
      
         
            
            
            A godly Confession
and Protestacion
of the christian fayth, made and
set furth by Ihon Hooper, wherin
is declared what a christiā
manne is bound to beleue of
God, hys King, his neibour,
and hymselfe.
            
               The herte beleueth to iustice,
confession by the
mouth is to saluation.
               Roma .x.
            
         
         
            
            
            To the Most vertuous
and myghtie Prynce, Edward the sixt
our mooste redoubted soueraygne Lorde, Kynge of
England, Fraunce, and Ierland, defendour of the fayth, and in
yearth nexte and immediately vnder God, the supreme heade
of the churches of Englande and Ierland: And also vnto the
most wyse godly, and honourable Lordes, of his hyghnes priuye
Counsell, and vnto the rest of the most wyse godly and lerned
assembled of all the honourables, and other appoynted to
be of hys Maiesties most hygh and godlye Court of Parliamēt,
Iohn Hooper hys most humble, louing,
and obedient Subiect, wysheth all grace
and peace frō God, wyth long, godly
and most prosperous raygne
ouer vs in al godly knowledge,
honour, helth,
and perpetual
felicitie.
            
               THe wyse manne
Cicero (most gracious
and myghtie Prynce)
sayth,Offici. lib. i. that he doth not
onely wronge, yt by violēce
oppresseth wrōgfully
an other mā, but
also he that defendeth
not (if it lye in his power)
the wronges offered
& is in no lesse faultye
then though he hadde forsaken parentes, fryndes, or
countrye. The same doctrine practised he in the defence
and propulsyng the iniuries and wronges at
tempted wrōgfully against Milo by the fryndes of

Clodius as it appeareth by hys eloquente and 
                  •
               acundious
oration made for that purpose in the senate
of Rome. The same kynde of iniuries, other
godly men in the scryptures of God, haue alwayes
accordyng to the lawe eschued: for it is wrytten, if
a manne se hys neyghbours Asse fal vnder hyr but
then, or hys Oxe to go astraye, hys neighboure is
bounde to helpe them bothe.Exodi. xxiii. The Asse from
burthen, and the Oxe from hys straying. The same
practised Abraham:Gen. xiiii. when he perceiued hys neuewe
Loth oppressed with the warres of the Infidelles,
propulsed, and reuenged the iniuries, and set hys
neuewe at large and lybertie: Euen so bee there two
sortes of people, that two sundry wayes do iniuries
and wronges vnto the soule and conscience of men.
The one of thē, by force or subtiltie defraudeth thē
from the truth and perfection of Goddes worde, as
hereticall and supersticious mynisters: The other,
at such tyme as they should wyth prayer, diligence,
and preachynge, defende the people of GOD from
such iniuries and wronges: are negligent or dūme.
The whyche kynde of iniury, doubtles the Lorde
God almyghtie wyll at length greuously reuenge.
Therefore, against this kynde of iniurye, he spake
vnto the Prophete Ezechyel:Ezechi. iii. xxxiii. It I purpose to sende
a Plague vppon the people, and thou gyue theym
not warnynge thereof, I wyll requyre theyr blo
                  •
               de
at thy hande. The same sayde he vnto Saynt Peter:
Feede my lambes,Iho. xxi, Marck. xvi. fedemy sheepe. And vnto all
the Apostles, he sayde: make ye all Gentyles my disciples.

And saynt Paule fearyng to fall in the daunger
of the second kynde of doyng wrouge, in sauing
the wronges of false religion from the churche of
Christ,i. Corin. ix. layde: woo be vnto me, if I preach not.
            Vpon the consideration of these premisses, seyng
al thīge be writtē for our doctrin,Roma. xv haue thought
it good, to wryte and set furth this Confession, and
protestation of my fayth: submyttyng my selfe, and
my fayth also mooste humbly to be iudged by your
Maiestie, your most honourable Counsel, with the
godly assemblaunce of your maiesties most hyghe
Court of Parliamēt, according to the word of god.
That by this meanes, I may auoyde the payn, and
daunger dewe vnto all them that neglect, or omyt
the iniuries and wrōges that may happen & chaūce
by sinister report, and false slaunder of Gods word,
to the conscience of any of your maiesties subiectes.
For I am credibly infourmed that many false, and
erronious opiniōs is entred into their hedes of me
(god forgeue thē that hath bene y• occasiō therof) If
any way these iniuries and daungerous slaunders,
may be holpe, I thynke this to be the waye, to offer
mooste humbly my selfe and my faith to be knowne,
and iudged bi your maiestie, after the worde of god.
I protest before god, and your maiestie, I wryt not
this cōfession for any Apollogie or defence, to contend,
or striue with any man, in any matter, nor for any
priuate affeccion, or displeasure I beare vnto any
man liuyng, or for any inordinate or percial loue
vnto my self: but for the cause, & to the same ende, before
rehersed.
            
               
Lykewyse for three other great causes, that shal folow.
The one toucheth God, the other your maiestie,
the thyrd your louyng subiects. As cōcerning God,
seing both his maiestie, myne own conscience, & my
audytory knowe, that I haue nether in doctryne,
nether in maners,Mathew. x. taught no other thynge then I receyued
of the Patryarches,Marke. viii. Prophetes,
                  
                     •
                  uke. xii. & the Apostles,
it were not onely synne, but also the very parte
of a myscreant, to deny or betraye the innocencye of
that doctrine, or to be ashamed to stande to the defence
therof, seing all godly men haue estemed more
the true worde of God, then theyr owne mortall liues.
The seconde cause, that toucheth youre Magestie,
and your mooste honorable Counsell, is because
vpon credyte, and good opinion, and partly by experience,
that your maiestie had both of my true fayth
and godly zeale: appoynted me (amōg other of your
preachers) though moost vnworthy, to teache your
subiectes their dutie to God and man. What true
subiect can hear and vnderstād such vntrue bruites
of those that a Kynges maiestie shall appoynte to
preach, and would not be glad, both for Gods sake
and his kyngs, to remoue such vngodly bruites, yf
he can, for the peace and quietnes of their subiects.
As for the cause ye toucheth the people, it is no lesse
worthy then eternal dānation. In case he be worthy
of iudgement,Mathew. v. & in daunger of hel fyre yt is angry wt
his brother, & calleth him fole: how much more, if he
cal hys brother heriticke▪ & a denyer of God? If the
fyrst 
                  •
               e worthy hel fyre, much more the last▪ Therefore

least my brother shoulde dye,Galathi. vi. and then receyue
condigne reward,Iacob. v. dew for a slaunderer: what it lieth
in me, I do by this Protestatiō of my fayth, cal him
to repentaunce. And incase any man stand in doubt
of myne opinion and meanyng in religion: Let hym
not damne me before time, but vse the meanes with
me that the .x.Iosi. xxii. Tribes of Israel vsed wyth the Tribe
of Ruben, Gad, & halfe the tribe of Manasses, that
buy it at their returne to their possessions, an aulter
vpon the borders of Iordane the whych fact was
lyke to haue ingendered great warres. But it was
stayed by the meanes of consultation, and communication
had with those that buylded it: and theyr
myndes knowne, the dissention was ended and appeased.
Euen so I wold desyre my christe coūtremē
to vse me (for I haue built no aulters of ydolatry) if
they be in doubt of me in any thyng, & not to kyll by
hearesay, nether before they haue heard me speake.
Thus I pray God, both thei and I may serch
alwaies to liue in his feare, to obeie oure
Kinge, and to be profitable, and true
members of this Realme of Englande.
So be it. The .xx. day
of December, in the yere
of our Lorde God.
a. M. D. & fiftie.
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               Assone as I perused this confession,
and protestation of
my faythe after the prynt, I
perceyued wordes, and sillables
euil placed. And in yt letter
G. the sixt face, and syxte
lyne, both agaynst my copye
and the state and argumante
of my matter, ther is printed
Saynt Paule confesseth, for s. Paule confuteth, an
affirmatiue for a negatiue, as thou mayst vnderstande
by the place, howe the worde prynted, semeth
to affirme, that the place denieth. But suche faultes
escapeth some times, contrary aswel to the Printers
as the authours mynde. Thus the Lorde be wyth
the & pardon al our faultes, for the death of Christ.
            
               At London the. xxvi
Decem. An. M. D. l.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Confession and
protestaciō of Iohn hoopers
Fayeth.
            
               
               I Beleue accordyng to
the holy Scripture to
bee thynges wythout
time, and before time.
Also to bee thynges
wyth tyme, and made
in tyme. The thynge
wythout and before tyme, is God only,
and soly, iii. in diuersitie of persōs, and
one in essence and equalitie of the godhead.
Math. iii. and. xxviii Zacary. iii The father, the sonne, and tholygost.
Not. iii. Gods, but one God, Thinges
wyth tyme,Gene. i. and in tyme, be al thynges,
that euer was, now is, or euer shal
be created in heauen or in yerth, vntly
the day of the last generall iudgement,
when as both body & soule, shal begyn
together (for the soule euer lyueth) immortalitie
and ioyes wythout tyme, of
such as be ordayned by God to eternal
saluation, and of such as be appointed

and haue deserued it, to eternal damnacion,
to begyn eternal paynes, and
so to endure without tyme.
            
                I beleue the sprites both good and
bad, and lykewyse the soules of men,
and women, created by God, to be immortal,
and from their creaciō to lyue
for euer, and neuer to dye.
            I beleue al thīges created by God
as concernyng their creaciō, to be perfect
and good: wythout hatred, displesure,
grudge, cōtumacie, rebelliō, disobediēce
or pryde against their maker.
            
                I beleue that thynges created by
God, part of them by grace, and gods
fauour, hath & euer shal perseuer and
cōtinue in the perfecciō, and excellencie
of their creacion,Colossians. i as the spirites, or
angelles, that neuer fel, nor hereafter
shalfal, through the meanes of Christ.
            
                I beleue that parte of these creatures
whyche God made in theyr perfeccion,
nowe to be subiecte, parte of
theym to immortall paynes, parte to

mortall paynes, parte vnto bothe:
as the deuyl, and manne, that fel into
thys ruin, and perdicion of theym selues,
althoughe diuers wayes: To say
the deuyl by pryde, and Arrogancye,
whyles he would be lyke vnto God.Psalme. v.
Man by ignoraunce,Ihon. vii
                     •
                  
                and by crafte of
the deuyll deceyued, and not by anye
imperfeccion of goddes partie in theyr
creacion, not by any force, compulsion
or violence of goddes parte, that compelled
them to euel.
            For I beleue God to be the author
of lyfe, and saluacion, and the wyll of
the deuyl, and of man, to be the occacion
of both theyr losse.
            
                I beleue al the people of the world,
to be eyther the people of GOD, eyther
the people of the Deuyl. The people
of God, be those that wyth hearte
and mynd knowe, worshippe, honour,
prayse, and lawde GOD, after the
Doctryne, of the Prophetes and Apostels.
            
               
The people of the Deuyl be those, that
thynke, they worshyp, honour, reuerēce
feare, laude, or prayse God, anye other
wayes, besydes, or contrary to the doctryne
of the Prophetes and Apostles.
            
                I beleue, that this people of God,
which be the very true churche of God,
to haue a certaine doctryne, that neuer
was, is, or hereafter shalbe violated by
time, or any mannes authoritie. Thys
doctrine onely and soly, is comprehended
in the sacred, and holye Byble.
            
                And I beleue, this doctryne of the
Patryarckes, & Prophetes to be sufficient,
and absolutely perfect, to enstructe
me, and al tholy churche, of our duties
toward God, & toward our neibours.
Of God it teacheth, that he is but one,
almightie, maker of all thinges, merciful,
iust, & al thynges that good is. And
seyng we knowe nothinge of God, nor
can iudge nothing of God, as touching
our saluation, but after his worde we
must iudge of hym, as we be taughte

therin, as well of hys diuine nature, as
of the diuision of the persons, in the deuyne
essēce, so that we be compelled by
thaucthoritie of gods worde, to cōfesse
the pluralitie of persōs, the Father, the
Sōne, and the holy ghost, in the vnitye
of one deuine godhead and essence.
            
                I beleue as touchyng the father of
heauen, as much as holy scripture teacheth
vs to beleue, & is set furth by partes
in the .iii. Credes, the Crede commō
               ly
called the Apostles Crede, where as
we saye:
            
                I beleue in God the Father almightie
maker of heauen and of yearth, and
so furth, wyth al suche thynges as the
crede of Nece beleueth, & after the faith
& Crede of Athanasius, in this behalfe
            
                I beleue, the second person in Trinitie,
to be one God with the Father in
godhead, and diuers in persō. I beleue
hym to be the very substaunce, image,
and figure of God, wythout begynning
or ending, with al other properties and

conditions, that the hollye scripture of
God, or the decree, or doctryne of any of
the thre former creades affyrme:
            
                I beleue that the mercy of the father,
the sonne, and the holye ghost, pitied, &
had compassion vpon Adam the loste
man, and was prouoked to ordeine the
sonne of god, second person in Trinitie
to debase and humble him self vnto the
nature of man, and also to become man
to redeme and saue the loste man. For
euen as he was by externall malyce
and craft of the deuell, broughte to confusion,
to sinne, and so to death both of
bodye and soule, nothynge hauynge in
himself, as touching his fyrst creacion,
that prouoked, styrred, intysed or allured
hym to euell: Euen so after his fal
was there nothynge in hym, or euer
after coulde be in his posteritie, that
myghte or maye allewer, or prouoke
hym or anye of hys posteritye, to the
meanes or helpe of his or theyr saluacion.
But euen as he was loste by malyce,

and deceyte of the Deuyll: so is he
and so shall all hys posteritye be saued
by the mercye, and merites of Chryste.
The Deuil and Adams wyl, wrought
synne and death: goddes mercye, and
Christe hys merites, wroughte grace,
and lyfe. The wyll of Eaue and Adam
strayinge, and wanderynge abrode vpon
the fruyte, an obiecte, and matter
forbydden of God, that they sholde not
eate of, brought them into death:
            Iesus Christe the seade of the wom
                  ••
               e
applying both bodye and soule, to the
obedience of God, deserued lyfe. As it
is in the scriptures, and in the seconde
part of the common crede.
            
                I beleue in Iesus Christ, his onelye
sonne our Lorde, whiche was conceyued
by the holy ghoste, borne of the vyrgyn
Marye, suffred vnder Ponc
                  •
               us
Pylate, he was crucified dead, and buried,
he descended into hel, and the third
day he arose agayn frō death vnto life:

and ascended into heauen, and there sitteth
on the ryght hand of God the Father
almyghtie. And frō thence he shal
come to iudge both the quick & the dead
            
                I beleue that by this meanes, and
no other,Iho. vi. xii. the sinnes of al beleuers,Rom. xv. to be
forgeuen without the merites and deseruīges
of Adams posteritie.Ephe. i. ii. By Adā
sinne came into the world,Heb. ii. ix. x. and bi sinne
deathe:Col. i. ii. Euen so wythoute all merites,
respectes, and worthynes of Adam, either
of anye of his posteritie, by Iesus
Chryste came remission of synne and
lyfe euerlastyng. And euen as I beleue
stedfastli, sinne & death, bi this meanes
to be ouercome and destroyed, and euer
lastyng lyfe to follow it: so beleue I the
sonne of God to be perfect God & mā,
accordyng to the scriptures, and do condemne
the heresies of Arian and Mar
               
                  •
               ian,
with their complices & adherētes,
that wyckedly beleued the contrarye.
And as I confesse and beleue the measies
of our saluation to be onely Christ:

so I condemne the Pelagian: and all
such other, as beleued and taught, that
thei culd by their own powers, strēgth
and wyll, worke theyr own saluation:
which false opinion cōculcateth, frustrateth,
slandereth, condemneth, and blasphemeth
all the deseruynges of Christ.
Therfore the Pelagian is called worthyly
the ennemy of grace.
            Farther I be
                  •
               eeue that the grace of
God, deserued by the passion of Christ,
dothe not onely freely, and without all
merites of man, begyn, teache, and prouoke
manne to beleue the promyses of
God, and so to begyn to worke the wyl
of God: but also all the woorkes, merites,
deseruynges, dooynges, and obedience
of man, towardes God, althoughe
they bee done by the spirite of
god, in the grace of god, yet being thus
done, be of no validitee, worthynes nor
merite before God,Luke. xvi Roma. xiiii. except God by mercy
and grace, accompte theym worthy
for the worthynes and merites of Iesus

Christ, that dyed vnder Poncius
Pilatus. So that I beleue grace, not
oneli to be the begynner of al good workes,
Esay. lxiiii. but that all good workes done by
man in the greattest perfeccion,Psal. cxliii. haue
neede, and wanteth grace to pardon
their imperfeccion.
            
                I beleue in the holye ghoste equalle
god with the father, and the sōne, and
procedynge from them both: by whose
vertue, strēgth, and operacion, the Catholyke
churche is preserued from all

                  〈◊〉
               ,Math. iii. and .xviii. and false doctrines,Act. ii. and teacheth
the cōmuniō 
               
                  •
               f saincts in al truth
and verity:i. Corin. xii. the whych holy spirit,Ephe. ii. iii. shal
neuer forsake the holy church which is
Christ his mystical bodye.Ihon. xiiii.
               Gala. iii.
               Ioel. ii.
            
            
                I beleue that this holye spirit, worketh
the remission of synne, the resurreccion
of the fleshe, and euerlastynge
lyfe, accordyng to the holy scripture.
            Thys is my fayth,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . and doctryne,
concirnyng the Godhed and diuersitie
of persons in the holy Trinitie, and also
of the two natures in Chryst, hys
godhed, and manhed. Abhorring, and

detestīg the heresies of Samosa
                  •
               enes.
Arian, Nestor, Eutiches, who wer condemned
by godly coūcels Nece, Cōstā
               tinople,
Ephesin, Calchedom, & other,
I detest and abhor the Martian & Man
                  •
               che,
that faineth to be two gods, and
both eternal: one good, & the other euil,
alwaies at debate among them selus.
I detest, & abor ye monsterous doctrine
of the Valentines, & so generally of all
those that haue denied to be ani god, or
wold haue many gods. Also al those I
detest that haue erred, and in aintaine
theyr erroure in any thyng concerning
the essence of god, ordeined the plurality
of persons, as of the father the sōne
and the holye goost, This is the faith
of gods spiryte, in my conscience, whiche
I haue lerned in hys word, & haue
fayethfullye, and r
                  •
               lygyouslye preathed,
and taughte the same in all my
sermons, as I wyll be iudged by onne
audytory. Also the same doctryne. I
haue furthred & set forth in al mi boks

                  〈◊〉
                writings, though sum Calūniators

and sclaunderers, wulde gladly make
pore the people beleue the cōtrary. But
I do decline and appeale from such vncharitable
spretes, vnto the charitable
reader and louyng herte of all theym,
that be indued with gods holy sprete
for they wyll not constrayne, nor force
letter, sillable, word, or sentēce, cōtrary
to the mynde of the speaker, & writer,
but wyll Iudge, and serche for iudgement,
in the processes and circumstances
of the writer, & content themselues
with the writers mynde, rather than
to brynge theyr affection and corrupte
myndes, to make their own imaginations
and fantasies an other mans doctrine,
as the Arrian, Pelagiane, Anabaptist,
Papist, and other do, and haue
doone, bryngynge corrupte myndes to
the lesson and readyng of Christes testament,
and wold that their fals heresies,
and vntrue imaginations, should
be Christe his doctrine. Seeyng bothe
goddes lawes, and mans lawes suffereth,

and geueth libertee to euery man
in a cause of religion, to be interpretater
of his owne wordes, it were contrarye
to iustice, to put any man from it.
For if the auctor, may not be the interpreter
of his owne mynde, what wold
not malyce, enuy, spite, and disdayne
gather of works most truly, and faith
fully mente and wrytten. And seyng
charitee and the lawes of this realme
as it appereth in an act of parliament
made in y• first yere of the reigne of our
Soueraine Lorde Kyng Edward the
syxte, geueth lybertee, and lycence to
hym that shalbe accused for a matter
of Religion, vpon malice, euyll wil, hatred
disdayn, or bee made and suborned
recordes, to repell and conuicte all
suche false recordes, and theyr accusers
by other faithfull and indifferent Recordes.
The whiche acte of parliament
God forbydde should be denied to any
of the kyngs Maiesties preachers: for
yf the testimonye of theyr audientes,

shal not quitte theym from the spyte &
calumniacion of malicious, & vncharitable
mē, they shal not long preache
the truth. For ether the papistes wyll
accuse thē, bycause thei wishe thē pope
& al monumentes of papistry to be taken
out of the way: Ether the carnall
gospellar, that cannot abyde to heare
his faultes, & carnal life rebuked. And
I thinke if the Kinges magestie, & his
most honorable coūsel prepare not the
soner a brydle & correction for synne,
the true preacher of God hereafter shal
be more persicuted for reprehendynge
of synne and vngodly lyfe, then euer
yet hyther vnto he hath bene persecuted
by the papistes. Thus I haue declared
my fayth, and belefe towardes
God, accordyng to the Scriptures, in
the which I trust to cōtiune vntil deth
end this myserable, and w
                  •
               fihed life.
            Nowe I wyll declare also the same
towardes the churche of Christe, what
I bele
                  •
               e of the magistrates the mynisters
of the wo
                  •
               de, and the people I

dwel wyth al. And of these thynges I
wyl speake accordyng to the doctrine
of the Prophetes and Apostles. For
many tymes as well heretofore, as in
our daies, haue bene supersticious Hipocrites,
and phātastical sprites, that
haue neglected, and cōdemned the office
of maiestrates, iudgemētes, lawes
punishmentes of euyl, lawful dominion,
rule, lawful warres, and such like:
without which a cōmon wealth maye
not endure. Thei haue condemned also
the ministery, and ministers of Christes
church: and as for christiā societie
and charitable loue, they confounde.
Thei vse the ministerye of the churche
so, that it is out of al estimatiō, supposyng
them selues to be of such perfection,
that thei nede neither the ministery
of the word, nether the vse of Christ
hys holye Sacramentes, Baptisme,
and the Supper of the Lorde.
            And the other they vse wyth suche
deuilish disorder, that thei would by a

law, make theyrs theyr neighbors and
theyr neyghbors theyrs, confoundyng
al proprietie and dominion of goodes.
Before our tyme the furye, & damnable
heresy of Marcian and the Ma
                  •
               lchees
against the maiestrates, troubled many
a yere dangerousely both Asia, and
Affrica. And not yet .cccc. yeres syth a
gone, a sorte of people called Flagelliferi
dyd the same.
            And nowe in our tyme to the greate
trouble and vnquietnes of mauy common
welthes, in Europe, the Anabaptistes
hathe resuscitated, and reuyued
the same errours. Whyche is an argument
and token of the deuyls great
indignation agaynst ciuile policy and
order. for he knoweth wher such er
                  •
               ors
and false doctrines of politicall ordres
be planted: two great euils necessarily
must nedes folowe, the one is sedition,
that bryngeth murders, bloudshedyng
and dissipations of realmes: the other
is blasphemy agaīst Christes precious

bloude, for those sectes thincke they be
able to saue them selues, of & by thē selues.
Farther wheras the magistrates
be cumbred wyth those daungerous
sorte of people, the Deuyll knoweth
theyshal haue no leaser at wil to take
some order by gods worde, to oppresse
suche false doctryne. But thys we bee
taughte out of the scripture, that euen
as mā is ordeined to the order, chang,
and alteracyon of tyme, as thorder of
the yere appointeth, now to be subiect
vnto summer, nowe vnto winter, now
to the sprynge, and nowe to the falle:
so hath God ordeined, & comaūded mā
to be obediēt to pollices, & orders were
soeuer he be, so they be not repngnaūt
nor cōtrary to the word of God: As Ioseph
in his hert, bore abrode whersoeuer
he wente, the true knowledge & inuocatiō
of God, also of Christ to come,
yet outwardly in courts, indgements,
contractes, and inpossessyon of goddes
he vsed the lawe of the Egiptiās: euen

so did Daniel in Babilon.Dan. iii. Ther is nomore
to be taken hede of, in lawes, and
ciuil policies but to se the lawe repugne
not the lawe of god: and that the lawe
makers and those to whom the execucion
of the law is cōmended vnto, haue
a special, and singuler 
                  •
               se vnto the effect
and the meaning of the lawe, wher
                  •
               ore
it was made a law: the which S. Paul
wonderfully exhorteth people to vnderstande,Roma. xiii
saying of the lawe,Exod. 
                     •
                  xxii. and magistrates:
let them be a feare and terrour
to the euil doers, and a praise, and commendacion
to the welldoers. Neither
forceth it, though the fourme and maner
of lawes, of iudgements, of paines
and punishmentes, be not like in al places,
as the lawes of Feuderies 
                  •
               ee not
lyke in Italy, Englād, Fraūce, Spain
nor Germany. Yet shuld euery nation
be subiect vnto the lawes of hys owne
realme, and cyuyll pollicie: and in hys
doyng. he shal offend God no more, thē
the Englysh mē, that haue lōger days
in the somer, shorter dayes in wynter:

then those that dwel nere to the south.
Or s. Paule that had longer dayes at
the Solsti
                  •
               ium and pitch of the sunne
in Macedon▪ then Christ had at Ierusalem.
But euē as we be content with
our measure and length of dai & night
and others be contented wyth theyrs:
so must both thei and we submit oure
selues and be contented wyth the measure
and order of oure owne lawes. I
do therfore be wayle and lament, that
the preachers in the church, and scolemasters
ī their scholes, the housholder
in his housholde, do knowe no better
what the dignitie and honour of a cyuyl
pollicy is: by whom it is ordained,
and by whom it is preserued, how dangerous
& damnable a thynge it is before
god and man, to trouble and disquiet
it, by any furour and madnes of
opinion, as the Marcion, Maniches, &
Anabaptistes do. I se & know by experience,
muche trouble & danger to ryse
among the vnlearned & vngodly people,
by ignorancy: for whē thei se such

deformities, & cōfusiōs, rise & chaūce, as
we se manitimes, to happē in kingdōs
Cortes, indicials, lawes, gouernonres,
that more fansy pryuate profytte, and
syngularitye, then the profytte of the
hole commō wealth, and indifferencye
of all men, and all causes indifferentelye:
they suppose verelye, (for lacke of
knowledge in goddes woord) that all
orders, pollycyes, kingdoms, and domynyons,
be no other thing, thē cruell
Tirannie and oppression of the poore.
And also to haue theyr beginning, and
orygynall eyther of the Deuyll or of
pryde,Romay. xiii. and couetousnes of men. Thys
same euyl vpon the same occasyon of
ignorauncye, caused natural wise mē,
muche to be troubled and vexed about
the consideraciōs of kyngdomes, pollicyes,
Rules, and dominions, because
they perceiued all kingedomes to be
subiect vnto troubles and alteracions
and not only that, but they perceiued
ryghte well, no kyngedome too bee

perpetuall, nor for euer. And in dede,
who so behouldeth the begynnynge,
the contynuaunce and end of the Empyre
of Rome, shal se righte well, they▪
imaginations to be no vayn thinges.
            Howe muche of herre owne bloude,
and of straungers bloude dyd Rome
shedde, before, she came to the regimēt
and rule of all the worlde? When she
was aspyred therunto, and was a fear
to al the worlde, howe muche bloud of
her owne shedde she, by cyuyll warres
and contencyons, the iestes and wrytinges
that men cioneth of Silla, Marius,
Cinna, Cezar, Pōpeius, Brutus,
Anthonins August, & other declareth.
Thus when the Lord God wold take
from Rome, for her synnes, the dominion
of the world, he sēt the Gothes, Vā
               d
                  •
               ls,
H
                  •
               ns, Arabies. and Turks: that
wasted not only Italy but also Egipt,
Aphrica, and Asia, and so broughte
the Empyre of Rome to noughte. As
many tymes as I reade & marke thys

history and 
                  ••
               her lyke it causeth me to

                  •
               doke vpon many euyll Englyshe men
as Scipio loked vpon the greate citye
of Car
                  •
               hage whiles it was a burning,
saying with a lamentable voice: the inconstancy
of fortune in humain things
is to be lamented. Which voice sprang
vpon thys occasion that Carthage being
a cyty of greate 
                  •
               eno
                  •
               me, & dominiō,
was now becom a pray vnto ye fire,
and deuolted as wisdō alwayes doth,
the consideracion of presēt euels, vnto
other yet floryshynge in hault, & prosperous
felycyty: and declared as a mā
seing before, the ruine and fal of things
that stode, destinated the fall of Rome
to com, that shuld perish by like plage
Euen so when I beholde the eu
                  •
               l pestiferous
affected mindes of english men,
and perpend and wa
                  •
                the fru
                  •
               ts of such
corrupte myndes, contempte, hatred
grudge & malice against their King magistrates
laws, orders & pollicies, d
                  ••
               tles
I can 
                  〈◊〉
                other think, but these men
as much as is in thē, cōspire & work the

distruccion of thys realme: For it cāno
                  •
               
other wise be, but as cōtempt of godlye
lawes, & sedicion amonge the people▪
and subiectes of what 
                  〈…〉
               
they be, haue wroughte the desti
                  •
               icyon
of other realmes: so must it: and can no
otherwise do, vnto thys realme.The chefest remedye agynst sedition. 
               
                  〈◊〉
               
what realme or kingdom 
                  〈◊〉
                auoyde
these eulls, 
                  〈◊〉
                prouide the
word of God to be trulye and di
                  •
               igently
preached, & taught vnto the subiects
and members thereof. The lacke of 
                  〈◊〉
               
is the chiefe cause of sedition and 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
Proue. xxvi. as Salomon sayth. Wher 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  ••
               
               phecye
wanteth, the people are dyscy
                  •
               
               pated.
wherfore 
                  〈◊〉
                not a litle wō
               der
at the opinion and doctrine of su
                  •
               ly
as saye a Sermon 
                  〈◊〉
                in a weke, in a
moneth, or in a quarter of a yere is sufficiēt
for ye people. Truly it is iniuriously

                  〈…〉
                agaīst yt glory of god, & saluaciō
of the people. But seing they wil
not be in the whol, as good vnto god as
before thei haue ben vnto the diuil, neither
so glad to remoue false doctryne

frō the people, and to cōtinue them in
the true▪ wher as thei did before occupi
the most parte of the for
                  ••
               o
                  •
               e, the most
part of the after none, yea, and a great
part of the night, to kepe the estimatiō
& continuance of daungerous, & vayne
supersticious, were it much now to occupy
one hour in the morning, and another
hour towardes nyght, to occupye
the people with true and ernest prayer
vnto GOD in Christe his bloud, and
in preaching the true doctrine of Christ
that they myghte knowe and continue
in the 
                  •
               ewe relygyon, and faythfull
confydence of Christ Iesu.
            Exercyse; and dylygence bryngeth▪
credit vnto religion, whether it be true
or false. For it neuer taketh place, nor
coole in the people without diligence,
as it is to be perceiued bi the acts, and
iestes, done in the
                  •
                me of Iero
                  •
               oā, and
Roboam, the kynge of Israel, and Iuda.
What brought the Masse and al other
Idolatry into estimacion, but dailye

preachyng and saying therof, with
such laud and praise as euery old wife
knew what a masse was worth.
            Fyftene Masses in a churche dayelye
were not to many for the priests of
Baal, and shuld one sermō euery day
be to muche for a godly Bishoppe and
Euangelical preacher? I wonder how
it maye be to muche opened, and declared
vnto the people. If any man saye,
labour is left, and mennes busynes lyeth
vndon by that menes. Suerly it is
vngodly spokē, for those that here the
people in hande of such a thyng knoweth
ryghte well that there was nether
laboures, cares, nedes, necessity nor any
thynges elles, that heretofore could
kepe thē frō hearing of Masse, though
it had bene sayd at .iiii. a, clocke in the
mornynge.
            Therfore, as far as Ise, people wer
content to lose more labour, and spent
more time then to go to the Deuyl, thē
nowe to come to God: but my faith is

that both Master & seruant shal find
vauntage, & gaine therby at the yeres
end, though they heare morning Sermon
and mornyng prayers euery daye
of the weake. For by this meanes thei
should learne, not only to know God,
but also theyr magestrates, & to put
difference betwene the office, & the person
that is in office: & betwene the offyce,
and the troubles, necessarilie annexed
vnto the office, which bringeth
not onely knowledge of office & officer
but also honour, & reuerence vnto thē
both, as. S. Paule that leued the policy,
laws, order, and wisdom of the Romaynes,
yet dislyked verye muche the
vice & naughtines of Niro, vnto whō
he submitted and willyngly bro
                  •
               ght
into seruitude both his body and hys
goddes, and rebelled not thoughe Nero
was a nought
                  •
                Emperoure, for his
office sake, which was the 
                  〈…〉
               
of God.i. Reg. xvi
                     •
                  . So dyd Elias loue the state,
honour, and dignitie of the kynges fo

Israel: yet detested, and fell foule oute
with y• fauts of Hachab. The same doctrine
teacheth saint Peter vnto al seruauntes,
commaunding them to obey
their maister, thoughe they be euil, hauyng
a respect to the place they be in,
which is thorder of god & not vnto the
vice, & abuse of the persō in gods order
Truly be the ruler of him self neuer so
euel, yet the lawes, iudgementes, punyshmētes
and statutes, made for the
punishment of euyl,Deut. xvii. and the defence of
the good, be the very worke of god, for
the magistrates be the kepers of discipline
and peace. Therfore as ye motion
of the heuēs the fertilite of the earth be
the works of god, & preserued by him:
euen so be the gouernours and rulers
of the earth,Ps. l. c. xliiii as Dauid saith: he geueth
healthe to Prynces as it was shewed
in hym selfe, Salomon, Iosophat, & others.
The regimente & policy of king
Dauid was troublous, and ful of miseries,
thereygne of king Salomō his

sonne, peaceable and quiet, the re
                  •
               ygne
of Iosua. victorious, and prosperous.
The raygn of the iudges that folowed
so troublous & vnquyet, as a more rēt
and torne common wealth, I haue not
redde of: yet was the order of God all
one, aswel in the one as in thother, and
requyred as much loue, assistence, and
obedyence of the people, to theyr kyng
and magistrates in theyr trouble as in
theyr quietnes & peace. So doth Daniel
y• prophet most godli & wysely teache
by hys ymage that he sawe made of
fower 
                  •
               undry mettals, but he concludeth
whether the regiment, and regētwer
gold, syluer, copper or Iron, the
people alwayes obeied. The same teacheth
also the doctryne and example
of Iohn Baptyste, Chryste, Saynte
Stephen, and saynte Iames, Iohns
brother. For althoughe the regymente
were neyther so godlye, nor so quiet in
Herodes times, and Pontius Pilatus
as it was in Salomons time: yet gaue

they alwayes lyke reuerence, honoure,
and obedience vnto them, for theyr orders
sake, as thoughe they had ben the
verteousest princes of the world as their
doctrine tribute and bloude recordeth.
For they gaue vnto Cesar the thinges
dewe vnto Cesar, as theyr boyes, a
                  •
               d
their goods, but their soules they owed
to none, but vnto God. And when
diuersitye of relygyon, & doctryn shuld
be discussed and determined by their lawes,
they declyned frō theyr iudgemēt.
and appealed vnto the word of god, to
haue al controuersyes ended thereby.
When that toke place, they gaue thankes
to god: when it dyd not, they were
content paciently to beare whatsoeuer
goddes hand wold permyt the magystrates
to say vpō thē. Wer these exā
               pels
knowē and kept before mens eies
people wold not for a faut or two that
shuld happen in the regyment, iritate
and prouoke the regentes, and Prynces
wyth contumacy, and rebellion as

it is sene commonlye at thys daye, but
rather folow the exāple of the Iewes
that when they herd of the facts, and
doīgs of Ptolome Lathure, that killed
twentie thousand of their country mē
and caused those that he toke captiue,
to eare the fleashe of their owne deade
fathers, and brothers, yet rebelled thei
not, but knewe it was for their sin, and
therfore exorted one y• other to penaūce
& amendmēt of life: the same selfe doctrine,
teacheth oure sauioure Christ in
his holy Euangeliste Luke.Luk. xiii Thus I
thoughte good, to put in my Crede for
the declaracion of my faith, towardes
ciuil magistrates, orders, & lawes, & to
opē the differēce betwene thorders the
person, & such troubles as be annexed
vnto thorder: lest any mā shold, for troble
& confusions sake, dāne order, & regimēt
it self: or els, by the meanes ther
of, to detract & forsake, to take paines
ī suh vocacion as the Epycures dyd,
wher as in dede, rule, & regimēt, thēselues

be the greate benefites of god. And
ther fore row in the later time, more to
be pre
                  •
               hed & taught to the people for diuers
cōsideraciōs: thē euer hertofore.
Specially because cōtēpt of honesti, &
lawes, labors, & godlye exercises, rain
more thē euer they did. For at the begining
men so obeied reasō & were ruled
therby, that they brought them selues
into order & pollicie. And for the maintenance
therof, sought out craftes and
& artes necessary for the preseruacion
of pollicie and order, and so were glad
rather to be ruled by 
                  •
               eson thē by force
and violēce. This time beyng expired
& resō corrupt, asp
                  •
               rīg farther thē reasō
by nature wold, partly for tomuch
loue of her self, partly to tame & kepein
subiecciō such as disordred al good order,
& rule: descended frō ye regiment of
reasō, vnto the force of war, & marcial
lawes, The same semīg good vnto almighty
god to tame, & reclame mā by
force, that wolde not be ruled by reson

But now are we fallē into the last time
& end of the world, wherifor reson ruleth
lust, & for iust battail, ruleth immoderate
cōcupiscence: for scarce is there
one of a. C. that loue to seke for wysdō
& knolege of resō, & of artes, that other
mē foūd out & left vnto vs. And as for
the paines & trauayls of war, let 
                  •
               uery
māiudge, & cōsider him self, whether
our weak nature cā suffer as much as
Dauid, Archilles, Cyrus, Alexāder, Hanybal,
Marcellus, Scipio, C, Cesar, &
other did: thē shal we perceiue, that nature
now in man consumed, effeminated,
& worne out, is a thynge most vnable
to do, that fore age hath done.
            Therfore haue these later daies more
nede of much tcachyng, in cyuyle causes,
then the old age before vs, why che
better, and more modestlye, gouerned
them selfes, by onlye reasō, then now
we do by goddes worde, and reason.
            And this is not knowen onely by the
holye scriptures, but also by prophane

writers, that declare wyth the age of
the world to encrease miquytye. And
oure experience maye be a comentary
in this behalfe to gods laws, & mānes
lawes: for where as saynte Paule declareth
the ciuill Magistrates, not only
to be ordeined, but also preserued by
god, & that al mē shuld accept, & accōpt
hym to be the trewe Magistrate, that
God had appoynted, and not suche a
one as y• people & subiects appoīt their
selues. And euē as wyse Cicero perceyued
at the begynnynge of the mortall
dissencion and debate betwene Pompeius,
and Iulius Cesar, gaue counsell
accordinge to the wil of God, (declared
vnto him, by the suffrages, and voices
of the Romaynes) that Cesar shoulde
haue bene cheyfe Ruler of the people:
nowe for lacke, and cōtempte of knowledge,
both say
                  •
               te Paule, and Cicero
be neglected. For either the people wil
haue no magistrate at al, or elles suc
                  •
               
a one, as it pleaseth them selues, and

not hym that God hathe appoynted.
If thys aduenture take no place, they
wyll chaunge (if they can) the state of
the common wealth, that wheras one
raigneth, a Monarche or kynge, they
wolde chaunge it into the regimente
of manye. And whereas many raigne
(as mē neuer contented with the state
that God hathe appoynted) turne the
regymente of manye into the gouernaunce
of few. Whose nature Orace
wel declareth. 
            
               
                  Lib. Epist.
               
               ☞ Optat Ephippia bot. p
                     •
                  ger Optat, arare Caballus,
            
            Against whose preposterous iudgement
and fickil myndes,Romay. xiii. sainte Paule
vehemētly writeth. The powers saith
he that be, ar ordeined of God, and not
the powers that subiectes shal chouse
& make at their pleasures. For no man
of what degre, state, or autoritie soeuer
he be being a priuate mā, (as al men be
in a monarchy wheras one ruleth, in respect
of the kyng that ruleth) shuld medle
with the state of a realme. For it is

god that ordayned it,Daniell. ii. and he that dissolueth
it.Psal. cxxvi. Cxliii. Neither shold this fond opinion
take any place in a christian mās
heade,Prouer. xviii. Parap. ii. Esaye. i. that any offices appointed by
god,Psalme. viii shold cause the officers to be euell
before god. For the lord giueth thē tytles
and names of great honoure and
loue, as gods, and suche as serue and
please hī,Psal. lxxxii. also the nurses of the churche
as the examples of Adā,Esa. xlix. Henoch, Noe,
with other,Genesis. ix. who were in those dayes
veri godly rulers, to maintaine vertue
and punish vice. This sawe not onelye
the Patriarkes, and godly men of the
scripture, but also naturall wyse men,
that saw and reuerenced order and pollicye
as Plato writeth,De legivus. sayinge. As the
Oxe is not ruled bi ye Oxe, nor the goat
bi the goate, but bi a more pure nature,
to saye, by man so the nature of man:
is more infyrme then can rule it selfe,
Therfore god appointed, not onely mē
to rule, but also such men as excelled in
wyt and wisdō,ii. Pa
                     •
                  ap. xx adioined with the special

& singuler grace of God, & so saieth
Plato de legibus: vbi non deus sed mortalis aliquis dominatur, ib
                     •
                  
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   dorum uel erumnarū nullum esse effugiū: wheras any
mortall manne beareth dominion, and
not god, there can be none escape of calamities,
& miseries. Of the same opinion
is Homer the poet, who saieth that
the gods appoynteth their shieldes to
defēd princes, as Pallas defēded Achi
                  •
               
               les.
That doth Iosophat the kynge in
the plate afore rehersed, wōderfully declare.
And whosoeuer wil consider the
execucion & dew paines to wardes euel
doers, shal rightwel perceiue that god
himself is ī the magistrate, For Christ
sayeth: he that stryketh wyth the
swearde, shal perishe with the sweard,
And of the oppressoures it is spoken:
wo be vnto the that spoyleste,Math. xxvi. for thou
shalt be sp
                  •
               iled So that we se god to defend
ciuil iustice vpon the earth,Esay. xxxiii Abrahā,Iob. xi.
Ieremye,Eccle. viii. & saynt Paule,Gene. i. declareth
that the ciuill pollicie is the ordinance
of God,Ierem. xxix.
               i. Timo. ii. by suche prayer as they commaunded

the people to praye for it: and
thys praier for the maiestrates declareth
what diuersitye is betwene a magistrat
christened, & a Heathen. Wherin
Cicero dyffereth from Esay, & kyng
Dauid frō Iulius Cesar. Cicero gaue
coūsel, after reason & experience to rule
the common wealth, but manye tymes
it toke not good effecte for lacke of the
wysdom of God, Esay, & the rest of the
prophets gaue coūsel not of them selus
but frō god & what prynce soeuer obeyed
theyr coūcel he prospered alwayes &
had good succes. The same maie you
se in the fashyons, and maner of theyr
warres. Alexander thoughte hym selfe
stronge inough by natural strengthe,
to conquer his enemies. Kynge Dauyd
added to hys s
                  •
               yage stones,i. Sam. xvi
                     •
                  
                the prayer
and helpe of goddes name. Therfore if
heath in mag
                  •
               strates should be obeied,
muche more chrystian magystrates.
            And in case the kynges mayestye of
Englande maye fynde no lesse obedyence

                  •
               n his subiectes then Scip
                  •
               o Alexander,

and other foūd amongs theirs,
England shalbe to strong, with gods
helpe, for all the worlde. But Englysh
men I speake it with sorow, and griefe
of herte, haue learned of Cleon, a man
that Aristophanes wryteth of, that
had one footein the senate, and the other
in the fielde: so haue Englyshmen
one hand at the plough, and the other
against y• magistrates. The ministers
of the churche, persons & vicares, one
hād vpon the portesse, and the other to
strike at the kinges crowne.
            They do followe the Ape that Harmogenes
fable speaketh of, that wold
haue had other Apes to haue builded
houses, tounes, & cities to haue defēded
them selfs from the dominion of their
Lord, and ruler man:
                  
                     •
                  ene. ii. 
                     〈◊〉
                  , ix and thought it
not meete to liue in the state that God
had appoynted them: euen so subiects,
nowe a dayes, (God amende it) wolde
make them selues defences, cities, castels,
townes, tentes, pauilions, to defend

them against their king, lord and
magistrate, and wil not be contente to
liue in the state that god apointed thē
vnto. But it shal happē vnto them, as
it did vnto the Apes: their counsel and
conspiracie shal neuer take place. Let
vs therfore remēber s. Paul that saith:
the powers that be,Romay. xiii. be of God, and not
suche as we wolde make and let vs be
contented with them, and obeye them
for conscience sake: for suche as disobey
and rebel againste superioure powers,
rebel agaynst god, & so god punisheth
it with eternal damnacion. This is
ynoughe to kepe euerye good man and
trew subiect, in obedience, to theyr hyer
powers. If the reader of the scripture
of god note the first & the secōde chap.
of Gen. he shuld perceyue rule & policie
or euer man wist what sinne menre: for
the Lord gaue the superioritie & dominiō
to Adā ouer al beasts. Of whō now
we may right wel lerne obediēce yf we
wer not worse thē bestes. Now a word

or two of the magistrates duty: Aristotle
calleth the Magistrate 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                A
keper of the law. Let hym vse it therfore
indifferentlye wythout respect of
persons,
                  
                     •
                  eni. xxiiii. in punishynge suche as trouble
by inordinate meanes,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . xii. xviii the common
wealthe:Psalm. ii. and also suche as blaspheme
the liuing God,
                  
                     •
                  roue
                     •
                  . xxv as godly kinges & Rulars
haue done, Dauyd, Iosias, Nabucodonozor,
Constātine, and other. For
although a Eyuyl Law, and punishment
can not chaunge the Herisies of
the minde, neyther the desire that men
haue to do euell: yet when they breake
forth agaynst the honoure of GOD,
and trouble the common welthe, they
shoulde be punished.
            For the maiestrat is, as one that hath
the two testaments tyed at hys necke,
and should defend them, as hys owne
life:
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . xiii. and therefore saynte Paule calleth
him not only the reuenger of euyll, but
the mayntener of good, and Esay the
Prophet sayth the same.
            
               
Nowe I wyl declare my fayth concerning
the external,xvii. & visible churche
of Christ, & of the ministers thereof. I
call thys visible churche a visible congregation
of mē and womē that heare
the gospell of Christ and vse his sacramentes,
as he hath instituted them. In
the whyche congregatyon the spyryte
of God worketh the saluacion of al beleuers,
as saynte Paule sayeth:Rom. i. The
gospel is the power of God, to the saluaryon
of the beleuer. As thoughe he
hadde sayed: the gospel of Christ, wher
it is hearde and beleued, the mynde is
chaūged by the vertue of the holy gost,
from the loue of synne, vnto the loue
of vertue. The wyl is wrought to consente,
and the consente so assisted by
the holye ghooste, that saythe obteyneth
the remission of fy
                  •
               ne, and the beginning
of euerlastyng life. And these
two markes, the true preachīg of gods
word & right vse of the sacramētes declare
what, & wher the true church is▪
               
Vnto the which churche, I woulde all
Christian men shoulde assosiate them
selues, although there may happen to
be some things desired in maners and
discipline. For no church as touchyng
thys parte, can be absolutely perfecte.
But where as the doctryne is sounde,
and no Idolatry defēded, that church
is of God, as farre as mortal man can
iudge. And wher as this doctrine and
right vse of Sacramentes be not, ther
is no church of Christ, though it seme
neuer so holi. For in the blessed virgins
time, the Pharisies, and bishops, wer
accompted to be the true church: yet by
reason their doctrine was corrupt, the
true Church rested not in them, but in
Simeon,Luke. i. ii. zacharye, Elisabeth, the shepherdes
& other. The same doth saynte
Paule teach vs,Io. x. that whatsoeuer he be
that preacheth other doctryne then the
worde of God is not to be credited,Io. iii. thoughi. Cor. i.
he were an Angel of heauen.Roma. x NeitherEphe. ii. iiii.
wyl 
                  〈◊〉
                as knowe God,Esa. viii. lix harken

vnto thē: but wyl heare Christ, the Prophetes
and Apostles, and no other.
The other marke is the right vse of sacramentes,
wherof were two in noumber
wyth the fathers, in the ministerye
of the church, and so many yet be wyth
vs in the ministerie of the churche, and
haue annexed vnto them the promyse
of eternal saluation, and also of eternall
damnacion if they be contemned, and
may be lawfully hadde. In the lawe of
Moses was Circumcision and the Pascall
Lambe: & in theyr places we haue
Baptisme and the Supper of the Lord
dyuers in externall elementes, and Ceremonies,
but one ineffect misterie, and
thing it selfe, sauing that theyr Sacramentes
shewed the graces of God to be
geuen vnto men, in Christ to come: and
ours declare y• graces of God to be geuē
in Christe that is alredye come: so that
the Sacramentes be not chaunged, but
rather the Elementes of the Sacramē
               tes.
And euerye of these Sacramentes

haue theyr peculier & proper promyses,
vnto the which they hange annexed, as
a seale vnto the writynge. And there
fore be called after Saynte Paule, the
confirmations or seales of goddes promises.
Roma. iiii Thei haue peculier Elementes,
by the whych thei signifie the heauenly
misteries, that sacramētall
                  •
                thei cōtain
& be the thynge in dede They are called
Sacramentes. That is to saye: visible
sygnes of inuisible grace. They haue
their proper ceremonies, that testifie vnto
vs the obsignation, and confirmation
of Goddes heauenly gyftes.
            The haue also their proper commaundement,
because we shuld not chaūge,
adde, nor take, from them anything at
our pleasures. Thus in general I thīk
of all gods Sacramentes in the ministery
of the churche. And of Baptisme
because it is a marke of our Christian
church,Roma. iiii. this I iudge after the doctryne
of Saint Paul, that it is a seale and cō
               firmacion
of iustice,xviii. either of our accepcion

into the grace of God for Chryst,
for his innocencye and iustice by fayth
is ours, and our sinnes and iniustice, bi
his obedience ar his, wherof baptisme
is the signe, seale and cōfirmatiō. For
although frely by the grace of god our
synnes be forgeuen: yet the same is declared
by the Gospel, receiued by faith
and sealed by ye sacramentes, whyche
be the seales of gods promises, as it is
to be sene by the fayth of the faythfull
Abraham.Mat. xxviii. Baptisme hath hys promises
as is a fore sayd hys elemente,Mat. xvi. the
water:Act. viii. his proper cōmaūdemēt, & hys
proper ceremonies, washīg in ye water.
As for other mens opinio
                  •
               s that saye
Circumsicion was the seale, not onely
of Abrahās acceptation freely into the
grace of God by faith, but also of hys
obedience and proper iustice: I beleue it
not to be trewe, for. S. Paul confuteth
it, in the same place as an errour, sayīg
Abrahā had nothīg wherof he mighte
glory before god. If he had nothīg, god

confirmed that he gaue him, & not that
he found in him, for S. Paul saith, that
Circumcision was the seale of the Iustice
that cā by faith, & not by workes.
They be out of the way, that haue the
lyke opinion of baptisme, for S. Paul
disputeth not in that place, whether
works plese god,Rom. iiii. ix. but sheweth that our
saluacion cōmeth by grace, and not bi
workes. Ther be other that think Sacramēts
to be the cōfirmatiōs, not only
of our fre acceptacyon into gods fauour
by fayth, but also of our obedyēce
towardes God hereafter. And because
Infantes and young babes, cannot professe
obedience, nor put of the olde man,
nor put on the newe, thei would exempt
and defraud the young chyldren of baptisme.
Saynt Paule cōfesseth also this
opinion in the same place.Gen. xvii. Abrahā saith
he, beleued God, and it was accōted vnto
hym for iustice, and sayth not Abraham
professed obedience. Therfore God
cōfirmed his owne infallible truth and

promises to Abraham by circumcision,
and not Abrahams obedience. For if he
had, he had confirmed the weke and vncertayn
infirmitie of man, and not hys
own infallible truth. For Abrahā wyth
all hys obedience was infyrme and vnperfect
wythout Christ, Yet was boūd
to work in a godly life. As for those that
say Circumcisiō and Baptisme be like,
and yet attribut the remission of originall
synne to Baptysme, whyche was
neuer gyuen vnto Circumcision, they
onelye destroye not the similitude and
equalitie that should be betwene them:
but also take from Christe remission of
synne, and translate it into the water,
and element of baptisme.
            As for the supper of the Lord, which
is the other Sacrament, whereby the
church of Christ is knowne, I beleue it
is a remembraunce of Christes death, a
seale & confyrmation of his preciouse body
geuen vnto death, wherwyth we are
redemed. It is a vysyble word, that precheth

peace betwene God and man, exhorteth
to mutual loue, and godlye lyfe,
teacheth to contemne the world, for the
hope of the lyfe to come, when as chryst
shall appeare, and come downe in to
the cloudes, whyche nowe is in heauen
as consernynge hys humanytye, and
no wher elles, nor neuer shalbe tyll the
tyme of the generall resurrection.
            I be leue that this holi sacrament hath
his proper promises,Math. xxvi. proper elementes,Mark. xiiii.
proper commaūdemēt,Luke. xxii. and proper Ceremonies.
i. Corinth. xi As concerning the ministers
of the churche, I beleue that the church
is bound to no sort of people, or any ordinary
successiō of bishops,xx. Cardinals
or such lyke, but vnto the only word of
god, & none of thē shuld be beleued but
whē thei speak ye word of god. Althogh
there be diuersitie of giftes & knowledge
amōg men,Ephes
                     •
                  . iiii. some know more, and some
know lesse. And if he that knoweth lest
teache Christ,Gala i after the holy scriptures
he is to be accepted, & he that knoweth

most, & teacheth Christ contrary or and
ther wayes, then the holye scryptures
teache, is to be refused. I am sory therfore
wyth all my herte to se the churche
of Christ degenerated into a ciuil pollicy:
for euen as kinges of the world naturally
by descent frō theyr parentes
must solow in ciuil regiment, rule, and
lawe, as by right they oughte: euen so
must such as succede in the place of Bishops
and priestes that dye, possesse al
giftes, and learning of the holly gost,
to rule the church of Christe as his godly
predecessour had: so that tholy ghost
must be captiue & bondman to byshops
seas, & palacies. And because the holye
gost was in saint Peter at Rome, and
in mani other godly men that haue occupied
bishopprickes and dioses, therfore
the same gifts thei sai must nedes
followe in their successours, althoughe
in dede thei be no more like of zeale nor
diligence, then Peter and Iudas, Balaham
and Ieremy, Anna & Caiphas

to Iohn and Iames. But thus I conclude
of the mynysters, of what degre
or dignity soeuer thei be, thei be no better
thē recordes & testymonyes, mynysters
and seruauntes of goddes worde
and gods sacramēts. Vnto the whych
they shuld nether adde, demynish, nor
chaunge any thyng. And for their true
seruyce and dyligēce in thys part, thei
shoulde not be onely reuerenced of the
people,Ma. xxviii. but also honoured by the magistrates,
i. Cor. iiii. as the seruauntes of god.
                  
                     •
                  er. i. And
I beleue,Eze. ii. that as many soules as perish
by their negligēce or contempt of gods
word,xxxiii. shalbe required at theyr handes.
Of the people thus I beleue: that they
owe their dutye and obebience to god:
to them kyng, and magistrates: vnto
theyr neighboures: and vnto them
selues. Vnto god they owe both bodye
and soule, to laude and prayse him according
to gods boke. To cal vpō him
in the daies of their trouble,
                  
                     •
                  . Cor. vi. x. and vpon
none els, to cōforme both their doctrin

& their lyues, to promote and set forth
the glory of God.
            Theyr dutye to the kynges maiestie is
theyr obedience to him,Rom. xiii. his lawes,i. Timo. ii and
the Realme for conscience sake,i. Peter. ii. and rather
to lose bothe body an goodes, thē
to offende his highnes or his lawes, &
whensoeuer any subiect be called to serue
with body or goodes, at home or frō
home, willingly thei must obei without
question or farther inquision to serche
whether the kynges cause be righte or
wronge: for whether it bee, or be not, it
maketh the death of him that serueth
in this respect, nether better nor worse.ii. pa
                     •
                  . xxxv.
For I beleue suche as obeyed kyng Iosias
and were slaine in the battayle againste
the Egiptians wer acceptable
vnto god in Christ,Mathew. v. thoughe kyng IosiasLuke. vi.
had not y• best quarell.Iho. xv In this caseRoma. xiii.
the subiect oweth his body,Gala. v. and goods
vnto this lawfull magistrate,Ihon. ii. iii. and mayExod. xiii.
deny him of none of them bothe.Deu. vi. VntoEphe. vi.
theyr neighboures they owe good wylCollossi. i.
               
and charitie, helpe, & preseruacyon of
theyr bodyes, souls, goodes, and fame,
that none of all those peryshe, yf they
may preserue them. Thetowe vnto thē
felues, the s
                  •
               udy & labour to reade, and
heare the scripture of God, vntill suche
time as thei haue laid a true foūdaciō
of faith in christ. Whē yt is done, thei be
boūd to thē selues, to buyld vppō that
foūdatiō, al charytable workes, as wel
to god as to mā, wyth innocēcy of lyfe.
After that they ow to thē selues,Psal. C. xix. study
& dylygence to make defēces for theyr
true relygyō agaīst the deuyl,i. Corin. iii. y• fleshe,
y• world, syn: the wysedome of mā and
supersticyous hipocrites, which ceasse
not to peruert, & destroi in mā y• image
& worke of God. Away away I pray
you wyth thys opynyō, & thynketh
a man to owe no more vnto hym selfe
for relygyin, then to learne by rote the
Crede .x. cōmaundements, and Pater
noster. S. Paule rebuketh that opynion,

as it is to be seene in hys Epistle.
We owe vnto our selues,Psal. Cxi
                     •
                  
                dew laboures
in praying vnto God daili for the necessities
of both body & soul,Ge
                     •
                  es. & lykewise to
geue him thāckes for al the goodnes he
hath geuē vnto vs. Also we owe vnto
our selues, the exchuing & a
                  •
               oidīg of Idlenes,
& ociuiti, and the labours of our
own handes, wyth the industrye & gift
of reason, learnyng & wyt, to eate oure
owne breade with the sweat and pain
our owne bodies, according to the commaūdemēt
of god. Thus I cōclud my
fayth, the which being examined by the
word of god, is catholyke & godli, who
send vs of hys grace to feare hym, honoure
the kyng, and to loue one the
other, as Christ loueth vs
al. So be it.
            
               
                  The .xx. of Decembre
Anno. M. D. and fiftye
               
Lorde blisse thy Church
and saue our Kynge.
         
      
      
         
            
            Imprinted at London
by Ihon Daye dwellyng ouer
Aldersgate beneth saynt
Martyns, and are to
be solde at his shop
by the litle conduit
in Chepe
syde.
            
               Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum
            
            
               Per septennium.
            
            
         
      
   