
      
         
            
            
            THE ACTES and life of the most Victorious Conquerour, Robert Bruce King of SCOTLAND.
            WHEREIN also are contained the Martiall deeds of the valiant Princes, Edward Bruce, Syr Iames Dowglas, Erle Thomas Randel, Walter Stewart, and sundrie others.
            Newly corrected and conferred with the best and most ancient Manuscripts.
            EDINBVRGH, Printed by Andro Hart. ANNO 1620.
         
         
            
            
            The Printers Preface to the Reader.
            
               THere is nothing vnto which the minde of mā doth more aspire thā to renown & immortality: therfore it is, that no time hath bene so barbarous, no countries so vnciuile, but they haue had a care to preserue worthie actions from the iniurie of obliuion, and laboured that the names of these that were vertuous, while they liued, should not perish with their breath. And amongst all the strange and diuerse fashions of remembring the dead, no record hath bene found to bee compared to that of bookes, and amongst all bookes none so lasting as these in verse, which how so euer rudely done, yet seeme to haue striuen with dayes, and euen to compasse time, beeing the first remembrances that either Greece or Rome haue, and apparantly shall be the last.
            Howe curious our Antecessours in this Isle haue bene to extend their memorie to after ages▪ many olde monuments yet to be seene, can beare witnesse, but more than any, that fame of which

many yeers since was amongst forrainers of their ancient Poets the Bardes, who wrote in verse the deedes of their most valiant men, and song them in the wilde Forrests and mountaines, with which (though long time after) the manie records wee haue of the ancient defenders of our Countrie, may bee brought forth: and amongst all the rest, this storie of the valiant BRVCE is not the least: it speaketh the language of that time, if it spake ours, it would not bee it selfe: yet as an antique it is venerable.
            To speake somewhat of the occasion of those warres, that the Historie may the better appeare. Alexander the third of that name, King of SCOTLAND departed this life suddenlie without succession to the crowne, except Margaret his Neece, daughter to the King of Norway, who beeing left the vndoubted heire to the Kingdome, King Edward of England desired her in mariage to his sonne Prince Edward, whereunto our Scottish Nobilitie easilie condescended, but shee beeing dead, before the ambassadors arriued, they returned with sorrowfull hearts: wherevpon arose great t
                  •
               oubles and contention amongst the Nobilitie, who should succeed to the Crowne: and albeit there were manie contendents: yet at lēgth, came onely betwixt the Bruce & Baliol. The Nobility to auoide further strife, conueened themselues, to decide who should haue the vndoubted right: but because they could not agree, both the parties being so great, that their power could not make the parties stand to their arbitrement, they with one voyce referred the deciding thereof to Edward of Englād, supponing, that he should deale

most sincerely therein, considering how willingly they had condescended to the marriage of his sonne with Margaret the Neece of King Alexander, who accepting very gladly of the matter, hoping to atchieue by craft, that which hee and his predecessours could neuer obtaine by force, left off his Iourney to the Holie LAND, hoping to speede better at home for the enlarging of his Dominions, beeing a man greatly inclined that way, called the parties before him at Barwike, protesting heere withall that hee called them not vpon any presumption, that he pretended ouer them, but as they had chosen him to be arbiter in the cause: so hee called them to the deciding of the matter, and to collour his purpose, hee had conueened a number of learned Lawyers out of France, and other Countries, pretending that he would doe nothing without law and reason: yet the moste parte of the Doctours there conueened, as namely, Mr. Siluius, Mr. Rainerius, Decius, Mr. Severius de Florentia, mentioned in the Pluscadin Chronicle, and in Scotichronicon condescended, that Robert Bruce had the best right, quòd propinquior in gradu debet succedere: and therefore Robert Bruce in respect hee was uno gradu stipiti propinquior, and was also the first Male, albeit begotten on the younger sister. But King Edward had his owne decinct, not regarding their arbitrement, called first secretly the Bruce vnto him, to whome he was well inclined, promising to decide in his fauours, if he would hold his Kingdome in homage of him. But Bruce being a man of Heroik spirit, refused absolutely to subject a free Realme to the seruitude of any forraine Prince whomsoeuer.

The King highly offended, turned himselfe frowardly in great anger frō the Bruce, called Iohn Ballioll also secretly, & promised him the same cō
               ditions: the man being blinded with ardent desire to reigne, not regarding what hee did promise, so hee might haue Soueraignitie, condiscended easily to whatsumeuer Edward required, and so by him was nominate King, & sent home to Scotland, where hee was conueyed to Scone, and there crowned, and all, except Bruce, swore to him obedience. Shortly after, there fell out a slaughter of Makdulffe Erle of Fife, by the Abirnethies men at that time in great authoritie and wealth, and because Makdulffe his brother suspected the King to bee partiall in judging, summond him to bee judged before King Edward. The Ballioll being there present, and sitting beside King Edward in the conuention of Estates, and being called, thoght to answere by a Procutour, was compelled to arise and defend his cause at the Barre, wherewith being sorely grieued, albeit hee durst not peepe for the time, yet returning home in a maruelous chaufe, reuoluing in his minde, how hee might cast off this yoke and bondage, whereunto foolishly hee had subjected himselfe, and as hee did meditate vpon this, a profitable dissention for his purpose, interueened betweene France and England, which immediatly brast foorth in warre: so that at a Conuention in Scotland both the Kings Ambassadours were present. The French to renue their olde league with the new King, the English by the recent surrender of the Realme, desired assistance in that warre. Both the Ambassadours

were referred to the Parliament, the Nobilitie prone to cast off the late yoke of England decerned the French petition just, and the English vnjust, for that league with France, was made fiue hundreth yeeres agoe, by the consent of the whole Realme, inviolably obserued to that day, but that surrender was but new throwen out of the King against his will, which albeit hee had beene willing to doe, yet neither was the King, nor the Realme bound to bide at it, seeing it was done without the consent of the Estates in Parliament, without whose consent, the King could doe nothing. These Newes comming to King Edwards eares, hauing taken some Moneths truce with France, hee sent his Nauie that was bowne to France into Scotland, thinking to ouerthrowe the Scots, before they were prouided, and to keep Barwike vnvittalled. The Scots encountring this Nauie at the Riuer mouth of Tweed, wanne eighteene shippes, and chased the rest. King Edwards wrath was by this losse more vehemently prouoked to reuenge, summond the Ballioll thrise to compeare before him at Newcastle, and because he compeared not at all, hee sent for Bruce, and promised him the Kingdome, if hee would write to his friendes, either to leaue their King, or to flee in battell. The King with all diligence past toward Barwike, where finding the towne strongly garnished with men: and comming small speed in his pursute, hee fained a retreat, and caused some of the Bruces faction sparse brutes that the Ballioll with a great Oast was euen there at hand, whereupon the most notable men of the towne, supponing themselues to bee free of the

common enemie, ran foorth for to receiue their King honourably: and so both horse and foote went out of the towne confusedlie. But Edward had appointed a number of horsemen to wait vpō that turne, who cutted them off easilie from their companies, beeing vshed so confusedly, and out of order, and comming to the next Port, entred in the towne, the King with his foot-hoste following, made miserable slaughter vpon all sorts of people, & increasing in multitude, sent a part of his armie to besiege Dumbar, himselfe within few dayes receiued the Castell of Barwike, which the keepers randred, despairing of reliefe: then joyning all his forces together at Dumbar, encountred with the Scots hoste which came hither with a great battell to raise the siege: the victorie enclined to the English side. The chiefe men of the Nobilitie fledde to the Castell, but the Captaine not hauing Viuers sufficient to sustaine such a multitude randered, and all kinde of crueltie execute vppon the captiues. But when the Bruce desired the Kingdome in recompense of his trauell, and according to promise. Edward answered him in French, haue we nothing ado, but to purchase Kingdomes for you. Dumbar, and some other Castles vppon the Border beeing randred, Edinburgh and Striuiling were deliuered also: from Striuiling Edward passed Forth, and marched towards Forfare, where the Ballioll was, when without impediment hee came to Monrosse: The Ballioll by perswasion of Iohn Cummine of Strabogie randred himselfe, & the Kingdome into King Edwards hands, whom he shipped, & sent into England. Edward returned to Barwike, & by sharpe edict summond all

the Scottish Nobilitie to come thither, such as came were compelled to sweare obedience vnto him. William Dowglas a man of Noble blood, and valiant, refusing to sweare, was cast in prison, where within few yeeres he died. Thus all things succeeding to his wish, hee appointed Iohn Warre
                     •
                  
                Erle of Surrey Viceroy, Hew Cressingham Thesaurer, and leauing them behind him, hee returned to London, where hee warded Iohn Ballioll, when hee had reigned 4. yeeres. But hee within a short space at the request of the Bishop of Rome was sent to France, leauing his sonne Edward in pledge for him. Afterward Edward with a great army, tooke shipping to passe in France. The Scots in esperance of liberty (hee being absent) chused twelue Regents, and by all their aduises, Iohn Cummine Erle of Buchan with a sufficient armie was sent in England. The English Garrisons left in Scotland dispersed heere and there, durst not stirre: so hee without impediment spoyled Cumberland and Northumberland. Albeit this voyage somewhat incouraged the Scots, yet did it but small help to the whole warre, for all strong holds were fortified by the enemies garrisons. But while as Noblemen lacked both strength and sufficient courage to enterprise greater matters, VVilliam VVallace a man of Noble and ancient Family, who did Actes, in those Warres not only aboue all mens exspectatiō, but also incredible, being a man of great bodily strenght, & high courage: He hardened his body against injuries of Fortune, and confirmed his courage by perillous attempts to enterprise higher and greater, euen with danger: he gathered vnto him some companie of Men, and herewith not only slew any Englishmen he met with, but often times a
                  •
               so with few foght with

great numbers in sundrie places where he met with them, & slew them. In short space his fam filled both the Realms: so they that had lik causes as he had, & not vnlike loue to their Countrey, gathering together swarmed to him from all parts, and within few moneths he amassed an indifferent Army: Noblemen for feare or lashnes lying still, Wallace was proclaimed Gouernour, and as Lieutenant for Ballioll, commanded as lawfull Magistrate. Hee tooke not this name of pride or of desire to Empire, but only (like another Sampson) vpon compassion, and loue of his Countrey-people. After this, he essayed with open force, tooke many Castells, (either not sufficiently furnished or not weill guarded, or negligently kept) and razed them. His Men of Warres minds were so confirmed, that vnder his conduct they feared no perrill, for that his hardiment lacked neuer wisdom, nor his wisdome the wished euent. So in short space he wan all the Forts that Englishmen possessed beyond Forth.
            
            King Edward hearing these rumours, and hauing all his Army with him in France, he wrote to Henrie Pearsie Lord of Northumberland, & to William Latimer, to raise quickly Forces out of the next adjacent Countrey, and joyne themselues with Cressinghame, to suppres the Scots. Wallace in this time besieged the Castle of Cowper in Fyfe, to the end his men of warre should not be idle, attending the coming of the English army: his enimies now cuming neare, marched directly to Striuiling, (The Riuer of Forth hath no foords at Striuiling) Yet there was a vvoodden bridge, ouer the vvhich Cressinghame past, vvith the great part of his a
                  •
               m
                  •
               : the rest following so thick, (the bridge being ouerburthened vvith so hudge a weght) brak

in pieces. The Scots charged these that vvere past, before they could be Arayed, slew their leader, droue backe the rest in the water, with so huge a slaughter, that almost the whole were either slain by the Scots, or drownd in the riuer. Wallace after this so followed his fortune, that he left not an Englishman in Scotland, except prisoners. This victory was obtained vpō the Ides of Septemb. 1297. Hereafter followed great Famine for not manuring of the ground: and Pest followed Hunger: wherof greater destruction was feared than of the Warre. Wallace to remedy this aswell as he might, charged al sensible men, to come vnto him at a certain day, & caried them with him into England: vvhere liuing in vvinter in their enemies lands, they spared Viuers at home; vvhere he remained from the kalends of Nouember, vnto the kal. of Febr. and no man durst match him, And then hauing inriched thēselfs vvith their enemies spoyls, returned with great glory. As this journey augmented Wallaces fame and authority among the people, so it increased the Noble mens enuy against him: vvhereof Edw. being priuy, setting things in France in order, as time would permit, leauing his old souldiers beyond sea, amassing a very great army vpon the sudden, of nouices, he marched toward Scotland: but whē in the plain of Stanemure both armies stood in order of battel, about half a mile from other: Edw. viewing Wall. hoste, his skil and order of battell: albeit he had a greater number of people, yet durst he not hazard; returning his standerds, softly retired: but Wallace for feare of ambushment durst not follow. This victory obtained without blood, against a most potent King. The enemies of Wall. more sharply assaulted him, raising brutes through the countrey, that he openly shot at the

Kingdom. So they conclude, by all means to subuert Wall. authority. These deuises not vnknown to King Edw. he raised a great army of English & Scots, vvho had remained constāt in their promise made to him the next Sōmer came vnto Faw-kirk: vvhich village is builded vpon the very ruins of Seuerus Wall, distant from Striuiling 6 myles. The Scottish host abade not far from thence, strong enough indeed, for they were 30 thousand, if the Rulers had agreed amongst themselues. The Rulers were Iohn Cumming, Iohn Stewart, & Will. Wallace. the former two in blood, & puissance, the last in Marshall glory, most flourishing of al Scotland. While as the 3 battels stood in redines to fight, a new contention was added to the former enuy, Who should lead the Vanguard: & neither of them giuing place to the other: the Englishmen ended the strife vvho in order of battell, vvith displayed Banners, came vpon them with expedition: Cummine with his company fled vvithout stroke: Steward enuironed both behind and before, vvas slaine with his hoste. Wallace being sore set vpon in front, and Bruce comming about a Knowle, to charge him on the backe, contained his men together in such order, as in such state he best could, and returned backe ouer CARROVN Water, vvhere he defended himself, hauing gathered together those that were fled, and Bruce desiring to speak with him, he refused not: whē these two alone stood right ouer against other, at a deep & narrow part of the Riuer, Bruce first said, he wondred at him, that being caried with the facile fauour of the people, would hazard himself in so many perils againe a King, most puissant of that age: assisted also with great support of Scots, & that without any hope of recompence of his pains? For albeit he

vanquisht Edward, the Scots would neuer allow of him to be King: and if he were ouerthrowne he had no refuge, but in the mercy of his enemy. To whom Wallace answered: I (said he) neuer tooke these paines to purchase to my self a Kingdom, for that is vnagreeable with my condition, and my mind couets it not, but seeing my Countrey-men through your cowardice, to whom the Realme rightly appertains, destitute of Rulers, & hereby casten into their most cruel enemies hands: not only in bondage and slauery, but euen to the shambles, I pittied their case, & haue enterprised the defence of their cause, forsaken by you, whose liberty I shall not forsake, bef
                  ••
               e my life forsake me. And so the conferēce ended: either of both returning to their owne. After this vnhappy Battell Wallace returned to Perth, and there skailed his army giuing place to the enuy born against him: and after that day enterprised nothing for the Realm: and renounced the name of Magistrat: albeit he left not off the inuading of the English Nation, wheresoeuer he could be their master. Edward, after this wasted by all warlike calamities, the Lands beyond Forth euen to Perth: subduing those that in respect of the present misery durst not stir: & so retired with his army into England. The Scots that were carefull for the liberty of their Realme, a little refreshed after the enemies departure, made Iohn Cumming younger, Regent: who by the aduise of the Counsell sent Ambassadours to Philip Valloys King of France, to trauell with him that by Mediation of his Sister, who was then affianced to Edward, they might at least obtaine Truce. By her trauels they obtained Truce for seuen Moneths, but not obserued (bona fide:) for Englishmen tooke the Ambassadours that were directed to Bonifacius the eight, and imprisoned them. The Scots in

the meane time who could not abide the tyranny of Englishmen, nor culd by no punishment satiat Edwards cruell mind, neither yet obtaine peace vpon just conditions, prepared themselues with obstinat minds to fight it out, without all hope of pardon. First they droue all Edwards Captains foorth of all Towns, and Fortresses, and vexed the Scots, of the English factiō, vvith all the force they might: vvhile as the stat of matters thus cōtinued almost two years. Edward sent Rodolph Confrey, with a puissant Army, to suppresse this rebellion of the Scots, and to put an end to those Warres. This Army without impediment wasted all to Rosling, a place in Louthian, foure miles distant from Edinburgh, & to destroy farther within the Countrey diuided their Army in three, Iohn Cummine, and Iohn Fraser, the most wealthy men in Tweed-dale, gathering to the number of 8000 men, marched towards the enemy, of purpose either to keep in the enemy, that he should not run at randon to spoyl the Country, or if they found better occasion, to follow Fortun. Better occasion was offered then they looked for: For Englishmen fearing nothing lesse than the comming of their enemies, so often ouerthrowne, behauing themselues more losely than was expedient, in their enemies ground, by sudden comming of the Scots vpō the first of their Camps, were ouerthrown with a great slaughter: they that escaped raised great tumult in the secōd camp, where th'alarm was fearfully raised, euery man exhorting his Mate to support their own, they prepared thēselues for reuenge. The conflict was terrible, as betwixt these that were fiers, throgh victory, & these that were enraged by thirst of reuenge: in end, th'Englishmen discomfist & chased, victory, albeit not vnbloody, yeelded to the Scots: the

third host, which had bin furder off, affraid the Scots, for many being wounded, & most part wearied with trauels in 2 late battels foresaw manifest danger to ensue by fighting, & assured destruction by flight, at length the Heads commanded to slay al captiues: left while they were occupied with th'enemy, they shuld come vpon their backs: they armed their seruants vvith slain mens armor▪ & so made shew of a greater army to their enemies: the battel begun vvas keenly foghten on both sides: the fight being doutfull for a while, the scots by exhortatiō of their leaders, & calling to mind their late doble victory, renewing their strēgth: ran so fiercely vpō their enemies that their aray broken, they gaue backs, It was foghten at Rosline, the 6 of the kal. of March, 1320. The more notable that this victory was, 3 hosts in one day ouerthrown by one, the more sharply Edw. set his mind to deface this ignominy, and once to put an end to their longsome Warre. He amasseth a greater army than euer he did before, & persued Scotland both by land & sea, to the vtter most borders of Ros. No man in warfare durst hazard him self against so puissant an army, except Wallace, with his few folks, somtimes behind, & somtims before, & somtims vpon their wings, chopped at such as had rashly run forth frō the host. Edw. preast by great promises to mak him his own, but in vain: his answer was ay to all men, that hee had auowed his life to his Countrey. Thus things atchieued: Edw. adjoyned himself to his son Edward, whom he had left at Perth, took in sundry Strengths & Forts & Striuiling, after 3 moneths siege, the rest rendred for fear Edward held a Parliamēt in Sainct-Andrews, vvher he made most part of the Nobility for fear to swear to be his true subjects; Wall, always excepted; who for

fear to be betrayed of the nobility, withdrue himself to his old lurking places. Edw. appointed Lieutenāts and Magistrats throughout Scotland, past home to England, and left no Monuments, Histories, Books, Lawes, nor learned men, vndestroyed, or transported with him: thinking therby to exterminate the name of that Natiō. He left Odomare Valentine, Vice-Roy, to extinguish all innouations, if any begin to peepe. But now Wars arose, where he least meaned. Among the rest of Scottish Nation with Edward was Robert Bruces son, who contēded with Ballioll for the Kingdome, and Iohn Cummine, cousen german to Iohn Ballioll, late King of Scots. Edw. had spoken often times seuerally, & long time holden them in the hals, vpō vain hope of the Kingdom, and so used their means in the conquest of the same, being both mē of great power and friendship: but the deceitfull mockage at length manifested: there was nothing more desired of either of them, than occasion to be reuēged vpon Edw. falset against promise & trust to both: but emulation whereby the one suspected the other, was the stay, that neither durst cōmunicat his counsell to the other. Now Cum. perceiued these doings miscōtēted Bruce, vehemently deplored vnto him the misery of their Countrey, beginning from the ground thereof and inueighing greatly against the King of Englands persidie, accused first himself, & then Bruce, by whose assistance and trauels their people were brought to this misery proceeding further from this beginning of speach, euery of them promising secrecy to other vpon their Faith and honesty. They agreed betwixt themselues thus: That Bruce should bee King and Cummine should resigne his Right in his fauours: & Cummine should haue all Lands that Bruce possessed in Scotland (he

had many faire and fruitfull Lands) and Cummine should be second in honour next vnto the King. These things sworn, writtē, & sealed, Bruce vvaiting opportunity of change, past to the Court of England, leauing behind him in Scotland his wife and brethren. After his departure, Cummine either repenting his former aduise, or els he thought by craft to cut away Bruce, that therby he might more easily come by the kingdome. He bevvrayed these secrets to Edward: and to purchase credite herein, he sent him the Contract signed by both. Bruce was summōd to a day for treason, charged not to depart from Court, & quiet keepers appointed vnto him, commanded to spy both his vvords and deeds. The cause why the King protracted time in this so manifest a turne, was, that his brethren might be apprehended before the brute of his execution should arise. Bruce in the meane time was informed of the suddē danger, by his old freind the Earle of Gomera: vvho durst not counsell him by letter to flee, but warning by example, sent a pair of guilt spurs with som pieces of gold, as if he had borrowed them the day preceeding. Robert, as men in danger are most tenty, not ignorāt what was meant by the propine called for a Smith in the night, caused shoo three Horses backward, lest the print of the Horse feet in the snow might bewray their flight, & that same night might be espied: accompanied with other two, took journey vpon the 7 day thereafter: themselues and their horses weary, came to a Castle of his own standing beside Lochmabene: there finding his brother Dauid & Robert Fleming: and taking them with him, scarcely opening vnto them the cause of his flight, chanced vpon a Messenger, carying letters from Cummine to Edward, bearing, That Robert should

be executed with diligence: for delay brought danger, lest a Noble man, 
                     •
                  auoured of the people, and therewith also wise & stout should raise new troubles, &c. The Cummines treason also by this testimony tried, Robert inflamed with rage of ire, past directly to Drumfreise, wher he vnderstood his enemy was: & finding Iohn Cummine in the Gray-Friers Kirke: produced his letters, & reproued him bitterly, while as he impudently stood to the deniall therof: but he impatient, in wrath strak him in the belly with his Dagger, and left him for dead. When he was horsing again, Iames Lindesay his cousen, and Roger Kirk-Patricke, his friend, perceiuing his countena
                  •
               ce chāged inquired the cause? He told them in a word, He belieued Cummine was dead. What? said LINDESAY, Hast thou left so dangerous a deed in doubt? & therwith he entred into the Kirk, & not only slew him but also Robert Cummine, his kinsman, preassing to support him. This murther was committed the 4 of the Ides of February 1305. about this time William Wallace was taken, and betrayed by Iohn Menteith, his familiar companion, corrupted by Edwards Mony in the bounds of Glasgow, where he lurked for the time: sent to London, where by Edwards command he was vnhonestly beheaded and quartered: his members t
                  •
                terrifie others) hung vp in most publicke places in England & Scotland. This was the end of this most worthy mans life, who for high spirit in interprising dangers, for fortitude in execution, comparable in deed to the most famous Chiftains, amongst the Ancients: for loue to his natiue Countrey, second to no
                  •
               e, he onely free, the rest slaues, could neither bee b
                  •
               ught with benefites, nor compelled by force to leaue the publicke cause which he had once profest; whose death appeared more to be lamented, that

being inuincible, to his enemie he was betrayed by his Familiar, that in no cace should haue done so.
            The Bruce staying only till he had obtained pardon of the Bishop of Rome, for the murther committed in holy Church. In the next month of Aprile, 1306. passing to Scone, hee was crowned King. First knowing well the great puissance of his enemie, hee amasseth all the forces he could, from all parts, although the whole clan of Cummines, the greatest in Scotland that euer was before them, or since in puissance withstoode him, and his assisting of Edward, offended many, and the greater part of the Realme beside, lay quiet for feare of English force, hee, notwithstanding of his few number, hazarded against Odomar at Meibwen, with the losse of a few was put to the worst. The like bad successe hee had in passing from Atholl to Argyle
               ▪ where the Cummines beset him, and forced him to fight at Dalry, his men fleeing to saue themselues in places of greatest suretie. From this time with one or two in companie, thinking himselfe in that state more sure with few than many. Hee wandred in the wildernes like a wilde man: and albeit hee would haue assayed Fortoun, hee saw no appearance of force in anie part: for the common people vpon the construing of the two former losses caused him bee forsaken of all: two onely of his old friends stood constantly by him, Micolum Leuin Erle of Lennox, and Gilbert Hay, Englishmen not saciate sufficiently with his miseries, sent, and apprehended his kinsemen throughout all the Countrie, his wife token by William Erle of Rosse, was sent into England, his brother Nigell, the Castle of Kildrummie betrayed by the Captaine thereof, with his wife, and children, were randred to the enemie, Thomas and Alexander
               
his brethren also passing from Galloway to Carrik were taken at Lochrien, and sent into England. These three in sundrie places were beheaded, the remnant of the Bruces faction were sought also and slaine, & their goods confiscate. The King himself most often with one in companie in this time kept the vnhaunted mountaines, euery day and houre changing lurking holes, and while as hee thought not himselfe sure that way, neither from treason of the people, nor crueltie of his enemies, past to the Iles, to an old friend of his called Angus, and lurking there certaine moneths, he was supposed to bee dead, and so the enemie ceased searching. This brute as it was not vnprofitable for his securitie, so if it had any while cō
               tinued, it appeared to his frends, to cut away all hope of recouering the Realme: thinking therefore to attempt some what, getting a smal company from his friend, with whome hee lurked: he sailed to Carrik, where hee tooke a Castle of his owne inheritance, at vnawares kept by a strong garison of Englishmen, and slew them all, least hee might bee inuironed by force of the enemie, and crossing the Firth of Clyde, with the like felicitie tooke the Castle of Innernesse far distant from there and so passing from place to place, taking in townes, Castles, and strengths. The Countrie-people (beeing heauily opprest by the enemy) flocking to him from all quarters, hee gathered a reasonable armie: and albeit hee had not onely the common enemy to withstand, but also a number of mightie intestine enemies at home, especially the Cummines faction, yet from this time forth, whatsoeuer hee attempted succeeded prosperously, till he had expelled the enemie vtterly out of the Realme, and subdued the whole Countrie to his

obedience: but leauing the History of his further progresse, because it will appeare more particularly it selfe, I remit the Reader to the perusing thereof. This is he of whom it may be said, that was said of that Roman Scipio, unus homo nobis cunctando restituit rem. Into what bondage found he his Nation? To what liberty did he restore it? Since the times of the old Heroes none hath more excelled in all vertues. Who more couragious in warre? Who more temperate in peace? Who euer had a fortun more hard? Who euer did more hardly lead Fortun captiue, and lesse regarded her frownes? a constant course of victorie still enabling all his enterprises, whose mind would not bin broken, much more bowed vnder such heaps of miseries? whose eonstancy would not be queld to haue his wife taken captiue, his foure brethren slaine, his friends with all mischiefes opprest: to haue himselfe not only barred of his patrimony and estat, but of a Kingdome? and all done against faith, by a Prince the mightiest of that age. Beside all these calamities, thralled, and brought to the extreamest of wāt: he neither doubted of ye
                recouery of his Crown, nor was at any tim sene, to cōmit any thing vnworthy of a kingly mind. Let Rome boast of Camillus and Scipio, France of her Charles, Epirus of great Scandeberge, Scotland shall not forget this Prince, for she cannot. And if hee be not so renoumed as these, it is not for that he is not as worthy: but for that he hath not had so braue trumpeters of his fame, being born in so vnpolished an age: which time the destroyer and restorer of euery thing may perhaps hereafter in these more learned dayes amend. There be some who hold the opinion that the publishing of those books is hurtfull,

as embers of consumed discord, but it is not the publishing of the simplicity of our predecessours that can diuide vs, or cause any discord, but rather our owne too great subtilty, ambition and auarice, and the turning the pages of Tacitus and of Secretar Machiauell that cā breed an ague in our state. Can the reading of the warres betwixt Longcaster and Yorke separate the red and white Roses? I thinke no. But I am perswaded that al men of sound minds will rather abhor discord in reading of these books, seeing what miseries and horrible calamities these warres, bring foorth and what great occasion we of both Nations haue to magnifie Gods goodnes, yt
                in our dayes since the Gospell hath bene in sincerity published amongst vs, hath turned all these bloody broyles into a peaceable Calme, especially now in the person of our dread Soueraigne: So that now, as the Prophet sayeth, Our swords are brokē into mattocks, and our speares into siths. But if we would consider what meanes haue bene vsed, what paines taken, and plots laide by the wisest of both Nations, to knit vp this vnion, and yet could neuer effectate the same, vntill it pleased GOD to cut downe this partitiō wall of long debate, in the person of our most gracious SOVERAIGNE. GOD giue vs grace to bee thankefull for it. AMEN.
         
         
            
            ROBERTVS BRVSSIVS Regni instaurator, ac penè novus conditor, in omni Fortuna invictus.
            
               
                  QVIS varios casus, quis dura pericula BRVSSI,
               
               Fatorumque vices commemorare queat?
               Qui victus toties, toties qui victor & hostis,
               In vacuo fixit Martia signa solo.
               Qui domitis Fatis pugnando restituit rem;
               Civibus & patriam, jusque suum patriae.
               Cùm tot acerba virum, cùm tot cumulata suorum
               Funera funeribus cerneret ante oculos;
               Mens generosa animi Fortunae excelsior omni
               Imperio, stabili perstitit usque gradu?
               
                  SCOTIA quae statues VICTORI justa trophaea?
               Qui Fati, ac hostis, Victor & ipse Sui est.
            
            
               The same in English.
               Who can the hazards hard, the chances strāge
               Of Bruce report, a Mark of Fortunes chāge?
               Oft was hee thrall'd, his Foes oft from him fled,
               Oft ensignes on the purple Plaines he spred.
               He danted Fates, his natiue Soyle ou'rthrowne
               Her to her own, to her brought backe a Crowne.
               By fight he all restor'd, and hauing seene
               So many funerall heapes before his cene
               His Mind vnquell'd reach't Fortunes wheele aboue,
               And in the Spheare of Courage 
                  
                     •
                  ixt did moue.
               Where hast thou (Scotland) for his Trophees room,
               Who Fates, Foes, & himselfe for thee o'recome.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE ACTES AND LIFE OF the most victorious Conquerour Robert Bruce King of SCOTLAND.
            WHEREIN ALSO ARE contained the Martiall deedes of the valiant Princes: Edward Bruce, Syr Iames Dowglas, Earle Thomas Randell, Walter Stewart, and sundrie others.
            
               STories to read are delectable,
            Suppose they nought containe but fable
            Then sould Stories ye soothfast were,
            If they bée spoken in good maner:
            Haue double pleasure in hearing:
            The first is their pleasant carping,
            The other is, their soothsastnesse,
            That shewes the thing right as it wee.
            And soothfast things that are likand,
            To mens hearing are pleasand:
            Therefore I would faine set my will,
            If my wit might suffice theretill.
            
               To put in write a soothfast storie,
            That it may last in memorie:
            Sa that no length of time may let,
            Nor gar it hailly be forȝet,
            For ald Stories that men reides,
            Represents to them their deides
            Of stalward folk that liued air,
            Right as they then present wair.
            And certes they sould weill haue prise,
            That in thair time were wicht and wise:
            And led thair life in great trauell:
            And oft intill hard stoure of battell,
            Wan richt greit praise of Cheualrie,
            And was voyde of all Cowartrie:
            As was King Robert of Scotland,
            
            That hardy was of hart and hand:
            And gude Schir Iames of Dowglas,
            
            That in his time sa worthie was:
            That of his praise and his bountie,
            In sindrie lands honour wan he.
            Of tham I thinke this buke to ma.
            Now God of grace, that I may swa
            Treit it, and bring it to gude ending,
            That I say nocht but suithfast thing.
            QUhen Alexander the King was deid
            That Scotland had to steir and leid
            The land sex ȝeires, and mair perfay
            Lay desolate efter his day:
            Till all the Barouns at the last
            Assemblit them, and that full fast,
            To cheis a King the land to steir:
            That of the ancestrée cummin weir,
            Of Kings that had that Royaltie,
            And had most richt their King to be,
            
               But Inuy that is so felloun,
            Maid among them dissensioun,
            For some wold haue the Balliol King,
            For he was cummin of the ofspring
            Of hir, that eldest sister was:
            Uther sum contrary it that cais:
            And said, that he there King sould be,
            That was of als neir degre,
            And cummin was of the first Male,
            And of Branches Collaterale.
            They said, succession of Kinrike,
            Was not till lower state alike:
            For there micht not succeid a Female,
            Quhill foundin micht be ony Male,
            That were in lyne euen descendand:
            They beir all vther wayes in hand:
            For then the nixt cummin of their seid,
            Man, or woman sould succeid.
            By this ressoun the Lords thocht haill,
            That the Lord of Annandaill,
            
            
               Robert the Bruce, Earle of Carrik,
            
            Aught to succeid to the Kinrik.
            THe Barons thus were in discord,
            And on no maner micht accord:
            Till at the last they all accordit,
            That all their speich sould be recordit,
            To Schir Edward of England King,
            And he sould sweir but fenȝeing,
            He sould as arbiter declair,
            Of the two that I tould of air:
            Quho sould succeid to sit on hicht,
            And let him Regne that had the richt.
            This Ordinance they thocht the best,
            For at that time was peace and rest
            
               Betwixt Scotland and England baith,
            That they could not perceiue the skaith,
            That toward them was appearand,
            For why the King of England
            
            Held such friendship, and companie,
            With their King that was worthie:
            They trow'd that he as good nighbour,
            And as friendfull Compositour,
            Wold haue iudged in leele Lawtie,
            But otherwise yeed all the glie.
            
               A Folke blinded full of great follie,
            Had ye bethought once earnestlie,
            What perill to you might appeare,
            Ye had not wrought in that maneare.
            Had ye tane keepe, how that this King
            Alwayes withoutten fainyéeing,
            Trauell'd for to win Senyeorie,
            And through his might did occupie
            Lands, that were to him marchand,
            As Wales was, and all Ireland,
            
            That he put into such thirlage,
            That they that were of hie Parage,
            Should run on foot, as Ribalds all,
            When he would anie folke assaile.
            Durst none of Wales in battell ride,
            Nor yet fra Euen fell, abide
            Castle, nor walled towne within,
            But he should lith and limmes tine▪
            
            Into sik thirlage them led he,
            Whome he ou'rcame with his poustie,
            Ye might sée he should occupie
            Through slight, that he might not through mastrie.
            Had ye tan
                  •
                kéepe what was thirlage,
            And had considred his vsage,
            
               That gripped ay but gane giuing,
            Ye should withoutten his denying,
            Haue chosen you a King, that might
            Haue holden well your Land at right.
            
               Wales ensample might haue beene
            To you, had ye it well foreséene.
            And wise men say he is happie,
            That will therein himselfe chastie,
            For vnfaire things may fall perfay
            The morne, as they did yesterday:
            But ye trusted into lawtie,
            As simple folke but subtiltie,
            An
                  •
                wist not what might after tide:
            For in the world that is so wide,
            As none, determinatly that shall
            Know ony thing that's for to fall,
            For GOD that is of most Poustis,
            Reseru'd it to his Maiestie,
            For to know in his Prescience,
            Of things to come the contingence.
            IN this maner assented were,
            The Barons (as I said you aire)
            And through their owne haill consent,
            Messengers to him they went.
            Then to the holie land boun was he,
            To Saracens to wéere surely.
            And fra he wist what charge they had,
            He busked him but more abade,
            And to England againe is gane,
            And left the purpose that he had tane.
            And syne to Scotland word sent he,
            That they should make an assemblie,
            And he in hie should come to do:
            In all thing, as they write him to.
            
               But he thotht weill throw their debait,
            That he sould slely find sum gait,
            How that he all the Senȝory
            Throw his greit micht sould occupy:
            And to Robert the Bruce said he:
            Gif thou will hald in cheif of me
            For euermore, and thine ofspring:
            I sall do so, thou sall be King.
            Schir (he said) so God me saif,
            The Kinrik ȝarne I nocht to haif:
            But gif it fall of richt to me:
            And gif God will that it so be,
            I sall als frely in all thing
            Hold it, as longes to a King,
            Or as myne Elders before me
            Held it in freast Royaltie.
            The vther wryit him, and swair,
            That he sould neuer haue it mair:
            And turnit him in wraith away,
            But Schir Iohn Ballioll perfay
            Assentit sone till all his will:
            Quherethrow efter fell mekill ill.
            He was King but a litill quhyle,
            Quhen throw greit subtiltie and gyle
            For litill enchesoun or for nane,
            He was arreistit and syne tane,
            And degradit fine was he
            Of honour and of dignitie,
            Quhether that it was wrong or richt,
            God wait it, that is most of micht.
            QUhen Schir Edward the michty King,
            Had on this wayes done his liking,
            With Iohn the Ballioll, that so sone
            Was all degrad and it vndone:
            
               To Scotland went he then in hy,
            And all the land can occupy:
            So haill, that both Castell and Toun,
            Were all in his possessioun:
            From Weik anent Orknay,
            
            To Mulesnuke in Galloway,
            
            And stuffit all with Englishmen,
            Schireffs, and Bailleis made he then,
            And all kin vther Officers,
            That to gouerne the land affeires,
            He made of Inglis Natioun.
            Then worthit they so feirs and felloun,
            And so wickit and so greuous,
            So heuy, and so couetous,
            That Scottismen micht do nothing,
            That euer micht pleis to their liking
                  •
               
            
            Their wyfes wold they oftly by,
            And their doughters despiteously,
            And gif ony thereat were wraith,
            They wold him wait with a great skaith:
            For they sould sone find enchesoun,
            To put him to destructioun:
            And gif ony man neir them by,
            Had ony thing that was worthy,
            Hound, or hors, or vther thing,
            That pleasand was to their liking:
            With richt, or wrong haue it wold they,
            And gif ony wold them ganesay,
            They wold so do, that he sould tyne,
            Outher lyfe, or land, or liue in pyne:
            For they dampnit them euen at their will.
            Takand no keip to richt, nor skill.
            Alace they dampnit them fellounly:
            For gude Knichts that were worthy,
            
               For litle enchesoun, and oft for none
            Were hanged by the neckes ilkone.
            Alace, they sore that euer was frée,
            And ay in fréedome was wont to be,
            Through their mischance and their follie,
            Were thirled then so wickedly:
            That their foes their iudges were:
            What wickednesse may men haue maire?
            O how freedome is Noble thing:
            For it makes man to haue liking.
            Fréedome all solace to men giues:
            He liues at ease that fréelie liues:
            A Noble heart may haue none ease,
            Nor nought els that may it please,
            If fréedome failyee: for free liking
            Is yarned aboue all other thing.
            O he that hath ay liued frée:
            May not know well the propertie,
            The anger nor the wretched dome,
            That is coupled vnto thirldome:
            But if he had as
                  •
               ayed it,
            Then all perqueir he might it wit:
            And should thinke fréedome more to prise,
            Then all the gold men may deuise.
            For contrarie things euer mare,
            Discouerings of the other are:
            And he that into thraldome is,
            All that he hath in bandoun is,
            To his Lord what euer he be:
            Yet he hath not so méekle frée,
            As free liking to leaue or do
            It▪ that his heart drawes him to:
            And yet Clarkes make Question,
            When they fall in disputation:
            
               If a man bad his thirle ought do:
            And in the same time came him to
            His Wife, and asked him his det,
            Whether he his Lords néed should bet,
            And pay first what he ow, and syne
            Doe foorth his Lords commanding:
            Or leaue his Wife vnpaide, and do
            It that his Lord commanded him to.
            I leaue all the solution,
            To men of more discretion.
            But sen they make sik comparing,
            Betwixt the debts of wedding,
            And Lords bidding to their will thirl.
            Ye may well sée though none should tell,
            How hard a thing that thraldome is:
            For men may well wit that are wise,
            That wedding is the hardest band,
            That ony man may take on hand,
            And thraldome is well war then dead,
            For while a thirle his life may lead,
            It marres him both bodie and banes,
            And dead annoyes him not, but ones.
            Shortlie to say, is none to tell
            The sore condition of a Threll.
            THus gate they liued in thirlage
            Both poore and rich of hie parage.
            For of the Lords some they slew,
            And some they hanged, & some they drew;
            And some they put into prison,
            Withoutten cause or Encheson,
            And among other of Dowglas,
            
            Sir William put in prysoun was,
            That of Dowglas was Lord and Syre,
            Of him they haue made a Martyre:
            
               For in presoun they him slew,
            And his lands that were faire anew,
            They to the Lord of Cliffurd gaue,
            He left a sonne, a litill knaue,
            That then was but a litill Page,
            And syne came to great vassalage,
            His fathers death he venged sa,
            That in England I vnderta,
            Was none in life, but they him dred:
            For he so feill in armes sched,
            That none that liues can it tell.
            So wonder hard thinges befell
            Till him, or he to state was broucht,
            But there was none auentour that mocht
            Astoney his heart, nor gar it let
            To do the thing it was on set.
            How that he ay thocht ernistly
            To do his déed auisedly.
            He thocht he was not worth no weill,
            That might not of annoyes feill:
            And that for to encheif great things,
            With hard trauell and barganings,
            Sould gar his prise ay doubled be:
            Therefore in all his lifetime he
            Forsuike neuer paine nor trauell,
            Nor neuer wold for mischiefe faile,
            To dryue the thing euen to the end,
            And tak the chance that God wold send.
            ¶ His name was Iames of Dowglas,
            
            And quhen he heard his father was
            Put in presoun so fellounly,
            And that his lands so haillely
            Were giuen to the Cliffurd, perfay
            He wist not what to do, or say.
            
               For he had nothing to dispend,
            Nor there was none that euer him kend,
            Wold do so mekle for him that he
            Micht with sufficience found in be.
            THus was he wonder will of wane,
            And suddenly in hart hes tane,
            That he wold trauell ouer the sée,
            And a quhile into Paris be,
            And drée mischiefe quhere none him kend,
            Quhill God sum succour to him send:
            And as he thocht, he did richt sa,
            And soone to Paris can he ga,
            And liued there full simpilly,
            Quhere that he glaid was, and ioly,
            And to sic exercise oft he ȝeid:
            As course craues of ȝouthheid,
            And quhiles in play and vanitie,
            The quhilk sumtime may auailȝe:
            For knowledge of mony estates,
            May quhiles auailȝe mony gates,
            As to the gude Erle of Artois,
            
            
               Robert befell intill his dayes:
            For oft fenȝeing of Ribaldie,
            Auailȝeit him, and that greatlie,
            And Cato sayes intill his writ,
            To fenȝe foly quhyles is wit.
            In Paris neir thrée ȝeires dwelt he,
            And then came tything ouer the sée,
            That his father was done to dead,
            Then was he wonder will of read.
            And thocht that he wold home againe,
            To looke gif he throw ony paine▪
            
            Micht wyn againe his heritage,
            And his men out of all thirlage.
            
               
               The first rising of Lord DOWGLAS.
               
                  TO Sanctandrous he came in hy,
                  Where the Bishop full courteously
                  Receiued him, and gart him beare
                  His kniues, to carue to him, and sheare:
                  And cled him then full honorably,
                  And ordainde chamber where he should ly.
                  A well great while there dwelt he,
                  All men him loued for his bountie:
                  For he was of full faire affeir,
                  Wise, courteous, and deboneir,
                  Large, and louing als was he:
                  And ouer all thing he loued lawtie,
                  Lawtie to loue is no follie,
                  Through lawtie liues men right wiselie.
                  With one vertue of lawtie,
                  A man may yet sufficient be:
                  And but lawtie may none haue prise,
                  Whether that he be wight or wise:
                  For where it failyies, no vertue,
                  May be of price, nor of value:
                  To make a man so good, that he
                  May simply good man called be.
                  He was in all his déedes léele:
                  For he deinyied not to deale
                  With traitourie nor with falset:
                  His heart on hie honour was set:
                  And him contented on sik maner,
                  That all him loued that were him neere:
                  But he was not so faire that we
                  Should speake greatly of his beautie.
                  In visage was he some déele gray:
                  And had black haire (as I heard say)
                  But then of limmes he was well made,
                  
                     With banes great and shoulders brade.
                  His bodie well made, and lenyie,
                  (As they that saw him said to me)
                  When he was blyth he was louely,
                  And méeke and swéet in company
                  But who in battell might him sée,
                  Another countenance had he:
                  And in his spéech lisped some dell,
                  And that set him full wonder well
                  To good Hector of Troy might he
                  In manie things likened be.
                  
                     Hector had blacke haire as he had,
                  And starke limmes, and right well made.
                  And lisped also as did he,
                  And was fulfill'd of all bountie,
                  And was courteous, wise and wight:
                  But of manhéed and méekle might,
                  To Hector dare I none compare,
                  Of all that euer in world were▪
                  
                  For in his time so wrought he,
                  That he should greatly loued be.
                  HE dwelt there thus till on a tide
                  The King Edward with méekle pride
                  Came to Starling with great menyie:
                  For to hold there an assemblie,
                  Hitherward went many a Baroun,
                  And Bishop William of Lambertoun
                  
                  Who hither als, and with him was
                  His Esquyre Iames of Dowglas,
                  
                  The Bishop led him to the King
                  And said Sir, here to you I bring
                  This Child, that claimes your man to be,
                  And prayeth you for Charitie,
                  That ye receiue here his homage,
                  
                     And grant to him his heritage.
                  Quhat lands claimes he, said the King?
                  Schir, gif that it be your lyking,
                  He claimes the Lordship of Dowglas:
                  For Lord thereof his father was.
                  The King then wrythed him angerly,
                  And said, Schir Bischop, sikkerlie
                  Gif thou wold keepe thy fewtie,
                  Thou mak no sic speaking to me.
                  His father was ay my felloun:
                  And died therefore in my presoun:
                  And was agains my Maiestie:
                  Therefore I ought his aire to be.
                  Go purches lands quhere euer he may,
                  For thereof gets he none perfay,
                  The Clyffurd shall haue them, for he
                  Ay leillely he hes serued me
                  The Bischop heard him so answer,
                  And durst then speake to him no mair:
                  Bot from his presence went on hy,
                  For he dred sore his fellony:
                  So that no more he spoke thereto:
                  But did that he came for to do.
                  The King in England went againe,
                  With mony men of mekill maine.
                  LOrdings who likes for to heare,
                  The Romanes now begins héere:
                  Of men that were in greit distres,
                  And assayed full greit hardynes,
                  Or they micht come to their intent.
                  But syne our Lord sic grace them sent,
                  That they sensyne through greit valour,
                  Came to greit hicht, and hie honour,
                  Magre their foes euer ilkone,
                  
                     That were so fell,, that ay for ane
                  Of them, they were well a thousand,
                  Bot where God helps, who may wtstand?
                  Ȝet if we say the suithfastnes,
                  They were eir more then they were lesse,
                  But God that is of mekill micht,
                  Preserued them in his foresicht,
                  To venge the harmes and the contrares,
                  That they fell folke, and oppressares
                  Did to simple folke and worthy
                  That could not saue themselues: for thy
                  They were like to the Maccabees,
                  
                  That as men in the Bible sées,
                  Throw their great worship and valour,
                  Faucht in mony a stalwart stour:
                  For to delyuer their Countrie,
                  Fra folke that throw Iniquitie
                  Held them, and theirs into thirlage,
                  They wrocht so throw their vassallage,
                  That with few folke they had victory,
                  Of michty Kings (as sayes the Story)
                  And delyuered their lands all frée,
                  Quherefore their names sould loued be.
                  This Lord the Bruce I spoke of air.
                  Saw all the Kinrik so forfair,
                  And so troubled the folke saw he,
                  That he thereof had great pitie.
                  Bot quhat pitie that euer he had,
                  No countenance thereof he made.
                  Quhill on a time Schir Iohn Cuming,
                  
                  As they came ryding from Striuiling,
                  
                  Said to him, Schir, will ȝe not see,
                  How that gouerned is this Countrie?
                  They slew our folke but Enchesoun,
                  
                     And hes this land against reasoun:
                  And ye thereof Lord should be.
                  And if that ye will trow to me,
                  Ye shall thereof gar make you King,
                  And I shall be in your helping:
                  With thy, ye giue me all the land,
                  That ye haue now into your hand:
                  And if that ye will not doe swa,
                  Nor sik a state vpon you ta:
                  All haill my lands shall yours be,
                  And let me take the state on me,
                  And bring this land out of thirlage:
                  For there is neither man nor Page,
                  In all this land, but they will be
                  With vs, to make themselues frée.
                  The Lord the Bruce heard his carping,
                  And weinde he spake but soothfast thing:
                  And for it liked to his will,
                  He gaue soone his assent theretill.
                  And said, sen ye will it be swa,
                  I will blythlie vpon me ta
                  The name for I wote I haue right:
                  And ri
                        •
                     ht makes oft the féeble wight.
                  THir Barouns thus accorded are:
                  And that ilk night written were,
                  Their Indentours, aithes made,
                  To hold that they forespokē had.
                  But ouer all thing woe worth treasoun:
                  For there is neither Earle nor Baroun,
                  Nor Duke, nor Prince, nor King of might,
                  Though he be neuer so wise nor wight,
                  For wit, worship praise, nor renoun,
                  That euer may kéepe him fra treasoun.
                  Was not all Troy with treason tane
                  
                     When ten yéeres of the siege was gane,
                  Where there was slaine eight hundred thousand
                  Of them thereout through strength of hand,
                  As Dares in his booke did wraite,
                  And dyted their battell and their state.
                  They might not haue bene tane with might:
                  But treasoun tooke them through her slight,
                  And Alexander the Conquerour,
                  That conquered Babylons Towre,
                  And all this world of length and bréede,
                  In twelue yéere through his doughtie déede▪
                  
                  Was syne destroyed by poysoun,
                  In his owne house through treasoun:
                  But ere he died his land dealt he,
                  To sée his death was great pitie,
                  
                     Iulius Cesar als that wan
                  
                     Britane and France, as worthie man,
                  
                     Africk, Arabie, Egypt and Syrie,
                  
                  And als Europe all haillelie.
                  And for his worship and valour,
                  Of Rome was first made Emperour,
                  Syne in his Capitoll was he
                  Through them of his counsell priuie,
                  Slaine with botkins vnto the dead,
                  And when he saw there was no read,
                  His ene with hand enclosed he,
                  For to die with more honestie.
                  Als Arthur that through Cheualrie,
                  Had Britane Maistres and Ladie,
                  Of twelue Kinrikes that he wan,
                  And also as a Noble man,
                  He wan through battell France all frée,
                  And Lucius Tyber vanquisht he▪
                  
                  Then he of Rome was Emperour,
                  
                     And yet for all his great valour,
                  
                     Modreed his Sister sonne his slew:
                  And good men als ma than anew,
                  Through treason and through wickednesse,
                  The Bruce thereof beares witnesse.
                  So fell it of this cunning making,
                  Of the Cuming to the King
                  Of England, and told all the cace,
                  But I trow not all as it was.
                  The Indentour to him gaue hée,
                  And syne shawed the iniquitie,
                  And therefore syne hee tholed dead,
                  That to it could set no remead.
               
               
                  WHen the King saw the Inden
                        •
                     our,
                  Hée was angrie without measure.
                  And swore that hee should vengeance ta,
                  Of the Bruce that presumed sa,
                  Against him for to braull and rise,
                  Or to conspire in sic a wise:
                  And to Sir Iohn Cumyng said hee,
                  That hée should for his lawtie
                  Be rewarded, and that highly,
                  And hée him thanked humbly,
                  And thought well to haue the leading
                  Of all Scotland but gane saying:
                  Fra that the Bruce to death was brought,
                  But oft failyeis that fooles thought.
                  And wise mens etteling
                  Comes not aye to that ending,
                  That they thinke that it should come to:
                  For GOD wats what is ado,
                  Of his etling right so it fell,
                  As I shall afterwards you tell,
                  
                     He tooke his leaue, and home is went,
                  And the King cummed a Parliament
                  Hes set, then after hastely,
                  And hidder summon he in hy,
                  The Barons of his fewtie,
                  And to the Lord the Bruce sent he,
                  Bidding to come to that gaddring:
                  And he that had no perceiuing,
                  Of the treasoun, and the falset,
                  Rade to the King but langer let:
                  And in London him harbred he
                  The first day of their assemblie:
                  Syne on the morne to Court he went,
                  The King sat into Parliament,
                  And before his counsell priuie,
                  The Lord the Bruce there called he:
                  And shewed him the Indentour,
                  He was in full great auentour,
                  To tyne his lyfe: but GOD of might
                  Reserued him to hier hight:
                  That would not that he so were dead,
                  The King besought him in that stead,
                  The Indentour, the Seale to sée,
                  And asked if that it sealde hée,
                  He looked the Seale full tentiuely,
                  And answered him full méekely,
                  And said, though that I simple be,
                  My Seale is not all time with me.
                  I haue another it to beare:
                  Therefore if that your wills were,
                  I aske you respet for to sée
                  The letter: and therewith auise me
                  Till the morne that ye be set,
                  And then but any longer let,
                  
                     The letter sall I enter héere
                  Before your Court plane yéere,
                  And there till broch draw I
                  Mine heritage all halely.
                  The King thoght he was traist an
                        •
                     ugh,
                  Gif he his land in Borrow dreuch,
                  And let him with the letter pas,
                  To enter as forespoken was.
               
            
            
               The escaping of the Bruce, and the dead of Iohn Cuming.
               
               THe Bruce went to his Innes swyth,
               And wit ye well he was full blyth,
               That he had gotten that respyte,
               He calde his Marshall to him tyte,
               And bad him looke on all maneare
               That he made to his men good cheare,
               For he will in his chamber be,
               A well great whyle in priuitie.
               With him one Clarke and no ma.
               The Marshall to the hall can ga,
               And did his Lords commanding.
               The Lord the Bruce but more letting,
               Gart priuily bring Stéedes twa,
               And he, and the Clarke withoutten ma
               Lap on withoutten perceiuing,
               And day and night but soiourning
               They rade, till on the fift day
               Comming to Lochmabene are thay,
               His brother Edward there they fand,
               That thoght ferlie he tooke on hand,
               For to come home so priuily,
               He told his brother halely:
               How that he there summond was,
               And how he escaped through ca
                     •
                  e.
               
                  So fell it in the samine tide,
               That at Dumfreis right there besyde,
               Sir Iohn Cumyng soiourne made,
               The Bruce lap on but ony bade,
               And thoght but ony more letting,
               For to quite him his discouering,
               Hidder he rade but longer let,
               And Sir Iohn Cumyng there he met,
               In the Friers at the hie Altar,
               And shewed him with bourding chéere,
               The Indentour, syne with a knife
               Right in that place he reft his life.
               Sir Edward Cumyng als was slaine,
               And other als of méekle maine:
               And not for thy yet some men sayes,
               That that debate fell otherwayes:
               But whosoeuer fell in debaite,
               Therethrough he died well I waite.
               He misdid that greitly but wéere,
               That gaue no gyrth to the Altéere.
               Therefore so hard mischiefe him fell,
               That I heard neuer in Romanes tell,
               Of man so hard sted as was he,
               And after came to sic bountie.
               NOw againe to the King go we.
               That on the morrow with his barnie
               Sate into his Parliament,
               And after the Lord the Bruce he sent,
               Right to his Innes with Knights kene,
               When he ofttime had called bene.
               And his men after him asked thay,
               They said that he sen yesterday,
               Dwelt in his chamber it handly,
               And a Clarke with him anerly,
               
                  Then knocked they at the chamber there:
               And when they heard none make answer,
               They brak the doore, but they found noght,
               He was away that they there soght:
               They told the King all haill the cace,
               And how that he escaped was,
               He was of his escape sorie,
               And swore in ire full stalwartlie.
               That he sould drawne and hanged be,
               He menassed as him thought, but he
               Thought it sould passe another way:
               And when he, as ye heard me say,
               Into the Kirk Iohn Cumyng had slaine,
               To Lochmabene he went againe,
               And gart men with his letters ride,
               To friends vpon ilk side.
               They came to him with their menye,
               And his men als assembled he,
               And thoght that he would make him King,
               Ouer all the land the word can spring,
               That the Bruce had the Cumyng slaine,
               And among others letters a
                     •
                  e gane,
               To the Bishop of Androistoun,
               
               That told how slaine was the Baroun.
               The Letter told him haill the dead,
               And he till his men can it read:
               And then he said, full sikkerly,
               I hope that Thomas prophecy,
               Of Erstiltoun, sall verray be
               In him for so our Lord me sée,
               I haue great hope he shall be King,
               And haue this land all in leading.
            
            
               
               The Dowglas Meeting with King Robert.
               
               
                  IAmes of Dowglas that aye where
               Alwayes before the Bishop share:
               Hée had well hard the Letter red,
               And hée tooke also full good heede
               To all that the Bishop had said,
               And when the boordes downe were laid:
               To Chamber went hée then in hy,
               And Iames of Dowglas priuily:
               Said to the Bishop, Sir, yée sée
               How Englishmen through their poustie,
               Disherites mée of all my Land,
               And men haue gart you vnderstand,
               Als that the Erle of Carrike,
               
               Clames to gouerne this Kinrike:
               And for your Man that hée hath slaine,
               All Englishmen at him againe.
               And would disherite him blythly,
               And in a Line with him am I.
               Therefore Sir, if it bée your will
               I would take with him good and ill,
               Through him I thinke my Land to win,
               Magre the Cliffurd, and his kin.
               The Bishop heard, and had pitie,
               And said, Sweet Sonne so God mée sée,
               I would blythly that yée were there,
               So that I not reproued were.
               On this maner well worke thou may,
               Thou shalt take farrand my Palfray.
               For there none Horse is in this Land
               So wight, nor yet so well rinnand,
               Take him as of thine owne head,
               As I had giuen thereto no read.
               
                  And gif his kéeper oft grunches,
               Looke that thou take him magre his,
               So sall I more assonyied be,
               Almighty GOD, for his poustie,
               Grant, that he thou passes to,
               And thou so well all time may do,
               That ye you fra your foes defend.
               He taught him siluer for to spend:
               And syne gaue him his bennisoun,
               And bad him passe his way off toun:
               For he wold sléepe till he was gane,
               The Dowglas then his way hes tane,
               Right to the horse as he him bad:
               But he that him in kéeping had,
               Warned him well despiteously,
               But he that wraithes him angerly,
               Felled him with a swordes dynt,
               And syne but ony longer stint,
               The horfe he sadled hastely,
               And lap on him delyuerly:
               And passed foorth but leaue taking.
               Deare GOD that is ouer all things King,
               Saue him and shield him fra his faes:
               All him alone the way he taes
               Toward the towne of Lochmabane,
               
               And a litle fra Ayrik stane,
               The Bruce with a great rout he met,
               He rade to Scone for to be set
               In Kings stoole, and to be King.
               And when Dowglas saw his comming,
               He rade and hailsed him in hy,
               And lowted to him courteously,
               And told him hai
                     •
                  ly all his state,
               And what he was and als what gate,
               
                  The Clyffurd held his heritage,
               And that he came to make homage
               To him, as to his righteous King,
               And that he boun was in all thing
               To take with him both good and ill.
               And when the Bruce had heard his will.
               He receiued him in great dayntie,
               And men and armes to him taught he.
               He trowed well he should be worthy,
               For all his frends were ay doughty.
               Thus gate made they their acquaintance,
               That neuer yet for no mischance
               Departed while they liuing waire.
               Their friendship ay waxt more and maire:
               For he serued ay léelely▪
               
               And the other ay wilfully
               That was both worthy, wight and wise,
               Rewarded him well his seruice.
               The Lord the Bruce to Glasgow rade,
               And sent about him till he had
               Of his frends a great menye.
            
            
               Coronatio Regis ROBERTI.
               And then to Scone in hy rade he,
               And was made King but longer let,
               And in the Kings stoole he was set:
               As in that time was the maneir,
               But of their noble and great affeir,
               Their seruice nor their royaltie,
               Ye sall heare now nothing of me.
               Outtane that he, of the Barnage
               That hidder came tooke their homage,
               And syne he went ouer all the land,
               Friends and friendship purchasand:
               To maintaine that he had begun.
               
                  Hée wist ere all the lands were win,
               That hee should finde hard barganing
               With him that was of England King:
               For there was none in life so fell,
               So proud, so hie, and so cruell.
               And when to King Edward was told,
               How that the Bruce that was so bold:
               Had brought the Cumyng to an ending,
               And how hée had syne made him King,
               Out of his wit hee yéed full néere,
               And syne gart call him Sir Aymeere,
               
               Of Wallans, that was wise and wight,
               And of his hands a doughty Knight,
               And bade him men and Armes ta,
               And in all hy to Scotland ga,
               And burne, and 
                     •
                  la, and raise Dungeoun,
               And heght all Fife in warisoun
               To him, that might outher take or sla,
               
                  Robert the Bruce that was his fa.
               Sir Aymer did as hée him bade,
               Greit Cheualry with him hée had,
               With him was Philip the Mowbray,
               
               Sir Ingrayme Vmfraywile perfay,
               That was both wise and als worthie,
               And fulfild of greit Cheualrie,
               And of Scotland the most party,
               They had into their Company.
            
            
               The first Speaking of King Robert with Sir Aymer
               
               FOr yet then mekle of the Land
               Was into the Englishmens hand.
               To Perth they went into a rout,
               That then was walled all about.
               
                  With fell Towres right hie battailled,
               For to defend if it were sailyeid,
               Therein dwelt Sir Aymery
               
               With all his great Cheualry,
               The King Robert wist he was there,
               And what kin Chiftanes with him were,
               He assembled all his menye,
               And had feill folke of great bountie:
               But their foes were mo than they,
               By fiftéene hunder as I heard say:
               And yet he had there at that néed,
               Feill folke that doughtie were indéed,
               And Barons that were bauld as Baire,
               Two Erles als was with him there
               Of Lennox, and Athol were thay
               
                  Edward the Bruce was there alsway,
               
                  Thomas Randell and Hew de la Hay,
               
               And good Sir Dauid de Barclay,
               
               
                  Fresell, Somerwell, and Inchemertine,
               
               
                  Iames of Dowglas there was syne,
               That then was but of litle might,
               And other feill forcie men in fight:
               Als was good Cristall of Setoun,
               
               And Robert Boyde of great Renown:
               And other feill men of méekle might,
               But I cannot tell what they hight.
               Though they were few they were worthy,
               And fulfilde of great Cheualry,
               And in battell in good array,
               Before Saint Iohnstoun they lay:
               And bad Sir Aymer ish and fight:
               And he that in his méekle might
               Trusted on them that were him by,
               Bade his men arme them hastely:
               
                  But Sir Ingrayme of Vmfrawile,
               
               Thought it was all too great perill,
               In plaine battell to them to go,
               While that they were arrayde also:
               And to Sir Aymer then said he,
               Sir, gif that ye will trow to me,
               Ye shall not ish them to assailye:
               Till they are purvayed in battailye:
               For their leader is wise and wight,
               And of his hand an noble Knight,
               And he hes in his company
               Mony a good Knight and worthy,
               That shall be hard for to assay
               While they are in so good array:
               For it sould be full mekle might
               That now should put them to the flight.
               For when they folke are well arrayed,
               And for the battell are puruayed,
               With thy that they all good men be
               They sall far more be auisie,
               And well more to be dred then thay
               Were set some deill out of array.
               Therefore ye may gar say them till,
               That they may this night gif they will,
               Gang harbrie them, and sleepe and rest,
               And on the morne but longer frist,
               Ye shall ishe foorth to the battaile,
               And feght with them but gif they faile.
               So sall they wend to their harbrie,
               Some sall to Forray passe sickerlie.
               And they that dwells at the ludging,
               Gif they come out of trauelling,
               Sall in short time vnarmed be,
               Then on our best maner may we
               
                  With all our faire Cheualry
               Ryd toward them full hardely:
               And they that wenes to rest all night,
               When they sée vs arrayde to fight,
               Comming on them so suddenly,
               They shall afrayde be gréetumly,
               And ere they knit in battell be,
               We sall spéed vs 
                     •
                  ic sort that we
               Sall be all readie for to semble,
               That some for erynesse sall tremble,
               When he assailyde is suddenly,
               That with auisement is doughty.
            
            
               The Ludging of King Robert in the Parke of Methwen.
               
               AS he deuised, so haue they done,
               And to them outwith sent he soone:
               And bad them harbrie them that night,
               And on the morne come to the fight.
               When they saw they might doe no mair,
               Toward Methwen soone can they fare:
               And in the Wood them lodged thay,
               The third part went to the Forray:
               And the laue soone vnarmed were,
               And skailed to lodge them here and there.
               Sir Aymer then but more abade,
               With all the folke he with him had,
               Ished enforcedly to the fight,
               And rade into a randoun right,
               The straight way toward Methwen
               
               The King that was vnarmed then,
               Saw them come on enforcedly,
               And to his men can highly cry.
               
                  To armes swyth, and make you yaire,
               Héere at our hand our foes are:
               And they did so in full great hy,
               And on their horse lept hastely:
               The King displayed his baner,
               When that his folke assembled were.
               He said, Lordings, now may ye sée
               That you folke through subtiltie,
               Shapes them to doe with slight,
               If that they dread to doe with might.
               Now perceiue I, that who will trow
               His fa, it sall him sometime grow:
               
                  
                     •
                  nd noght for thy, though they be feill,
               GOD may right well our werdes deill:
               For multitude makes no victory,
               As men haue red in mony Story.
               As few folke oft haue vanquisht ma,
               Trow ye that we sall doe right sa,
               Ye are ilkane wight and worthie
               And called of great Cheualrie,
               And wate right well what honour is,
               Worke ye therefore on sic a wise,
               That your honour be saued ay,
               And one thing will I to you say,
               That he that dies for his Countrie,
               In hight of heauen sall harbred be.
               When this was said they saw cummand,
               Their foes ryding at their hand,
               Arrayed right auisedly,
               Wilfull to do Cheualry.
            
            
               
               The Battell of Methwen, and the first Discomfite of King Robert.
               
               ON either side thus were they there,
               And to assemble readie were:
               And so rudely can raging ryde,
               That Speares all too frushed are,
               And fe
                     ••
                  l men dead and wounded saire,
               The blood out of the beirnes brast,
               Of best and of the worthiest,
               That wilfull were to win honour,
               Plunged into that stalwart stour,
               And routes rude about them dang,
               Men might haue seene into that thrang:
               Knights that wight and worthie were,
               Under Horses féete defouled there.
               Some wounded and some all dead,
               The grasse waxt all of blood all red:
               And they that held on Horse in hy,
               Swapped out Swords deliueredly,
               And so fell strokes gaue and tooke,
               That all the rinke about them shooke,
               The Bruces folke full hardely,
               Shawed their great Cheualry:
               And he himselfe attour the laue,
               So hard and heauie dints gaue,
               That where hee came they made him way,
               His men them put to hard assay,
               To stint their foes méekle might:
               Than they so fair had of the fight:
               That they wan place aye mair and mair.
               The Kings small folke néere vanquisht were.
               ANd where the King his folke hes seene,
               Begin to failye for proper teene:
               
                  To his Ensenye can highlie crie,
               And in the stour so hardelie.
               He raged till all the semble shooke,
               He all so hew'd that he ouertooke:
               And dang on them while he might drée,
               And to his folke he cryed hie.
               On them, on them, they féeble fast,
               This bargane may no longer last,
               And with that word so wilfullie,
               He dang on them so hardelie:
               That who had séene him in that fight,
               Sould hold him for a doughtie Knight:
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   it though he stout was, and hardie,
               And other als of his companie,
               There might no worship there auailie,
               For there small folke all haill they failie.
               And fled and skailled here and there,
               But the good that escaped were,
               Baide fighting in that stalwart stour,
               To conquesse them endlesse honour.
               And when Sir Aymer he hath séene,
               The small folke fléeing haill be déene,
               And saw so few abide the fight.
               He drew to him monie a Knight,
               And in the stour so hardelie,
               He rushed with his companie,
               That he rushed his foes ilkane.
               Sir Thomas Randell there was tane,
               That then was a young batcheler,
               And Sir Alexander the Fraser,
               
               And Sir Dauid the Barclay,
               
               
                  Inchemertine and Hew de la Hay,
               
               And Somerwell, and other ma,
               And the King himselfe alswa,
               
                  Was set into so hard essay,
               Through good Sir Philip the Mowbray,
               
               That rade to him full hardelie:
               And hint his renyie, and then can cry:
               Helpe, helpe, I haue thée now made King,
               With that came griding in a ling,
               
                  Christill of Setoun when hée so
               The King saw seased with his foe,
               To Sir Philip sic routes hée rought,
               That thought hée was of méekle mought,
               Hée gart him stakker desilie,
               And had to eird gane haillelie:
               War not hée held him by the Stéed,
               Out of his hand the bridle yéed,
               And the King his Enseigne can cry,
               Relieu'd his men that stood him by,
               That were so few that they not might,
               Indure the force more of the fight.
               They pricked then out of the preasse,
               And the King that all angrie was:
               For hée his men saw flée him fro,
               Said then, Lordings, sen it is so
               That weere runneth againe vs héere,
               Good is wée passe off their danger,
               While God vs send eftsoones some grace,
               And it may fall, if they will chace.
               Quite them combate some deill wée shall.
               To that word they assented all.
               And from them walloped vppermere,
               Their foes also they wearie were:
               That of them all they chased nane.
               But with prisoners that they had tane,
               Right to towne they held the way,
               Right glade and joyfull of their Prey.
               
                  That night they lay all in the towne.
               There was none of so greit renowne,
               Nor none so hardie of them all.
               That durst harbrie without the wall:
               So dread they sore the gane comming
               Of Sir Robert the doughtie King,
               And to the King of England soone,
               They wrote haillie as they had doone:
               And hée was blyth of that tything,
               And for despite bade drawe and hing
               All the prisoners, though they were mo,
               But Sir Aymer did nothing so:
               To some both life and land gaue hée,
               To leaue the Bruce and his fewtie,
               And serue the King of England,
               
               And of him for to hold their land:
               And warie the Bruce as their foe,
               
                  Thomas Randell was one of tho.
               That for his life became their man,
               And others that were taken then,
               Some they ransomde, and some they slew,
               And some hanged, and some they drew.
               IN this maner rebuted was
               The Bruce that greit mourning mais:
               For his men that were slaine and tane,
               And hée was also will of wane:
               For hee trowde in none sikkerlie,
               Except them of his companie
               That were so few they scarce might bée,
               Fiue hunder men of haill menyie,
               His brother also was him by,
               Sir Edward that was so worthie,
               And with him was a bold Baroun,
               Sir William the Halyburtoun,
               
               
                  The Erle of Atholl he was there:
               Bot ay sen they discomfite were.
               The Erle of Lennox was away,
               And was put to full hard assay,
               Ere he met with the King againe,
               Bot alwayes as a man of maine,
               He him maintained manfully,
               The King had in his company
               
                  Iames also Lord of Dowglas
               
               That wise, wight, and worthy was.
               Sir Gilbert de la Hay alswa,
               Sir Neill Campbell and other ma:
               That I their names cannot tell,
               And Outlawes went to daill and fell,
               Dreeing in the mountaines pine,
               And eat flesh, and dranke water syne,
               He durst not into plaines ga,
               For all the Commons went him fra:
               That for their liues were full faine,
               To passe to English peace againe.
               So fares it alwayes commonly,
               In Commons may no man affy,
               Bot he that may their warrand be:
               So fare they then with him, for he
               Them fra their foes might not warrand,
               They turned all to the other hand,
               Bot thraldome that men gart them féele,
               Gart them ay yarne, that he fure well.
               THus in the hi
                     •
                  les liued he,
               Till the most part of his Menye
               Was reuen and rent, and no shoone had,
               Bot as they then of Hydes made:
               Therefore they went to Aberdene,
               
               Where Neill the Bruce came, & the Quéen
               
                  And other Ladies faire and pleasand,
               Ilkone for loue of their husband:
               And for leele loue and loyaltie,
               Partner of their paines would be.
               They choosed rather with them to ta
               Anger and paines, than be them fra:
               Syne loue it is of sik a might,
               That it does all the paines make light,
               And mony times makes tender wight,
               Als of sik strength, and of sik might:
               That they may meekle paine indure,
               And to forsake none auenture,
               That euer may fall: with thy that thay
               Therethrough succour their liues may.
               ¶ Men reades when Thebes was tane,
               And King Adrestus men were slaine,
               That assieged the Citie,
               All the women of his Countrie,
               Came for to fetch him home againe▪
               
               When they heard all his folke was slaine,
               UUhere that the King Campeus
               
               Through the Oast of Menestheus,
               
               That came through cace ryding them by,
               UUith thrée hunder in company,
               That through the Kings prayer assailyéed,
               And yet to take the towne had failyéed,
               War not the wiues that thrilde the wall,
               With pikkes where the assailyeours all
               Entred and destroyed the toun,
               And slew the people but ransoun:
               Syne when the Duke his waies was gane
               And all the Kings men were slaine:
               The Wiues had him to his Countrie,
               UUhere was no liuing man but he,
               
                  In women méekle comfort lies,
               And great solace in mony wise.
               So fell it here for their comming
               Comforted gretumly the King:
               For why euerilk night he woke.
               And his rest on the day he tooke,
               A good while there he soiournde then,
               And eased wonder well his men,
               While that the Englishmen heard say,
               That he there with his menyie lay:
               At all kin ease, and sikkerly,
               Their Oast assembled they in hy.
               And trowed there him to supprise:
               But he that in his déedes was wise,
               Wist, they assembled were, and where:
               And wist that they so monie were:
               That he might not against them fight:
               His men in hy he gart them dight,
               And bushe them of the toun to ride,
               The Ladies rade hard by his side:
               Then to the hilles they held their way,
               Where great default of meat had thay:
               Bot worthie Iames of Dowglas,
               
               Ay trauellde he, and busie was,
               For to purchase the Ladies meat:
               And éeles in monie wise wald get:
               For whyles vennison he them broght,
               And with his hands whyles he wroght.
               Girnes to take Geddes, and Salmons,
               Troutes, Celes, and Menons,
               And whyles they went to the Forray,
               
               And so their meat purchased thay
               Ilke man trauellde for to get,
               And purchast them that they might eat,
               
                  But of all that euer there were,
               There was not one among them there,
               That with the Ladies more praisde was,
               Than was Sir Iames of Dowglas:
               And the King oft comforted was
               Through his wit, and his businesse,
               On this maner then gouernde they,
               Till they came to the head of Tay,
               
            
            
               How Iohn of Lorne discomfist King Robert.
               
               THe Lord of Lorne winned thereby,
               That was Capitall enemie,
               To the King for his Emes sake
               
                  Iohn the Cumyng, and thought to take
               Ueng
                     •
                  ance vpon cruell manéere.
               When the King wist hée was so néere:
               Hée assembl
                     •
                  d his Men in hy,
               And had into his companie,
               The Barons of Argyle alswa.
               They were a thousand well and ma.
               That come for to suppresse the King,
               That was well ware of their comming,
               But all too few with him hée had:
               And yet hée boldlie them abade:
               And feill of them at their first méeting
               Was laid at eird but recouering:
               The Kings folke full well them bare,
               And slew and feill wounded sare:
               But the folke of the other partie
               Faught with axes so fellounly:
               For they on foote were euerilkane,
               But they feill of their Horse hes slaine,
               And to some gaue they wounds wide,
               
                  Iames of Dowglas was hurt that tid,
               
                  And als Sir Gilbert de la Hay,
               
               The King his men saw in affray,
               And his Ensenye right fast gan cry:
               And in the stour full hardelie,
               Hée rade, and rushed among them all,
               And feill of them there gart hee fall:
               But when hée saw they were so fell▪
               
               And saw them so greit dints deale,
               Hee dread to tine his men for thy,
               His solke to him hee can rely.
               And faid Lordings, it folly were,
               To vs for to assemble mare:
               For they feill of our Horse haue slaine,
               And if wee feght with them againe:
               Wee shall tyne of our small Menȝie,
               And our selues shall in perill bée,
               Therefore mée thinke most according,
               To withdraw vs, wée defending,
               Till wee come out of their danger,
               Our strength is at our hand well neere.
               Then they withdrew them haillelie:
               But that was nothing cowartly,
               For samin into a sop held they,
               And the King him abandound ay,
               To defend behind his Menyie:
               And through his worship so wrought hée,
               That hée rescued all the fléears,
               And so astonisht all the chasers.
               That none durst ont of battell chase:
               For at their hand alwayes hée was.
               So well defended hée his men,
               That who so euer had seene him then
               Prooue so worthie vassalage:
               And turne so oft-time his visage,
               
                  Hée should say, hée ought well to bée,
               A King of full greit Royaltie.
               WHen that the Lord of Lorne saw,
               His men stand of him sik aw,
               That they durst not follow the chase.
               Right angrie in his heart hée was.
               And sair wondred that hee should so,
               Stoney them him allone but moe,
               Hée said, Mée thinke Martheokes sonne,
               Right as Golmakmorne was wonne,
               To haue from Fyngall his menyie,
               Right so from vs all his, hes hée,
               Hée set ensample thus him lyke,
               The whilk hée might more manerlyke,
               Likened him to Gaudifer Delaryse:
               When that the mightie Duke Betyse
               
               Assayed in Gaders the Forrayours,
               
               And when the King them made recourse:
               Duke Betyse tooke on him the flight,
               And would no more abide the fight,
               But good Gaudifer the worthie
               Abandound him so hardelie.
               For to rescue all the fléears:
               And for to astoney the chasers:
               That Alexander to eird hée bare,
               And so did hee Ptolome there,
               And good Corneus also,
               
                  Danchine, and also other moe,
               But at the last there slaine hée was,
               In that failȝied the liklinesse
               For that the King Cheualruosly,
               Defended all his companie,
               That was set in full greit danger,
               And yet escaped haill and féere.
            
            
               
               Howe the King slewe the three men that swore his death.
               TWo brether were into the land,
               That were the hardiest of hand,
               There were in all that same Countrie:
               And they had sworne if they might see
               The Bruce and him ouer ta,
               That they should die, or then him s
                     •
                  a,
               Their Surname was Makindorser,
               
               That is als meekile to say héere,
               As Durwarts sonnes perfay,
               Of their conuéene the third had they:
               That was right stout, ill and felloun.
               When they the King of greit renoun
               Saw so behind his Menȝie ride,
               And saw him turne so mony a tide.
               They abade ay while that hée was
               Entred into a narrow place,
               Betwixt a Loch and a narrow Bra,
               That was so strait I vnderta,
               That hee might not well turne his Stéed:
               Then with ane will to him they yéed,
               And ane him by the Bridle hint:
               But hée raught to him sik a dint,
               That arme and shoulder flaw him fra,
               With that another can him ta
               By the Leg, and his hand can shoote
               Betwixt the stirop and his foote,
               And when the King felt there his hand,
               In steroppes stythlie can hée vp stand.
               And strake with Spurres his Stéed in hy,
               And hee lanced deliueredly:
               So that the other failȝied feete.
               And nought for thy his hands was yet,
               
                  Under the sterop magre his.
               The third in full greit hy with this,
               Right to the braes side hée yéed.
               And stert behind him on a Steed.
               The King was then in full greit preasse,
               The whilk bethought, as hée that was.
               In all his déedes auisie,
               To doe an outragious bountie:
               Hee hint him that behind him was,
               And magre him hee can him raise.
               From behind him though hée had sworne,
               And laid him euen him beforne:
               Syne with his sword sic dints him gaue.
               That hee the head till harnes claue.
               Hee rushed downe of blood all red,
               As hee that stoun
                     •
                   felt of the dead:
               And then the King in full greit hy,
               Strake at the other vigorouslie,
               And at the first strake hee him slew,
               That hee after his sterop drew.
               On this wise him deliuered hee,
               Of all these felloun foes thrée.
               WHen Iohn of Lorn hes seen ye King
               Set for himselfe so greit helping,
               And defend him so manfully:
               Was none among them so hardie:
               That durst assailȝie him more in fight,
               So dred they of his méekle might.
               There was a Baroun Maknaghtane,
               
               That in his heart greit kéepe hes tane
               Unto the Kings greit Cheualrie,
               And praisde him in his heart greitly,
               And to the Lord of Lorne said hee.
               Surelie Sir may now yée sée
               
                  Betane the starkest pondlayne
               That in your lifetime ye saw tane,
               For you Knight through his doughtie déed
               And through his couragious manhéed,
               Hes felled into a litle tide
               Three men of meekle might and pride,
               And stoneyed all our menyie swa,
               That efter him dare no man ga,
               And turnes so mony time his Stéed,
               It séemes of vs he hes no dread.
               Then can the Lord of Lorne say,
               It seemes it likes thée perfay,
               That he slayes yone gate our menyie.
               Sir said he, so our Lord me sée,
               To saue your peace, it is not sa,
               Bot whether he be friend or fa,
               That winnes praise of Cheualrie,
               Men sould speake thereof léelely,
               And sikkerly in all my time,
               I heard neuer in song, nor ryme,
               Tell of a man that so smertly,
               Encheefed so great Cheualry.
               Sik speaking of the King they made,
               And he efter his menyie rade,
               And to sic sauitie them led,
               Where he his foes nothing dred:
               And they of Lorn
                        •
                     
                   againe are gane,
               Meening the skaith that they had tane.
               The King that night his watches set,
               And gart ordaine that they might eat.
               And bade them comfort to them take,
               And at their mights merie make:
               For discomfort as then, said he,
               Is the worst thing in world may be:
               
                  For through méekle discomforting,
               Men ofttimes falles in desparing.
               And fra a man despared be,
               Then vtterly vanquisht is he:
               And fra the heart be discomfite,
               The bodie is not worth a myte:
               Therefore he said, attour all thing.
               Kéepe you well from discomforting,
               And thinke, though we now harmes féele.
               That GOD may yet reliefe vs well.
               Men reades oft of mony that were
               Far harder sted, then wee yet are:
               And syne our LORD sik grace them lent,
               That they came well to their intent:
               For Rome vmwhile so hard was sted,
               When Hanniball them vanquisht had:
               That of Kings with rich stane,
               That was off Knights fingers tane,
               He send thrée bolles to Carthage,
               
               And syne to Rome tooke his voyage,
               For to destroy the Citie all,
               And they within both great and small,
               Had fled when they saw his comming,
               Had not bene Scipio the ying,
               That ere they fled would them haue slaine,
               And so he turned them againe:
               And syne for to defend the Citie,
               Thrilled, and seruants made he frée,
               And made them Knights euerilkane:
               And of the Temple syne hes tane,
               The armes that their Elders bare,
               In name of victorie efféered there.
               And when they armed were and dight,
               Thay stalwart Carles were and wight,
               
                  And saw that they were frée alswa,
               They thought that they had rather ta
               The déed: than let the toun be tane:
               And with common assent as ane,
               They ished of the toun to fight,
               UUhere Hanniball of méekle might,
               Against them arrayed was:
               Bot through the might of Gods grace,
               It rainde so hard and so heauie,
               That there was none so hardie.
               That durst then into the plaine abide,
               But sped them all in hy to ride.
               The one part to the Palliouns,
               And the other part to the tounes.
               The raine thus letted the fighting:
               So did it twise thereafter syne.
               UUhen Hanniball saw this ferly,
               UUith all his great Cheualry,
               He left the towne, and held his way,
               And syne was put to sik assay,
               Through the power of that Citie,
               That his life and his land tint he,
               Sen so whéene and so vnworthie
               Man sik a Knight, and so mightie:
               Ye may well by example sée,
               That no man sould despared be,
               Nor let his heart be vanquisht all:
               For no mischiefe that euer may fall:
               For nane wate in how litle space,
               That GOD will sometime send his grace,
               Had they fled and their wayes tane,
               Their foes sould the toun haue tane:
               Therefore men that wéering are,
               Sould set their intent euermare,
               
                  To stand against their foes might,
               Outher with strength or els with flight:
               As they thinke to come to purpose,
               And gif that they were set in chose,
               To die or to liue cowardly,
               They should erer die Cheualrously.
               THus gate them comforted the King,
               And to comfort them in can bring,
               Old Stories of men that were
               Set into hard assayes feere,
               And that Fortoun contraried fast,
               And came to purpose at the last:
               Therefore he said, that he that would
               Their harts vndiscomfite hald▪
               
               Sould ay thinke Ithingly to bring
               All their purposes to good ending.
               As whylum did Cesar the worthie,
               That trauellde ay so busilie,
               With all his might following to make
               End of the purpose that he would take
               That him thought he had done right noght
               Ay to doe while he left oght:
               For thy great things enchéeued he,
               As men may in his Storie sée,
               Men may sée by his Ithand will,
               And it sould als accord to skill,
               That who takes purpose intierly,
               And followes on it Ithandly:
               Withoutten fainting or falding,
               With thy it be cunnable thing,
               Bot he the more be vnhappie,
               He sall encheeue it be partie
               Haue he lifedaies it may befall,
               That he sall well encheeue it all.
               
                  For they should none haue desparing,
               For to enchéeue a full greit thing:
               For if it fall, hee therefore fa
                     •
                  lye,
               The fault may ly in his trauailye,
               HEe preached to them on this maner,
               And fainȝied to make better cheare,
               Then hee had matter to, be far,
               For his cause yeed from ill to war,
               They were ay in so hard trauaile,
               While the Ladies began to faile:
               That might the trauele dree no mare,
               So did other als that were there,
               The Erle Iohn was one of thay,
               Of Atholl, when that hee saw say,
               The King thus bee discomfist twise,
               And so feill folke against him rise,
               And leaue him in sik trauell and dout,
               His heart began to faill all out:
               And to the King vpon a day,
               Hée said, if I durst to you say,
               Wee liue into so meekle dread,
               And of meat hes so meekle need,
               And is ay in sik trauelling,
               With Cald and Hunger and waking,
               That I set of my selfe in so,
               I count not of my life a stro.
               Thir angers may I no more dree.
               For thought mee worthed therefore to die.
               I mon sojourne where euer it bee.
               Leaue mee thereto for Charitie,
               The King saw that hee thus gate failȝied,
               And that hee was so sair trauailyied,
               Hee said Sir Erle wee shall soone see,
               And ordaine how it may best bee.
               
                  Where euer yee bee our Lord you send
               Grace, from your foes you to defend.
               With that in hy to him calde hee,
               They that were to him most priuie,
               Then among them they thought it best,
               And ordainde for the likeliest,
               That the Queene and the Erle also,
               And the Ladies in hy should go,
               With Neill the Bruce to Kildromy
               
               For they thought they should sikkerly
               Dwell there, while they were vittaild well
               For so starke was the Castell.
               That it with strenth was hard to get,
               While that within were men and meat,
               As they ordainde they did in hy,
               The Queene and all her company,
               Lap on their Horse, and foorth they fare,
               Men might haue seen who had been there,
               At lieue taking Ladies grat,
               And made cheekes with teares wat:
               And Knights for their loues sake
               Both sigh and weepe, and mourning mak.
               They kist their loues at their departing,
               The King bethought him of a thing
               That hee fra thyne on foote would goe,
               And take on foot both well and woe,
               And would no Horsemen with him haue,
               From them there all haill they gaue,
               To the Ladies that mister had.
               The Queene foorth her wayes rade,
               And safelie came to the Castell,
               Where her folke were receiued well.
               And eased well with meat and drinke:
               Yet might none ease let her to thinke
               
                  On the King that so hard was stad,
               That but two hunder with him had.
               The whilke them well gouerned ay,
               God helpe them that all mights may▪
               
            
            
               The paine of King Robert among the Mountaines
               THe Quéene dwelt thus in Kildromie,
               
               And the King and his companie.
               They were two hunder and no mo,
               Fra they had sent their Horse them fro:
               Wanred among the hie mountaines,
               Where hee and his oft tholled paines:
               For it was to the Winter néere,
               And so fell foes about them were,
               That all the Countrie them weirrayed.
               With so hard noy they them assayed.
               Of hunger, cold, and showres snell,
               Is none that liues that can tell,
               The King saw how his men were stad,
               And what annoy else that they had:
               And saw was Winter drawing néere,
               And that hée might on no manéere,
               Drée in the Hilles the cold lying▪
               
               Nor yet the long nights waking,
               Hée thought hée would to Kintyre goe,
               And so long sojourne there to moe,
               While Winter weather were away,
               And then hée thought but more delay,
               In the maneland for to arriue,
               And to the end his weirds driue.
               And for Kintyre lyes in the sea,
               Sir Neill Campbell before sent hée,
               For to get him Nauing and meat,
               A certaine time to him hée set,
               
                  When hée should méet him at the sea,
               Sir Neill Campbell with his Menȝie,
               Went his way but more letting.
               And left his brother with the King,
               And in ten dayes so trauelde hée,
               That hée gate shipping good plentie,
               And vittane in greit abundance,
               So made hée Noble Cheuisance:
               For his friends winned thereby,
               That helped him full willingly.
            
            
               How the King past-ouer Lochlowmond.
               
               THe King after that hée was gane,
               To Lochmabene the way hes tane:
               And came there on the third day:
               But there about no Boat fand they,
               That might them ouer the Water beare,
               Then were they noyed in greit maner.
               For it was far about to ga,
               And they were into doubt alswa:
               To méete their foes that spred were wide,
               Therefore endlang the Loeh side,
               They sought so busilie and so fast,
               While Iames of Dowglas at the last,
               Fand a litle sinking Bait,
               And it to land they drew full hait:
               But it so little was, that it
               Might but thrée ouer the Water flit.
               They send thereof word to the King,
               That was joyfull of that finding:
               And first into the Batte is gone,
               With him Dowglas: the third was one▪
               
               That rowed them ouer deliuerlie,
               And set them on the land all drie:
               
                  And rowed so oft syes to and fra,
               Fetching ay ouer twa and twa:
               That in a night and in a day,
               Commed ouer the Loch are thay:
               For some of them could swoome full well,
               And on his back beare a Fardell,
               So with swooming and with rowing,
               Thay brought them ouer, & all their thing.
               The King a whyle merily,
               Read to them that was him by,
               
                  Romanes of worthie Ferembras,
               That worthely ouercommen was,
               With the right doughtie Olyuer,
               
               And how the doughtie Dutch péeres were,
               Assieged into Egrymor,
               
               Where King Lanyn lay them before,
               With mo thousands than I can say,
               And but eleuen within were thay,
               And a woman: that were so stad,
               That they no meat there with them had▪
               
               But as they fra their foes it wan.
               Yet they conteined so them than,
               That they the toun held manlely,
               While that Richard of Normandy,
               
               Magre his foes warned the King,
               That was ioyfull of that tything:
               For he weind they had all bene slaine,
               Therefore he turned in hy againe:
               And wan Monetribill and past Flagote:
               And syne Lauyn, and all his flote,
               Despiteously discomfite he,
               And deliured his men all frée.
               And wan the Nailes and the Speare,
               And the Crowne that IESUS beare,
               
                  And of the Crosse a great partie,
               He wan through his great Cheualrie.
               The good King vpon this maner,
               Comforted them that were with him néere,
               And made him gaming and solace,
               While that his men ouerpassed was.
               WHen they had past the Water brade,
               Suppose they feill of foes had,
               They made them merie, and was blyth,
               Yet not for thy full feill syth,
               They had full great default of meat,
               And therefore Uennison to get,
               In twa parts are they gane.
               The King himselfe was into ane,
               And good Sir Iames of Dowglas,
               
               Into the other partie was,
               Then in the hight they held their way.
               And hunted lang whyle of the day,
               They sought Shawes, and seattes set:
               Bot litle good gate they to eat.
               Then hapned in that time through eace,
               That the Erle of Lennox was,
               Among the hilles neare thereby,
               And when he heard sik blow and cry,
               He had wonder what it might be,
               And on sik maner spyed he,
               That he knew well it was the King,
               And then but ony more dwelling,
               With all them of his company,
               Right to the King he went in hy.
               So blyth and so ioyfull, that he
               Might on no maner blyther be:
               For he the King weind had béene dead,
               And he was also will of read:
               
                  That he durst rest into no place,
               Sen that the King discomfite was
               At Methwen: he heard neuer tithing,
               That euer certaine was of the King:
               Therefore in full great daintie,
               The King full homely hailsed he,
               And he him welcommed right blythly,
               And kissed him full tenderly,
               And all the Lords that were there,
               UUere ioyfull of their méeting there.
               And kissed him in great daintie,
               It was great pitie for to sée,
               How they for ioy and pitie grat,
               When that they with their fellowes met,
               That they weind had bene dead: for thy
               They welcommed him more hartfully:
               And he for pitie grat againe:
               That neuer of méeting was so faine.
               Though I say, that they grat soothly,
               It was no gréeting properly,
               For I trow traistly that greeting,
               Comes to men through misliking:
               And that none may but anger greet,
               Bot it be women that can wéet
               Their chéekes, when them list with teares
               The whilk oft times none ill them déeres.
               Bot I wate right well but léesing,
               Where euer men hes of sik gréeting,
               That méekle ioy and great pitie,
               May gar men so amooued be,
               That water fra their heart will rise.
               And wéet their éene on sik a wise,
               That it is like to be gréeting,
               Though it be not like in all thing.
               
                  For when men greetes inkerly,
               The heart is sorowfull or angry:
               Bot for pitie, I trow greeting,
               Be nothing but an opening
               Of heart: that shawes the tendernes,
               Of reuth, that in it closed is.
               THe Barons vpon this maner.
               Through Gods grace assembled were
               The Erle had meat, and that plentie,
               And with blyth heart, them it gaue he:
               And they, eate it with full good will,
               And sought none other sauce theretill,
               Bot appetite that oft men takes,
               For well scowred was their stomackes.
               They ate and dranke sik as they had.
               And to the Lord sik louing made,
               And thanked him with full good cheare,
               That they were met on that maner,
               The King at them then asked yarne,
               Sen he them saw, how they had farne:
               And they full piteously can tell,
               Of auentures that them befell:
               And great annoyes. and pouertie.
               The King thereat had great pitie,
               And tauld them piteously againe,
               The noy, the trauell, and the paine.
               That he had tholed sen he them saw,
               Was none among them hie, nor law:
               But he hath pitie, and pleasance,
               When he heard make remembrance
               Of the perils that passed were.
               For when men ought at liking are,
               To tell of paines passed by,
               Pleases the hearing wondrously.
               
                  And to rehearse their olde diseases,
               Does them oft comfort, nor eases.
               With thy thereto follow no blame,
               Dishonour, Wickednes▪ nor Shame.
            
            
               How the King past to the Sea, and how the Erle of Lennox was chaist.
               AFter the meat soone raise the King,
               When hée had leaued his speaking,
               And busked him with his Menȝie,
               And went in hy toward the sea,
               Wher Sir Neill Campbell soone them met
               Both with shippes and with meat,
               Sailes, Aires, and other thing.
               That was spéedfull to their faring.
               Then shipped they withoutten mair,
               Some went to Stéere, and some to Aire,
               And rowed about the Ile of Boote,
               
               Men might sée mony fréelie foote,
               About the Coastes there bowning,
               As they on Aires were rowing
               And néeues that stalwart were and square
               That wont to span greit speares were.
               So spanned Aires that men might sée,
               Féele of their Hide left on the trée:
               For all was doing, Knight and Knaue,
               Was none that other disport might haue,
               From Stéere, from Aire and from rowing
               To further them in their flitting,
               But in the samine time that they,
               Were shipped, as yee heard mée say,
               The good Erle of Lennox was,
               (I cannot tell you through what cace)
               Left behind all with his Gaillay,
               While the King was far on his way.
               
                  And when that they of his Countrie,
               Wist, that so left behind was hee,
               By sea with shippes they him sought,
               And hee that saw that hée was nought
               Of pith, to feght with these traitours:
               And that hee had no néere succours,
               Nor the Kings flote: for thy
               Hée sped him after them in hy:
               But the traitours him followed so,
               That they well neere can him ouerta:
               For all the might that hee might doe,
               Aye néere and neere they came him to.
               And when hée saw they were so neere:
               That hee might well their manance heare,
               And saw them néere and néere come aye,
               Then to his Menȝie can hee say,
               But if wee find some subtiltie,
               Wée shall all soone ouertaken bée:
               Therefore I réede but more letting,
               That outtaken our arming.
               Wee cast all thing into the sea,
               And fra our ship so ligh
                     •
                  ed bée,
               Wee shall all row and spéed vs so,
               That wee shall well escape them fro,
               With that they shall make dwelling,
               Upon the sea to take our thing,
               And wee shall row but resting aye,
               Till wée escaped bée them fray
               As hee diuised so haue they do one,
               And their ship haue they lighted soone,
               And rowed soone with all their might,
               And when their ship was made so light.
               Shee raiked sliding through the sea,
               And when their fo
                     •
                  s can them see.
               
                  Before them alwayes maire and maire.
               The things that there fleeting were
               They tooke and turned syne againe,
               And so they leesed all their paine.
               WHen that the Erle on this maner,
               And his Menȝie escaped were.
               After the King hee can him hy,
               That then with all his companie
               Into Kintyre arriued was.
               The Erle hee told him all the cace,
               How hee was chased on the sea,
               With them that should his owne men bee:
               And how hee had beene tane but dout,
               War not it that hee wapped out.
               All that hee had him light to ma,
               And so escaped hee them fra
               Sir Erle, said the King perfay,
               If thou escaped is away,
               Of thy tynsall is no plenyeing:
               But I will tell thee well ane thing:
               That there will fall thee greit folly,
               To passe oft from my companie:
               For oft syes when thou art away,
               Thou art set in full hard assay:
               Therefore mee thinke it best for thee,
               To hold thee alway néere by mee.
               Sir, said the Erle, it shall bee so,
               I shall no wayes passe far you fro,
               Till GOD giue grace wee bee of might,
               Against our foes to hold our right.
               
                  ANgus of the Iles that time was syre
               And Lord, and leader of Kintyre.
               
               The King right well receiued hee,
               And vndertooke his man to bee:
               
                  And him and his on mony wise,
               Hee abandounded to his seruice:
               And for more sikkernesse gaue him syne,
               His Castle of Donabardyne:
               To dwell therein at his liking,
               Full greitly thanked him the King.
               And receiued his seruice:
               Yet not for thy on mony wise,
               Hée was dreading for treasoun aye
               And therefore as I heard men say,
               Hée trusted in none sikkerlie,
               While that hée knew him vtterlie,
               But what kin dread that euer hee had,
               Fair countenance to him hee made,
               And in Donabardyne dayes three:
               Hée sojounrde still with his Menyie:
               Syne gart his men all make them yare,
               Toward Ranchoyn by sea to fare,
               That is ane Ile into the sea,
               And may well in the midway bee,
               Betwixt Kintyre and Ireland,
               
               Where als greit streames are rinnand,
               And als perillous and mair,
               For to saile them in ship fair,
               And the greit Raes of Britanye,
               
               Or Straites of Marroke into Spainye,
               
               Their Shipes to sea they set.
               And made readie but longer let,
               Ankers, Rapes, both Saile, and Aire,
               And all that needed to Ship-fare,
               When they were boun, to ship they went,
               The wind was well to their intent,
               They raised Sailes, and swith they fare,
               And by the Mule they passed there.
               
                  And entred soone into the Raes,
               
               Whereat the storme so sturdy was,
               With waues wyde that bolning were,
               UUaltering as hilles here and there.
               The ships ouer the waues slade,
               For wind at will blowing they had:
               But not for thy, who there had bene,
               A great stertling he might haue séene
               Of ships. For while some would be
               Right on the waues summitie:
               And some slade fra the hight so law,
               Right as they downe to hell would draw:
               Syne on the waues stert suddenly,
               And other ships that were by,
               Delyuerly drew to the Déepe,
               It was great Cunning for to kéepe,
               Their Takle into sik a thrang,
               And waite sik waues ay amang,
               That reft them oft sight of the land.
               When that they to it were marchand.
               And when ships were sayling néere,
               The sea would rise on sik maner▪
               
               That of the waues the waltering hight,
               Would reaue them oft off their sight:
               Yet into Raughring sikkerly,
               They arriued ilkone safely,
               Right blyth, and glade that they were sa,
               Escaped the hiddeous waues fra.
               IN Raughring they arriued are,
               And to the land they went but mare,
               Armed vpon their best maner:
               When the folke that there winning were,
               Saw men of armes in their Countrie,
               Arriue into sik quantitie:
               
                  They fled in hy with their Cattell,
               Right toward a stalward Castell,
               That in the land was néere them by:
               Men might heare women highly cry,
               And flée with Cattell here and there:
               Bot the Kings folke that were
               Delyuer of foot, them can ouer-hy,
               And them arréested haillely,
               And brought them to the King againe.
               So that none of them all was slaine.
               Then with them treated so the King,
               That they to fulfill his yarning,
               Became his men euerilkane:
               And hes him truely vndertane,
               That they and theirs loude and still,
               Sould be in all things at his will:
               And while him liked there to leind,
               Euerilk day they sould him send
               Uittaile for thrée hunder men:
               And ay for Lord they sould him ken,
               So that their Fortresses might be,
               For all his men their owne frée.
               The Cunnand on this wise was made,
               And on the morne but longer bade:
               Of all Raughring both man and page
               Kneeled, and made the King homage,
               And therewith swore to him fewtie,
               To serue him into léele lawtie:
               And held him therewith léele Cunnand.
               For while he dwelt into that land,
               They gaue meat to his companie,
               And serued him right faithfullie.
            
            
               
               How the Queene, and other Ladies were tane, and prisoned, and her men slaine
               
                  AT Raughring leaue we now the King,
                  In rest withoutten barganing:
                  And of his foes a whyle speake we,
                  That throgh their might and their poustie,
                  Made sik a persecutioun,
                  So hard, so straite, and so felloun,
                  On them, that to him louing were,
                  Or kyn or friend in ony maner.
                  That it to heare was great pitie,
                  For they spared none of no degrée,
                  That they trowed his friends were,
                  Nouther of the Kirke nor Seculare.
                  For of Glasgow Bishop Robert,
                  
                  And Marcus of Maine they stythly spared
                  Both in fetters and in prisoun,
                  And als good Cristall of Setoun
                  
                  Into Lochdon betrayed was,
                  Through a Disciple of Iudas.
                  
                  
                     Maknaght a false Traitour that ay
                  Was with him dwelling night and day,
                  Whome to he made good company,
                  It was far war than traitoury,
                  For to betray sik a persoun,
                  So Noble, and of so good Renoun:
                  Bot thereof had he no pitie,
                  In Hell condemned mot he be.
                  For when he him betrayed had,
                  The Englishmen right with him rade
                  In hy in England to the King:
                  And gart draw him, and head and hing,
                  Withoutten pitie or mercie,
                  It was great sorrow sikkerlie,
                  
                     That so worthie a person as he,
                  Sould in sik maner hanged be.
                  Thus gate ended the worthines
                  Of Craufurd als, Sir Reynald we
                        •
                     ,
                  And Sir Bryse als of the Blaire,
                  
                  Were hanged in a barne at Aire.
                  
                  The Quéene and Dame Mariory,
                  
                  Her Doughter that syne worthely,
                  Was coupled into Gods band,
                  With Walter Stewart of Scotland,
                  
                  That would in no wise longerly
                  In the Castle of Kildromy,
                  
                  To bide a Siege. Bot ridyng raith
                  With Knights and with Squyars baith,
                  To Rosse, right to the gyrth of Thane.
                  
                  Bot that trauell they made in vaine.
                  For they of Rosse they would not beare
                  For them no blame, nor no danger.
                  Out of the gyrth them als hes tane,
                  And syne hes send them euerilkane:
                  Right into England to the King,
                  That gart draw all the men and hing,
                  And put the Ladies into prison,
                  Some in Castle and some in Dungeoun.
                  It was great pitie for to heare,
                  Folke troubled on sik maner.
               
            
            
               How Englishmen sieged the Castell of Kildromy.
               
               
                  THat time was into Kildromy,
                  
                  Good men that were wight, & worthy,
                  Sir Neill the Bruce this wate ye well,
                  And the Erle also of Atholl,
                  
                  The Castle right well vittailde thay,
                  And meat, and Fuell they can puruay:
                  
                     And enforced the Castell so,
                  That them thoght no strength might ta it,
                  And when it to the King was told
                  Of England: how they shoope to hold
                  The Castell: hee was all angry,
                  And calde his Sonne to him in hy,
                  The Eldest and appearand aire,
                  A young Batchler, starke and faire,
                  Sir Edward of Carnauerane:
                  That was the starkest man of ane,
                  That might bee found in a Countrie:
                  Prince of Wales that time was hee,
                  And hee gart call Erles two,
                  
                     Glochester and Harfoorde were tho,
                  And bade them wend into Scotland,
                  
                  And set a Siege with stalwart hand,
                  To the Castell of Kildromy,
                  
                  And the holders 
                        〈◊〉
                      haillily,
                  Hee bade destroy them but ransoun,
                  Or bring them to him in prisoun.
                  WHē this mandament they had tane
                  They assembled an Host on ane:
                  And to the Castell went in hy,
                  And it assieged vigorously:
                  And mony a time it hard assailyied:
                  And yet to take it oft they failyied:
                  For they within were right worthie,
                  And them defended doughtely,
                  And repugned their foes oft againe:
                  Some baissed, some wounded, & some slain
                  And mony a time ishe they would,
                  And bargaine at the Barras hold,
                  And wound their foes oft and sla,
                  Surely they them contemned sa,
                  
                     That they thereout despaired were,
                  And through England againe to fare,
                  For so starke saw they the Castell,
                  And thought that it was weaponde well,
                  And saw the men defend them sa,
                  That they none hope had it to ta,
                  None had they done all that sessoun,
                  Gif it not war right false treasoun.
                  For there within was a Traitour,
                  A false Lurdane, a Losyngeour▪
                  
                  
                     Osbarne to name made the tressoun,
                  I wate not for what enchesoun:
                  Nor whome with hee made the conuine,
                  But as they said, that were within,
                  Hee tooke a Coulter hoat glowing,
                  That red was in a fire burning:
                  And went into the meekle Hall,
                  That then with corne was filled all.
                  And high vp in the mow it did,
                  But it full long was not there hid,
                  For men sayes oft that fire nor pride,
                  But disconering may no man hide:
                  For the pompe of the pride foorthshawes,
                  Or else the greit boast as it blawes,
                  Nor there may no man fire so couer,
                  But it shall low or reeke discouer.
                  So it fell heere: for fire so cleare
                  Soone through ye thicke boord can appeare.
                  First as a Sterne▪ syne as a Moone,
                  And well braider thereafter soone.
                  The fire out soon in bleases brast,
                  And the reeke raise so wonder fast:
                  The fire ouer all the Castell spred,
                  There might with force no man it red,
                  
                     Then they within drew to the wall,
                  That at that time was battailde all
                  Within, right as it was without.
                  That battalling withoutten doubt,
                  Saued their liues, for to brake,
                  Fire blasts that them would ouertake.
                  And when their foes that mischiefe saw
                  To armes went they in a thraw.
                  And assailled the Castell fast,
                  Where they durst come for fires blast▪
                  
                  But they within that mister had,
                  So greit defence and worthie made,
                  That they full oft their foes rushed,
                  For no kin perill they refused.
                  Nor trauell for to saue their liues,
                  But Weird, that to the end all driues,
                  The Worlds things them so trauelled:
                  That they on two sids were assailled.
                  Within with fire, that them so broolyied:
                  Without with folke that them so tuilyied▪
                  
                  That they brint magre theirs the ȝet,
                  But for the fire that was so het,
                  They durst not enter so soone in hy,
                  Therefore their folke they gart rely,
                  And went to rest for it was night,
                  Till on the morne that day was light.
                  AT sik mischiefe as yée may sée,
                  Were they within, which was pitie,
                  They them defended doughtely:
                  Contemning them so manfully,
                  That they ere day throw mekill paine,
                  Had timmered vp the ȝat againe:
                  But on the morne when day was light.
                  And sunne was shinning faire and bright:
                  
                     Then they without in haill battaile,
                  Came puruayed ready to assaile:
                  But they within they were so stad,
                  That they not meate nor fewell had.
                  Where with they might the Castell hald,
                  Treated first, and syne them yald,
                  To bee into the Kings will.
                  That aye to Scottish men was ill:
                  As soone after well was knawne:
                  For they were hanged all and drawne.
                  When this Cunnand thus treated was,
                  And affirmed with sikkernesse,
                  They tooke them off the Castle soone,
                  And in short time so haue they doone,
                  That all a quartter of Snawdoun,
                  
                  Right to the eird they tumbled downe,
                  And toward England held their way:
                  But when that King Edward heard say,
                  How Neill the Bruce held Kildromy,
                  
                  Against his sonne so stalwatrly,
                  Hee gathered greit Cheualry,
                  And toward Scotland went in hy.
                  And as hée in Northumberland,
                  
                  Was with his greit rout rydand.
                  A sicknesse tooke him by the way,
                  And put him to so hard assay,
                  That hee might neither gang nor ryde,
                  Him behooued magre his abyde,
                  Into an Hamelet was thereby,
                  A little towne and vnworthy,
                  With greit paine they him hither brought,
                  Hée was so stad, that he na moght
                  His breath but with greit paines draw:
                  Or speake but if it were well law.
                  
                     But then he bad they sould him say,
                  What place was that where he in lay.
                  Sir, they said, Burgh in the sand:
                  They call this place into this land.
                  Call they it Burgh, alas (said he)
                  My hope is now fordone to me:
                  For I weind neuer to thole the paine
                  Of death: while I through méekle maine,
                  The Burgh of Ierusalem had tane,
                  My life there weind I sould be gane.
                  In Burgh, I wist well I sould die,
                  But I was neither wise nor slie,
                  To other Burghes help for to ta.
                  Now may I no wise further ga,
                  Thus plenyied he him of his folie,
                  As he had matter sikkerlie.
                  When he weind to wit certaintie
                  Of it, that none might certein be.
                  Yet some men said, inclosde he had
                  A Spreit that him an answere made,
                  Of things that he would inquyre:
                  But he was foole withoutten wéere,
                  That gaue traist to that Creature:
                  For Feynds are of sik nature,
                  That they to Mankinde haue enuie:
                  For they will on no wise truelie,
                  That they that well are liuing here,
                  Sall win the Siege, where fra they were
                  Tumbled through their méekle pride.
                  Wherethrough oft times will betide,
                  That when Feynds distrenyied are,
                  They will appeare, and make answere,
                  Through force of coniuration:
                  But they so false are, and so felloun,
                  
                     That they make ay their answering,
                  Into double vnderstanding,
                  To deceiue them that will them trow.
                  Ensample will I set you now,
                  Of a Were, as I heard tell,
                  Betwixt France and the Flemings fell.
                  The Erle of Flanders Mother was
                  A Negromancer, and Sathanas
                  She raised: and him asked syne,
                  What sould worth of the feghtyne,
                  Betwixt the French King, and her Sonne.
                  And he (as all time he was wone)
                  Into deceit made her answere,
                  And said to her thir verses here.
               
               
                  Versus Bellide BOSBEK.
                  Rex ruet in bello, tumulíque carebit honore.
                  FERRANDVS (comitissa) tuus, mea chara Minerva,
                  Parisios veniet, magna comitante caterva.
               
               
                  This was the spéech he made perfay,
                  And is in English thus to say.
                  The King sall fall in the feghting,
                  And sall failye honour of eirding,
                  And thy Ferrand, thy Nephew, my Deare,
                  Sall right to Paris wend but wéere:
                  Following him a great companie,
                  Of Noble men, and of worthie.
                  This is the sentence of the Saw,
                  That he in Latine can her shaw.
                  He called her his deare Minerue.
                  
                  For she was ay wont for to serue
                  Him▪ till she léesed at his deuise:
                  And for she made the samine seruice,
                  
                     His Minerue and her called he:
                  And als through his subtilitie,
                  He cald her Deare, her to deceiue:
                  That she the titter should conceiue,
                  Of his spéech the vnderstanding,
                  That most pleased to her liking.
                  His double spéech her so deceiued,
                  That through it her sonne the dead receiued:
                  For she was of his answere blyth,
                  And to her sonne she told it swyth,
                  And bade him to the battell spéed,
                  And he sould Uictor be but dread:
                  And he that heard her sermoning,
                  Sped him in hy to the fighting.
                  Where he discomfite was and shent,
                  And taken and to Paris sent:
                  But in the fighting not for thy,
                  The King through his Cheualry,
                  Was laid at eird and laimed baith:
                  But his men horsed him well raith.
                  And when Ferrandus Mother heard,
                  How her sonne in the battell farde:
                  And that he was so discomfite:
                  She raisde the ill Spirit tyte,
                  And asked him why he lyed had,
                  Of the answere he to her made,
                  And he said, that he said sooth all.
                  I said hée, that the King sould fall
                  In the battell, and so did he,
                  And failyéed eirding, as men may sée,
                  And I said hée, that thy sonne sould go
                  To Paris: and he did right so:
                  Following him sik a menyie,
                  That neuer in his lifetime, he
                  
                     Had sik a Menye into leading.
                  Now sees thou, I made no léesing.
                  The Wife conuicted was perfay,
                  And durst no more to him then say.
                  Thus gate through double vnderstanding,
                  That bargaine came to sik ending,
                  That the one part deceiued was.
                  Right so fell it vpon this cace,
                  At Ierusalem trowed he,
                  Grauen into the Burgh to be,
                  At the whilk Burgh into the sand,
                  He swelt right in his owne land.
                  And when he to the death was néere,
                  The folke that at Kildromy were,
                  Came with the prisoners they had tane:
                  And soone vnto the King are gane,
                  And for to comfort him they tauld,
                  How they the Castle to them yald:
                  And how they to his will were brought.
                  To doe with them what euer him thought.
                  Asked what they sould with them do?
                  Then looked he angerlie them to,
                  And said girning, gar hang and draw.
                  It was great wonder of sik saw:
                  That he, that to the death was néere,
                  Sould answere vpon sik maner,
                  Withoutten meaning of mercie:
                  How might he trust on him to crie,
                  That soothfastlie déemes all thing,
                  To haue mercie for his crying.
                  Of him that through his fellonie,
                  Into sik point had no mercie.
                  His men his mandament haue done,
                  And he died thereafter soone.
                  
                     And syne was brought to Burying,
                  His Sonne syne after him was King.
               
            
            
               How Iames of Dowglas past into Arrane.
               
               TO King Robert againe goe wée
               In Raughring with his Menȝie
               Lay▪ till al the winter neer was gan
               And of that Ile his meat hes tane
               
                  Iames of Dowglas was angrie,
               That they so long should idle lie.
               And Sir Robert Boyd said hée,
               The poore folke of this Countrie,
               Are Charged vpon greit maner,
               Of vs that idle lyes here.
               I haue heard say: that in Arrane,
               
               In a strong Castle made of stane,
               Are Englishmen, that with strong hand,
               Holds the Lordship of that Land.
               Goe wée hidder, and well may fall,
               Annoy them in some thing wée shall.
               Sir Robert said, I grant theretill,
               To ly here more were little skill:
               Therefore to Arrane passe will wée.
               For I know right well the Countrie,
               And the Castle also know I.
               Wee shall come there so priuilie,
               That they shall haue no perceiuing,
               Nor yet knowledge of our comming,
               And wée shall neere inbushment bee,
               Where wee their comming well may sée.
               So shall it on no maner fall,
               But catch them in some wise wee shall:
               UUith that they busked them on ane,
               And at the King their leaue hes tane.
               
                  And went soone foorth vpon their way,
               Into Kintyre soone come are they:
               Syne rowed alwaes by the land,
               While that the night was néere at hand,
               Then to Arrane they held their way,
               And safely their arriued they.
               And in a Glen their Gaillay dreugh,
               And syne it hailled well eneugh.
               Their Takle aires, and all their Stéere,
               They had all on the same maner:
               And held their way then in the night,
               So that ere Day was dawen light:
               They were enbusht the Castle néere,
               Armed vpon their best maner:
               And though they wet were and weary,
               And long fasting all hungrie:
               They thought to hold them all priuie.
               Untill that they their time might sée,
               Sir Iohn the Hastings at that tide,
               With Knights of full méekle pride,
               And with Squyers and Yemanrie,
               And had a well greit company:
               Was in the Castle of Brathwyke:
               And oft time when it would him lyke,
               Hee went to hunt with his menyie,
               And so the Land abandound hée.
               That none durst warne to doe his will,
               Hee was into the Castle still,
               The time that Iames of Dowglas,
               
               So néere hand by enbushed was,
               So hapned at that time through chance,
               That with vittaile and purveyance,
               And with cléething and als arming,
               The day before in the Euening,
               
                  The Under Wardane arriued was,
               With three Baittes right néere the place,
               Where the folke I spake of aire,
               Full priuily enbushed were.
               Soone from the Baittes saw them goe,
               Of Englishmen thretty and moe,
               Charged all with sundrie things,
               Some bare wine, and some armings,
               The remanent all charged were,
               With things of sundrie maner.
               And other sundrie yéed them by,
               And they were Masters idlely:
               They that enbushed were them saw,
               And then withoutten dread or aw,
               Their bushment on them they brake,
               And slew all that they might ouertake.
               They cryed hiddeously and hie,
               And they that dreeding were to die,
               Right as beastes can rairre and cry,
               And they slew them without mercy,
               So that into the samine stead,
               Were neer so fourtie that were dead.
               When they that in the Castle were,
               Heard the folke so cry and raire,
               They ished foorth to the fighting,
               But when the Dowglas saw their comming,
               His men to him hee can rely,
               And went to meete them hastely.
               And when they of the Castle saw,
               Him come on them but dreed or aw,
               They fled withoutten more debate,
               And they them followed to the yate,
               And slew of them as they in past:
               But they their ȝets barred so fast,
               
                  That they at them might doe no mair,
               Therefore they left them ilke one there,
               And turned to the place againe,
               Where that the men before was slaine,
               And when they that within the Baittes,
               Saw them comming, and what gaites
               They had discomfite their Menyie,
               In hy they put them to the sey,
               And rowed fast with all their maine,
               But the wind was them againe:
               And so greit the Land birst rise,
               That they might wéeld the sea no wise.
               Nor they durst not come to the Land,
               But held them there so long hobland.
               That of thrée Baits drowned two,
               And when Dowglas saw it was so,
               Hée tooke the arming and the cléething,
               Uittaile, and wine, and other thing,
               That they found there: and held their way
               Right glad and joyfull of their prey.
               ¶ On this maner Iames of Dowglas,
               
               And his Menyie through Gods grace,
               Were well relieued with arming.
               And with Uittaile and als Cléething.
               Syne to a strait they held their way,
               And them full manlie gouernde they,
               While on the tent day that the King,
               With all that were in his leading,
               Arriued were in that Countrie,
               With threttie Gaillaies come and thrée,
               The King arriued in Arrane,
               
               And syne to the Land is hee gane:
               And in a towne tooke his Harbrie,
               And syne speared full speciallie,
               
                  If ony men could tell tithand,
               Of ony strangers in that land.
               Yes said a woman, Sir, perfay,
               Of strange men, I can you say,
               That are come into this Countrie,
               And short while syne through their bounty
               They discomfited our Wardane,
               And mony of his men haue slaine,
               And to a stalward place hereby,
               Repaireth all their company.
               Dame, said the King, wilt thou me wis,
               To the place where their repaire is,
               I sall reward thée but léesing:
               For they are all of my dwelling,
               And I right blythly would them sée,
               And as I trow, so would they me.
               Yes Sir: said she, I will blythly,
               Goe with you and your company,
               While that I shew you their repaire.
               That is enough, my sister faire,
               Now goe we forward, said the King.
               Then went they foorth but more letting
               Following her. And she them led,
               While at the last she shew the stéed
               To the King in a woodie Glen:
               And said, Sir, yonder saw I the men
               That ye spéere after, make ludging,
               Here trow I, is their repairing:
               The King then blew his horne in hy,
               And gart the men that were him by,
               Hold them still in priuitie,
               And syne againe his horne blew he:
               
                  Iames of Dowglas heard him blow,
               And well the blast soone can he know.
               
                  And said, surely yone is the King,
               I ken him well by his blowing,
               The third time therewith als he blew,
               And Sir Robert Boyd him knew:
               And said, yone is the King but dréed,
               Go we will foorth to him good spéed,
               Then went they to the King in hy,
               And to him inclined courteously,
               And blythly welcommed them the King,
               That was ioyfull of their méeting,
               And kissed them, and speared syne
               How had they farne in their huntyne?
               And they him told all but léesing:
               Syne loued they GOD of their méeting,
               Then with the King to his harbry
               They went, both blyth and ioyfully.
            
            
               How the King sent his man to spy in Carrik
                  ▪ who were to him frendly.
               THE King vpon the other day,
               To his priuie men can say:
               Ye know all well, and well may sée,
               How ye are out of your Countrie
               Banisht through Englishmens might,
               And that which ours sould be with right,
               Through their mastrie they occupie,
               And would also without mercie,
               Gif they had might, destroy vs all:
               But GOD forbid, that it sould fall
               To vs, as they make menassing,
               Then were there no recouering,
               And manhéed bids vs, that we
               To procure vengeance busie be:
               
                  For ye may sée we haue thrée things,
               That makes vs admonishings.
               For to be worthie, wise, and wight,
               And to annoy them at our might.
               One is, our liues safetie:
               That could in no wise saued be.
               Gif they had vs at their liking.
               The other that makes vs egging,
               Is that they our possession
               Holds with strength against reason:
               The third is, the ioy that we abide,
               Gif that it happens (as well may tide)
               That we haue victorie and maistrie,
               To ouercome all their fellonie.
               Therefore we sould our hearts raise,
               So that no mischiefe sould vs abase:
               And shape alwayes to that ending,
               That beares in it mense and louing:
               And therefore, Lordings, if that ye sée,
               Among you, that it spéedfull be:
               I will send a man in Carrik,
               
               To spie and speare how the Kinrik
               Is led? and who is frend or fo.
               And gif he sees we land may to:
               On Turneberyse-nuke he may
               Make a fire on a certane day,
               To make takning to vs, that we
               May there arriue in safetie:
               And if he sees, we may not sa,
               Looke on no wise the fire he ma.
               So may we thereof haue witting
               Of our passage and our dwelling.
               To this spéech all assented are,
               And there the King withoutten mare,
               
                  Calde one that was to him priuie,
               And borne was of Carrik Countrie:
               And charged him in life, and mair,
               As ye heard he deuised aire:
               And set him certaine day to mo
               The 
                     •
                  ire: gif he saw it were so,
               
                  
                     •
                  hat they had possibilitie,
               To maintaine wéere in that Countrie:
               And he that was right well in will,
               His Lords yarning to fulfill,
               
                  
                     •
                  s he that worthie was and léele,
               And could his secret well concéele.
               Said, he was boun into all thing,
               For to fulfill his commanding,
               And said, he sould do so wiselie,
               That no reproofe sould after lie.
               Syne at the King his leaue hes tane,
               And foorth vpon his way is gane.
               NOw goes the Messenger his way,
               That hight Cuthbert (as I heard say)
               In Carrik soone arriued he:
               And passed through all the Countrie:
               But he found sew therein perfay,
               That good would of his Master say.
               For feill of them durst not for dread,
               And other some right into déed,
               Were faes to the Noble King,
               That rewed syne their barganing,
               Both hie and low the land was then,
               All occupied with Englishmen:
               That despised attour all thing,
               
                  Robert the Bruce the doughtie King.
               
                  Carrik was giuen then whollelie
               To Sir Henrie the Lord Percie
                  ▪
               
               
                  That into Turnberyse Castle then,
               Was well neere with thrée hundreth men,
               And danted so all haile the Land,
               That all to him were obeyand.
               This Cuthbert saw his fellony,
               And saw the folke so haillely,
               Be worthen English, both rich and poore,
               That he to none durst him discouer:
               But thought to leaue the fire vnmade:
               Syne to his Master went but bade:
               All that conuyne to him to tell,
               That was so angrie, and so fell.
            
            
               Of the fire the King saw burning
               THE King that into Arrane lay.
               When that commin was the day,
               That hee set to his Messenger,
               As I to you deuised aire,
               After the fire hee looked fast,
               And soone as the Noone was past,
               Hee thought well that hee saw a fire,
               By Turneberie burning faire and shyre,
               And to his men hée couth it shaw,
               Ilkane thought well that they it saw,
               Then with blyth heart the folke can cry.
               Good King, spéed you deliuerly,
               So that wée soone in the Euening,
               Arriue withoutten perceiuing.
               I grant (said hée) now make you yare,
               God further vs into our fare:
               Then in short time men might them sée,
               Shoot all their Gaillayes to the sea,
               And bare to sea, both Aire and Stéer:
               And other things that néedfull were.
               
                  And as the King vpon the sand,
               Was ganging vp and downe bydand,
               His menyie till they ready were:
               His Hostes came right to him there,
               And when that shee him hailsed had,
               A priuie speake shee to him made:
               And said, Take good kéepe to my Saw,
               For ere yée passe, I shall you shaw,
               Of your Fortune a greit partie,
               And attour all thing especially,
               A wittering héere I shall you ma.
               What end that your purpose shall ta.
               For in this Land is none truely,
               Wats things to come so well as I.
               Yée passe now foorth in your voyage,
               To venge the harme and the outrage,
               That Englishmen hes to you done,
               But yee wat not what kin Fortune.
               Yée mon drée in your weraying,
               But wit yee well without léesing,
               That fra yee haue now taken Land,
               There shall no might nor strength of hand
               Gare you passe out of that Countrie,
               UUhile all to you abandounde bée,
               Within short time yee shall bée King,
               And haue the Land at your lyking,
               And ouercome your foes all,
               But fell annoyes féele yee shall,
               Or that your purpose end haue tane:
               But yee shall them ouerdriue ilkane.
               And that yée trow this sikkerly,
               My two sonnes with you shall I
               Send: to take part of your 
                     ••
                  auaile,
               For I wot well, they shall not faile.
               
                  To be rewarded well at right,
               When yee are raised to your hight.
               ¶ The King that heard all her carping
               Thanked her in méekle thing,
               For shee comforted him some deill,
               And hée trowed not all well
               Her spéech: For hee had greit ferly,
               How hée should wit it sikkerly.
               As it was wonderfull perfay,
               How ony mans science may
               Know things that are to come,
               Determinatly, either all or some,
               But if that hée inspired were,
               Of him that all thinges euermare
               Sées, in his owne Prescience,
               As it were aye in his presence.
               As was Dauid and Ieremy,
               
               
                  Samuell, Ioseph, and Esay.
               
               That through his holy grace could tell
               Feill thinges that afterwards befell,
               But these Prophets so thin are sowne,
               That none in eird may now bee knowne.
               But feill folke are so curious,
               And to wit things so couetous,
               That they trow through their great Clergie,
               Or else through their deuiltie,
               Of thir twaine maners makes finding,
               Of things to come to haue knowing,
               Ane of them is Astrologie,
               Wherethrough Clerkes that are wittie,
               May know Conjunction of Planets,
               And whidder that their course them sets,
               In soft Sieges, or in angrie,
               And of the Heauen all haillelie,
               
                  How that the dispositioun
               Wirkes vpon things héere downe:
               On Regions or on Climates,
               That all where worketh not all gaites.
               Yet may they faile the trueth to say,
               In things that them happen may.
               For whether that man inclined bee,
               To vertue or iniquitie:
               Hée may right well refraine his will,
               Either through vertue or through skill,
               And to the contrare turne it all,
               As hath béene mony time séene fall,
               That men kyndlie to ill giuen,
               Through their greit wit away haue driuen
               Their ill: and worthen of renowne,
               Magre the constellatioun.
               As Aristotle, if as men réedes,
               Hée had followed his kindly deedes:
               Hée had beene false and couetous,
               But his wit made him vertuous,
               And syne that man may on this wise,
               Worke against the course, that is
               Principall cause of their deeming,
               Mée thinke they déeme no certaine thing,
               Negromancie another is,
               That kens men on sundrie wise:
               Through stalwart Conjuration:
               And als through Exhortation
               To gar Sprites to them appeare.
               And giue them answere on seir maner,
               As whylum did the Pithonesse,
               That when Saul abased was,
               Of the Philistimes might,
               Raised through her meekle s
                     •
                  ight.
               
                  
                  Samuels Spreit als tite,
               Or in his stead the euill spreit,
               That gaue right graith answere her to:
               But of her selfe right noght wist sho,
               And man is into dreeding ay,
               Of things that he hes heard say,
               Namely that are to come, while he
               Know of the end the certainetie:
               And sen they are in sik wening,
               Withoutten certen witting:
               Me think, who sayes he knowes things
               To come: he makes great gabings.
               But whidder she that told the King,
               How his purpose sould haue ending,
               Weind, or wist it vtterlie,
               It fell after all hollelie,
               As she said, for syne King was he,
               And reigned into frée poustie.
            
            
               Of the Kings Hansaling in Carrik, at his first arriuing.
               THis was in Ver, when Winter tide,
               With his blasts hideous to bide,
               Was ouerdriuen: and birds small,
               As Turtle, and the Nightingale,
               Began right swéetlie for to sing,
               And for to make their solacing.
               Swéet notes and sounds séere,
               And melodies pleasant to heare.
               And trées begouth breaking to ma
               Burgeons, and blyth bloomes alswa,
               To win the hewing of their head,
               That wicked Winter hath them made,
               And all gersse begouth to spring.
               In that swéet time the Noble King,
               
                  With his flote, and a few menyie.
               Four hunder I trow they might be,
               Went to the sea out of Arrane,
               
               A litle before the Euen was gane.
               They rowed fast with all their might,
               While that vpon them fell the night,
               That woxt mirke on great maner:
               So that they wist not where they were,
               For they no needle had nor stane,
               But rowed alwayes foorth in ane.
               Stéering alwayes vpon the fire,
               That they saw burning light and shire.
               It was but auentour them led,
               And they in short time so them sped,
               That at the fire arriued they,
               And went to land but more delay:
               And Cuthbert that hath séene the fire,
               Was full of anger and of ire,
               For he durst not doe it away.
               And he was also doubting ay,
               That his Lord sould passe to the sea,
               Therefore their comming waited he.
               And met them at their arriuing:
               He was right soone brought to the King:
               That spéered at him how he had done?
               And he with sore heart told him soone▪
               
               How there was none there well willand:
               But all were foes, that euer he fand.
               And that Sir Henry the Percy
               
               With néere thrée hunder in companie,
               Was in the Castle there beside:
               Filled full of despite, and pride,
               But more then two parts of his rout,
               Were harbred in the townes about;
               
                  And despises you more, Sir King,
               Then men may despise any thing,
               Then said the King in full great ire,
               Traitour▪ why made thou then the fire?
               Ah (Sir) he said, so God me sée,
               The fire was neuer made through me:
               Nor ere this night I wist it noght:
               But fra I wist it, well I thought,
               That ye and whollie your Menyie,
               In hy sould put you to the sea,
               For thy come I to méete you here,
               To tell perills that may appeare.
               The King was at his spéech angry,
               And asked his priuie men him by.
               What that they thoght was best to doe.
               Sir Edward answered first thereto,
               His brother that was so hardie:
               And said, I say you sikkerlie,
               There sall no perill that may be,
               Driue me againe vnto the sea
               Mine auenture here take will I,
               Whether it be easefull or angrie,
               Brother (he said) sen ye will sa,
               It is good we the 
                     •
                  amine ta,
               Disease, or ease, or paine, or play.
               After as GOD will vs puruay.
               And sen men sayes, that the Percy,
               
               Mine heritage will occupy:
               And his Menyie so néere vs lies.
               That vs despises mony wayes.
               So we venge some of the despite,
               And that may we haue done full tyte:
               For they lie traistlie but dréeding
               Of vs, or of our here comming:
               
                  And thought we sléeping slay them all,
               Reprooue vs thereof no man sall:
               For werrayour no force should mo,
               Whether he might ouercome his fo,
               Through strength, or great subtiltie,
               But at good faith ay holden be.
               When this was said, they went their way,
               And to the towne soone commen are they,
               So priuilie but noise making:
               That none perceiued their comming,
               They skailled through the toun in hie,
               And broke vp doores sturdelie:
               And slew all that they might ouertake,
               And they that no defence might make,
               Full piteouslie can raire and the crie:
               And they slew them without mercie,
               As they that were in full great will,
               To venge the anger and the ill,
               That they & theirs to them had wrought
               With so felloun a will them sought:
               That they slew them vp euerilkone,
               Except Makdowell him alone,
               That escaped through méekle slight,
               And through the mirkenes of the night.
               In the Castle the Lord Percie,
               
               Heard well the noise and the crie.
               And so did the men with him were,
               And full infrainly got their geire:
               But of them none was so hardie,
               And durst ishe foorth to crie,
               In sik affray baide they that night,
               While on the morne that day was light,
               And then ceased into partie,
               The noise, the slaughter and the crie.
               
                  The King gart then departed bée,
               All haill the spraith to his Menyie,
               And dwelt there syne dayes thrée,
               Sik hansell to these folke gaue he:
               Right in the first beginning,
               Newlings at his Incomming.
               WHen that the King and his folke were,
               Arriued, as I tould you aire.
               A while in Carrik leinded hee,
               To sée who friend, or foe would bee,
               And hée found litle tendernesse.
               But not for thy the people was,
               Inclined to him in party:
               But Englishmen so angerlie.
               Led them with danger and with aw,
               That they no friendship durst him shaw
               But a Ladie of that Countrie,
               That was to him in neere degree,
               In Cosinage, was wonder blyth
               Of his arriuing, and als swyth▪
               
               Sped her to him in full greit hy,
               With fourtie men in companie,
               And betaught all vnto the King,
               To helpe him in his warraying.
               And he receiued them in daintie,
               And her full greitlie thanked hee,
               And speered tithings of the Quéene,
               And of his friendes all bedéene,
               That hee had left in that Countrie:
               When that hee put him to the sea,
               And shée him told sighing full saire,
               How that his brether token were:
               In the Castle of Kildromy,
               
               And syne destroyed villanously.
               
                  And the Erle of Atholl also,
               And how the Quéene and other moe,
               That his partie were holdand,
               Were tane and led into England
               
               Were put into felloun prisoun,
               And how good Christall of Setoun
               
               Was slaine: gréeting: shée told the King,
               That was sorrowfull of that tithhing.
               And said when hée had thought a thraw,
               The words that I shall to you shaw,
               Alace, hée said, for loue of mee,
               And for their méekle léele lawtie,
               They Noble men; and they worthie,
               Are destroyed so villanouslie:
               But if I liue in liege poustie,
               Their death right soone shall venged bée,
               Yea, whether the King of England,
               
               Thought that the Kinrike of Scotland:
               Was all too litle for him and mée,
               Therefore I will it mine all bee.
               But of good Christall of Setoun,
               
               That was so worthie of Renowne,
               That hée should die were greit pitie.
               Where ony worship might préeud bée,
               THe King thus sighing made his mane
               And the Lady her leaue hes tane:
               And syne went home to her winning.
               And feill syes comfort shee the King,
               Both with siluer and with meate,
               Sik as shee in the land might get,
               And hee oft ryoted the land,
               And made all his that euer he fand,
               And syne he drew him to the hight,
               To stint better his foes might.
               
                  In that time was the Percie,
               
               With a full simple companie:
               In Turn
                        •
                     berise Castle yet lying,
               For the King Robert sore dréeding,
               That hee durst not ish foorth to fare
               Fra thyne to the Castle of Aire.
               
               That was then full of Englishmen,
               But lay lurking in a Den,
               While the men of Northumberland,
               
               Should come armed with strong hand,
               And conduct him to his Countrie,
               For to them send his Poist hath hée,
               And they in hy assembled then,
               Passing attour a thousand men:
               And asked counsell them amang,
               Whether that they should dwell or gang:
               But they were stonisht wonder saire,
               So far in Scotland for to fare,
               For a Knight Sir Gawter de Lile,
               
               Said it was too greit perill,
               So néere these Souldiers to goe:
               His spéech discomforted them so.
               That they had left all the voyage.
               Were not a Knight of greit courage,
               That Sir Roger of Sainct Iohn hight,
               That them comforted with his might,
               And sic words can to them say,
               That they together held their way,
               To Turnebery where the Percy
               
               Lap on, and went with them in hy.
               In England his owne Castle till,
               Without distroublance or more ill.
               Now in England is Percy,
               
               Where I trow he a while shall ly,
               
                  Or that hée shape him for to fare,
               To weirray Carrik ony mare:
               For hee wist that he had no right:
               And als hee dred the Kings might:
               That in Carrik was dwelland,
               In the most strengths of that Land.
               ¶ Where Iames of Dowglas on a day
               Came to the King, and can him say,
               Sir, with your leaue I would goe sée
               How that they doe in my Countrie.
               And how my men demained are,
               For it annoyes mee wonder sare:
               That the Cliffurde so peaceably,
               Brookes and holds the Senyeory,
               That should be mine with all kin right,
               But while I liue, if I haue might,
               To lead a Yeaman or a swane:
               Hée shall not brooke it but bargaine,
               The King said, Certes, I cannot see,
               How that yee yet may sikker bee.
               Into that Countrie for to fare,
               While Englishmen so mightie are:
               And thou wat not who is thy friend,
               Hee said, Sir, needlesse I will wend,
               And take the auenture God will giue,
               Whether it bee to die or liue.
               The King said, Sen that thou wilt so
               And sik a yarning hes to goe:
               Thou shalt passe foorth with my blessing,
               And if thee happens ony thing,
               That annoyous or skaithfull bee,
               I pray thee speed thee soone to mee:
               Take wee together what euer may fall.
               I grant, hee said, and therewithall
               
                  He louted, and his leaue hes tane,
               And is toward the Countrie gane.
            
            
               The first winning of the Castle of Dowglas.
               
               NOw takes Iames his voyage,
               Toward Dowglas his heritage.
               With two men withoutten ma,
               This was a simple store to ta,
               Castle or land of wéere to win.
               But fast he yarned to begin,
               To bring his purpose to ending:
               And good helpe lies in beginning:
               For good beginning and hardie,
               Gif it be followed wittilie,
               May gar oft syes vnliklie thing,
               Come to right good and fair ending:
               So did he here: for he was wise,
               And saw he might not on no wise,
               Wearie his foe with euen might:
               Therefore he thought to worke with slight,
               In Dowglasdaill his owne Countrie:
               Upon an Euening entred he,
               And then a man winned thereby,
               That was of frends right mighty,
               And rich of monie and of Cattell,
               And had bene to his father léell:
               And to himselfe in his Youthhead,
               Had done mony a thankfull déed.
               
                  Thomas Diksoun was his name perfay,
               To him he send, and can him pray,
               That he would come allanerlie,
               For to speake with him priuilie,
               And but danger to him he gaes:
               But when he told him what he was,
               
                  He grat for ioy, and for pitie,
               And him right to his house had he▪
               
               Where in a chamber priuilie,
               He held him and his companie:
               That none of him had perceiuing,
               And meat, and drinke, and other thing,
               That might them ease, they had plentie:
               So wrought they with their subtiltie,
               That all the leele men of the land,
               That with his Father were dwelland,
               This good man gart come one and one:
               And make him man
                     •
                  ent euerilkone:
               And he himselfe first homage made.
               
                  Dowglas in heart great gladnesse had.
               That the good men of his Countrie,
               Would this wise to him bounden be,
               He spéered the conuéene of the land.
               And who the Castle had in hand?
               And they him told all haillelie,
               And syne among them priuilie:
               They ordainde that he still sould be,
               In hiddles and in priuitie,
               Till Palmesunday that was néere hand,
               The third day after followand.
               For then the folke of that Countrie,
               Assembled at the Kirk would be:
               And they that in the Castle were,
               Wold als be there their Palmes to beare.
               As folke that had no dréed of ill:
               For they thought all was at their will,
               Then sould he come with his two men,
               Before that folke sould not him ken.
               He sould a mantle haue old and bare,
               And a flaile, as he a Ta
                     •
                  ker were.
               
                  Under the mantle not for thy,
               He sould be armed priuilie:
               And when the men of his Countrie,
               That sould all boun before him be:
               His Ensenyie might heare him crie,
               Then sould they all right enforcedly,
               Right in mids the Kirke assaill,
               The Englishmen with hard battaill.
               So that none might escape them fra,
               For therethrough trowed they to ta
               The Castle: that beside was néere:
               And when this, that I tell you here
               Was deuised and vndertane,
               Ilkone home to his house is gane:
               And held this speake in priuitie,
               Untill the day of their assemblie.
            
            
               How Dowglas in Sanct Brydes Kirke, With the Englishmen can wirke.
               THE folke vpon the Palmesunday,
               Held to Saint Brydes Kirk their way:
               And they that in the Castle were,
               Ished out both lesse and maire:
               And went their Palmes for to beare,
               Except a Cooke and a Porter.
               
                  Iames of Dowglas, of their comming:
               And what they were had good witting,
               And sped him to the Kirk in hy:
               But ere he came, so hastely,
               One of his men cried Dowglas, Dowglas,
               
               
                  Thomas Dikson, that néerest was,
               To them that were of the Castell,
               That were then Inwith the Chancell.
               
                  UUhen they the Dowglas so heard crie,
               Drew out his sword, and fellounlie
               Rushed among them to and fro,
               And one other withoutten mo.
               But they in hie were left lyand,
               UUith that Dowglas came néere at hand,
               And they enforced on them the cry:
               But they the Chancell sturdelie
               Held, and them defended well,
               While of their men were slaine some dell.
               But, the Dowglas so well him bare,
               That all the men that with him were,
               Had comfort of his well doing.
               And he himselfe spared nothing:
               But prooued so his force in fight,
               That through his worship and his might,
               His men so kéenelie helped than,
               That they the Chancell on them wan.
               Then dang they on so sturdelie,
               That in short time men might sée lie,
               The two part dead, or then dieand.
               The laue were seased soone in hand:
               So that of threttie liued nane,
               But they were slaine ilkane or tane.
               
                  Iames of Dowglas when this was doone,
               The prisoners hes tane full soone,
               And with them of his companie,
               Toward the Castell went in hie:
               Or onie noise of cry sould rise.
               And for he would them soone supprise:
               That in the Castle leaued were,
               They were but two withoutten mare,
               Fiue or sex before send he,
               
                  That fand all open the entrie,
               And entred, and the Porter tooke,
               Right at the ȝet, and syne the Cooke.
               With that the Dowglas came to the ȝet,
               And entred in without deba
                     •
                  te,
               And 
                     •
                  ound the meat all ready graithed,
               With boordes set, and claithes laide,
               The ȝets then hee gart them spare,
               And sate at meat all at laissair,
               Syne all the goods tursed they,
               That they thought light to beare away.
               Siluer, treasure, and als cléething,
               And namelte weapons, and all arming,
               Uittaile that might not tursed bée,
               On this maner destroyed hée,
               All the Uittaile outtaken salt,
               And Wheate▪ and Floure, and Meale and Malt,
               In the wine Cellar gart hée bring.
               And syne all on the Floore downe fling,
               And the Prisoners that hee had tane,
               Right there in gart hee hid ilkane,
               Syne off the Tunnes the hedes out strake:
               A foul melle there gart hee make.
               For Meale, and Malt Bread, and Wine,
               Ran together in a melline:
               That was vnseemlie for to s
                     •
                  e.
               Therefore the men of that Countrie,
               Called it the Dowglas Ladnaire.
               And will bee called this mony yéere,
               Then tooke hee Salt as I heard tell,
               And dead Horse and forded the Wall,
               And syne burnt all outtaken stone,
               And is foorth with his Menyie gone.
               
                  To his reset: for hée trowed well,
               If hee had holden the Castle,
               Hée should had beene assieged raith:
               And that thought him to méekle skaith▪
               
               For hee none hope had of rescuing,
               And als it was right perillous thing,
               In Castle assieged for to bee,
               When a thing wants of thir thrée:
               Uittaile, or meat, with arming,
               Or els good hope of rescuing,
               And for hée dred thir things should faile,
               Hee choosed forward to trauaile,
               Where hée might at his larges bee,
               And so driues foorth his Destinie:
               IN this wise was the Castle tane,
               And slaine that were therein ilkane,
               The Dowglas syne all his menyie,
               Gart in seir places parted bée,
               That men should wit lesse where they were
               That yéed aye parted here and there,
               Them that were wounded gart hée ly,
               Into hiddles all priuily,
               And gart good Léeches to them bring,
               While that they were into leeching:
               And himselfe with a few menyie,
               While one, while two, and whiles thrée,
               And sometime, hee himselfe alone,
               In hiddles through the Land is gone.
               So dred he Englishmens might,
               That he durst not well come in sight:
               For they that time were all wéeldand:
               As Masters and Lords ouer all the Land,
               But thir tithings were skailled soone,
               Of this déed the Dowglas had done.
               
                  Came to the Cliffurdes eare in hy:
               That for his tynsell was right sory.
               And meened his men that were slaine:
               And syne he hes to purpose tane,
               To big the Castle vp againe.
               Therefore as men of méekle mane
               Hée assembled a great companie,
               And syne to Dowglas went in hy,
               And bigged vp the Castle swyth,
               And made it right stalwart and styth:
               And put therein Uittaile and Men.
               And ane of the Thrilwailes then,
               Hee left behind him the Captaine,
               And syne to England went againe.
            
            
               How one man and his sonnes twa, Vndertooke King Robert to sla.
               INto Carrik yet was the King.
               With a full simple gaddering,
               Hee past not two hundreth men,
               But yet Sir Edward his brother then
               In Galloway was neere hand by,
               With him another companie,
               They held the Strengths of the Land,
               For they durst not yet take on hand,
               To ryde ouer all the Land plainelie,
               For of Wallange Sir Aymery,
               
               Was into EDINBVRGH lyand,
               And als was Wardane of the Land,
               And when hee heard of his comming,
               Of King Robert and his Menyie,
               Into Carrik, and how that hee,
               Had slaine so of the Persies men:
               His counsell hee assembled then.
               
                  And with consent of his Counsaile,
               Hee sent to Aire him to assaile,
               Sir Ingrame Bell that was hardie,
               And with him a greit companie,
               And when Sir Ingrame come was there,
               Him thought not spéedfull for to fare,
               For to assailyie him in the hight,
               Therefore he thought to worke with slight,
               And lay still in the Castell than,
               While he gat spéering of a man
               Of Carrik that was slie and wight,
               And als a man of méekle might:
               As ony man of that Countrie,
               Was to King Robert most priuie,
               As hee that was his sibbe man néere,
               And when hee would, without danger,
               Might to the Kings presence goe,
               The whilke man and his Sonnes two,
               Were winning still in that Countrie,
               For they would not perceiued bée,
               That they were speciall to the King,
               They made him mony time warning,
               When that they might his tynsell see,
               Therefore in them affyed hée,
               His name I cannot tell perfay,
               But I haue heard of sooth men say,
               Forsooth that his ane eye was out.
               But hee so sturdie was and stout,
               That hée was the most doughtie man,
               That into Carrik was liuing than,
               And when Sir Ingrame gat witting,
               Forsooth this was no léesing.
               After him in hy hée sent.
               And hee came at his commandement.
               
                  Sir Ingrame that was slie and wise,
               Treated with him on sik a wise:
               That he made sikker vndertaking,
               UUith treasoun for to slay the King:
               And he sould haue for his seruice,
               Gif he fulfilled this deuise:
               Well fourtie pounds worth of land▪
               
               To him and all his aires liuand.
               THE treasoun thus is vndertane,
               And he home to his house is gane:
               And waited opportunitie,
               To fulfill his iniquitie.
               In great perill then was the King,
               That of this treasoun wist nothing:
               For he, that he trowed most of ane,
               His dead hes fully vndertane.
               None may betraise tittar than he,
               That man introwes into lawtie.
               The King in him traisted: for thy,
               He had fulfilled his fellony,
               Were not the King through Gods grace,
               Got warning how his purpose was:
               And how, and for how méekle land,
               He tooke his slaughter vpon hand.
               I wate not who the warning made:
               But in all time sik hap he had:
               That when men shupe him to betrayse,
               He got witting thereof alwayes:
               And mony a time as I heard say
               Through women that him loued ay:
               That would tell all that they might heare,
               And so may fall that it did here,
               But how so euer it fell pardie,
               I trow he sall the warrer be.
               
                  Yet not for thy the Traitour ay,
               Had in his thought both night and day:
               How he might best bring to ending,
               His treasonable vndertaking.
               Till he bethought him at the last:
               And in his mind can vmbecast,
               That the King had in custome ay,
               For to rise airlie euerie day:
               And passe well far from his Menyie:
               UUhen he would passe to the Prinie,
               And séeke a couert him alone,
               And at the most had with him one.
               There thought he with his sonnes twa,
               For to supprise the King, and sla:
               And syne wend to the UUood their way:
               But yet of purpose failyied thay.
               And for this cause came all thrée,
               Into the couert that was priuie:
               UUhere that the King was wont to ga,
               His priuie néedes for to ma.
               There hid they them till his comming,
               And the King airlie in the morning
               Raise, when that his liking was,
               And right toward the Couert gaes:
               UUhere lying were the Traitours thrée,
               For to doe there his priuitie.
               To treasoun then he tooke no héed:
               But he was wont where euer he yéed,
               His sword about his halse to beare:
               And that auailde him greatlie there.
               For had not GOD all things weildand:
               Sik helpe set in his owne hand,
               He had béene dead withoutten dread:
               A chamber Page then with him yéed:
               
                  And so withoutten fellowes mo.
               Toward the Couert can he go.
               Now but GOD help the Noble King,
               He is néere brought to his ending.
               For that Couert that he yéed till,
               Was on the other side of the hill:
               That none of his men might him sée:
               Thitherward went his Page and he.
               And when he commen was in the Shaw,
               He saw the thrée comming on raw,
               Against him full sturdelie.
               Then to his boy he said, in hie,
               Yone men will slay vs, if they may.
               What weapons hast thou? ah Sir, perfay
               I haue a bow, but and a wyre.
               Giue me them smertlie, he said, ah Sir,
               UUhat will ye then that I sall do?
               Stand on far, and behold vs to.
               If thou me sées aboue to be,
               Thou salt haue weapons great plentie,
               And if I die, withdraw thée soone:
               And with the sword withoutten hone,
               He tooke the bow out of his hand,
               For the Traitours were néere cummand.
               The Father had a sword but maire:
               The other both sword and handare bare:
               The third a sword had, and a speare.
               The King perceiued by their afféere,
               That all was sooth, men to him told,
               Traitour (he said) thou hes me fold:
               Come thou no further, but hold thée there,
               I will thou come no furthermare.
               Ah Sir, bethinke you then said he,
               How néere that I sould to you be.
               
                  UUho sould come néerer you then I?
               The King said, I will sikkerlie,
               At this time that thou come not néere,
               Thou may say what thou wilt on féere,
               But he with false wordes fleeching,
               With his two sonnes was néere comming.
               UUhen the King saw he would not let,
               But ay came on with fléeching falset:
               He takes the wyre and lets it flee,
               And hit the Father right in the eye:
               UUhile that it in the harnes ran,
               And he backward fell downe right than.
               The brother that the hand axe bare,
               That saw his father felled there.
               A gird right to the King can make,
               And with the axe can him ouertake.
               But he that had his sword on hight
               Raught him sik routes in ran doun right:
               That he the head to harnes claue,
               And dead downe to the eird him draue.
               The other brother that the speare bare,
               Saw his brother was fallen there:
               UUith the speare as an angrie man,
               In a race to the King he ran.
               But the King that him dred some thing,
               Waited the speare at the comming:
               And with a wiske the head off strake.
               And ere the other had comming to take
               His sword, the King sik swak him gaue,
               That he his head to the harnes claue:
               He rushed downe of blood all red:
               And when the King saw they were dead,
               All thrée lying, he wipes his brand.
               With that his boy came fast rinnand.
               
                  And said, Our Lord mot loued bée,
               That granted you might and poustie,
               To fell the fellony and the pride,
               Of thir thrée in so little tide.
               The King said, So our Lord mée sée
               They had béene worthie men all thrée,
               Had they not beene full of treasoun,
               But that made their confusioun.
               ¶ The King is went to his ludging,
               And of this deede came some tithing:
               To Sir Ingrame of Vmfrawile:
               
               That thought his subtiltie, and gyle
               Had all failyied in that place.
               Therefore hee so annoyed was,
               That hee againe to Lochmabane,
               
               To Sir Aymer his way is gane,
               And to him told all haile the case,
               But hée thereof sore wondred hes.
               How ony man so suddenly,
               Might doe so greit a Cheualry,
               As did the King, that him allane,
               Uengeance of the thrée Traitours hes tane,
               And said, Now may men well pardie
               Wit that it is all in certainetie,
               That Ure aye helpes the hardy men,
               As by this dead wée may well ken,
               Were hée not so outragious hardy,
               Hée had not so vnabasedly:
               And so smertly done his auantage.
               I dread that his greit vassalage,
               And his greit trauell bring to end,
               The thing that men full litle wend.
               Sik speaking made they of the King,
               That they withoutten Sojourning.
               
                  Trauelde in Carrik héere and there,
               His men from him so skailled were.
               To purchase their necessitie,
               And als the Countrie for to sée,
               That they left not with him sixtie,
               And when the Gallowayes wiste surelie,
               That hee was with so few Menyie.
               They made a priuie assemblie,
               Of well two hunder men and ma:
               And a slooth-Hound can with them ta.
               For they thought him for to supprise:
               And if hee fled in ony wise,
               To follow him with Hounds so,
               That hee should no wise passe them fro:
               They shupe them in ane Euening,
               To supprise suddenlie the King,
               And to him held they straight the way:
               But hee that had his Watches ay,
               On ilke side: of their comming,
               Long ere they came had sure witting,
               And how feill folke that they might be,
               Therefore hée thought with his Menyie,
               To withdraw him out of that place,
               For the night neere hand fallen was,
               And for the Night he thought that they,
               Should not haue sight to hold the way:
               That hée were past with his Menȝie,
               And as hée thought, right so did hée,
               And went him downe to a Marace,
               On a Water that rinning was:
               And in a Boge hee found a place,
               Was strait, and well two Bow-drawght was,
               From that watter they passed had,
               Hée said, here may wée make abade:
               
                  And rest you all a while and ly,
               I will goe wait all priuilie,
               If I heare ought of their comming:
               And if I heare of ony thing,
               I shall gare warne you, so that yee,
               At your aduantag ay shall bee.
            
            
               How hee discomfist him allane, Two hunder, and slew fifteene certaine.
               THe King now taks his gate to go,
               And with him tooke seruants two,
               And Sir Gilbert de la Hay left he
               There, for to rest with his Menȝie.
               To the Water hee came in hy,
               And harkened full tentfully,
               If hee might heare of their comming,
               But yet then might hee heare nothing,
               Endlang the water then yéed hée,
               On either side greit quantitie,
               And saw the braes high standing,
               The Water how through slyke rinning:
               And fand no Foord, that men might passe,
               But where himselfe ouerpassed was.
               And so strait was the vpcomming,
               That two men might scarce through it thring,
               Nor on no maner might guid them so,
               That they together long might goe.
               And when hée long time had béene there,
               He hearkned and heard as horsemen were
               And Hounds whilssilling vpon feer,
               That aye he thought came neere and neere
               Hee stood still for to hearken maire:
               And aye the longer hee stood there,
               
                  Hée heard it néere and néere command:
               But hée thought he would still yet stand,
               While that hee heard more takinning,
               Then for a Hounds whissilling,
               Hée would not waken his Menyie.
               Therefore hée would abide, and see,
               What folke they were: and whether they
               Held toward him the right way:
               Or past another gaite far by,
               The Moone was shining right clearely:
               So long hee stood, that hee might heare,
               The noyse of them that commen were,
               Then his two men in hy sent hee,
               To waken and warne his Menyie,
               And they are foorth their wayes gone:
               And hee left still there him alone,
               And so long stood hee hearkenand,
               While that hee saw come at his hand,
               The haill rout in full greit hy,
               Then hee bethought him hastely,
               If hee held toward his Menyie,
               That ere hee might repaired bee:
               They should be past the foorde ilkane,
               And then behoued to choose him ane
               Of these two: outher flee, or die,
               But his heart that was stout and hie,
               Counseld him alone to bide:
               And keepe them at the Foordes side,
               And defend well the vpcomming,
               Sen hee was garnisht with arming.
               That hee their arrowes should not dreed.
               And if hee were of greit manheede:
               Hee might astoney them ilkane,
               Sen they could come but ane and ane,
               
                  Hée did right as his heart him bade:
               For manheed, strength and courage he had
               When he so stoutlie him allane,
               For litle strength of earth hes tane:
               To feght with two hunder or moe,
               Therewith hee to the Foord can goe:
               And they vpon the other party,
               That saw him stand allanerlie,
               Thringing in the Water rade,
               For of him litle doubt they had,
               And came to him in full great hy:
               Hée smote the first so rigorously,
               With his Sword that sharplie share,
               While hee downe to the eird him bare,
               The laue came on in a randoun:
               But his Horse that was borne downe,
               Cumbred them the vpgang to ta,
               And when the King saw it was sa,
               Hée stikked the Horse▪ and hee can fling,
               And syne fell in the vpcomming.
               The laue with that came with a shout,
               And hée that stalward was and stout,
               Met them right stoutly at the bra,
               And so good payment can them ma,
               That fiuesome in the Foord hée slew.
               The laue then some deill them withdrew,
               That dred his strakes wonder sair:
               For hée in nothing them forbare.
               Then said ane, Certes wee are to blame:
               What shall we say when wée come hame,
               When one man feghts against vs all,
               When saw men euer sik foully fall,
               As vs, if wee it thus gate leaue?
               With that all haill a shout they gaue.
               
                  And cryed: on him, he may not last.
               With that they preassed on him so fast,
               That had he not the better bene,
               He had bene dead withoutten wene.
               But he so great defence can make:
               That where he hit with euen strake,
               There might no thing against him stand.
               In litle space he left lyand
               So feill that the vpgang was then,
               Ditted with slaine horse, and men.
               So that his foes for that stopping,
               Might not come to the vpcomming.
               Ah deare GOD, who had bene by,
               And séene how he so hardely,
               Addressed him against them all:
               I wate well that they sould him call,
               The best that liued in his day:
               And if that I the sooth would say,
               I heard neuer in no time gone,
               One stint so monie him allone.
            
            
               Example how Tydeus slew forty nine men, And the Lieuetenāt thold shame & paine.
               EUen like when that Achilles,
               
               Fra his brother Polynices,
               
               UUas sent to Thebes in message,
               To aske whollie the heritage
               Of Thebes, to hold it for a yéere:
               Two twynnes of one both they were.
               They straue: for either King would be.
               But the Barnage of that Countrie,
               Gart them assent on that maner,
               That the one sould be King one yéere,
               
                  And the other with his Menyie,
               Sould not be found in that Countrie,
               While the first brother reigning were.
               Syne sould the other reigne ane yéere,
               And then the first sould leaue the land,
               While that the other were reignand.
               Thus ay one yéere sould reigne the one,
               The other one yéere, when that were gone.
               To aske holding of this assent,
               UUas Tydeus to Thebes sent:
               And so spake for Polynices,
               
               That of Thebes Eteocles,
               
               Bad his Constable with him ta,
               Men armed well, and so foorth ga:
               To méet Tydeus in the way:
               And sla him but longer delay.
               The Constable his way is gane,
               And nine and fourtie hes with him tane:
               So that he▪ with them made fiftie,
               Into the Euening priuilie,
               They set a bushment in the way,
               UUhere that Tydeus behoou'd to ga,
               Betwixt an hie Craig and the Sea.
               And he, that of their Mauitie
               UUist nothing: his way hes tane,
               And toward Grece againe is gane,
               And as he rode into the night,
               So saw hee with the Moones light,
               Shining of shields great plentie:
               And had wonder what it might be.
               With that all haill they gaue a crie:
               And he that heard so suddenlie
               Sik noise, some deill affrayed was:
               But in short time he to him taes
               
                  His spreits full hardelie:
               For his gentle heart and worthie,
               Assured him into that néed:
               That with spurres he strake the Stéed,
               And rushed in among them all.
               The first he met he gart him fall,
               And syne his sword he swapped out,
               And raught about him monie a rout:
               And slew sexsome well soone or ma
               Then vnder him his horse they sla:
               And he fell: but he smertlie raise,
               Stryking about him rowme he mais,
               And slew of them a quantitie.
               But wounded wonder sore was he.
               With that a litle rod he fand,
               Up toward the craig strykand:
               Hither he went in full great hie,
               Defending him right doughtelie:
               While in the craig he clam somedeill,
               And found a place inclosed well:
               Where none but one might him assaill.
               There stood he▪ and gaue them battaile,
               And they assailyied him ilkone:
               And oft syes when that he slew one,
               As he downe to the eird did dryue:
               He would beare downe well foure or fiue.
               There stood he, and defended so,
               While he had slaine the halfe and mo.
               A great stone then by him saw he:
               That through the great mauitie,
               Was lowsed readie for to fall.
               And when he saw them comming all,
               He tumbled downe on them the stane,
               And eight men therewith hath he slaine.
               
                  And so astoneyed the remnand,
               That they were neere all retéerand.
               Then would hee prison hold no maire.
               But on them ran with sword all baire:
               And hewed and slew with all his maine,
               While hee had nyne and fourtie slaine,
               The Constable syne can hée ta,
               And gart him sweare that hée should ga:
               To King Eteocles, and tell,
               The auentures that them befell:
               
                  TYDEVS bare him doughtelie,
               That ouercame him allane fiftie.
               Yée that this reades, judge yee,
               Whether that more should praised bee:
               The King that with his auisement
               Under tooke sik hardement?
               As to stynt him allone but feare,
               The folke that fully two hundreth were,
               Or Tydeus that suddenly
               Fra they had raised on him the cry,
               Through hardement that they had tane,
               Wan fiftie men all him alane?
               They did their déede both in their night,
               And faught both with the Moones light,
               But the King hée discomfit ma,
               And Tydeous the ma can sla.
               Now déeme yee whidder more louing
               Should Tydeus haue or the doughtie King
               IN this maner as I haue told,
               The King that stark was stout and bold
               Was feghting on the Foordes side,
               Giuing and taking routes red:
               While hee sik martyrdome had made,
               That hée the Foord all stopped had:
               
                  That none of them might to him ryde,
               Then thought they folly for to byde,
               And haillelie the flight can ta,
               And went homeward where they came fra.
               Then the Kings men with the cry,
               Wakned, and full frayedlie,
               Came for to séeke the Lord the King,
               The Galloway men heard their comming
               They fled▪ and durst no longer byde,
               The Kings men that dreading were that tyde,
               For their King full spéedilie,
               Came to the Foorde: and syne in hy
               They found the King sitting allane,
               And had his Basnet off tane,
               To take the aire: for hée was heat,
               Then spéered they at him his state:
               And hee told them all haill the cace,
               And how that hée assailyied was.
               And how that GOD him helped so,
               That hée escaped haill them fro:
               Then looked they how feill were dead:
               And they found lying in that stead,
               Fiftéene that was slaine with his hand,
               Then loued they fast God all weildand,
               That they their Lord fand haill and feir,
               And said▪ they would in no maner
               Dread their foes▪ sen their Chiftane
               Was of sic heart and of sik mane:
               That for them had vndertane,
               With so feill folke to feght allane.
               SIk Wordes spake they of the King,
               And of his hie vndertaking,
               They ferlied and yarned him to sée,
               That wont was oft with him to bée
               
                  Ah, how worship is a perfite thing,
               Worship makes men to haue louing,
               
                  
                     •
                  f it be followed worthelie,
               But pryse, and worship not for thy,
               
                  
                     •
                  s hard to win but great trauell,
               Oft to defend, and oft assaile,
               And to bee in their deeds wise,
               Garres men of worship win the prise.
               There may no man haue wo
                     •
                  thheed,
               But hée haue wit to stéere the déed:
               And sée what is to liue or ta,
               Worship extremities hes twa,
               Foole hardement the formest is,
               And the other is Cowardise.
               And they are both to forsake.
               Foole hardement all will ouertake:
               As well things to leaue as ta,
               But Cowardise does nothing sa,
               But vtterlie forsaketh all.
               And that were wonder for to fall,
               Were not wanting of discretion:
               For thy hes worship sik renowne,
               That it is mid betwixt the twa,
               And taketh that it will vnta:
               And leaues that is to leaue. For i
                     •
                  
               
               Hes so greit garnishing with wit,
               That it all perills well can sée:
               And all auantage that may bee.
               It would to hardement hold holie.
               With thy away were the folie,
               For Hardement with folie is,
               But Hardement that melled is
               With wit, is worship aye, pardie,
               For but wit worship cannot bée.
               
                  THis Noble King that wée of read,
               Melled all time Wit with Manhéed,
               That may men by his mellie see,
               His Wit shewde him the strait entrie
               Of the Foord, and the ishing alswa,
               That him thought was hard to ta,
               Upon a time that was worthie.
               Therefore his hardement hastely
               Thought well, it might bee vndertane,
               Sen atanes him might assaile but ane,
               Thus hardinesse gouernde with wit,
               That hee in all time together knite,
               Gart him of worship winne the prise,
               And oft ouercame his enemies.
            
            
               How Iames of Dowglas with a traine, Slew Thriswaile, and his men of maine.
               THe King in Carrik dwelt then still,
               His men assembled fast him till,
               That in the Land were trauelling,
               When they of this deed heard tything,
               Then thought they well with him to ta.
               Their hap, that sik defence can ma.
               But yet then Iames of Dowglas
               
               In Dowglasdaile dwelling was,
               Or else well née
                     •
                  e hand thereby,
               In hiddles some deill priuilie.
               For hée would sée his gouerning,
               That had the Castle in kéeping,
               And gart make mony jeopardie,
               To see if hee would ishe blythly,
               When hée perceiued well, that hée
               Would ishe blythly with his Menȝie,
               
                  He made a gaddering priuilie,
               Of them that were of his partie:
               That were so fell, that they durst fight
               UUith Thriswaile, and all his haill might
               Of them that in the Castle were,
               He shupe in one night for to fare
               To Sandylands, and néere thereby,
               He him embushed priuily:
               And sent a few a traine to ma,
               That soone in the morning can ta
               Cattell, that were the Castell by.
               And syne withdrew them hastely
               Toward them that embushed were.
               Then Thriswaile withoutten maire
               Gart arme his men withoutten bade,
               And ished with all the men he had:
               And followed fast after the Ky.
               He was armed at point cleanly,
               Outtaken that his head was bare.
               Then with the men that with him were,
               The Cattell followed he good spéed.
               Right as a man that had no dread,
               UUhile that he of them got a sight,
               Then pricked they with all their might:
               Following them out of array:
               They sped them fleeing, while that they
               The bushment by some deill were past:
               And Thryswaile chased them right fas
                     •
                  .
               And then they that embushed were,
               Rushed on them both lesse and more:
               And raised suddenlie the cry,
               And they that saw so suddenly.
               That folke came egerly prickand,
               Betwixt them, and their warrand:
               
                  Then were they in full great effray:
               And for they were out of array.
               Some of them fled, and some abade
               And Dowglas that there with him had.
               A great Menyie, full egerlie
               Assailyied, and skailled them hastelie.
               And in short time them cumbred so,
               That well néere none escaped them fro.
               
                  Thriswaill that was their capitane,
               Was there into the Bargane slaine:
               And of his men the most partie.
               The laue fled full effrayedlie,
               
                  Dowglas Menyie fast can chase:
               And the fléears their wayes gaes.
               To the Castell in full great hie:
               The formest entred spéedilie:
               But the chasers sped them so fast:
               That they ouertooke some at the last,
               And them without mercie can sla.
               And when they of the Castle swa
               Saw them sla of their men them by:
               They closed the ȝets hastely,
               And in hy to the walls ran,
               
                  Iames of Dowglas Menyie than
               Seazed well hastelie in hand,
               All that they about the Castle fand
               To their resset: syne went their way,
               Thus Thriswaile ished to that essay.
               When Thriswaile vpon this manéere
               Had ished, as I tell you héere:
               
                  Iames of Dowglas and his men
               Busked them altogidder then,
               And went their way toward the King
               In great hy: for they heard tything,
               
                  That of Wallance Sir Aymery
               
               With a full greit Cheualry,
               Both of English, and of Scotishmen,
               With greit fellony were ready then
               Assembled for to séeke the King,
               That was that time with his gaddering,
               In Cummok, where it straitest was,
               Hidder went Iames of Dowglas,
               
               And was right welcome to the King,
               And when hée told had that tithing,
               How that Sir Aymer was command,
               For to hunt him out of the Land,
               With Hounds and Horne, right as he were
               A Wolfe, or else a theifes féere.
               Then said the King, It may well fall,
               Though hee come and his power all,
               Wée shall abide in this Countrie,
               And if hée comes, wée shall him sée,
               The King then spake on this maner,
               And of Wallance then Sir, Aymer,
               
               Assembled a greit company,
               Of Noble men and right worthie,
               Of England and of Louthiane:
               And hée hes also with him tane,
               
                  Iohn of Lorne, and all his might,
               That had of worthie men and wight
               With him aught hunder, and ma,
               A Slooth-hound had hée there alswa
               So good that change would for nothing,
               And some men sayes yet, that the King,
               As a traitour him nourisht had,
               And aye so méekle of him made:
               That his owne hands would him féede,
               Hee followed him where euer hée yéede:
               
                  So that the Hound him loued sa,
               Through him he thought the King to ta:
               For he wist that he loued him sa,
               That he would passe no wayes him fra.
               But how that Iohn of Lorne him had,
               I heard neuer no mention made:
               But men said, it was certaine thing,
               That he had him in his leading,
               And through him thought the King to ta:
               For he wist that he loued him sa,
               That fra that he might ones féele
               The Kings Sent▪ he wist right well,
               That he would change it for nothing.
               This Iohn of Lorne hated the King,
               For Sir Cumyng his Emes sake:
               Might he him outher sla or take,
               He would not prise his life a stra:
               But if he vengeance might of him ta.
            
            
               How Sir Aymer and Iohn of Lo
                        •
                     ne, Chased the King with Hound and horne.
               THis Wardane then Sir Aymery
               
               UUith Iohn of Lorne in company:
               And other of great renoun alswa:
               Sir Thomas Randell was one of tha,
               Came in Cumnok to séeke the King.
               That was well war of their comming:
               And was vp in the strengths then,
               And with him well thrée hundreth men,
               His brother that time with him was,
               And als Sir Iames of Dowglas.
               
               Sir Aymers xout there they saw,
               That held the Plaines and the Law,
               
                  And in haill battell was arrayed,
               The King that no supposing had,
               That they were moe then hee saw there:
               To them, and nouther else where
               Had eye: and wrought vnwittily.
               For Iohn of Lorne full craftely,
               Behind thought to supprise the King,
               Therefore with all his gaddering,
               About an Hill hee held his way,
               And held him into Couert aye,
               While he so néere came to the King,
               Ere hee perceiued his comming,
               That hee was at his hand well néere.
               The other Hoste, and Syr Aymer,
               
               Preassed vpon the other party,
               The King was in greit ieopardy,
               That was on either side beset
               With foes, that to sla him thret.
               And the least partie of the two,
               Was starker than the other two,
               And when hee saw them preasse him to,
               Hée thought in hy what was to doe.
               Hee said Lordings wee haue no might,
               At this time for to stand in fight.
               Therefore depart wee vs in thrée,
               So shall wee not all sailyied bée,
               And in three parts hold on your way,
               Syne to his Menyie can hee say,
               Betwixt them into priuitie,
               In what stéede their repaire should bee.
               With that their gate all are they gane,
               And in three partes their way haue tane,
               
                  Iohn of Lorne came to the place,
               Wherefra the King departed was.
               
                  And in his trace the Hound is set,
               That then withoutten longer let,
               Held euen the way efter the King,
               Right as hee had of him knowing.
               And left the other parties twa,
               As hee no Keepe would to them ta
               And when the King saw his comming,
               Efter his rout into a ling:
               Hée thought hée knew that it was hée,
               Therefore hée said to his Menyie,
               Yee then in thrée depart you soone,
               And they did so withoutten hone:
               And held their wayes in thrée parties.
               The Hound did there so greit Maistresse,
               That hee held aye without changing,
               Efter the rout where was the King.
               ANd when the King hes séene them so,
               All in ane rout efter him goe
               The way, and followed not his men,
               Hee had a greit perceiuing then,
               That they knew him, for thy in hy,
               Hee bad his men right hastely
               Skaill, and ilke man holde his way
               Right by him: and so did they
               By themselfe and sundrie gates are gane:
               And the King hes with him tane
               A Foster-brother withoutten ma,
               And togedder held their gate they twa,
               The Hound alway followed the King,
               And changed not for no parting,
               But ay followed the Kings trace,
               But wauering, as hée passed was.
               And when that Iohn of Lorne saw
               The Hound so fast efter him draw,
               
                  And followed fast efter them twa:
               Hee knew the King was one of tha,
               And bade fiue of his company,
               That were right wight men and hardy:
               And als of foote the spéediest were,
               That they might find among them there:
               Run efter him, and him ouerta:
               And let him no wise scape you fra.
               And fra they haue heard his bidding,
               They held their way efter the King,
               And followed him so spéedily,
               That they well soone can him ouerhy,
            
            
               How the King slew the fiue men, That Iohn of Lorne sent to him then.
               THE King that saw them comming weere,
               Was annoyed in great maner.
               For hée thought, if they were hardie,
               They might him trauell, and tary,
               And hold him still so tariand,
               While the remnant were at hand.
               But had hée dred but anerly
               They fiue, I trow full sikkerly,
               Hée should not haue full méekle dréed:
               And to his Fellow as hée yéede:
               Hée said, thir fiue are fast cummand,
               They are well neere now at our hand.
               Say, Is there ony helpe in thée?
               For wée shall soone assailyied bée.
               Yea Sir (hee said) all that I may,
               Thou sayes well, said the King perfay:
               I see them comming to vs néere,
               I will no farther, but right héere
               
                  Abide while I am into aynd,
               And sée what force that they will faynd.
               The King then stood full sturdelie:
               And the fiue men in full greit hy,
               Came with greit shore and manassing.
               And thrée of them went to the King,
               And to his man the other two,
               With Swords in Hand can stoutly goe.
               The King met them that to him sought,
               And to the first sik rout hee rought,
               The Eare and Chéeke downe to the halse,
               Hee share off, and the shoulders als,
               Hee rushed downe, all desily,
               The two that saw so suddenly
               Their Fellow fell: effrayed were,
               And start a litle backermare.
               The King with that blenked him by,
               And saw the two men sturdely,
               Against his men sik mellie ma,
               With that hee left his owne twa,
               And to them that fought with his man,
               A loupe right lightly made hee than,
               And smote the Head quite off the one,
               To his owne two syne is hee gone,
               That came on him right sturdely:
               Hée met the first so egerly,
               That with the sword that sharply share
               The armes hee from the body bare,
               What strakes they gaue I cannot tell,
               But to the King so sore befell.
               That though hee trauell had and paine,
               Hee of his foes foure hes hee slaine.
               His Foster-brother efter soone,
               The fist hes out of his dayes doome.
               
                  And when the King saw that all fife,
               UUas on this wise brought out of life,
               To his fellow can he say:
               Thou hes helped right well perfay.
               It likes you to say so (quod he)
               But ouer great part to you tooke ye:
               Ye slew foure of the fiue alone.
               The King said, as the glée is gone,
               Better than thou I might it do:
               For I had more leisure thereto.
               The two fellowes that delt with thée,
               UUhen they me saw assembled with thrée,
               Of me right no kin doubt they had:
               For they weind I was straitly stad.
               And for thy that they dred me nought,
               Noy them more than thou I moght,
               But let vs thanke GOD of his grace,
               That fra our foes vs deliuered hes:
               UUith that the King looked him by,
               And saw of Lorne the company,
               Well néere with their sloothhound cūmand
               Then to a UUood that was néere hand
               He went; with his fellow in hy,
               GOD saue them for his great mercy.
            
            
               How the King scaped fra his faes, And how the sloothhound slaine was.
               THE King toward the Wood is gane,
               Wearie for sweit, and will of wane.
               Into the Wood soone entred he,
               And held downe toward a vaillie,
               Wherethrough the Wood a water ran:
               Hidder in great hy went he than,
               
                  And begouth for to rest him there:
               And said, he might no further fare.
               His man said, Sir, that may not be:
               Bide ye ought long, ye sall soone sée
               Fiue hunder yarning you to sla,
               And that is monie against vs twa.
               And sen we may not deale with might:
               We man help that we may with slight.
               The King said, sen that thou wilt so,
               Goe foorth, and I sall with thée go:
               But I haue heard oft times say,
               That who endlong a Water ay,
               Would w
                     ••
                  de a bowdraught, he sould gar
               Both the 
                     •••
                  thhound and his leidar,
               Tyne th
                     •
                   Se
                     •
                  t that men gart them ta,
               Prooue 
                     〈◊〉
                   i
                     •
                   it will now doe swa.
               For 
                     〈…〉
                   deuilish Hound away:
               I rek 
                     〈◊〉
                   all the 
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  ue perfay.
               As he deuised so haue they done,
               And entred in the UUater soone:
               And held downe endland it their way,
               And syne vnto the Land yéede they,
               And held their way as they did aire,
               And Iohn of Lorne with greit efféere
               Came with his rout right to the place,
               Where that his fiue men slaine was,
               Hée méened them When hee them saw:
               And after said, in a litle thraw,
               That hée should soone reuenge their dead,
               But otherwise the gaming yeede,
               There would hée make no more dwelling,
               But foorth in hy followed the King.
               Right to the Burne they passed were,
               But the Slooth-hound made stinting ther:
               
                  And wauered long time to and fro,
               That he no certaine gate could go.
               UUhile at the last that Iohn of Lorne
               
               Perceiued the Hound the Sent had forne:
               And said: we haue tint this trauaile,
               To passe further may not auaile:
               For the Wood is both long and wide,
               And he is far foorth by this tide,
               Therefore is good we turne againe,
               And wast no more trauell in vaine.
               With that resyed he his Menyie,
               And his way to the Oist tooke he.
               THus escaped the Noble King:
               But some men sayes, his escaping,
               Upon another maner fell▪
               
               Then through the waiding, as they tell,
               That the King a good Archer had.
               And when he saw his Lord so stad:
               That he was left so anerly.
               He ran on side alwayes him by,
               While he into the Wood was gone.
               Then said he to himselfe allone:
               That he right there a rest would ma,
               To looke if he the Hound might sla:
               For if the Hound might last on liue,
               He wist, right well that they might driue
               The Kings trace, while they him ta:
               And he wist well they would him sla.
               And for he would his Lord succour,
               He put his life in auentour:
               And sate into a bush knéeland,
               While that the Hound came to his hand,
               And with an arrow soone him slew:
               And to the Wood syne him withdrew,
               
                  But whether his escaping fell,
               As I told first, or I now tell:
               I wate not, but without leesing,
               At that Burne escaped the King.
            
            
               What maner that the thieues three, Made to the King slight lawtie.
               THE King is foorth his wayes tane,
               And Iohn of Lorne againe is gane,
               To Sir Aymer, that fra that chase
               UUith his Menyie repaired was:
               That sped but litle in their chasing.
               And thought that they made following
               Full egerlie, they wan but small:
               Their foes were escaped all.
               Men sayes, Sir Thomas Randell than
               Chasing, the Kings banner wan:
               Wherethrough in England with the King
               He had great prise, and hie louing.
               UUhen the chasers relyed were,
               And Iohn of Lorne had met them there▪
               
               He told Sir Aymer all the cace,
               How that the King escaped was:
               And how that he his fiue men slew,
               And to the UUood syne he him drew.
               UUhen Sir Aymer heard tell in hy,
               He sained him for this ferly:
               And said, he is greatly to praise,
               I know none liuing in thir dayes:
               That at mischiefe can helpe him sa.
               I trow he sall be hard to ta,
               And he were bodin euenlie,
               On this wise spake Sir Aymerie,
               
               
                  And the good King held foorth his way,
               Betwixt him and his men, while they
               Passed out through the Forrest were:
               Then in a Moore they entred are,
               That was both hie, long and brad,
               And by the halfe they passed had,
               They saw on side thrée men cummand:
               Like to light men, and wauerand,
               Swordes they had, and axes als,
               And one of them about his Hals,
               A meekle bound in Wedder bare,
               They met the King, and hailsed him faire,
               The King againe them hailsed yald,
               And asked them whether they wald?
               They said, Robert the Bruce they sought,
               To méete with him, if that they mought,
               Their Man-rent to him would they ma,
               The King said, If that you will swa▪
               
               Hold foorth your wayes now with mée,
               And I shall gar you soone him sée.
               They perceiued by his speaking,
               And his efféeres▪ hee was the King,
               They changed countenance, and late,
               And held not in the first estate:
               For they were foes to the King,
               And thought to come into talking:
               And dwell with him▪ while that they saw
               Their point, and bring him out of daw,
               They granted to his Speake for thy,
               But the King that was aye witty,
               Perceiued well by their hauing,
               That they loue him well nothing.
               Hée said, Felloews yee must all thrée,
               (Farther acquanted while that we bee)
               
                  All by your selfe before vs goe,
               And on the samine wise wee two
               Shall follow you behind well néere,
               Sir (said they) it is no mistéere
               To trow into vs ony ill.
               None doe I (said hee) but I will
               Yée goe before vs a little waie,
               Better with other knowne while wée bée,
               Wee grant (they said) sen yée will so,
               And foorth vpon their gate they goe.
            
            
               The slaying of the Thieues three, And how the King his death was nie.
               THus yéed they while the night was néere,
               And then the formest commed were,
               To a waste Husband House, and there
               They slew the Wedder that they bare:
               And strake fire for to make their meat,
               And asked the King if hée would eat,
               And rest him while the meat were dight:
               The King that hungrie was, I hight,
               Assented to their speech in hy,
               But hee said, hee would alanerly
               Betwixt him and his Fellow bée
               At a fire, and they all thrée,
               In the end of the House should ma
               Another fire, and they did swa,
               They drew them to the House end,
               And halfe the Wadder to them send:
               And they rosted in hy their meat,
               And fell right freshlie it to eat:
               For the King right long fasted had,
               And had full meekle trauell made:
               
                  Therefore hee ate full egerly,
               And when hee eaten had hastely,
               Hee had to sleepe so meekle will,
               What hee might make no let theretill,
               For when the Ueines filled are,
               The body is heauie euermare,
               And to sleepe draweth heauinesse,
               The King that all fortrauelde was,
               To his Foster brother sayes,
               Certes, mee behooues to sléepe need ways.
               Say, may I trust thee mee to wake,
               While I a litle sleeping take.
               Yes Sir (hée said) while I may drée,
               The King then winked a little wi
                     •
                  ,
               And slept, but not right inkerlie,
               And glifned vp oft suddenly,
               For hée had dred of the thrée men,
               That at the other fire were then:
               That they his foes were well hée wist,
               Therefore hée sléeped as fowle on twist▪
               
               The King sléeped but litle than.
               While sik a sleepe fell on his man.
               That hée might not hold vp his eye,
               But fell on sléepe and snored hie.
               Now is the King in greit perill:
               For sléepe hée so a litle while,
               Hée shall bée dead withoutten dread,
               For the thrée tratours tooke good heed,
               That hee on sléepe was, and his man,
               In full greit hy they gate vp than,
               And drew their Swords full hastelie,
               And went toward the King in hy,
               And sléeping thought him for to sla,
               And his Foster brother alswa.
               
                  To him they yéed a full greit pace,
               But in that time, through Gods grace,
               The King vp blenked suddenly,
               And saw his man sléeping him by:
               And saw comming the Traitours three,
               Deliuerlie on foote start hée:
               And drew his sword, and syne them met,
               And as hee yéed his foot hee set,
               Upon his man right heauily,
               Hée wakned and rose desily,
               For the sléepe mastered him sa,
               That ere hee gate vp, ane of tha,
               That came vp for to sla the King,
               Gaue him a straike in his rising,
               That hee might helpe himselfe no maire
               The King so straitly stad was there,
               That hée was neuer yet so stad,
               Were not the arming that hée hade,
               Hée had béene dead withoutten weere,
               Yet noughthelesse on this manéere,
               GOD helped him so in that bargane,
               That the thrée traitours hes hee slaine,
               Through Gods grace, and his manhéed,
               His Foster brother there was dead,
               Then was hée wonder will of wane,
               When hée saw hée was left allane,
               His Foster-brother sore méened hée,
               And waried all the other thrée,
               And syne his way tooke him alone,
               And is toward his tryst then gone,
               The King went foorth right wrathfully
               Meenand his man full tenderly,
               And held his way all him alone,
               And right toward the House is gone,
               
                  Where hee set tryst to méet his men.
               It was well néere the night by then,
               Hée came soone in the House and land,
               The House-wife on the Benke sittand,
               Shée asked him soone what hee was,
               And whence he came, and whether he gas?
               A trauelling man good Dame (said hee)
               That trauells here through the Countrie,
               Shee said, all trauelling men heere
               For anes sake more welcome are.
               The King said, Good Dame what is hee?
               That garres you haue sik specialtie
               To men that trauells? Sir perfay,
               (Quoth the Goodwife) I will you say.
               The King Robert the Bruce is he,
               Whilke is right Lord of this Countrie,
               His foes now holds him in thrang,
               But I thinke to see ere it bee long,
               Him Lord and King ouer all this Land,
               When that no foes shall him withstand,
               Dame loue yee him so well, said hee?
               Yea Sir (shee said) so GOD mee sie▪
               
               Dame (hee said) loe him heere the by:
               For I am hee, I say thee soothfastly,
               Ah, Sir (shee said) and where are gone
               Your men, that yee are thus alone,
               At this time, Dame, I haue na ma,
               (Shee said) it may no wise bee sa,
               I haue two Sonnes wight and hardy,
               They shall become your men in hy.
               As shee deuised so haue they doone,
               His sworne men became they soone,
               The Goodwife gart him sit and eat▪
               
               But hee sat short whyle at the meat.
               
                  UUhen that he heard great stamping,
               About the house: then but leesing,
               They stert vp the house for to defend:
               But soone efter the King hes kend
               
                  Iames of Dowglas: then was he blyth,
               And bade open the doores swyth:
               And they came in all that they were,
               Sir Edward his brother was there,
               And Iames also of Dowglas,
               
               That was escaped fra the chase,
               And with the Kings brother met:
               Syne to the tryst that there was set,
               They sped them with their companie,
               That was a hunder and fiftie.
               And when that they haue séene the King,
               They were ioyfull of that méeting:
               And asked how he scaped was?
               And he them told all haill the cace:
               How the fiue men him preassed fast,
               And how he through the Water past,
               And how he met the thieues three,
               And how he sléeping slaine sould be▪
               
               When he wakned through Gods grace,
               And how his Foster brother was
               Slaine, he told them haillelie.
               Then loued they GOD almightie,
               That their Lord was escaped so.
               Then spake they words to and fro:
               While at the last the King can say,
               Fortoun hes traueld vs fast this day,
               That skailled vs so suddenlie.
               Our foes this night traistlie lie:
               For they trow we so skailled are,
               And fled to warrand here and there,
               
                  That we sall not thir daies thrée,
               All togidder assembled be.
               Therefore this night they sall traistlie,
               But UUatches take their ease and lie:
               And this day they haue done despite.
               Therefore this night I would them quite:
               UUherefore who knew their harberie:
               And would come on them suddenlie:
               With few Menyie men might them skaith,
               And yet escape withoutten waith.
            
            
               Here tranoynted the Noble King, And to his faes made an affraying.
               PErfay (quoth Iames of Dowglas)
               As I came hitherward by cace,
               I came so néere the harberie,
               That I can bring you where they lie:
               And would ye speed you yet ere day
               It might well happen that we may
               Doe them a greater skaith well soone,
               Than they vs all this day hes doone:
               For they lie skailled as them list,
               Then thought they all it was the best,
               To spéed them to them hastelie:
               And they did so in full great hie,
               And came on them in the dawing.
               Right as the day begouth to spring,
               So fell it that a companie
               Into a toun had tane harbrie,
               UUell fra the Oist a mile, or maire:
               Men said, that they two hunder were.
               There assembled the Noble King:
               And soone efter their assembling,
               
                  They that sléeping assailyied were,
               Right hideouslie can cry and reare,
               And other some that heard the cry,
               Ran foorth so right effrayedlie:
               That some of them all naked were,
               Fleeing to warrand here and there.
               And some their Harnesse to them drew.
               And they withoutten mercie them slew,
               And so cruell vengeance can ta,
               That the two part of them and ma,
               Were slaine into that samine stead,
               And to their Host the remnand fled.
               THe Oist then heard the noyse and cry,
               And saw their men so wretchedlie,
               Come naked fléeing here and there,
               Some all haill, some wounded sare,
               Into full greit effray they rose,
               And ilke man to his Baner goes:
               So that the Oist was all on stéere,
               The King and they that with him were,
               When they on stéere the Oist saw so,
               Toward their warrand can they goe,
               And there in sauitie came they,
               And when Sir Aymer heard say,
               Now that the King their men had slaine.
               And how they were turned againe,
               Hee said, Now may yee clearelie sée,
               That Noble heart where euer it bee,
               Is hard to ouer come with Mastrie,
               For where an heart is right worthie,
               Against Stoutnesse it is ay stout,
               And as I trow there may no doubt,
               Gar it all out discomfite bee,
               While body liuing is in poustie,
               
                  As by this melle may bee seene:
               Wee weind Robert the Bruce had béene
               So discomfite, that by good skill,
               Hée should haue neither heart nor will,
               Sik jeopardie to vnder 
                     •
                  a,
               For hee was put at vnder sa.
               That hee was left all him alone,
               And all his men were from him gon,
               And hee was so sore trauelled,
               To put them off that hee assailyied:
               That hee should haue yarned resting,
               More than feghting and trauelling,
               But his heart full is of bountie,
               So that it vanquisht may not bee.
               IN this wise spake Sir Aymery,
               
               And when they of his company
               Saw that they trauelde had in vaine:
               And how the King their men had slain
               That at his larges was then all frée,
               Them thought it was but Nicitie,
               For to make there longer dwelling,
               Sen they might not annoy the King,
               And then said Sir Aymery,
               
               That vnbethought him hastely:
               That hee to Carlile then would ga,
               And there a while so journey ma:
               And leaue his spyes on the King,
               To know alwayes his contening,
               And when that hée his time might sée.
               Hée thought that with a greit Menyie,
               Hee should set on them suddenlie,
               Therefore with all his companie,
               To England hée his way hes tane.
               And ilk man to his House is gane.
               
                  A while to Carlyle went is hée,
               And therein thinked for to bée,
               While hee his time saw of the King,
               That then with all his gaddering,
               Was in Carrik as hée was wount,
               And would wend with his men to hunt.
            
            
               How the King and his Hounds twa, Three men in the Wood can sla.
               SO hapned it vpon a day,
               Hée went to Hunt for to assay,
               What gaming was in that Countrie,
               So happned it that day when hee
               By a Wood side to a seate is gane.
               With his two Hounds him allane,
               But hee his sword ay with him bare,
               Hee had but short while sitten there,
               When hée faw from the Wood command,
               Thrée men with bowes in their hand,
               That toward him came spéedily,
               And hée perceiued them in hy,
               By their effeere and their hasting,
               That they him loued no kind thing,
               Hee raise vp, and his Léech drew hée,
               And leet his Hounds gang all frée,
               GOD helpe the King now for his might:
               For bot he baith bee wise and wight,
               Hee shall bee set in meekle preasse,
               For tha three men withoutten lies,
               They were his foes all verely,
               And waited him ay busilie,
               To see when they might vengeance take
               Of him: for Sir Iohn Cumyngs sake,
               
                  And they thought then they leasure had.
               And sen he him alone was stad.
               They thought in hy they should him sla.
               And if that they might cheuish sa,
               That they might win the Wood againe:
               Fra that th
                     •
                  y had the good King slaine.
               His men they thought they should not dread.
               In yre toward the King they yéed,
               And bent their bowes, when they were neere.
               And that he dred on greit manéere
               Their arrowes: for hée naked was,
               In hy a speech to them hee mais:
               And said, you aught to shame pardie,
               Sen I am one and yée are three,
               For to shoot at mee vpon feere.
               But had you hardiment to come neere,
               And with your swords to essay.
               Win mee on sik wise if yee may,
               Yée shall all out maire praised bee,
               Perfay, quoth one then of the thrée:
               Shall no man say wee doubt of thee sa,
               That wée with arrowes shall thee sla,
               With that their bowes away they kest,
               And came on fast but longer frist,
               The King them met full hardelie,
               And smote the first so rigorouslie,
               That hée fell dead downe on the greene,
               And when the Kings Houndes had séene,
               Two men assailyie their Master sa,
               They lap to one, and could him ta,
               Right by the necke▪ full sturdely,
               While top ouer taile they gart him ly,
               And the King that his sword out had.
               Saw the Hounds sik succours made.
               
                  Ere hee that fallen had might vp rise,
               Hée him assailyied on sik a wise,
               That hée the backe strake euen in two,
               The third that saw his fellow so,
               Without recouering to be slaine,
               Tooke to the Wood his gate againe,
               But the King followed speedily,
               And als the Hounds that were him by,
               When they the man saw flee him fra,
               Ran to him soone, and can him ta
               Right by the necke while hée him dreugh,
               And the King that was neere aneugh.
               In his rising a straike him gaue,
               That starke dead to the eird him draue.
               The Kings Menyie that were néere
               When that they saw on sik maneer,
               The King assailyied so suddenly,
               They sped them toward him in hy,
               And asked how that cace befell?
               And hée all haill it can them tell:
               How they assailyied him all thrée.
               Perfay (say they) wee may well see
               That it is hard to vndertake,
               Sik mellie with you for to make,
               That so smer
                     •
                  lie hes slaine three,
               Withoutten hurt: Perfay (said hée)
               I slew but one withoutten ma.
               GOD and mine Hounds hes slaine twa,
               Their treason cumbred them perfay,
               For right wight men all three were they.
               WHen that the King through Gods grace,
               On this maner escaped was,
               Hee blew his Horne, and then in hy,
               His good men can to him rely,
               
                  Then homeward buskde he him to fare:
               For that day would he hunt no maire.
               In Glentrolle a while he lay,
               And went oft times to hunt and play,
               For to purchase them vennisoun:
               For then the Deire were in season.
               In all that time Sir Aimery,
               
               With Noble men in companie,
               Lay in Carlile his time to sée.
               And when he heard the certainetie,
               That in Glentrolle was the King,
               And went to hunt and to playing:
               He thought then with his Cheualrie,
               To come vpon him suddenlie,
               And from Carlile on nights ride,
               And in Couert on daies bide:
               And thus gate with his tranoynting,
               He thought for to supprise the King,
               He assembled a great Menyie,
               Of folke of full great Renounie,
               Both of Scots and Englishmen,
               Their way togidder held they then,
               And rade on nights priuilie,
               While they came to a Wood néere by
               
                  Glentrolle: where lodged was the King,
               That wist right noght of their comming:
               Into great perill now is he.
               For but GOD through his great bountie
               Saue him, he sall be slaine or tane:
               For they were sex where he was ane.
            
            
               
               How the King with a few Menyie, Discomfite Sir Aymer in Glentrolle.
               
               WHen Sir Aymer (as I haue told)
               With his men that were stout and bold,
               Were comming so néere the King that they
               Were but a myle, fra him off way.
               He tooke auisement with his men,
               On what maner they sould doe then.
               For he said them that the King was
               Ludged, into so strait a place,
               That horsemen might him not assailyie:
               And if foot-men gaue him battailyie,
               He sould be hard to win, gif he
               Might of their comming witted be,
               Therefore I red all priuilie
               UUe send a woman him to spie:
               That poorelie sall arrayed be.
               She may aske meat for Charitie,
               And sée their conuéene haillelie.
               Upon what maner that they lie,
               And in that while we and our Menyie,
               Comming out through the Wood may be,
               On foot, all armed as we are.
               May we doe so, that we come there
               On them, or they wit our comming,
               UUe sall finde in them no stynting,
               This counsell thought they was the best:
               Then send they foorth but longer frist,
               The woman that sould be their spy:
               And she her way held foorth in hy,
               Right to the Ludging wher was the King,
               That had no dread of supprising:
               For in Glentrolle was the King,
               That was néere brought to supprising,
               
                  Yéed vnarmed, merrie and blyth.
               The woman hes he séene all swyth.
               He saw her vncouth, and for thy
               He beheld her more tentiuely:
               And by her countenance him thought,
               That for good commen was she nought.
               Then gart he men in hy her ta:
               And she that dred men sould her sla,
               Told them now that Sir Aimery,
               
               With the Clyffurde in company,
               And the flowre of Northumberland,
               
               UUere comming on them at their hand.
               WHen that the King heard that tything,
               He armed him but more dwelling:
               So did they all that with him were,
               Syne in a sop assembled there.
               I trow they were thrée hundreth néere.
               And when they all assembled were:
               The King his banner gart display,
               And set his men in good array.
               But they standen had but a thraw,
               Right at their hand when that they saw
               Their foes through the Wood c
                     •
                  mmand,
               Armed on foot, with speare in hand:
               They sped them full enforcedlie,
               The noise begeuth then and the crie:
               For the good King that formest was
               Stoutlie toward his foes gaes:
               And hynt out of a mans hand,
               That néere beside him was gangand.
               A bow, and a brade arrow als,
               And hit the formest in the hals,
               While throppell and wessand yéed in two,
               And he downe to the eird can go.
               
                  The laue with that made a stinting,
               And then but more the Noble King,
               Hint from His Banerman his Baner,
               And said, vpon them: for they are
               Discomfist all, and with that word,
               Hée swapped smertlie out his Sword,
               And on them ran so hardelie,
               That all they of his companie,
               Tooke hardement of his good déed.
               And some that first their wayes yéed,
               Againe came to the feght in hy,
               And met their foes vigorouslie.
               That all the formest rushed were,
               And when they that were backer mair,
               Saw that the formest left their stéede,
               They turned all their backe and fled.
               Out of the Wood they them with drew,
               The King but few men of them slew,
               For they right soone their gait can goe,
               For it discomforted them so,
               That the King and his men was,
               All armed to defend the place:
               When they weind through their tranoynting,
               To haue winning without feghting,
               That they effrayed were suddenly,
               And hee them sought so angerly,
               That they in full greit by againe
               Out of the Wood can to the Plane:
               For they failȝied of their intent.
               They were that time so foully shent:
               That fifteene hundreth men and ma.
               With a few were rebuted sa:
               That they withdrew them shamfullie,
               Therefore among them suddenlie.
               
                  Raise greit debate, and greit distance,
               Ilkane with other of their mischance,
               The Cliffurde and Vanis made a mellie,
               Where Cliffurde raught him routes thrée
               And either side drew to parties.
               But Syr Aymer that was ay wise,
               Departed them with méekle paine,
               And went to England home againe,
               Hée wist, fra strife raise them among,
               They should not hold togider long,
               Without debate or more melle,
               For thy to England turned hee,
               With more shame than hée went off tou
                     •
                  ,
               When so mony of sik Renoun,
               Saw so few men byde them battaile.
               Where they right hardy were to assaile.
            
            
               How Iames of Dowglas discomfite than, At Ederfoord Philip Mowbray with mony man,
               THe King fra Sir Aymer was gane
               Gathered his Menȝie euerilkane:
               And left both Woods and Mountaines,
               And held the straight way of the Plaines.
               For hée would fane that end were made
               Of that, that he begunnen had.
               And hée wist well hee could not bring
               It to good end but trauelling.
               To Kyle first went hée, and that land.
               Hée made to him all obeysand.
               And of Cuninghame the most party,
               Hée gart yéeld to his Senourie.
               In Bothwell then Sir Aymer was,
               That in his heart greit anger ta
                     •
                  s,
               
                  For them of Cuninghame and Kyll,
               
               That were obeysand to his will.
               And had left Englishmens fewtie,
               Thereof fane venged would hée bée,
               And sent there Philip the Mowbray
               
               With a thousand (as I heard say)
               That armed were in his leading,
               In Kyll, for to weirray the King,
               But Iames of Dowglas that all tide,
               Had Spyes out vpon ilk side,
               Wist of their comming: and that they
               Would hold downe Makyrnoks way.
               Hée tooke with him all priuilie,
               Them that were of his companie,
               That were sixtie withoutten ma,
               Syne in a strait place can they ga,
               That is into Makyrnoks way,
               The Nether Foord that heght perfay,
               And lyeth betwixt Marraises two,
               Where that none Horse on life may goe,
               On the South halfe where Iames was,
               Is an vpgang, and a narrow place,
               And on the North halfe is the way,
               So ill, as it appeares this day.
               
                  Dowglas with them hée with him had.
               Embushed him, and there abade.
               Hée might well farre sée their comming,
               But they of him might sée nothing.
               They bade in bushment all that night.
               And when the Sun was shinning bright.
               They saw the battell come arrayed,
               The Uangard with Banner displayed,
               And soone efter the remanand,
               They saw well neere behind cummand.
               
                  Then held they them still and priuie,
               While the formost of their menyie,
               Were entred in the Foorde them by,
               Then shout they on them with a cry:
               And with the weapons that sharply share.
               Some in the Foord they backward bare:
               And some with arrowes were bleeded brad
               Sik martyrdome on them they made:
               That they can thraw to voyde the place.
               But behind them so stopped was
               The way: that they fast might not flée,
               And that gart of them mony die:
               For they no wise might get away,
               But as they came: except that they
               Would through their foes hold their gate,
               But that way thought they all to hate,
               Their foes met them so sturdelie,
               And continued the feght so hardely:
               That they so dréeding were, that they,
               The first might flée, fled fast away.
               And when the Réeregard saw them so
               Discomfite: and their wayes fast goe,
               They fled on far, and held their way,
               But Sir Philip the Mowbray,
               
               That with the formest ryding way,
               That entred was into that place,
               When that hée saw how hée was stad,
               Through the greit worship that hee had.
               With Spurs hee strake the Stéed of prise,
               And maugre all his enemies
               Through the thickest of them hée rade,
               And but taking escaped had,
               Were not ane hynt him by the brand,
               But the good Steed that would not stand,
               
                  Hée lanced foorth deliueredlie,
               But the other so stubburnelie
               Held, while the belt brist from the brand
               And sword, and belt left in his hand.
               And hee but sword his wayes rade.
               Well outwith them, and there abade,
               Beholding how his Menyie fled:
               And how his foes obteénde the Stéed.
               That were betwixt him and his men:
               Therefore hee tooke his wayes then,
               To Kilmarnok and to KILWINNYNE
               
               And to Ardrossen efter syne:
               And through the Larges him alane,
               To En
                        ••
                     erkip the way hes tane,
               Right to the Castle that well then,
               Was stuffed all with Englishmen.
               That him receiued in greit daintie.
               And fra they wist what sort that hée
               So far had ridden him alane,
               Through men that were his foes ilkane,
               They praised him full gretumlie,
               And loued méekle his Cheualrie,
               Sir Philip thus escaped was?
               And Dowglas, that was in the place,
               Where hee sixtie had slaine, and ma,
               The laue foulie their gate can ga,
               And fled to Bothwell home againe.
               Whereof Sir Aymer was not fane:
               When he heard tell on what maner.
               That his Menyie discomfist were.
            
            
               
               How the King vnder Lowdon hill, Discomfist Sir Aymer his power still.
               WHen to King Robert he it told,
               How that the Dowglas that was so bold
               Uanquisht so feill with so few Menyie.
               Right glad into his heart was he:
               And als his men comforted were:
               For they thought well both lesse and mare,
               They sould the lesse their foes dréede:
               Sen their purpose so with them yéed.
               The King then lay into Gastoun,
               
               That is right euen anent Lowdoun:
               And to his peace tooke the Countrie.
               When Sir Aymer, and his Menyie
               Heard how he rioted all the land,
               And how that none durst him withstand,
               He was into his heart sorie,
               And with one of his companie,
               He sent him word, and said, if he,
               Durst him into the Plaines sée,
               He sould on the tent day of May,
               Come vnder Lowdoun hill alway.
               And gif that he would méete him there:
               He said, his worship were the mare,
               And more be turned to Noblene
                     ••
                  e,
               To méete him in the Plaine hard wayes,
               With hard dynts and euen fighting,
               Than for to doe into stalking,
               The King that heard his Messinger,
               Had despite on a great maner,
               That Sir Aymer spake so proudlie:
               Therefore he answered angerlie.
               
                  And to the Messenger said he,
               Say to thy Lord, gif that I be
               In life: he sall me see that day
               Well néere, gif he 
                     •
                  are hold the way
               That he hes said, for sikkerlie
               At Lowdon hill méete him sall I.
               The Messenger but more abade,
               To his Master his wayes rade.
               And his answere told him all swyth:
               That was no néede to make him blyth:
               For he thought through his méekle might,
               Gif the King durst appeare to fight:
               That through the great Cheualrie,
               That he sould lead his companie,
               He sould so ouercome the King,
               That there sould be no recouering:
               And the King on the other partie,
               That was ay wise, and right wittie,
               Rade for to sée, and choose the place:
               And saw the hie gate lying was,
               Néere a faire field both faire and dry.
               But vpon other side there by,
               Was a great Mosse, méekle and brade:
               And fra the way was that men rade,
               A bow-draught well on other side.
               But that place thought he all too wide,
               To abide men that horsed were:
               Therefore thrée dykes ouerthort he share,
               From both the Mosses to the way:
               That were so far from other, that they
               Were euen a bowdraught, or maire,
               So holl, and hie tha dykes were,
               That men might not but méekle paine
               Passe them, though none were thē againe:
               
                  But sloppes in the way left he,
               So large, and of sik quantitie:
               That fiue hundreth might togidder ride
               In at the sloppes side for side.
               There thought he battell for to bide,
               And bargane them, for he no dread
               Had, that they sould behind assail:
               Nor yet on side giue them battaill.
               And before, he thought well that he
               Sould from there might defended be.
               Thrée déepe dykes there gart he ma:
               For gif he might not well ouerta
               To méete them at the first: that he
               Sould haue the other at his poustie:
               Or then the third, gif it fell so,
               That they had past the other two.
               On this wise ordained he:
               And syne assembled his Menyie:
               That wexe sex hundreth feghting men,
               But Rangald that was with him then,
               That were als feill, as he, or ma,
               With all that Menyie can he ga:
               The Euen forow the field sould be,
               To Lowdon Bog, where that he
               Would abide to sée their comming.
               Syne with the men of his leading,
               He thought to spéed him, so that he
               Sould at the dykes before them be.
               SIr Aymer on the other partie,
               Gaddered so great Cheualrie:
               That he was well thrée thousand néere,
               Armed and dight on good manéere.
               And as a man of greet Noblay,
               He held toward the tryst his way,
               
                  When the set day commen was,
               He sped him fast toward the place,
               That he had named for to fight.
               The Sunne was risen shining bright,
               That blenked on the shields brade,
               In battels two ordainde he had,
               The folke that he had in his leading.
               The King well soone in the morning,
               Saw comming soone the first battell,
               Arrayed séemely, and wonder well:
               And at their backe they saw cummand,
               The other battell followand.
               Their Basnets burnisht all were bright,
               Against the Sunne lemand of light.
               Their speares, pennons, and their shields,
               With light illuminate all the fields.
               Their best and browdred bright Baners,
               And horse hewed on seire maners:
               And coat-armours, of seire colours:
               And Hawbréekes that were white as floures
               Made them glittering, that they were like
               To Angels hie of heauens Kinrike.
               THE King said, Lordings, now ye sée,
               How yone men through their great poustie
               Would if they might fulfill their will,
               Sla vs, and make sembland theretill.
               And sen we know their fellonie,
               Go we and meete them hardelie,
               That the stoutest of their Menyie,
               Of our méeting abased be:
               For gif the formest egerlie
               Be met, ye sall sée suddenlie,
               The hindmest full abased be,
               And though they be far mo than we,
               
                  That should abase vs litle thing,
               For when wee come to the feghting,
               There may méete vs no moe than wée:
               Therefore, Lordings, ilkane should be,
               Of worship, and of greit valour,
               For to maintaine héere our honour.
               Thinke what worship vs abides,
               If that wee may, as well betides.
               Haue victorie of our foes here:
               For there is no man far nor néere,
               In all this Land that wée them doubt.
               Then said they all that stood about,
               Sir if GOD will, wee shall so doe,
               That no reproofe shall ly vs to,
               Now goe wée foorth, then said the King,
               And hee that made of nought all thing,
               Leade vs, and saue vs for his might,
               And helpe vs for to hold our right.
               With that they held their way in hy,
               Well sex hundreth in company:
               Stalward and stout, worthy and wight.
               But they were all too few I hight,
               Against so feill to stand in stour.
               Were not their outragious valour.
               ¶ Now goes the Noble King his way
               Right stoutly into good array,
               And to the formest dykes is gane,
               And in the slop the field hes tane,
               The Carage men, and the pouerall,
               That were no worth into battaile,
               Behind him leaued hee all still,
               Sitting together vpon an Hill.
               Sir Aymer the King hes séene,
               With his men that were cant and kéene,
               
                  Came to the Plaine downe from the Hill,
               As him thought, into full good will,
               For to defend or then assailyie,
               If ony man would come into battailȝie,
               Therefore his men comforted hée,
               And bade them wight, and worthie bée:
               For if that they might win the King,
               And haue victorie of that feghting,
               They should greitly rewarded bée,
               And eke greitlie their Renounie,
               With that they were right néere the King,
               And heard well oft his manassing:
               And gart trumpe vp to the assembly,
               With the formest of his Menyie,
               They embraced to them shields brade,
               And right syne together rade,
               With heads stouping and spears straught,
               Right to the King their way they raught.
               That met them with so greit vigour,
               That of the best and most valour.
               Were laid at eird at their méeting,
               Where men might heare sicke a breaking
               Of speares: that too frushed were,
               And the wounded so cry and raire,
               That it annoyous was to heare.
               For they that first assembled were
               Fonyeed, and faught full sturdely,
               The noyse begouth then, and the cry.
               O mightie GOD who had there béene,
               And had the Kings worship seene,
               And his brother that was him by,
               That them contained so manfully.
               That their good deed and their bountie,
               Gaue greit comfort to their Menyie.
               
                  And how the Dowglas so manfully,
               Comforted them that was him by,
               Hee should well say, they had good will,
               To win honour and come theretill,
               The Kings men so worthie were,
               That with their speares that sharply share,
               They stiked men, and Stéeds baith:
               While red blood ran of wounds raith,
               The Horse that stikked were can fling,
               And rushed the folke in their flinging.
               So that they that formost were,
               Were stikked in sloppes here and there,
               The King that saw them rushed so.
               And saw them reilling to and fro,
               Ran vpon them so egerly,
               And dang on them so hardely,
               Hee feill gart of his foes fall.
               The field well neere was couered all,
               Both with slaine Horse, and with men,
               For the good King that followed then,
               With fiue hundreth with weapons bare,
               That would nothing their foes spare,
               They dang on them so hardely.
               That in short time men might sée ly,
               At eird an hundreth well and maire,
               The remnant well the weaker were,
               Then they begouth them to withdraw.
               And when they of the Réeregard saw,
               Their Uangard be so discomfite,
               They fled withoutten more respite,
               And when Sir Aymer hes seene,
               His men flying all bedéene,
               Wit yée well hee was full woe,
               But hee could not admonish so.
               
                  That ony for him would turne againe,
               And when hée saw hée tint his paine,
               Hee turned his bridle, and to goe,
               For the good King them preassed so,
               For some were dead, and some were tane,
               And all the laue thair gate were gane.
               THe folke fled on this maner
               Withoutten rest: and Sir Aymer,
               
               Againe to Bothwell is hée gane,
               Méenand the skaith that hee hes tane,
               So Shamefullie that hee vanquisht was.
               Then to England in hy hée gaes.
               Right to the King, and shamefullie,
               Hée gaue vp all his Wardanerie:
               Nor neuer syne for no kin thing,
               But if hee come right with the King,
               Come hée to wéere into Scotland.
               
               So heauie tooke hee that in hand,
               That the King into set battell:
               With few folke like a Pouerall,
               Uanquisht him with a greit Menyie.
               That were renouned of greit bountis,
               Sik anger had Sir Aymery:
               And King Robert that was worthie,
               Abade all still into the place,
               While that his men had left the chace,
               Syne with prisoners they had tane.
               They are toward their Innes gane.
               Fast louing GOD of their welfare:
               Hee might haue séene that had béene there,
               Folke that right merrie were and glad,
               For their victorie, and als they had,
               A King so swéete, and debonaire,
               So wise, and of so faire affeere,
               
                  So blyth, and als so well bourdand,
               And in battell so stout to stand,
               So wise, and also so worthie,
               That they had great cause blyth to be.
               So were they blyth withoutten doubt:
               For feill that winned thereabout,
               Fra they saw the King vse them sa,
               To him their homage can they ma.
               Then waxt his power more and waire:
               And he thought well that he would fare,
               Out ouer the Mount with his Menyie,
               To looke who there his friend would be.
               Into Sir Alexander Fraser
               
               He traisted for they Cousings were:
               And his brother Simon alswa.
               He had great mister of mony ma:
               For he had foes mony ane,
               Sir Iohn Cumyng Erle of Buchane,
               
               And Sir Iohn the Mowbray syne,
               And Sir Dauid of Brechine,
               
               With all the folke of their leading,
               UUere foes to the Noble King:
               And for he wist they were his faes,
               His voyage hitherward he taes:
               For he would sée what kin ending,
               They would make of their menassing.
               THe King busked and made him yare,
               Northward with his men to fare.
               His brother can he with him ta:
               And Sir Gilbert de la Hay alswa.
               The Erle of Lennox als was there,
               That with the King was ouer all where,
               Sir Robert Boyde and other mo.
               The King can foorth his wayes go.
               
                  He left Iames of Dowglas,
               
               UUith all the folke that with him was,
               Behind him, for to looke if he
               Might recouer his owne Countrie.
               He put himselfe in full great perill:
               But eiter in a litle while,
               UUith his great Worship so he wrought,
               That to the Kings peace he brought,
               The Forrest of E
                        •
                     t
                        •
                     ik all haill,
               And euen so did he Dowglasdaill,
               
               And Iedburgh Forrest alswa:
               And who so well on hand would ta,
               To tell his worshippes one and one:
               He sould of them find monie one:
               For in his time as men told me,
               Thretteine times vanquisht was he:
               And had victorie times seuen and fiftie
               He séemed not long time idle to lie:
               By his trauell he had no will.
               Me thinke, men sould him loue of skill:
            
            
               How Iames of Dowglas slew Webtoun, And wan his Castell, & kest it downe.
               THis Iames when the King was gane,
               All priuilie his men hes tane▪
               
               And went to Dowglasdaill againe,
               And priuilie hes made a traine,
               To them that in the Castle were,
               A bushment s
                     •
                  elie made they there,
               And of his men fourtéene and ma
               He gart, as they would sekkes ta,
               Filled with gers, and syne them lay
               Upon their horse, and hold their way,
               
                  Right as they would to Lanerik fare.
               Out with where they embushed were.
               And when they of the Castell saw,
               So feill lades ganging on raw,
               Of that sight were they wonder fane,
               And told it to their Capitane:
               That heght Sir Iohn of Webroun,
               
               That was both starke, stout and felloun:
               Iolie also, and couragious.
               And for that he loued Paramours,
               He would ishe far the lightlier.
               He gart his men all take their geare,
               And ishe to get them vittaile,
               For it that they had fast did faile.
               They ished all aboundantlie,
               And preiked foorth so wilfullie,
               To win the lades that they saw pas,
               Till the Dowglas and his men was
               Betwixt them and the Castell.
               The lade-men then perceiued well,
               And they cast downe their lades in hie,
               And their gownes deliuerlie,
               That heilled them, they cast away.
               And in great hy their horse hynt they:
               And start vpon them sturdelie,
               And met their foes with a crie.
               They had great wonder when they saw,
               Them that were eir lurking full law,
               Come vpon them so hardelie,
               They were abased suddenlie.
               And at the Castle would haue bene.
               When on the other side they haue séene,
               
                  Dowglas breake his Embushement,
               That against them so stoutlie went,
               
                  They wist not what to doe or say,
               Their foes on ather side saw thay,
               That strake on them without sparing:
               That they might help their selfe nothing,
               But fled to warrand where they moght:
               And they so angerlie them soght,
               That of them all escaped nane.
               Sir Iohn of Webtoun there was slaine:
               And when he dead was as ye heare,
               They fand into his Awmanneir
               A letter, that to him sent a Ladie,
               That he loued for Drowrie.
               That said when he had kept one yéere,
               In wéere as worthie Batcheléere,
               The auentrous Castell of Dowglas,
               
               That for to kéepe so perilous was:
               Then might he well aske a Ladie,
               His Armours, and her Drowrie.
               The Letter spake on this maner:
               And when they slaine on this wise wer,
               
                  Dowglas right to the Castell rade,
               And there so great debate he made:
               That in the Castell entred he:
               I wate not all the certaintie,
               Whether it was through strength or slight:
               For he wrought so with his great might,
               That the Constable, and all the laue,
               That was therein both man and knaue
               He tooke, and gaue them dispending,
               And sent them home but more grieuing,
               To the Cliffurde, in their Countrie:
               And syne so busilie wrought he,
               That he all tumbled downe the wall:
               And destroyed the houses all.
               
                  Syne to the Forrest held his way,
               Where hée had many hard assay:
               And mony faire points of wéere befell,
               Who could them all rehearse or tell,
               Hee should say that his name should bée
               Lasting in full greit Renounie.
            
            
               How ouer the Month past the King, And there fell sicke in his passing.
               NOw will wee leaue in the Forrest
               
                  Dowglas, that shall haue litle rest.
               While the Countrie deliuered bée,
               Of Englishmen, and their poustie:
               And turne wee to the Noble King,
               That with the folke of his leading,
               Toward the Month hes tane his way,
               Right short, into full good array,
               Where Alexander Fraser him met.
               And als his brother that Simon het?
               With all his folke they with him had.
               The King of their comming was glad:
               And cherisht them in all kin thing.
               And they told him of the comming
               Of Sir Comyng Erle of Buchane,
               
               That to him helpe, had with him tane
               Sir Iohn Mowbray, and other ma,
               And Sir Dauid Brechine alswa:
               With all the folke of their leading,
               And yarnes more than ony thing
               Uengeance of you, Sir, King to take,
               For Sir Iohn Cumyng his Emes sake,
               That whilum at Drumfreis was slaine,
               The King said, So our Lord mée sane,
               
                  I had greit cause him for to sla.
               And sen that they on hand will ta.
               Because of him to weere on mée,
               I shall abide a while and see,
               On what wise they will prooue their might,
               And if it fall that they will fight.
               If they assaile, wée shall de
                     •
                  end:
               Let fall efter what God will send.
               Efter this spéech the King in hy,
               Held straight his way to Enrowry:
               And there hée tooke sik a sicknesse,
               That put him to so heard distresse:
               That hée forbure both drinke and meat.
               His men no Medicine might get,
               That euer might to the King auailyi
                     •
                  ,
               His heart all haill begouth to failyie:
               That hée might nouther ride, nor goe.
               Then wit yee well his men were woe,
               For none was in that company.
               That would haue béene halfe so sory,
               For to haue seene his brother dead:
               Lying before them in that stead,
               As they were all for his sicknesse,
               For all their comfort in him was,
               And good Sir Edward the worthie,
               His brother that was so hardie,
               And wise and wight, set meekle paine,
               To comfort them with all his maine.
               And when Lords that were there,
               Saw that the euill aye mair and maire
               Traueld the King: they thought in hy,
               It was not sp
                     •
                  edfull there to ly,
               For there all plaine was the Countrie,
               And they were but a few Menyie.
               
                  To ly but strength into the Plaine.
               Therefore while that their Captaine,
               Were recouered of his méekle ill,
               They thought to wind some strengths till:
               For folke withoutten Captaine,
               But they the better be in paine,
               Shall not bee all so good indéed,
               As they a Lord had them to lead,
               That put himselfe in auenture:
               But abasing to take the Ure
               That God will send: for when that hée
               Of sik will is and sik bounty,
               That hée dare put him to essay,
               His folke shall take example ay,
               Of his good déede, and his bountie,
               And ane of them shall bee worth thrée,
               Of them, that wicked Chiftane hes,
               His wretchednesse so in them gaes,
               That they their manlinesse shall tyne.
               Through wickednesse of his conuyne.
               For when the Lord that them should lea
                     •
                  ,
               May doe nought, but as hee were dead.
               Or from his folke holds his way
               Fléeing: trow yée not that they
               Uincust shall in their hearts bée.
               
                  
                     •
                  es shall they, as I trow pardie:
               But if their hearts bée so hie,
               They will not for their worship flée,
               And though some bée of sik bountie,
               When they the Lord and his Menyie
               Sees flée, yet shall they flée a paine:
               For all men flees the deed full faine,
               See what hée does, that so foullie,
               Flées thus for his Cowardrie?
               
                  Both him and his vanquishes hee,
               And garres his foes abone bée:
               But hée through his greit Nobilay
               To perill him abandounes ay,
               For to recomfort his Menyie,
               Garres them bee of sik greit bountie,
               That mony time a vnlikelie thing
               They bring right well to good ending,
               So did this good King as I of read,
               That through his couragious manhead,
               Comforted his men on sik maner:
               That none had radnesse where hée were,
               They would not feght while that hée was
               Lying in sik greit sicknesse,
               Therefore in Litter they him lay,
               And to the Slenath held their way.
               And thought into that Strength to ly,
               While passed was his Malady.
            
            
               How the Kings men with feghting, Defended the King in his lying.
               BOt fra the Erle of Buchane
               
               Wist, that they were hidder gane:
               And knew that so sick was the King
               That men doubted of this recouering,
               Hee sent efter his men in hy,
               And assembled a great company.
               For all his owne men were there,
               And als his friends with him were,
               There was Sir Iohn the Mowbray
               
               And his brother, as I heard say,
               And als Sir Dauid of Breching
               
               With feill folke of his leading.
               
                  And when they all assembled were,
               In hy they tooke their way to fare
               To the Slenath, with all their men,
               For to assailyie the King, that then
               UUas lying into his sicknesse.
               This was after the Martimesse,
               UUhen snow ouerhailed all the land.
               To the Slenath they came néere hand,
               Arrayed on their best maner:
               And then the Kings men that wer
               Ware of their comming, them apparelled
               To defend gif they were assailyied,
               And not for thy, their foes were
               Ay two for one, or els maire.
               The Erles men neere comming were,
               Trumping, and making méekle fare,
               And made Knights when they were néere,
               And they that in the UUoodside were,
               Stood in array right sturdelie,
               And thought to bide there hardelie
               The comming of their enemies:
               But they would vpon no kin wise
               Ishe to assailyie them in feghting,
               While recouered were the Noble King,
               And gif other would them assailyie,
               They would defend, vailyie quoth vailyie.
               And when the Erles companie
               Saw, that they wrought so wiselie:
               That they their strength shupe to defend,
               Their Archere foorth to them hes send,
               To bikker them as men of mane:
               And they sent Archers them againe,
               That bikkered them so sturdelie,
               That they of the Erles partie,
               
                  Right to their battell driuen were,
               Foure daies on this wise laie they there,
               Bikkering them euerilke day:
               But the Bowmen the war had ay.
               And when the Kings companie,
               Saw their foes before them lie,
               That ilk day waxt ma and ma:
               And they were wheene, and stad were sa,
               That they had nothing for to eat:
               But gif they trauelled it to get.
               Therefore they tooke counsell in hie,
               That there they would no longer lie:
               But hold their way where they might get
               To them, and theirs, vittaile and meat.
               In a Litter the King they lay:
               And graithed them vpon their way,
               That all their foes might it sée.
               Ilke man busked in their degrée
               To fight, if they assailyied were.
               In mids of them the King they bare,
               And yéed about him right worthelie,
               And not full greatlie can them hie.
               The Erle, and they that with him were,
               Saw that they busked them to fare:
               And how with so litle affray,
               They held foorth with the King their way.
               Readie to fight, who would assailyie:
               Their hearts then begouth to failyie,
               And in peace léete them passe away,
               And to their houses home went they.
            
            
               
               How the King discomfist at Enrowry, The Erle of Buchane shamefully.
               THe Erle his way tooke to Buchane:
               And Sir Edward the Bruce is gane
               Right to Strabogie with the King:
               And so long made their Soiourning,
               UUhile he begouth to recouer and ga.
               And syne their wayes can they ta
               To Enrowrie straught againe:
               For they would lie into the Plaine
               The UUinter season: for vittaile
               Into the Plaine they might not faile.
               The Erle wist that they were there,
               And gaddered Menyie here and there:
               
                  Brechine, Mowbray, and their men,
               All to the Erle assembled then,
               They were a full great companie
               Of men arrayed iolelie,
               To old Meldrome they held their way:
               And there with their men lodged they.
               Before Yule-Euen one night but maire.
               A thousand trow I well they were:
               They lodged them there all the night,
               While on the morne that day was light,
               The Lord of Brechine, Sir Dauy,
               
               Is went toward Enrowry.
               
               To looke gif he in any wise,
               Might doe skaith to his enemies.
               And to the end of Enrowry,
               
               
                  
                     •
                  e came riding so suddenlie,
               That of the Kings men he slew
               One part, and other men withdrew.
               
                  That fled their way toward the King:
               That with most part of his gaddering,
               On yond halfe of the towne were lying:
               And when men told him the tything,
               How Sir Dauid had slaine his men,
               His horse in hie he asked then:
               And bade his men all make them yare,
               In full great hie: for he would fare
               To bargane with his enemies.
               UUith that he busked him to rise,
               That was not well recouered then,
               Then said some of his priuie men:
               What thinke ye, Sir, thus gate to fare
               To feght, and ye not recouexed are?
               Yes, said the King withoutten wéere,
               Their boast hes made me haill and féere,
               There sould no Medicine so soone
               Haue cured me, as they haue done.
               Therefore so GOD himselfe me sée,
               I sall haue them, or then they me.
               And when his men hes heard the King,
               Set him so well for the feghting:
               Of his recouering all blyth they were,
               And made them for the battell yare.
               THe Noble King and his Menyie,
               That might wel néere seuen hunder be
               Toward old Meldrome held the way,
               UUhere the Erle and his Menyie lay.
               The discurreours saw them cummand
               UUith Baners to the wind waiuand:
               And told it to their Lord in hie,
               That gart arme his men hastelie,
               And them arrayed for the battell,
               Behind them set they their poueraill,
               
                  And made good semblance for to fight.
               The King came on with méekle might.
               And they abade making greit feare,
               While that they néere assembled were,
               But when they saw the Noble King
               Come stoutly on without stinting:
               A litle on bridle them with drew,
               And the King that right well knew
               That they were all discomfist néere.
               Preassed on them with his Banéere,
               And they withdrew them maire and maire
               And when the small folke they had there,
               Saw their Lords withdraw them so,
               They turnde their backe, and haill to goe,
               And fled, and skailed héere and there.
               The Lords that yet togidder were.
               Saw that their small folke were fléeing,
               And saw the King stoutly comming:
               They were ilkeane abased so,
               That they the backe gaue, and to go,
               A litle stound togidder held they,
               And syne ilke man tooke 
                     •
                  undrie way,
               Fell neuer man sik foule mischance,
               Efter so sturdie countenance.
               And when the Kings companie
               Saw that they fled so foullelie.
               They chased them with all their mane.
               And some they tooke, and some hes slaine.
               The remanand were fléeing ay.
               Who had best Horse, gote best away.
               To England fled the Erle of Buchane:
               
               Sir Iohn Mowbray is with him gane,
               And were resset there with the King:
               But they both short while had resting
               
                  For they died both soone after syne,
               For good Sir Dauid of Breching
               
               Fled to Brechin his owne Castell,
               And garnist it both faire and well:
               But the Erle of Atholl Sir Dauy,
               
               His sonne, that was in Kildromy,
               
               Came syne, and him assieged there,
               And hee that would hold wéere na mair,
               Nor bargane with the Noble King.
               Came syne his man with good liking.
            
            
               Of the heirship of Buchane, And how the Castle of Forfare was tane
               NOw goe wée to the King againe,
               That of his victorie was fane,
               And gart his men burne all Buchane,
               
               From end to end, and spared nane:
               And heryed them on sik manéere,
               That efter that well fiftie yéere,
               Men méened the heirship of Buchane.
               
               The King then to his peace hes tane,
               The North Countrie all hailelie,
               Obeyed they to his Senyeorie:
               So that by North the Month was nane
               But they his men were commen ilkane.
               The Lordship aye woxt maire and maire,
               Toward Angous syne can hee fare,
               And thought soone to make his all frée:
               That were on Northside the Scots Sea,
               The Castell of Forfare was then,
               Stuffed all with Englishmen:
               But Philip the Frasar of Platane,
               
               Hes of his friends with him tane.
               
                  And with Ladder all priuilie
               Hee to the Castell can him by:
               And clambe vp ouer the walles of stane,
               And syne all that hée fand hes slaine:
               Syne yald the Castell to the King.
               That made him right faire rewarding,
               And syne hee gart breake downe the wall,
               And forded well and Castell all.
            
            
               How the King wan Sainct Iohnstown. And tumbled all the Towres down.
               WHen that the Castell of Forfare,
               
               And all the towres downe tumbled were,
               Right to the eird, as I haue I told,
               The King that stout was, stark and bold,
               Thought that hée would make all frée,
               Upon North halfe the Scots sea.
               To Perth hee went with all his rout,
               And vnbeset the towne about,
               But vnto it hes a Siege set,
               But while they might haue men, & meat,
               It might not but greit paine be tane:
               For all the wall were then of stane.
               And thicke towres, and high standing:
               And that time were there in winning,
               The Methwenes and the Olyphands:
               They two the towne had in their hands,
               Of Stratherne als the Erle was there:
               But his Sonne and his men were,
               Without into the Kings rout,
               There was ilke day bikkering stout,
               And men flaine on either partie:
               But the good King that was wittie
               
                  In all his déedes euerilkane,
               Saw the walles so stight of stane,
               And saw the fence that they can make.
               And that the towne was hard to take.
               With open assault of strength and might,
               Therefore he thought to worke with slight,
               And in all time that hée there lay,
               Hée spied, and slely gart assay,
               Where at the dykes it shaldest was:
               While at the last hée found a place,
               That they might to their shoulders waid.
               And when hee that place had founden had,
               Hée gart his Menyie buske ilkane,
               When sex Oulkes of the siege was gan
                     •
                  :
               And tursed their Harnesse haillelie,
               And left the siege all openlie,
               And foorth with all his folke can fare,
               As hée would doe thereat no mare.
               And they that were into the towne,
               When they to fare saw him all bowne,
               They shouted him, and scorning made,
               And hée foorth on his wayes rade,
               As hée no will had againe to turne,
               Nor beside them to make sojourne:
               And in aught dayes nought for thy,
               Hee gart make Ladders priuily:
               That might suffice to this intent:
               And in a myrke night syne hée went
               Toward the towne with his Menyie:
               And Horse and knaues leaued hée
               Far from the towne: and syne hes tane
               His Ladders: and on foote are gane
               Toward the towne all priuily,
               They heard no Watches speake nor cry,
               
                  For they that were therein may fall.
               As men that dred noght, but slept all.
               They had no dread then of the King,
               For they of him heard no tyding,
               All the thrée daies before or maire:
               Therefore sikker and traist they were,
               And when the King heard them not stéere,
               He was right blyth in great manéere,
               And his ladder in hand can ta:
               Example to his men to ma.
               Arrayed well in all his geare:
               Shot in the dyke, and with his speare
               Cast till that he it ouer wade,
               But to his throt the water stood.
               THat time was in his companie.
               A Knight of France, wight and hardie
               And when he in the UUater sa
               Saw the King passe, and with him ta
               His ladder vnabasedlie,
               He saned him for the ferlie,
               And said, O Lord, what shall we say,
               Of our Lords of France, that ay
               With good morcells fairses their panche,
               And will but eat, and drinke, and dance?
               UUhen sik a King, and so worthie,
               As this is through his Chenalrie,
               Into sik perill hes him set,
               To win a wretched Hamelet,
               UUith that word to the dyke he ran,
               And ouer after the King he wan.
               And when the Kings Menyie saw,
               Their Lord the King into a thraw,
               Past to the dyke, and but more let,
               Their ladders to the wall they set,
               
                  And to climbe vp fast preassed they:
               But the good King, as I heard say,
               UUas the second yéed ouer the wall,
               And bade there while his Menyie all,
               UUere comming vp in full great hy:
               Yet then raise neither noise nor crie,
               But soone efter they noyse made,
               That of them first perceiuing had.
               So that the cry raise through the towne:
               But he that with his men was boune,
               To assailyie, to the towne is went.
               And the most part of his men sent▪
               
               And skailled through the towne: but he
               Held with himselfe a great Menyie.
               So that he might be ay puruayde
               To defend, gif he were assayde:
               But they that he sent through the toun
               Put to so great confusioun
               Their foes: that in beds were,
               Or skailled: fleeing here and there:
               That ere the sunne raise, they had tane
               Their foes, and discomfist ilkane.
               The Wardanes both therein were tane,
               And Malise of Stratherne was gane
               To his father, the Erle Malis,
               
               And with strength tooke him, and all his.
               Syne for his sake, the Noble King
               Gaue him his land in gouerning.
               The laue that ran out through the toun,
               Seazed to them in great fusioun,
               Men, arming, and Merchandise,
               And other good of sundrie wise,
               While they that were both poore and bare,
               Of their goods rich, and mightie were.
               
                  But there was few slaine: for the King
               Had giuen them in commanding,
               Upon great paine they should sla nane,
               That but great bargane might be tane:
               For they were kinde to the Countrie
               He wist: and had of them pietie.
               IN this maner the towne was tane:
               And syne the Towres euerilkane,
               And walles great were tumbled downe,
               He left nothing about the towne,
               Towre standing, nor stone wall,
               But he gart haillelie destroy them all,
               And prisoners that there tooke he:
               He sent where they might kéeped be:
               And to his peace tooke all the land.
               Was none that then durst thē withstand,
               On North halfe the Scots sea,
               All obeyed to his Maiestie:
               Except the Lord of Lorne, and tha
               Of Argyle, that would not with him ga.
               He held him ay against the King,
               And hated him attour all thing.
               But yet ere all the gaming ga,
               I trow well that the King sall ta
               Uengeance of his great crueltie:
               And that him sore repent sall he,
               That he the King contraried ay,
               May fall, when he it mend not may.
               THE Kings brother when the towne
               Was taken thus▪ and doungen downe
               Sir Edward that was so hardie,
               Tooke him with a great companie,
               And tooke his gate in Galloway:
               For with his men he would assay,
               
                  Gif he recouer might that land,
               And win it fra Englishmens hand,
               This Sir Edward the Bruce I hight
               UUas of his hand a Noble Knight:
               And in blythnesse sweet and iolie,
               But he was outragious hardie:
               And of so hie vndertaking:
               That he had neuer yet abasing
               Of multitude of men, for thy
               He discomfist commonly
               Monie with whéene: therefore had he
               Attour his Péeres the Renounie.
               And who rehearse would all his déede,
               Of his worship, and his manhéede,
               Men might a méekle Romanes make.
               And not for thy I thinke to take
               On hand to say, of him some thing:
               But not teind part his trauelling.
            
            
               How Sir Edward discomfist at Cree, Sir Ingrame Vinfrauile, and Aymerie.
               
               THis good Knight that I spake of aire,
               With all the folke that with him were
               And into Galloway commen is,
               All that he found he makes all his,
               And heryed greatlie all the land.
               But then in Galloway was winnand
               Sir Ingrame Vmfrauile that was
               Renouned of so great Prowes,
               That he of worship past the rout:
               Therefore he gart ay beare about
               Upon an speare a red Bonet,
               Into takinning that he was set
               
                  Into the hight of Cheualry,
               Of Sainct Iohn: als Sir Aymery
               
               Thir two the Land had in stéering:
               And when they heard of the comming
               Of Sir Edward, that all plainelie,
               Ouer-rade the land, then in greit hy,
               They assembled of their Menyie,
               I trow twelue hundreth they might bée:
               But hée with fewer folke them met,
               Beside Cree, and so hard them set,
               With hard battell and stalward fight,
               That hée them put all to the flight.
               And slew two hundreth well and ma,
               And the Chiftanes in hy can ta.
               There to Both well for to bee,
               Receiued there into sauitie.
               And Sir Edward them chased fast,
               Both to the Castell at the last.
               Gate Sir Ingrame and Sir Aymery:
               But the best of their company,
               Lay dead behind them in the place,
               And when Sir Edward saw the chace
               Was faillyied, hée gart sese the Prey,
               And so feill Cattell had away,
               That it was wonder for to see,
               Of Both well towre they saw, how hée
               Gart his men with him driue the Prey:
               But no let there till set might they.
               Through his couragious Cheualrie,
               
                  Galloway was stoneyed gretumlie,
               And doubted him for his bountie,
               Some of the men of that Countrie
               Came to his peace, and made him aith:
               But Sir Aymer that had the skaith,
               
                  Ester the bargane I tolde of aire,
               Rade in England to purchase there,
               Of armed men greit companie,
               To venge him of the velanie,
               That Sir Edward the Noble Knight,
               Him did at Cree into the fight,
               Of good men hee assembled there,
               
                  
                     •
                  ell fifteene hundreth men and maire,
               That was of right greit Renounie:
               His way with all the folke tooke hee:
               And in the Land all priuilie
               Entred with that Cheualrie:
               Thinking Sir Edward to supprise,
               If hee might vpon any wise,
               For hee thought hee would him assailyie,
               Ere hee left into plaine battailyie.
            
            
               How Sir Edward with fifty, Wan fifteen hundreth, and Sir Aymery.
               
               NOw may yée heare of great ferlie,
               And als of right hie Cheualrie
               For Sir Edward was in the land
               With all his Menȝie right néere hand,
               And in the morning right airlie,
               Hee heard the Countrie men make cry,
               And had a witting of their comming,
               Then busked hee him but delaying,
               And lap on Horse deliuerlie,
               Hee had into his rout fiftie,
               All lap on Horse arrayed well,
               His small folke gart hee ilke deill,
               Withdraw them to a strait thereby:
               And hee rade foorth with his fifty.
               
                  A Knight that then was in his rout.
               Worthie, and wight, stalward and stout,
               Couries, and faire, and of good fame,
               Sir Alane Cathkart is his name,
               Told mee this tale, I to you tell.
               Greit Myst into the morning fell.
               So that men might not see them by
               For a Myst a bowdraught fullly,
               So hapned, that they fand the trace.
               Where the greit rout passed was
               Of their foes that before rade,
               Sir Edward that greit yarning had
               All time to doe greit Cheualry,
               With all his rout in full greit hy.
               Followed the trace where gane were they▪
               
               And before midmorne of the day,
               The Myst woxe cleare all suddenly:
               And then hée and his company,
               Was not a bowdraught from the rout.
               Then set they on them with a shout:
               For if they fled, they wist that they
               Should not get fourt part well away
               Therefor in auentur to die
               They would them part ere they would flée
               And when the English companie
               Saw on them come so sudddenly,
               Sik folke withoutten abasing,
               They were put into greit affraying,
               And the other but more abade,
               So hardelie among them rade:
               That feill of them to eird they bare,
               Astoneyed so greitly they were,
               Through the force of the first assay,
               And they that were to so greit affray,
               
                  They weind by far he had béene ma,
               For that they were assailyied sa.
               And Sir Edwards companie,
               When they had thrilled them hastelie,
               Set stoutlie in the head againe:
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   at their course bounden, and slaine
               Were of their foes a greit partie,
               That they affraiyed were vtterlie:
               So that they skailled greitly then,
               When good Sir Edward and his men
               Saw them into so euill array:
               The third time on them preiked they,
               And they that saw them so stoutly,
               Come on them, and so hardely,
               All their rout both lesse and maire,
               
                  
                     ••
                  ed fast skailling héere and there,
               Was none of them all so hardy
               To byde, but fled all commonly,
               To their warrand, and hée can chase,
               That wilfull to destroy them was:
               And some hée tooke, and some hes slaine:
               But Sir Aymery with méekle paine
               Escaped, and his gaite is gane:
               His men discomfist euerilkane.
               Some tane, some slaine, some fled away,
               This was a full faire point perfay.
               Loe how Hardement tane suddenly,
               And driuene syne to the end sharply,
               May gar oft time vnliklie thing,
               Come to right faire and good ending,
               As it fell into this cace here
               For Hardement withoutten wéere,
               Wan fifteene hundreth with fiftie,
               When aye for one they were threttie,
               
                  
                  
                     •
                  nd two men is ouer mony héere,
               But they were led on sik maneere,
               That they discomfist were ilkane.
               Sir Aymer home his gaite is gane,
               Right blyth, that so he gote away:
               
                  
                     •
                   trow, he sall not mony a day,
               Haue will to weirray that Countrie,
               With thy Sir Edward therein be.
               And he dwelt still into the land,
               Them that rebelled still weirrayand▪
               
               And in one yéere so weirrayed he:
               That he wan quyte all that Countrie,
               To his brothers peace the King:
               But that was nought but hard feghting.
               For in that time there him befell,
               Mony sore point, as I heard tell,
               The whilk are not all written here:
               But I wote well that in that yéere
               Threttéene Castels with strength he wan,
               And ouercame mony a moody man.
               And who of him the sooth would read,
               Had he had measure in his déede,
               I trow that worthier than he,
               In his time might not founden be:
               Except his brother alanerly,
               To whome into good Cheualry,
               I dare compare none, was in his day;
               For he led him with measure ay.
               And with wit all his Cheualry
               He gouerned ay so worthely,
               That he full oft vnlikly thing
               Brought right well to a good ending.
            
            
               
               How Iames Dowglas tooke Thomas Randell, And Alexander Stewart, as I heard tell.
               IN all that time Iames of Dowglas
               
               Into the Forrest ay trauelling was▪
               
               And it through hardement and slight,
               Occupied all, magre the might
               Of his feill foes, the whilk thay
               Set him oft syes in hard assay.
               But oft through wit, and through bountie,
               His purpose to good end brought he:
               Into that time himselfe through cace
               One night, as he trauelling was,
               And thought to haue had his resting,
               In a house by the Water of Lyn
                        •
                     ,
               
               And as he came with his Menyie,
               Neere hand the house, so listned he,
               And heard their Sawes euerilke deill.
               And he by that perceiued well,
               That they were strange men that there
               That night in that house harbred were:
               And as he thought, so fell through cace:
               For of Bonkill the Lord there was
               
                  Alexander Stewa
                        •
                     t heght he.
               With other two of great bountie:
               
                  Thomas Randell of great Renoun,
               And also Adam of Gordoun:
               That came there with great companie,
               And thought in the Forrest to lie,
               And occupie it with all their might,
               And with trauell and stalward fight,
               To chase Dowglas from that Countrie:
               But otherwise all yéed the glée.
               
                  When Iames of Dowglas had witting,
               And als to him there came tyding,
               That strange men had tane harberie,
               Into the place where he shupe to lie,
               He to that place past hastelie.
               Both he and all his companie
               And vmbeset the house about.
               When they within heard sik a rouf
               About the house, they raise in hy,
               And tooke their geare right hastely,
               And came foorth fra the haruest were.
               Their foes them met with weapons bare,
               And them assailyied right hardelie,
               And they defended doughtelie,
               With all their might, while at the last,
               Their foes preassed them so fast,
               That their folke failed them ilkane,
               
                  Thomas Randell there was tane,
               And Alexander Stewart alswa,
               Wounded into one place, or twa.
               
                  Adame of Gordoun fra the fight,
               What through strength, and what through slight,
               Escaped, and als seire of their men.
               But they that were arreisted then,
               Were of their taking wonder wa:
               But néedlings them behooude be sa.
               That night good Iames of Dowglas
               
               Made to Sir Alexander, that was
               His Emes sonne right gladsome chéere:
               So did he als withoutten wéere
               To Thomas Randell, for that he
               Was to the King in néere degrée
               Of blood, for his sister him bare.
               And on the morne withoutten maire,
               
                  Toward the noble King he rade,
               And with him both the two he had.
               The King of that present was blyth,
               And thanked him thereof feill syth,
               And to his Neuoy can he say
               Thou hes a whyle renoun
                     •
                  d thy fay,
               But now recounsailde thou mon be.
               Then to the King answered he,
               And said, ye chastie me, but ye
               Ought better for to chastyed be.
               For sen ye weirrayed the King
               Of England into plaine feghting,
               Ye sould preasse to direnye you right
               With might, and not yet with slight.
               The King said, yet fall it may
               Ere it be long, to sik assay:
               But sen thou speakes so rudely,
               It is great reason▪ that men chasty
               Thy proud words, while that thou knaw
               The right, and duerie that thou aw.
               The King without more delaying,
               Sent him to be in firme keeping,
               UUhere that he a whyle sall be,
               Nought all vpon his owne poustie.
            
            
               How the King at Gleclab
                        •
                     n, Discomfist Iohn of Lornes men.
               WHen Thomas Randel on this wise
               Was taken, as I here deuise:
               And sent to dwell in firme kéeping,
               For his speech he spake to the King.
               The King that thought vpon the skaith,
               The despite, and the velanie baith,
               
                  That Iohn of Lorne had to him doone:
               His 
                     •
                  ist assembled hée alsoone,
               And toward Lorne hée tooke the way,
               With all his men in good array.
               But Iohn of Lorne of his comming,
               Long ere hée came had good witting.
               And men on ilke side gathered hée:
               I trow two thousand they might bée.
               And sent them for to stop the way,
               Where the good King behooued to ga.
               
                  Clochmabanie heght that mountaine,
               I trow that into all Britaine,
               
               A higher Hill may not founden bée.
               There Iohn of Lorne gart his menyie,
               Enbushed bee aboue the way.
               If the King held that gait perfay,
               Hée thought hée should soone vanquisht be:
               And himselfe held him on the sea,
               Well neere the place with his Gaillayes,
               But the King that at all assayes,
               Was founden wise, and right wittie,
               Perceiued well their subtiltie,
               And him houed that gaite to goe,
               His men departed hée in two.
               And that to the good Lord of Dowglas,
               
               In whom all vertue winning was.
               Hée taught his Archers euerilkane.
               And the good Lord hes with him tane
               Sir Alexander the Phraser wight,
               And William Wiseman a good Knight,
               And with them then Sir Andro Gray,
               
               That with their Menyie held their way,
               And clambe the Hill deliuerly,
               And ere they of the other party
               
                  Perceiued them, they had ilkane,
               The hight abone their foes tane.
               The King and his men held their way,
               And when into the place were they
               Entred, the folke of Lorne in hy,
               Upon the King raised the cry,
               And shot, and tumbled on them stanes,
               Both greit and heauie for the nanes.
               But they skaithed not greitly the King,
               For hee had there in his leading,
               Men that light and deliuered were,
               And light armour vpon them bare,
               So that they stoutly clambe the Hill,
               And stopped their foes to fulfill
               The most part of their fellony,
               And als vpon the other party,
               Came Iames of Dowglas, and his rou
                     •
                  ,
               And shot vpon them with a shout,
               And wounded themwith arrows fast,
               And with their Swords at the last,
               They rushed among them hardely
               But they of Lorne full manfully
               Greit and a peart defence can ma.
               But when they saw, that they were sa
               Assailyied vpon two parties,
               And saw well that their enemies,
               Had all the fairer of the fight,
               In full greit hy they tooke the flight,
               And they a felloun chase can ma,
               And slew all that they might ouerta.
               And they that might escape perfay,
               Right to a Water held their way,
               That ran downe by the Hilles side,
               That was so straite so déepe and wide,
               
                  That men on no wise might it passe,
               But at a Brig that narrow was.
               To that Brig held they fast their way,
               And to breake it can fast assay.
               
                  
                     •
                  ut they them chased when they them saw
               Make their a rest but dread or aw
               They rushed vpon them hastelie,
               And discomfist them vtterlie:
               And held the Brig haile while the King,
               With all the folke of his leading,
               Passed the Brig all at their ease,
               To Iohn of Lorne it should displease,
               I trow when hee his men might sée,
               Out of the shipes into the sea.
               Bee slaine and chased from the Hill,
               And hee might set no let theretill:
               For it angers as gretumlie,
               To good heartes that are worthie,
               To see their foes fulfill their will,
               As to themselfe to thole the ill,
            
            
               How Linlithgow-Peill winnen was Through William Binnie, and his purchase.
               AT sik mischiefe were they of Lorne,
               
               For feill their liues there hes forlorne
               And other some had fled away.
               The King in haste gart sease the Prey,
               Ouer all the Land, where men may see,
               So greit aboundance come of fee,
               That it were wonder to behold,
               The King that stout was starke and bold,
               To Dunstaffage right sturdely,
               A Siege set: and busily
               
                  Assailyied that Castell for to get:
               And in short time hée hes them set
               In sik thrang, that therein were than,
               That magre theires hée it wan:
               And a good Wardane therein set.
               And betaught him both men and meat:
               So that hée long time there might bée,
               Magre them all of that Countrie.
               Sir Alexander of Argyle that saw
               The King destroy vp cleane, and law
               His land, sent treitise to the King,
               And Came his man but more dwelling:
               And hée receiued him to his peace.
               But Iohn of Lorne his sonne, that was
               Sittell, as hee was wont to bee,
               Hée 
                     •
                  led in shippes to the sea,
               But they that left were on the land,
               Were to the King all obeysand:
               And he their pledges all hes tane,
               And toward Peirth againe is gane,
               To play him there into the Plaine,
               Yet Lowthiane was him againe:
               And at Linlithgow was yet a Peill,
               
               Méekle and starke, and stuffed well
               With Englishmen that was resset
               To them that with armours, and meat,
               From Edinburgh would to Striuilng ga,
               And from Striuiling would againe alswa,
               That to the Countrie did greit ill,
               Now may yee heare if that yée will,
               Of interludes and jeopardies,
               That men assailyied mony wise,
               Castells and Peills for to ta,
               And this Linlithgow was ane of tha.
               
                  And I sall tell you how it was tane.
               In the Countrie there winned ane,
               That husband was, and with his fée,
               Oft hay vnto the Peill led he.
               
                  William Binny to name he heght,
               A stalward man he was in feght.
               He saw so hard the Countrie stad,
               That he great noy and pitie had:
               Through Fortresses that were then
               Gouernde and led with Englishmen,
               Then trauelde men out of measure.
               He was a stout Carle, and a sture:
               And of himselfe doure, and hardy.
               And had friends that winned him by,
               And shewed to some his priuitie:
               And vpon his conuéene gate he:
               Men that might enbushment ma,
               UUhile that he sould with his UUane ga:
               To lead them hay into the Peill:
               But his UUane sould be stuffed well.
               For aught men armed in the bodie,
               In his UUane sould sit priuilie:
               And with hay heilled all about.
               And himselfe that was dour and stout,
               Sould by the UUane gang idlely,
               And a Yeoman wight, and hardy,
               Before sould driue the Wane, and weare
               A hatchat that would sharpely sheare
               Under this belt: and when the ȝet
               UUere opned, and they were thereat:
               UUhen he heard him cry sturdely,
               Call all, call all, then in great by,
               He sould stryke with the axe in twa
               The chenyies: and then in hy sould thay
               
                  That were within the Wane come out,
               And debate make, while that the rout
               That sould néere by enbushed be,
               Come for to maintaine that melle,
               This was into the Haruest tyde,
               When fields that faire were, and wyde,
               Charged with corne, and furnisht were
               For sundrie cornes that they bare,
               Woxt ripe to win to man his food.
               And the trées all charged stood,
               UUith seire fruits on sundrie wise.
               In this swée time, as I deuise,
               They of the Peill had winnen hay,
               And with that Binny spoken had thay,
               To lead their hay, for he was néere:
               And he consented but danger.
               And said, that he in the morning
               Well soone a Fodder sould in bring.
               Fairer and greater, and well more,
               Than he did onie that yéere before,
               And held them cunnand sikkerlie,
               For that night warned he priuilie,
               Them that in his Wane sould ga,
               And them that bushed sould be alswa.
               And they so greatly sped them there,
               That ere day they enbushed were,
               Well neere the Peill, where they might heare,
               The cry, als soone as ony wéere.
               And held them so still, but stéering,
               That none of them had perceiuing,
               And this Binny fast can him paine,
               To dresse his Menyie in his Wane:
               And all a while before the day,
               He had them heilled well with hay.
               
                  And made him then to yoke his fée
               While men the sunne might shining sée:
               And some that were within the Peill,
               
               Were 
                     ••
                  hed out on their owne Séele,
               To win their haruest néere thereby.
               Then Binny with his companie,
               That in his Wane closed he had:
               UUent on his way but more abade:
               And called his Wane toward the Peill,
               
               And the Porter that saw him well.
               Came néere the ȝet, it opned soone.
               And then Binny withoutten hone,
               Gart call the Wane deliuerly,
               And when it set was euenly,
               Betwixt the chéekes of the ȝet:
               So that he might it close no gaite:
               He cried loude, call all, call all.
               And he then léete his Gad-wand fall,
               And hewde in two the chenyie in hy,
               
                  Binny with that deliuerly
               Raught to the Porter sik a rout,
               That blood and harnes both yeed out:
               And they that were within the Wane,
               Lap out belyue, and soone hes slaine
               Men of the Castell haillelie,
               Then in a while begouth the crie,
               And they that néere embushed were,
               Lap out, and came with swords bare,
               And tooke the Castell all but paine,
               And hes them that therein was slaine.
               And they that were went foorth beforne,
               When they the Castell saw forlorne,
               They fled to warrand here and there:
               And some to Edinburgh can fare.
               
                  And to Striuiling are other gane,
               And some into the gaite were slaine.
            
            
               How Thomas Randel came to the Kings Peace, And was made Erle withoutten lies.
               
                  BYnny on this wise with his Wane,
               Wan the Peill, and their men hes slaine;
               Syne gaue it to the King in hy,
               That him rewarded worthelie,
               And gart downe driue it to the ground.
               And syne ouer all the Land can send,
               Setting in peace all the Countrie:
               That vnto him obey and would bée,
               And when a litle time was spent,
               Efter Thomas Randell hée sent,
               And with him so well treated hée,
               That hee his man heght for to bée,
               The King his anger there him forgaue,
               And to maintaine his state him gaue
               
                  Murray, and Erle thereof him made,
               And other sundrie Lands brade,
               Hée gaue him into Heritage:
               Hée knew his worthie vassallage,
               And his greit wit, and his auise.
               His traistie heart, and his léele seruice.
               Therefore in him affyed hee,
               And made him rich of lands and fee,
               As hee was certes right worthie:
               For if men speake of him truelie,
               Hee was so couragious a Knight.
               So wise, so worthie, and so wight.
               And of sa Soueraigne greit bounty,
               That méekle of him may spoken bee.
               
                  And for I thinke of him to read,
               And to tell part of his good deede,
               I will describe you his fassouns,
               And part of his conditiouns.
               Hee was of measurable stature,
               And all well portrayed at measure.
               With brade visage pleasant and faire,
               Courtes at point, and debonaire,
               And of right sikker contéening:
               Lawtie hee loued attour all thing.
               Falset, treasoun, and fellony,
               Hée gainestood euer allutterly:
               And loued Honour and Larges,
               And aye maintained Righteousnesse:
               In company hée was Solacious,
               And with that blyth, and amorous,
               And good Knights hée loued aye.
               And if that I the sooth will say,
               Hee was fulfilled so of all bountie:
               As of all Uertues made were hee.
               I will commend him heere no more,
               But yee shall well heare farthermore.
               That hée for his déeds worthie,
               Sould well bee praised Souerainely.
            
            
               How Thomas Randell that was worthie, Sieged Edinburgh Castell stoutlie.
               WHen the King was with him saught,
               And greit Lordship had to him taught.
               Hée woxt so wise, and so auisie:
               That his lands first stablisht hee.
               And syne hee sped him to the wéere,
               To helpe his Eme at his power.
               
                  And with the consent of the King,
               And with a simple apparelling,
               To EDINBVRGH hee went in hy
               With good men into companie,
               And set a Siege to the Castell,
               That then was garnisht wonder well.
               With men and vittaile at all right,
               So that they dred no mans might.
               But this good Erle not for thy,
               Set a Siege to it full peartlie,
               And preassed the folke that therein was:
               So that not ane the ȝet durst passe.
               They may abide therein and eat
               Their vittaile, while they ought may get:
               But I trow they shall letted bée,
               To purchease more in that Countrie,
               That time Edward of England King,
               Had giuen the Castell in kéeping,
               To Sir Peirs Libald a Gascoun.
               
               And when they of his Warnisoun,
               Saw the Siege left there so straitly,
               They mistraisted him of Traitourie,
               That hee spoken had with the King,
               And for that ilke mistrowing▪
               
               They tooke and put him in prison:
               And of their owne Nation,
               They made a Constable them to lead,
               Both wittie and ware, and wight of déede
               And hee set wit, and strength, and slight,
               To keepe the Castell with all his might▪
               
               But now of them I will bee still,
               And speake a litle while I will
               Of the doughtie Lord of Dowglas,
               
               That left into the Forrest was.
               
                  Where hée mony a jeopardie,
               And faire points of Cheualry
               Prooued, as well by night as day,
               To them that in the Castell lay:
               Of Iedburgh, and Roxburgh, but I
               Will let feill of them now passe by:
               For I cannot rehearse them all,
               And though I could, trow well yée shall
               Say, that I might not suffice thereto,
               There should so méekle bée to doe,
               But it, that I wate sikkerlie,
               Efter my wit, rehearse shall I.
            
            
               How Iames Dowglas gart Ladders make Of hempe, the Castell of Roxburgh to tak
                     •
                  
               
               THe time that the good Erle Thomas,
               
               Assieged, as the letter sayes,
               
                  Edinburgh, Iames of Dowglas
               
               Set all his wit for to purchase,
               Now Roxburgh through subtiltie:
               Or ony craft, might winnen bée.
               While hée gart Sym of the Ledhouse,
               
               A craf
                     •
                  ie man, and curious,
               Of Hempine rapes Ladders ma,
               And tréene steppes bounden la,
               That they would breake on no kin wise,
               A Crooke they made at their deuise
               Of Yrne, that was starke and square,
               That fra it in a kernell were
               Festened, it should hing thereby,
               And the Ladder therefra straightly.
               This good Lord Dowglas as soone
               As this deuised was, and done
               
                  Gaddered good men in priuitie:
               Thrée score, I trow that they might bée:
               And in the Fastings Euen right,
               In the beginning of the night,
               To the Castell tooke their way,
               With blacke Frogges all heilled they,
               The armours, that they on them had.
               They came neere by there, and abade.
               And sent haillely their horse them fro,
               And in a raying on a rout they goe,
               On hands and féete, when they were néere
               Right as they Ky, and Oxen were,
               That were vnbounden left thereout,
               It was right mirke withoutten dout:
               But one vpon the Wall that lay,
               Beside him to his Féere can say:
               This man thinkes to make good cheare,
               (And named a Hu
                     •
                  band thereby néere)
               That hes left all his Oxen out.
               The other sayes, that is no dout:
               Hée shall make good cheare this night though they
               Bée with the blacke Dowglas led away:
               They weind the Dowglas and his men
               Had beene Oxen: for they yéed then
               On hands and féete, aye ane and ane.
               The Dowglas right good tent hes tane
               To all their spéech, but right soone they,
               Held speaking inward both their way.
               
                  DOwglas men there of was blyth.
               And sped them to the wall swyth.
               And soone had vp their ladders set,
               That made a clap when the crooke knet,
               And fastned fast in the kyrnell.
               Ane of the watches heard it well,
               
                  And busked hidderward but bade.
               But Ledhouse that the ladders made,
               Sped him to climbe vp first the wall:
               But ere he was commen vp all,
               He that that Waird had in kéeping,
               Met him right at the vpcomming.
               And for he thought to ding him doun,
               He made nouther cry nor soun:
               But sought to him deliuerly.
               And he that was in ieopardy
               To die, a loup he to him made,
               And got him by the necke but bade,
               And stikked him vpward with a knife:
               UUhile with his hand he reft his life,
               And when he dead so saw him ly:
               Up on the Wall he went in hy:
               And downe the bodie kest them till.
               And said: all gangs as we will,
               Spéed you all vp deliuerly.
               And they did so in full great hy:
               But ere they gat vp there came ane
               That saw Ledhouse stand him allane:
               And knew he was noght of their men,
               And in great hy rushed to him then,
               And him assailyied sturdelie:
               But he slew him despiteouslie:
               For he was armed, and was wight:
               The other naked was I hight,
               And had not for to stynt a straike.
               Sik melle there vp can he make,
               While Dowglas and his Menyie all,
               Were winnen vp vpon the UUall:
               Then to the Towre they went in hy,
               The folke that time were haillely
               
                  Into the hall, at their dansing,
               And singing, and other wayes playing:
               As vpon Fastings Euen is
               The Custome, to make ioy and blisse,
               To men that were in sauitie.
               So trowed they that time to be:
               But ere they wist, into the hall,
               
                  Dowglas, and his rout came all.
               And cried on hight, Dowglas, Dowglas,
               
               And they that mo were then he was,
               Heard Dowglas cry so hiddeously,
               They were abased for the cry:
               And shupe them no defence to ma.
               And they but pitie can them sla,
               While they had gotten the vpper hand,
               The other fled to séeke warrand,
               That out of measure the deede can dread.
               The Wardane saw how that it yéed,
               That called was Gilmyn de Fyrmes:
               In the great Towre he gotten hes,
               And other of his company,
               And closed the ȝets hastely▪
               
               The laue that left were thereout,
               Were tane, or slaine▪ this is no dout:
               But gif that ony lap the wall.
               The Dowglas held that night the hall,
               Although his foes thereat was wa.
               His men were ganging to and fra,
               Throughout the Castell all that night,
               While on the morne that day was light.
               THe Wardan that was in the Towre:
               That was a man of great valour,
               
                  Gilmyn de Firmes when he saw,
               The Castell tynt both hie and law:
               
                  He set his might for to defend
               The Towre, but they without him send
               Arrowes in so great quantitie,
               That sore annoyed thereof was he.
               Yet while the other day not for thy
               He held the Towre full sturdely.
               And then at an assault he was
               Wounded so felly in the face,
               That he was dréeding of his life:
               Therefore he treated them but strife,
               And yald the Towre on sik maner,
               That he, and all that with him wer,
               Sould safely passe into England,
               
               
                  Dowglas held them full good cunnand,
               And conuoyde him to his Countrie.
               But there full short whyle liued he:
               For through the wound into the face,
               He died soone, and buried was.
               
                  Dowglas the Castell séesed all,
               That then was closed with stalward wall:
               And sent this Ledhouse to the King,
               That made him right good rewarding:
               And his brother in full great hy,
               Sir Edward that was so doughty,
               He sent hidder to tumble downe,
               Both Towre, Castell, and als Dungeoun,
               And he came with great companie,
               And gart trauell so busilie,
               That Towre, & Wall, right to the ground
               He gart cast downe in litle stound:
               And dwelt there, while that Teuydaill,
               
               Came to the Kings peace all haill:
               Except Iedburgh, and other that néere
               To the Englishmens bounds were:
            
            
               
               How William Frances led Thomas Randell, Vp to the Craig of Edinburgh Castell.
               WHen Roxburgh was win on this wise,
               The Erle Thomas that hie emprise,
               Set ay on Souerane hie bountie,
               At Edinburgh with his Menyie,
               Was lying at the Siege, as I
               Told you before all openly.
               But fra he heard how Roxburgh was
               Tane with a traine, all his purchase,
               And wit and businesse, I hight:
               He set to purchase him some slight:
               How he might help him through victorie,
               Melled with hie Cheualrie:
               To win the wall of the Castell,
               Through some kin slight, for he wist well,
               That no strength might it plainelie get,
               While there within were men and meat.
               Therefore priuily spéered he,
               Gif ony man might there founden be,
               That could find ony ieopardy,
               To climbe the wall right priuily:
               And he sould haue his warisoun:
               For it was his intentioun,
               To put himselfe in auenture:
               Or at that Siege on him misfure.
               Then was there one William Frances,
               
               Wise and expert, wise and courtes:
               And he in his youthhead had bene
               In the Castell, when he had séene
               The Erle so ernestly him set
               Some subtiltie, or wyle to get,
               
                  Where through the Castell haue might hée,
               Hee came to him in priuitie.
               And said, Mee thinke yée would blithlie,
               That men found you some jeopardie,
               How yee might ouer the walles win:
               And certes, if yée will begin
               For to assay on sik a wise,
               I vndertake for my seruice,
               For to ken you to climbe the wall,
               And I shall formest bée of all
               Wherewith a short Ladder may wee
               (I hope of twelue foote it may bee)
               Climbe the Wall vp all quietlie.
               And if that yée will wit how I
               Wate this, I shall you blythlie say.
               When I was young this hinder day,
               My father was kéeper of yone house,
               And I was somedeill lecherous,
               And loued a Wench héere in the towne,
               And that I but suspitioun:
               Might repaire to her priuilie,
               Of rapes to mee a ladder made I:
               And therewith ouer the wall I slade,
               A strait rod there I spyed had,
               Into the Craige syne downe I went,
               And oft syes come to mine intent.
               And when that it drew néere the day,
               I held againe the samine way,
               And aye came in but perceiuing,
               I vsed so long that trauelling:
               So that I can that rod goe right,
               Though men sée neuer so mirke a night.
               And if yée thinke yée would assay,
               To passe vp after mee that way,
               
                  Up to the Wall I shall you bring,
               If GOD vs saue from perceiuing
               Of them that Watches are on the wall,
               And if it vs so faire may fall,
               That wee our ladders may vp set,
               While a man on the Wall may get.
               Hee shall defend if there bée néede,
               While the remnand vp them spéed,
               The Erle was blyth of that carping,
               And heght to him faire rewarding:
               And vndertooke that gate to ga,
               And bade him soone his ladder ma.
               And hold him priuie while they might,
               Set for their purpose on a night,
               Soone efter was the Ladder made:
               And then the Erle but more abade,
               Puruayed him a night priuily,
               With threttie men wight and hardy:
               And in a myrke night held their way,
               They put them in full hard assay,
               And to greit perill sikkerly,
               I trow, might they haue séene clearely,
               That gate had not béene vndertane,
               Although to stoppe them had not beene ane
               For the Craig was high and hiddeous,
               And the climming right perrillous,
               If ony hapned to slide, or fall,
               Hee should bee soone too frushed all,
               The night was mirke, as I heard say,
               And to the foot soone commen were they
               Of the Craige that was high and shore,
               Then William Frances them before,
               Clambe in the Crookes before them ay:
               And at the backe him followed they:
               
                  With méekle paine, while to, while fro.
               They clambe in the Crookes so,
               While halfe the Craig they climmen had:
               And there a place they found so brade,
               That they might sit on allanerly:
               And they were ayndlesse and weary,
               And there abode their aind to ta,
               And right as they were sitting sa,
               Right abone them, vpon the Wall,
               The Chak-watches assembled all,
               Now helpe them God that all thing may,
               For in full greit perill are they.
               For might they see them, there should nane
               Escape out of that place vnslaine,
               To dead with stons they sould them ding,
               For they might helpe themselues nothing:
               But wonder mirke there was the night.
               So that they had of them no sight.
               And not for thy: yet was there one,
               Of them that swakked downe a stone,
               And said, away treatoure, I see thée well,
               Nowbeit hee saw of him no deill
               Out ouer their heads flew the stane,
               And they sate still lurking ilkane.
               The Watches when they heard no stéere,
               From that place passed all in feare
               And car
                     •
                  ing held they foorth their way,
               The Erle Thomas as soone as they,
               That on the Craige, sat then him by,
               Toward the Craige clambe hastely,
               And hidder came with méekle maine,
               And not but greit perrill, and paine,
               For fra thyne vp was grei
                     •
                  ousar,
               To climbe vp, nor beneath by far,
               
                  But what kin paine so euer they had,
               Right to the Wall they came but bade:
               That was well neere twelue foot on hight.
               And withoutten perceiuing or sight,
               They set the Ladder to the Wall:
               And syne Frances before them all
               Clambe vp, and syne Sir Andro Gray,
               
               And syne the Erle himselfe perfay,
               Was the third man the Wall can ta▪
               
               When they there downe their Lord swa
               Saw, climbe vp vpon the Wall,
               As wood men they clambe efter all:
               But ere vp commen all were they,
               They that were watches to assay:
               Heard steering, and priuie speaking,
               And also framing of arming.
               And on them set full sturdelie,
               And they met them full hardelie:
               And slew of them despiteouslie,
               Then through the Castell rose the cry,
               Treasoun, treasoun, they cried fast,
               Then some of them were so agast.
               That they fled, and lap ouer the wall
               But to say sooth they fled not all.
               For the Constable that was hardie,
               All armed ished foorth to the cry:
               And with him feill hardie, and stout.
               Yet was the Erle hard with his rout,
               Feghting with them vpon the Wall:
               But soone discomfist hée them all,
               By that his men were commen ilkane,
               Up to the wall: and hée hes tane,
               His way downe to the Castell soone.
               In greit perill hée hes him done,
               
                  For they were ma than he therein.
               And they had bene of good conuine:
               But some thing they affrayed were.
               And not for thy with weapons bare,
               The Constable and his company,
               Met him and his greit hardely.
               Their men might see right bargane rise:
               For with weapons on mony wise,
               They dang on other at their might,
               While swords that were faire and bright,
               Were to the hilts all bloody.
               Then hiddeously began the crie:
               For they that felled, or stikked were:
               Right hiddeously can cry and raire.
               The good Erle and his companie,
               Faught in that feght so sturdelie,
               That all their foes rushed were:
               The Constable was slaine right there.
               And fra hee fell, the remanand
               Fled, where they might best to warrand,
               They durst not qide, nor make debate.
               The Erle was handled there so haite,
               That had it not hapned through cace,
               That the Constable there slaine was,
               He had bene in great perill there:
               But then they fled, there was no maire,
               Ilke man for to saue his life:
               Fled foorth his dayes for to drife:
               And some slade downe out ouer the wall.
               The Erle hes tane the Castell all,
               For there was none durst him withstand
               I neuer heard into no land,
               UUas Castell tane so hardely,
               Outtaken Tyre alanerly.
               
                  UUhen Alexander the Conquerour,
               That conquered Babylons Towre,
               Lap fra a Bar foorth to the Wall,
               UUhere he among his foes all,
               Defended him full doughtely,
               UUhile that his noble Cheualry,
               With ladders ouer the walls yeed,
               That nouther left for dead nor dréede.
               For when they wist well that the King,
               Was in the towne, there was nothing
               Into that time that stynt them moght,
               For all perill they set at noght.
               They clambe the wall and Areste
               
               Came first to the good King, where he
               Defended him with all his might.
               And they so hard were stad in fight,
               That he was felled on his knée,
               Then to his backe he set a tree:
               For dréede they sould behind assailyie.
               
                  Areste then to the battailyie
               Sped him in hy so sturdely,
               And dang on them so doggedly,
               That the King well rescued was.
               For his men into sundrie place
               Clambe ouer the walles, & soght the King,
               And him rescued with hard feghting,
               And wan the town deliuerly.
               Outtaken this taking alanerly,
               I heard neuer in no time gane,
               Where Castell was so stoutly tane:
               And of this taking that I méene,
               Sanct Margaret the good haly Quéene
               Wist in her time, through reueling
               Of him that knowes, and wats all thing.
               
                  Therefore in stead of Prophecy,
               She left a taikning full ioly,
               That is there in her Chappell.
               Sho gart well portray a Castell,
               A ladder vp to the wall standing
               And a man thereupon climming,
               And wrote on him, as old men sayes,
               In French, Garde vous de Francoys.
               
               And for this word she gart write sa:
               Men weind ye Frenchmen sould it ta:
               But Frances called was he,
               That so clambe vp in priuitie.
               She wrote it as in Prophecy,
               And it fell afterward soothly,
               Right as sho said, for tane it was,
               And Frances led them vp that place.
               On this wise Edinburgh was tane,
               And they that were therein ilkane,
               Outher tane, or slane, or lap the walk,
               Their goods haue they leaued all:
               And the house euerilkane.
               Sir Peirs Libald that was tane,
               As I said aire in Boyes they fand,
               And into hard festning sittand.
               They brought him to the Erle in hy,
               And he gart loose him hastely,
               And he became the Kings man.
               They send word to the King right than,
               And told how the Castell is tane:
               And he in hy is hidder gane,
               With mony men in company:
               And gart cast downe all haillely,
               Both Towre, and walles to the ground.
               And syne ouer all the land can found,
               
                  Séesing the Countrie to his peace.
               Of this déede that so worthie was:
               The Erle was praised gretumly,
               The King that saw him so worthy,
               Was blyth, and glad attour the laue:
               And to maintaine his state him gaue
               Rents and lands fair ineugh.
               And he to so great worship dreugh,
               That all spoke of his great bountie:
               His foes oft syes astoneied he:
               For he fled neuer for force in fight.
               UUhat sall I more say of his might?
               His great manhéede, and his bountie,
               Garres him yet renowned be.
            
            
               How Sir Edward wan Ruglein-Peill, And Dundie, sine St
                        •
                     iuiling sieged well.
               In this time that thir ieopardies
               Of thir Castells, as I deuise,
               UUere enchéeued so suddenlie,
               Sir Edward Bruce that was worthie
               Had all Galloway and Niddisdaill
               
               UUinnen to his liking all haill,
               And doungen downe the Castells all,
               Right to the dykes both Towre and Wall,
               He heard them say, and knew it well,
               That in Ruglyn was then a Peill.
               Hidder he went with his Menyie,
               And winne it in short time hes he:
               Syne to Dundie hes tane the way,
               That then was holden (as I heard say)
               Against the King: therefore in hy
               He set a Siege thereto stoutly,
               
                  And lay there till it yolden was.
               To Striuiling syne the way hee taes,
               Where good Sir Philip the Mowbray,
               
               That was so doughtie at assay,
               UUas UUardane, and had in kéeping
               The Castell of the English King.
               Thereto a Siege hee set stoutly,
               They bikkered oft syes sturdely.
               But greit Cheualrie was done nane.
               Sir Edward fra the Siege was tane
               A well long whyle about it lay
               From the Lentrone, that is to say,
               While forrow the Sainct Iohnes Masse.
               The English folke that therein was,
               Begouth to failyie vittaile by than,
               And Sir Philip as doughtie man,
               Treated till they consented were:
               That if at Midsommer then a yéere
               To come, it were not with battaile
               Rescued, that then withoutten faile,
               Hée should the Castell yéelde quietlie,
               That cunnand brake they sikkerlie,
            
            
               How Sir Edward withoutten sturne, Vndertook the battell of Bannock-burn.
               
               ANd when this cunnand thus was made,
               Sir Philip into England rade:
               And told the King all the haill tale:
               How that he twelue moneth all haill
               Had, as written was in their Tailyie,
               To rescue Striuiling with battailyie,
               And when hee heard Sir Philip say.
               That Scottish men had set a day,
               
                  To feght, and hee such leasure had
               To puruay him hée was right glad:
               And said, It was greit sucquidrie,
               That set them vpon sik follie:
               For hée thought to bee ere that day
               So puruayed, and in sik array,
               That there sould no strength him withstād
               And when the Lords of England
               
               Heard that this day was set plainely.
               They judged it all to greit foly,
               And thought to haue them at their lyking,
               If men abade them in feghting.
               But oft failȝies that fooles thought,
               And yet wise men comes nought
               To that end, that they weine alwayes:
               A litle stone oft, as men sayes,
               May gar walter a méekle Wane,
               Na mans might may stand againe
               The grace of God, that all things stéeres,
               Hée wates whereto all thinges afféeres,
               And dispones at his liking
               Efter his ordinance all thing.
               WHen Sir Edward, as I you say,
               Had giuen so outragious a day,
               To yéelde, or to rescue Striuiling:
               Right to the King then went hee syne:
               And told what treaty hée had made,
               And what day hée them giuen had▪
               
               The King said, when hee heard the day,
               That was vnwisely done perfay,
               I neuer yet heard so long warning
               Was giuen to so mighty a King,
               As is the King of England.
               
               For hée hes now into his hand
               
                  
                  England, Ireland, and Wales alswa,
               And Aquitayne yet with all tha
               Dwells vnder his Senyeory.
               And of Scotland a greit party
               And of treasure so stuffed is hée:
               That hee may wageours haue plentie.
               And wee are few against so feill.
               GOD may right well our weirdes deill:
               But wée are set in jeopardie
               To tyne or win then hastelie.
               Sir Edward said, So God mée réede,
               Though hée and all that hee may 
                     •
                  éede
               Come, wée shall feght all, though they were moe
               When the King heard his brother so
               Speake, to the Battell so hardelie,
               Hée praised him in his heart greatly.
               And said (Brother) sen so is gane:
               That this thing thus is vndertane,
               Shape wée vs therefore manly,
               And all that loues vs tenderly,
               And the fréedome of this Countrie,
               Puruay them at that time to bée
               Boun on their best wise, that they may.
               So if our foes will assay,
               To rescue Striuiling with battaile,
               That wée of purpose gar them faile.
            
            
               The sembling of the English Host, That with great power cam and boast.
               ON this wise all assented were,
               And bade their men all make them yare:
               For to bee boun against that day.
               Weapons and armours puruayed they.
               
                  And all that afféered to feghting:
               And of England the mightie King,
               Puruayed him in so greit array,
               That Certes, I heard neuer say,
               That Englishmen more apparell
               Made, than they did for that battell.
               For when the time was commen néere,
               The King assembled his powéere.
               And beside his owne Cheualrie
               That was so greit, it was ferlie
               Hée had of mony a farre Countrie,
               With him good men of greit bountie,
               Of France, and other Cheualry,
               Hée had into his companie,
               The Erle of Henault als was there,
               And with him met that worthie were:
               Of Gasconyie, and of Almanyie.
               
               And of the worthiest of Brittainyie:
               Hée had wight men, and well farrand,
               Armed cleanelie both head and hand.
               Of England als the Cheualrie,
               Hée had there gaddered so cleanelie,
               That none were left might weapons wéeld,
               Or worthie were to feght in field.
               Of Wales als with him had hée:
               And of Ireland a greit Menyie:
               Of Poytow, Aquitayne, and Bayoun:
               Hee had mony of greit renowne.
               Of Scotland hée had yet then,
               A greit Menyie of worthie men.
               When altogedder assembled were,
               Hee had of feghters with him there,
               An hundreth thousand men and ma:
               And fourtie thousand were of tha,
               
                  Armed on Horse, both head and hand,
               And of tha yet were three thousand,
               With barded Horse, in plait and mailyie,
               To make the front of the battailyie.
               And fiftie thousand of Archers
               Hée had, withoutten Hobillers,
               And men on foot, and small rangall,
               That kéeped Harnesse, and Uittaill:
               Hee had so feil it were ferly▪
               
               Of Cartes als that yéed him by,
               So feill, that by them that charged were
               With Pauilliouns, and that vessell bare,
               And apparell for Chamber and Hall,
               Fourescore were charged with Fewall,
               They were so feill where that they rade,
               And their battells were so brad:
               And so greit rout held they there,
               That men that méekle Host might sée there
               Ouertooke the Lands largelie,
               Men might sée there who had béene by,
               Mony a worthie man and wight,
               And mony an armour gaylie dight.
               And mony a sturdie stéering Stéede.
               Arrayed aye into rich wéede.
               Mony Helmes, and Haberiones,
               Shields, Speares, and eke Pennouns:
               And so mony a comelie Knight,
               That it séemed into that sight.
               They should vanquish the world all haill.
               Why should I make too long my tale?
               To Baruike are they come ilkane,
               And some therein hes Innes tane:
               And some lodged without the towne,
               In tents, and in Pauillioun.
            
            
               
               How Englishmen manassed at will The Scots, and delt their lands till.
               ANd when the King his Oast hes séene
               So great, so good men and so cleane:
               He was right ioyfull in his thought:
               And well supposed, that there were nought
               A King in World might him withstand,
               Him thought all winnen to his hand.
               And largely among his men,
               The lands of Scotland dealt he then.
               Of other mens lands large was he:
               And they that were of his Menyie,
               Manassed the Scottishmen haillely,
               With great words, and not for thy:
               Or that they come to their intent,
               Holl
                     •
                  s in haill claith sall be rent.
            
            
               In ton battels the Englishmen Were delt, & taught to Chiftanes then
               THe King through counsell of his men,
               His folke delt into battels ten.
               In ilk battell, were ten thousand,
               That thought they stalwardly sould stand
               In battell and sould hold their right.
               And let not for their foes might,
               He set Leaders to ilk battall,
               That knowen were of good gouernall.
               And to renouned Erles twa,
               Of Glocester and Herfurd were tha,
               He gaue the Uangard in leading,
               With mony men at their bidding,
               Ordained with full great array,
               They were so Cheualrous that thay
               
                  Trowed, gif they came to the fight,
               There sould no strength withstand their might:
               And the King when his Menyie were
               Diuided into battells sear:
               His owne battell ordained he,
               And who sould at his brydle be.
               Sir Geiles the Argentine he set,
               Upon the one side his renyie to get:
               And of Wallance Sir Aymery:
               On other halfe that was worthy,
               For into their soueraine bountie,
               Ouer all the laue affyed he.
            
            
               How all the Noble Cheualry, At Edinburgh tooke harbery.
               WHen the King vpon this wise,
               Had ordained, (as I here deuise)
               His battels and his renowning:
               He raise earely in the morning.
               And fra Barwicke they tooke their way.
               Both hilles and valleyes couered thay.
               And the battels there was so brade,
               Departed ouer the hilles rade:
               The Sunne was bright, and shined cleare:
               And armours that bright byrneist were,
               So blenked with the Sunnes beame:
               That all the land séemed in a leame,
               Banners right freshly flambisighand,
               And Pensalls to the wind waiuand:
               So feill they were of seir Countreyes,
               That it was wonder to deuise:
               And I sould tell all their afféere,
               Their countenance and their manéere,
               
                  Though I couth, I sould cumbred be.
               The King with all his great Menyie,
               To Edinburgh are they commen right.
               They were all out too feill to fight,
               With few folke of a simple land:
               But where God helpes, who may withstand.
            
            
               How in this time assembled then, To King Robert hes certaine men.
               THe King Robert when he heard say.
               That Englishmen in sik array:
               And into so great quantitie,
               Came in his land▪ in hy gart he
               All men be summonde priuily,
               And they came all full wilfully,
               To the Torwood, where that the King
               
                  
                     •
                  ad ordainde to make their meéeting.
               Sir Edw
                        •
                     rd the Bruce the worthy,
               Came with a full great company
               Of good men armed well, and dight:
               Hardie and forcy, for to fight.
               
                  Walter Stewart of Scotland syne.
               That then was but a beardlesse hyne,
               Came with a rout of Noble men:
               That men be countenance might thē ken.
               And the good Lord Dowglas alswa,
               Brought with him men, I vnderta:
               That well were vsde into feghting,
               They sall the lesse haue abasing,
               Gif them betide in thrang to be:
               And ane auantage sall sooner sée,
               For to astoney their foes might,
               Than men that vses not to fight.
               
                  The Erle of Murray with his men,
               Arrayed well came also then,
               Into good conuéene for to fight:
               And wilfull to maintaine their right.
               Outtaken mony other Baroun,
               And Knights of full greit Renoun,
               Came with their men full stalwardly,
               When they assembled were hailly,
               Of feghting men, I trow, they were
               Threttie thousand and some deill mare,
               Withoutten carriage and purall:
               That carried Harnesse and Uittall.
               Ouer all the Host yéed the King,
               And beheld to their conteening:
               And saw that of full faire afféere,
               And hardie countenance they were,
               By lyklinesse the most Cowart,
               Seemed to doe full well his part,
               The King hes séene all their hauing,
               That knew them well into sik thing,
               And saw them all commonlie,
               Of sikker countenance, and hardie,
               Without affray, or abasing,
               In his heart had hée greit liking,
               And thought that men of so greit will,
               If they would set their might theretill,
               Should bée full hard to win, perfay.
               And as hee met them in the way,
               Hee wel
                     •
                  omed them with gladsome faire,
               Speaking good words heere and there,
               And they that their Lord saw blythly
               So welcome them, and so homlie,
               Ioyfull they were, and thought that they,
               Aught well to put them in assay,
               
                  Of heard feghting, and stalward stour,
               For to maintaine well his honour.
            
            
               The parting of the Scots men, That in foure battells delt were then.
               THe worthy King when hée hes seene,
               His Host assembled all bedeene:
               And saw them wilfull to fulfill
               His lyking with good heart and will:
               And to maintaine well his franches,
               Hée was joyfull on mony wise:
               And called all his connsell priuie:
               And said them: Lords, now may yee see,
               That Englishmen with méekle might,
               Hes all disponed them to fight:
               For they yone Castell would reskew.
               Therefore is good wée ordaine now,
               How wee may let them of purpose,
               And so fra them the wayes close,
               That they passe not but greit letting.
               Wee haue here with vs at bidding.
               Well threttie thousand men and ma.
               Make wée foure battells of all tha.
               And ordaine vs on sik manéere:
               That when our foes comes néere,
               Wee to the new Parke hold our way,
               For there behooues them passe, perfay.
               But if they will beneth vs goe.
               And ouer the Maras passe, and so,
               Wee shall bée at a vantage there,
               And mee thinke that right spéedfull were,
               To passe on foot to this feghting,
               Armed but in light arming;
               
                  For shape wée vs on Horse to fight,
               Sen that our foes are maire of might.
               And better horsed than are wée,
               Wée should into greit perill bée,
               And if wée feght on foote, perfay,
               Wée shall bee at a vantage aye.
               For in the Parke among the trées,
               The Horsemen cumbred alwayes bées,
               And the Syke also there downe,
               Shall put them to confusioun.
               And they consented to that Saw:
               And then into a litle thraw,
               Their foure battells ordained they,
               And to the Erle Thomas, perfay:
               Hée gaue the Uangarde in leading,
               For in his Noble gouerning,
               And in his hie Cheualrie.
               They had affiance souerainely.
               And for to maintaine his Baner,
               Lords that of greit worship were,
               Were assigned with their Menyie,
               Within his battell for to bée.
               The other battell was giuen to leade,
               To him that doughtie was of déede,
               And praised als of Cheualrie
               That was Sir Edward the worthie.
               I trow hee shall maintaine him so,
               That how so euer the gaming goe,
               His foes to plenyie shall matter haue,
               And syne the third battell hee gaue,
               To Walter Stewart for to leade,
               And to Dowglas doughtie of déede:
               They were Cousings in néere degrée:
               Therefore to him betaught was hée,
               
                  For hée was young, and not for thy
               I trow, hée shall so manfullie,
               Doe his deuoure, and worke so well
               That men shall of his deédes tell.
               The feird battell the Noble King
               Tooke in his owne gouerning:
               And had into his companie,
               The men of Carrik haillelie:
               And of the Iles, whereof was syre
               And of Argyle and of Kintyre,
               
               
                  Angous of the Iles, and Boot alswa,
               And of the plaine lands hée had ma,
               Of armed men a Noble rout:
               His Battell stalward was and stout:
               Hée said, the Réeregard hée would ma,
               And euen before him should ga
               The Uangard, and on either hand,
               The other Battells should bée gangand
               Behind on side a litle space,
               And the King that behind them was,
               Should see where there was most myster,
               And reliue them with his Baner.
            
            
               How King Robert gart pottes make, And couert them well, I vndertake:
               THe King that was both wight, and wise.
               And right attentiue at deuise:
               And hardie als attour all thing,
               Ordained his men for the feghting.
               And on the morne on Satterday,
               The King heard his discurreours say,
               That Englishmen with meekle might,
               Had lyen at Edinburgh that night,
               Therefore withoutten more delay,
               Hée to the North-Parke held his way:
               
                  UUith all that in his leading were,
               And in the Parke them harbred there:
               And in a plaine field by the way,
               Where he thought they behooued haue way
               The Englishmen gif that they wald
               Through the Parke to the Castell hald:
               He gart men mony Pots ma,
               Of a foot-brade round, and all tha
               Were déepe, vp to a mans knée:
               And so thicke, that they might likned be.
               To a wax Kame with Bées made.
               And then the Pots they couered had
               With stickes, and with gersse all gréene,
               So that they might not well be séene.
               On Sunday syne in the morning,
               Well soone after the Sun-rising,
               They heard the Masse all reuerently.
               And mony shraue them full deuoutly:
               That thought to die into that melle,
               Or then to make their Countrie frée.
               To GOD for their right prayed thay,
               There dyned none of them that day,
               But for the Uigile of Sanct Iohn,
               
               They fasted water, and bread ilkone.
               THe King whē that the Masse was done
               Went for to sée the Pots soone:
               And at his lyking saw them made,
               On other side the way well brade.
               It was potted (as I haue tauld)
               Gif that their foes on horse would hauld,
               Foorth on the way, I trow they sall
               Not all escape withoutten fall:
               Throughout the Oast then gart he cry,
               That all sould arme them hastely,
               
                  And buske them on their best maner.
               And when that all assembled wer.
               He gart array them for to fight,
               And syne ouer all gart cry on hight,
               That who so euer he were, that fand
               His heart not sikker for to stand,
               To win all, or die with honour,
               For to maintaine that stalward stour:
               That he betime should take his way:
               And none sould dwell with him but thay,
               That would stand with him to the end,
               And take the grace that God would send.
               Then all answered with one cry,
               And with one voyce said generally,
               That none for dout of dead sould faile,
               While discomfist were the haill battaile.
            
            
               How the King sent fra him all haill, His small folke, cariage, and vittaill.
               WHen the good King hes heard his men
               So hardely answere him then:
               Saying, that nouther dead nor dread,
               To sik discomfort sould them lead:
               That they sould eschew the feghting:
               In heart he had great reioycing.
               For him thought men of sik hauing,
               So good, so hardy, and so fyne,
               Sould well in battell hold their right,
               Against men of full méekle might.
               Syne all the small folke, and puraill,
               He sent, with harnesse, and vittaill,
               Into the Parke right far him fra,
               And gart them fra the battell ga.
               
                  And as he bade, they went their way,
               Twentie thousand néere were thay.
               They held their way to a valley:
               Out of the sight of the great battellyie.
               Of men of armes wight and hardy:
               The King left with a cleane Menyie:
               That were togidder twentie thousand,
               That I trow stalwardly sall stand,
               And doe their deuoure as they aw.
               They stood then raynged on a raw,
               Ready for to byde battailyie,
               Gif ony folke would them assailyie.
            
            
               How the King bade the Erle Murray, To keepe beside the Kirke the way.
               THe King then gart them busked be:
               For he wist into certainetie,
               That Englishmen with méekle might
               Had lyen at the Falkirk that night.
               And syne to him the way all straight
               Held, with their men of méekle might.
               Therefore to his Neuoy bad he
               The Erle of Murray with his Menyie,
               Beside the Kirk to kéepe the way:
               That none sould passe that gaite, perfay,
               Without debate to the Castell:
               And he said, that himselfe sould well
               Kéepe the entrie with his battaile.
               Gif that ony would there assaile:
               And syne his brother Sir Edward,
               
               And young Walter the good Steward,
               
               And the Lord Dowglas alswa,
               With their Menyie good tent sould ta,
               
                  UUhilk of them had most mister,
               Sould help with them that with them wer.
               The King then sent Iames of Dowglas,
               
               And Sir Robert of Keith, that was
               Marshall of all the Oast in fée,
               The Englishmens comming for to sée:
               And they lap on withoutten bade,
               UUell horsed men with them they had:
               And soone the great Oast haue they séene:
               UUhere shields shining were so shéene:
               And Basnets byrnished so bright:
               That gaue against the Sunne sik light
               They saw so mony browdred Baners,
               Standerds, and Pensalls vpon speares:
               And so feill Knights vpon Stéedes,
               And flawming in their 
                     •
                  oly wéedes:
               And so feill battells and so brade,
               And tooke so great rowme as they rade.
               That the most Oast and the best,
               Of Christendome, and the lykliest:
               Sould be abased for to sée,
               Their foes into sik quantitie,
               And so arrayed for to fight.
               UUhen their discurreours had sight
               Of their foes (as I heard say)
               Toward the King they tooke their way:
               And told him into priuitie,
               The multitude, and the beautie
               Of their foes, that came so brade:
               And of the great might that they had.
               Then the King bade, that they sould ma
               No countenance as it were swa,
               But bade them into common say,
               That they came into ill array,
               
                  To comfort his men through that wise:
               For oft times of a word may rise
               Discomfort, and tynsall withall:
               And als well through a word may fall,
               Comfort may rise, and hardement.
               To garmen come to their intent:
               And on the same wise did it heare.
               Their comfort and their hardie cheare,
               Comforted them so gretumlie,
               That of their Host the least hardie,
               By countenance would formest bée.
               For to begin the greit melle.
            
            
               How with a hundreth the Erle of Murray To aught hundreth battell gaue.
               VPon this wise the Noble King,
               Gaue to his men greit comforting:
               Through hardie countenance, and cheare,
               That hee made on so good maneere,
               They thought that no mischiefe might bée,
               So greit with thy they might him sée
               Before them, that should so engréeue,
               But his worship should them relieue.
               His worship them comforted sa,
               And countenance that hée did ma.
               That the most Coward was hardie.
               On other halfe full sturdelie,
               The Englishmen in sik array,
               As yee haue heard mee forrow say:
               Came with their battalles approaching,
               Their Banners to the wind waiuing.
               And when they commen were so neere:
               That but two myle betwixt them were,
               They chused a 
                     •
                  oly companie,
               Of wight men armed 
                     •
                  olelie,
               
                  On faire Coursers ar med at right,
               And great Lords of méekle might,
               There was Capitane of that rout:
               The Lord Cliffurd that was so stout,
               Was of them all soueraigne leader,
               Aught hundreth armed I trow they were,
               They were all young men and joly:
               Yarning for to doe Cheualry
               The best of all the Hoste were they,
               Of countenance, and of array:
               They were the fairest companie,
               That men might find of so mony,
               To the Castell they thought to fare:
               For if that they might well come there,
               They thought it should rescued bee:
               Foorth on their way held this Menyie,
               And toward Stri
                        •
                     iling held their way:
               Beneath the Parke eschewed they.
               For they wist well the King was there,
               And beneath the Parke so can they fare:
               Under the Kirke into a rout.
               The Erle Thomas that was so stout.
               When hee saw them so take the Plaine
               In full greit by went them againe.
               With an hundreth withoutten moe,
               Annoyed in his heart, and woe:
               That they so far were passed by.
               For the King had him said rudely,
               That a Rose of his Chaiplet
               Was fallen: for hée was set
               To kéepe the way tha men were past,
               Therefore hee hasted him so fast,
               That commen into short time was hée,
               In the plaine fielde, with his Menȝie,
               
                  For hée thought that hee should amend,
               That hée trespassed had, or then end.
               And when the Englishmen him saw,
               Come on withoutten dread or aw:
               And tooke so hardelie the Plane,
               In hy they went then him againe,
               And strake with spurs the Stéedes stight.
               That bare them euen, and hard, and suight
               And when the Erle saw that Menyie
               Come so stoutly, to his men said hée,
               Bée not abashed for their shore,
               But set your Speares you before:
               And backe to backe set all your rout,
               And all your speare points out.
               That gate defend vs best may wée,
               Enuironed with them gif wée bée.
               And as hee bade, so haue they done.
               And the other came on all soone:
               Before them all there came prickand,
               A Knight hardy of heart and hand:
               And was a well greit Lord at hame.
               Sir William the Hawcourt was his name:
               And pricked at them so hardelie,
               And they met him so sturdelie,
               And he, and horse were both borne down,
               And slaine right there without ransoun.
               With Englishmen greitlie was hée
               Méened that day for his bountie.
               The laue come on full sturdelie,
               But none of them so hardelie,
               Rushed among them as did hée,
               But with far more maturitie,
               They assembled all in a rout.
               And enuironde them all about.
               
                  And to the enemies in that tyde,
               Rane with Speares wounds wide
               To their Horse that came them néere:
               And they that riding on them were,
               That were borne downe, lossed their liues:
               And als Speares▪ darts, and Kniues,
               And weapons vpon seir maner,
               Kest among them that feghting were,
               They defended them so worthelie,
               That their foes had greit ferlie,
               For some would shoot out of their rout.
               And of them that assailyied about,
               Sticked Stéedes, and bare downe men
               The Englishmen so rudelie then,
               Kest among them Swords and Speares,
               That in with them a mountyand was
               Of weapons that there warped were.
               The Erle and his men thus faught there,
               At greit mischiefe, as I heard say,
               For fewer by full far were they:
               For their foes them all about,
               Were enuironde, where mony rout,
               Were raught them full despiteouslie,
               Their foes demained them straitly.
               On either side they were so stad,
               For the greit bargane that they had,
               For feghting, and for Sunnes heate.
               That all their flesh with sweat was weat:
               And sik a stew rose ouer them then.
               Of breathing both of Horse and Men,
               And of powder, that sike mirknes,
               Into the aire aboue them wes,
               That it was wonder for to sée
               They were in greit perplexitie:
               
                  But with great trauell not for thy
               They them defended manfully:
               And set both will, strength and might,
               To rush their foes into that fight,
               That them demained angerly.
               But gif GOD helpe them hastely,
               They sall haue their fill of feghting.
               But when the Noble renouned King,
               With other Lords that were him by,
               Saw the Erle so abandountly,
               Tooke plaine field, Iames of Dowglas,
               
               Came to the King where that he was.
               And said, Sir, ah, Sancta Mary,
               
               The Erle of Murray openly
               Takes the plaine field with his Menyie
               He is in perill, but he be
               Soone helped: for his foes are ma
               Than he, and horsed well alswa.
               And with your leaue, I will me spéed
               To help him, for he hes great néed,
               All enuironde with his foes is he.
               The King said, so our Lord me sée,
               One foot to him salt thou not ga:
               Gif he well does, let him well ta,
               Whether it happen to win or lose,
               I will not for him breake purpose.
               
                  
                     •
                  ertes (said he) I may no wise,
               See that his foes him supprise,
               When that I may set helpe theretill.
               With your lieue, sikkerly I will
               Helpe him, or die into the Paine:
               Doe then, and spéed thée soone againe.
               The King said, and he held his way,
               Gifhe mae come in time, perfay,
               
                  I trow that he sall help so well,
               That all his foes sall it féele.
            
            
               How the King slew Sir Henrie Bowm, With his handaxe, & strake him down.
               NOw Dowglas foorth his way tane hes,
               And in that same time fell through cace:
               That the King of England, when he
               Was commen with his great Menyie,
               Néere to the place where I said aire,
               Where Scots men assembled were:
               He gart arrest all his battell,
               And also for to take counsell.
               Whether they wald harbrie thē that night,
               Or then but more go to the fight,
               The Uangard then that wist nothing,
               Of his arrest, nor his dwelling,
               Rade to the Parke all straight their way,
               But stinting into good array.
               And when the King wist that they were
               In haill battell comming so néere,
               His battell gart he well array.
               Himselfe rade on a gray Palfray
               Proper and ioly, arrayand
               His battell, with an axe in hand:
               And on his Basnet heght he bare,
               An hatte with Carbuncle ay where,
               And thereupon into takinning
               An hie Crowne, that he was King.
               And when Glocester and Harefurd were,
               In haill battell comming so néere:
               Before them all there came rydand,
               With helme on head, and speare in hand,
               
                  Sir Henrie the Bowme that was worthy,
               That was a Knight and hardy:
               And to the Erle of Harefurde Cousine,
               Armed in armours good and fine:
               Came on a Stéede a bowshot néere,
               Before all other that there were:
               And knew the King, for that he saw
               Him so arraying his men on raw:
               And by the Crowne also was set,
               Abone his head on the Basnet:
               And toward him he went in hy.
               And when the King so apeirtly,
               Saw him come foorth before his Féeres:
               In hy to him the Stéed he stéeres,
               And when Sir Henrie saw the King
               Come on withoutten abasing,
               To him he rade in full great hy:
               And thought that he sould well lightly
               Win him, and haue him at his will,
               Sen he him saw horsed so ill:
               They sprent togidder in a ling.
               Sir Henrie missed the Noble King:
               And he that in his stirrops stood,
               With axe that was both hard and good,
               With so great mane raught him a dynt,
               That neither hat, nor helme might stynt
               The heauie dynt that he him gaue:
               The head right to the harnes claue.
               The hand axe shaft frushed in twa,
               And he downe to the eird can ga
               All flatlings, for him failed might.
               This was the first strake of the fight,
               That was performed doughtely:
               And when the Kings men so stoutly
               
                  Saw him euen at the first méeting,
               Withoutten dout or abasing,
               Haue slaine a Knight euen at a strake:
               Sik hardement thereat they take,
               That they come on right hardelie.
               And when the Englishmen stoutlie
               Them saw come on, had sik abasing,
               Specially for that the King,
               So stoutly that good Knight had slaine,
               Then they withdrew them euerilkane.
               They durst not then abide the fight,
               So dred they for the Kings might.
               And when the Kings men them saw,
               So in haill battell them withdraw,
               A great shout to them can they make,
               And they in hy gaue all the backe.
               And they that followed, then hes slaine
               Some of them that they haue ouertane:
               But they were few, the sooth to say,
               Their horse féete had them all away,
               Except some part that died there,
               Rebuted filthily they were,
               They rade their way with well more shame,
               By far, then when they came fra hame.
               WHen that the King repaired was,
               And gart his men leaue all the chase,
               The Lords of his company,
               Blamed him, as they durst greatly,
               That he put him in auenture,
               To méete so starke a Knight and sture.
               In sik point as he then was seene:
               For they said, it might haue bene
               Cause of their tynsall euerilkane.
               The King answere hes made right nane,
               
                  But méened his hand-axe-shafte, that so,
               Was broken with that strake in two.
               THe Erle Thomas was yet feghtand,
               With his foes on either hand:
               And slew of them a quantitie,
               But wearie was his men and hée.
               The whilke with weapons sturdelie,
               Themselues defended manfullie:
               While the Lord Dowglas came néere:
               That sped him on gre
                     •
                  t manéere.
               And Englishmen that were feghting,
               When they the Dowglas saw comming,
               Euanishing made an opening,
               Sir Iames Dowglas by their réeling
               Knew, that they were discomfist néere.
               Then bade hee them that with him were,
               Stand still, and preasse no farthermare,
               For they that yonder feghting are,
               Hee said, that they are of so greit bountie,
               That their foes all soone shall bée
               Discomfist, through their owne might.
               Though no man helpe them for to fight.
               And come wée now to the feghting,
               When they are at discomfiting,
               Men should say, wée them rescued had:
               And then should they that cause had made,
               With greit trauell, and hard feghting,
               Lose a greit part of their losing,
               And it were sinne to lose his prise,
               That of sik soueragine bountie is,
               That hee through plaine and hard feghting
               Hes here enchéeued vnlikly thing:
               Hée shall haue that hee winnen hes.
               The Erle with that that feghting was,
               
                  When hée his foes saw réeling so,
               In hy vpon them can hée go,
               And preassed them so wonderfast,
               With hard strakes: while at the last
               They sled, and durst abide no maire:
               Horse and man both left they there.
               And held their way in full greit hy.
               Not altogidder, but sinderlie.
               And they that were ouertane, were slaine:
               The laue fled to their Host againe.
               Of their tynsell sorie and wo,
               The Erle that had him helped so,
               And his men als that were weary,
               Hints off their Basnets in hy,
               To draw thir braith: for they were haite,
               They were all hailling into Swait.
               They séemed men forsooth I heght:
               That had fended their foes to fight:
               And so did they full doughtely.
               They sai
                     •
                   of all their company,
               That there was but a some few slaine:
               Then loued they God, and were faine,
               And blyth, that they escaped so:
               Toward the King then can they go:
               To him well soone they commen are,
               Hée asked them of their welfare,
               And gladsome cheare to them hée made:
               For they so well them borne had.
               Then all ran into greit daintie,
               The Erle of Murray for to see.
               So fast they ranne to sée him there,
               That néere hand all assembled were,
               And when the good King can them sée,
               Before him all assembled bée,
               
                  Blith and glad, that their foes were
               Rebuted vpon that maner.
               A litle while hée held them still,
               Syne on this wise, hée said them till,
            
            
               How that the King comforted his men, That twise their foes rebuted had then.
               LOrdings, wée ought to loife and loue,
               Almightie GOD that sits aboue
               That send vs so faire beginning
               It is a greit discomforting,
               To our foes, that on this wise,
               So soone hes béene rebuted twise.
               For when they of their Host shall heare,
               And know the sooth, on what manéere:
               Their Uangard that was so stout,
               And syne yone other joly rout:
               That I trow of the best men were,
               That they may find among them there,
               Were rebuted so suddenly,
               I trow and knowes it all clearelie:
               That mony a heart so wauering bée,
               That seemed before of greit bountie,
               And fra the heart bee discomfite,
               The bodie is not worth a mite.
               Therefore, I trow that good ending,
               Shall follow to our beginning:
               And yet I say not this you till:
               For that yée should fulfill my will
               To feght: for in you it shall bée,
               And if yee thinke spéedfull that wée
               Feght, wee shall feght: and if yée will
               Wee leaue, your lyking to fulfill,
               
                  I shall consent in ilke wise
               To doe right as yee will deuise
               Therefore say on your will plainelie,
               Then with a voyce all can they cry.
               Good King withoutten more delay,
               The morne as soone as yee see day,
               Ordaine you haill for the battaile,
               For dout of deed wée shall not faile,
               Nor no paine shall refused bée,
               While wée haue made our Countrie frée.
               WHen the King heard them so manlie,
               Speake to the thing, and so hastelie:
               Saying, that nouther life nor dead,
               To sik discomfort should them lead:
               That they should eschew the feghting,
               In heart hee had greit rejoycing:
               And to him greit gladship can ta,
               And said, Lordings, sen yee will sa,
               Shape wee vs then in the morning,
               So that wee by the Sunrising
               Haue heard Masse, and bee busked well,
               Ilke man in his owne battell:
               Without our Pauillions arrayed
               Ilke man with his Baner displayed:
               And looke on na wise yée brake array,
               And as yee loue mee, I you pray,
               That ilke man for his owne honour,
               Puruay him a good gouernour.
               And when it comes vnto the fight,
               Ilke man set will, heart and might,
               To stint our foes méekle pride,
               They shall on Horse arrayed ride,
               And come on vs in full greit hy,
               Méete them with Speares sturdely:
               
                  And thinke then you on the méekle ill,
               That they and theirs haue done vs till:
               And are in will yet for to doe,
               Gif they haue might to come thereto.
               And Certes me thinke well that we
               Without abasing ought to be
               Worthie, and of great vassalage,
               For wee haue thrée faire auantage.
               The first is, that we haue the right,
               And for the right ay GOD will fight.
               The other is, that they commen are here,
               Through lipning in their great power,
               To séeke vs in our owne land:
               And hes brought here euen to our hand,
               Riches into so great plentie,
               That the poorest of you all sall be
               Both mightie and rich therewithall,
               Gif that we winne, as well may fall.
               The third is, that we for our liues,
               And for our children, and our wiues,
               And for our fréedome, and our land
               Are strenyied in battell for to stand.
               And they for their might anerly,
               And for they set of vs lightly:
               And for they would destroy vs all,
               Makes them to feght, but yet map fall,
               That they sall rew the barganing.
               And Certes, I warne you of one thing,
               Gif happen them, as GOD forbid,
               For to preuaile into this stéed,
               So that they winne vs all plainely,
               They sall of vs haue no mercy.
               And sen we know their felloun will,
               Me thinke it sould accord to skill,
               
                  To set stoutnesse against fellonie,
               And that gaite make a ieopardie.
               Wherefore I you require, and pray:
               That with all might that euer ye may,
               But Cowardise or abasing,
               Ye preasse you at the beginning,
               To méete them that sall first assemble:
               So stoutly, that the hindmest tremble.
               And thinke vpon your great manhéede,
               Your worship and your doughtie déede:
               And on the ioy that we abide,
               Gif that vs fall, as well may tide,
               Hap for to vanquish the great battailyie,
               Into our hands withoutten failyie,
               We beare honour, praise, and riches,
               Freedome, and welth, and all blythnesse,
               Gif ye contéene you manfully.
               And in the contrair, all haillely
               Sall faile, gif ye let Cowardise,
               Or wickednesse your heart supprise.
               Ye might haue liued into thraldome:
               But for ye yarned to haue fréedome:
               Ye are assembled here with me,
               Therefore it is néedfull that we be
               UUorthie, and wight but abasing
               And I warne you well of one thing,
               That more mischiefe may fall vs nane.
               Nor in their hands to be tane,
               For they sould sla vs (I wate well)
               Euen as they did my brother Neill.
               
               But when I thinke on your stoutnesse,
               And on the mony great Prowesse:
               That ye haue done so worthelie,
               I traist, and trowes it sikkerlie,
               
                  To haue plaine victorie into this fight.
               For though your foes be méekle of might,
               They haue the wrong and succowdry,
               And couets wrangous Senyeory,
               And the strength of this place ye sée,
               Sall let vs enuironed for to be.
               And I pray you all specially,
               Both more and lesse commonly:
               That none of you for gréedinesse,
               Haue eye to take of their riches:
               Nor yet Prisoners to ta,
               While ye sée them arrayed sa:
               And that the field ours plainely be,
               Then at our lyking so may we
               Take all the riches that there is.
               Gif ye will worke vpon this wise:
               Ye sall haue victorie sikkerly.
               I wate not what more say sall I?
               But ye wate all what honour is:
               Contéene you, that on sik a wise,
               That your honour ay saued be.
               And I heght here in my laytie,
               Gif ony dies in the battailyie,
               His land fréely but Taxe or Tailyie,
               On the first day his aires sall weild,
               Though he be neuer so young of eild.
               Now make you ready for the sight:
               GOD help vs, that is most of might.
               I réede, armed all night we be,
               Puruayed in battell, so that we
               To méete our foes all be boun.
               Then answered they all with one soun:
               As ye deuise all sall be done.
               Then to their Innes went they soone.
               
                  And ordainde them for the feghting.
               Syne assembled in the Euening:
               And that gaite all the night they lay.
               While on the morne that it was day.
               WHen the Clyffurde, as I heard aire,
               And all his rout rebuted were:
               And the great Uangard alswa,
               Were distrenyied the backe to ta,
               And they had told their rebuting,
               They of the Uangard, how the King
               Slew at one stroke so apertly,
               A Knight that wight was, and hardy.
               And how the Kings haill battaile
               Shupe them so stoutly to assaile,
               And Sir Edward the Bruce alswa,
               When they all haill the backe can ta,
               And how they left had of their men.
               And Clyffurd als had told him then,
               How Thomas Randell tooke the Plaine,
               With a few folke how he hes slaine
               Sir William Haward the worthy,
               And how the Erle faught manfully,
               That as a Hurcheon all his rout
               Gart set out speares them about.
               And how that they were put againe,
               And one part of their good men slaine.
               The Englishmen sik abasing
               Tooke, and sik dread of that tything,
               That in fiue hundreth places and ma,
               Together would they rowning ga,
               And said, our Lords for their might,
               With all gaites feght against the right:
               But who makes wéeres wrongouslie,
               They offend GOD all too greatlie,
               
                  And they that happen to misfaile,
               And so may happen here, wee shall.
               And when their Lords had perceiuing,
               Of that discomfort, and that rowning,
               That they yeed togidder two and two,
               Throughout the Host then can they go,
               To gar Heraulds soone make cry,
               That none discomforted should bée,
               For in jeopardies is off happennyne,
               Whiles to wine, and whiles to tyne,
               And that into the greit battailyie,
               That vpon no manner may failyie,
               But if the Scots flée their way,
               Shall all amended bée perfay,
               Therefore they monisht them to bée
               Of greit worship, and greit bountie,
               And stoutlie in the battell stand,
               And take amends at their owne hand.
               They may well monish as they will,
               And they may heght als to fulfill,
               With stalward heart their bidding all:
               But not for thy, I trow they shall,
               Into their hearts dréeding bée,
               The King with his counsell priuie,
               Hes tane to read that hee would nought,
               Feght while the morne, but he were sought
               Therefore they harbred them that night,
               Downe in the Kersse, and gart all dight,
               And make ready all their apparell,
               Against the morne for the battell.
               For in the Kersse Puilles were,
               Houses and thacke, they brake and bare
               To make brigges where they might passe.
               And some men sayes, the folke that was
               
                  In the Castell, when night can fall,
               When that they knew their mischiefe all,
               They went foorth all that euer there were,
               And doores and windowes with them bare
               So that they had before the day,
               Brigged the Pooles so that they
               Were passed ouer them euerilkane,
               And the hard field on Horse hes tane.
               All readie for to giue battell,
               Arrayed into their apparell.
               THe Scottish men when that it was day,
               Their Masse deuoutly heard haue they,
               Syne tooke a s
                     •
                  p, and made them yare:
               And when that they assembled were,
               And in their battells all puruayed,
               And their brad Baners all displayed,
               They made Knights, as it afféeres.
               To men that vses tha mystéeres,
               The King made Walter Stewart Knight
               And Iames Dowglas that was wight,
               And others als of greit bountie,
               Hée made ilkane in their degrée.
               When this was done, as I you say,
               Then went they foorth in good array,
               And tooke the plaine field apartly.
               Mony wight men, good and hardy,
               They were fulfilled of greit bountie,
               Men might into that rout there sée.
               The Englishmen on other partie,
               That right as Angels shine brightlie,
               Were not arrayed on sik maner,
               For all their battells togidder were
               In a shilltrum: but whidder it was,
               Through greit straitnesse of the place,
               
                  That they were in to byde feghting:
               Or then it was for abasing.
               I wat not, but in a shilltrum,
               It séemed they were all and some,
               Except the Uangard allanerlie,
               That with a right greit companie,
               By them selues arrayed were,
               Who had béene by, might haue séene there
               Tha folke ouertooke a méekle field
               On breadth, where mony a shining shield,
               And mony a birnisht bright armour,
               And mony man of greit valour,
               And mony a Baner bright and shéene.
               Might in that greit shiltrum bee séene,
               And when the King of England,
               
               Saw Scottishmen take on hand▪
               
               To take the plaine Field sa openlie,
               Upon foote hee thought ferlie:
               And said, What? will you Scottishmen fight:
               Yea, sikkerlie, Sir, said a Knight,
               Sir Ingrame the Vmfrauile heght hée,
               And said, Forsooth▪ Sir, now I see,
               But dread the most marueilous fight
               That euer I saw: whéene for to fight,
               The Scottishmen so few hes tane on hand
               Against the haill might of England,
               
               On plaine hard field to giue battell,
               But if yée will trow my counsell.
               Yée shall discomfite them lightly.
               Yée shall with draw you hyne suddenly,
               With Battells, Baners and Pennons,
               While that wee passe our Pauillions,
               And yee shall sée assoone that they,
               Magre their Lord, shall breake array,
               
                  And skaill then our Harnesse to ta,
               And when wée skailled sée them sa
               Pricke wée on them then hardely:
               And wée shall haue them well lightlie.
               For then shall none bée knit to fight,
               That may withstand our méekle might,
               I will not (said the King) perfay
               Doe so: for there shall no man say,
               That I should eschew the battell,
               Nor withdraw mée for sik Rangall.
            
            
               The meeting of the great battailyie, Where Scots defend, and English failyie.
               WHen this was said, that heare say I,
               The Scottishmen right reuerentlie.
               Knéeled all downe, to GOD to pray:
               And a short prayer then made they
               To GOD, to helpe them in their fight.
               And when the English King had sight,
               Of them knéeling, hée said, in hy
               Yone folke knéeles to aske mercie,
               Sir Ingrame said, Yée say sooth now,
               They aske mercie, but not at you,
               For their tresspasse to GOD they cry.
               I tell you ane thing sikkerlie.
               That yone men will win all, or die,
               For dout of déede they will not flée.
               Now be it so, then said the King:
               And then bot longer delaying,
               They gart come to the assemblie,
               On either side then men might sée,
               Mony a worthie man and hardy,
               Ready to doe great Cheualry.
               
                  THus were they boun on ather side:
               And Englishmen with méekle pride,
               That were into the Uangard,
               To the battell that Sir Edward
               
               Gouerned and led, held straight their way,
               The horse with spurres hardned they,
               And pricked on them sturdely.
               And they met them right hardely:
               So that at their assembling there,
               Sik a frushing of speares were:
               That far away men might it heare.
               At that méeting withoutten wéere,
               Were Stéedes sticked mony ane:
               And mony Knight borne downe, & slaine:
               And mony a hardie met doughtelie,
               Where they escaped full hardlie.
               They dang on other with weapons seire.
               Some of the horse that sticked were,
               Rushed and reilled right rudely:
               But the remnand not for thy,
               That might come to the assembling,
               For all that made no stinting:
               But assembled right hardelie,
               And they met them right sturdelie,
               With speares that were sharp to shéere,
               And axes that well grounden were,
               Wherewith raught was mony a rout:
               The fight was there so fell and stout,
               That mony a worthie man and wight,
               Through force was felled in that fight,
               That had no might to rise againe.
               The Scottishmen fast can them paine,
               Their foes méekle might to frush:
               I trow, they sall no paine refuse,
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  Nor perills, while their foes be,
               Set in well hard perplexitie.
            
            
               The Erle of Murray with his battailyie, Came on stoutly but ony failyie.
               ANd when the Erle of Murray sa
               Their Uangard saw so stoutly ta
               The way, to Sir Edward all straight,
               That met them with full méekle might.
               He held his way with his Baner,
               To the great rout, where togidder were
               The nine battels that were so brade.
               So feil Baners with them they had,
               And of men so great quantitie:
               That it was wonder for to sée,
               The good Erle hidder tooke the way,
               With his battell in good array:
               And assembled so hardily,
               That men might heare that had bene by,
               A great frush of the speares that brast:
               For their foes assailyied fast,
               That on the Steedes with méekle pride,
               Came pricking, as they would ouer ride
               The Erle, and all his companie:
               But they met them so sturdelie,
               That mony of them to eird they bare,
               And mony a Stéed was sticked there:
               And feill good men felled vnder féet,
               That had no power to rise yet.
               There men might sée an hard battaile,
               And some defend, and some assaile:
               And mony a rumble great and red,
               Be raught there on ather side,
               
                  While through the byrnisht breast the blood,
               That on the eird in streames yood.
               The Erle of Murray and his men,
               So stoutlie them contéened then:
               That they wan place ay maire and maire:
               On their foes, the whilks were,
               Ay ten for one, or ma, perfay.
               So that it séemed well that they
               Were tynt among so fell Menyie,
               As they were plunged in the sea,
               And when the Englishmen has séene
               The Erle, and all his men bedéene,
               Feght so stoutlie but affraying,
               Right as they had none abasing.
               They preassed thē fast with all their might:
               And they with speares and swords bright,
               And axes that right sharplie share,
               In middes the visage met them there:
               There men might see a stalward stour,
               And mony men of great valour,
               With speares, Masses, and with kniues,
               And other weapons wissell liues:
               So that mony fell downe all dead.
               The gersse wort of the blood all red.
               The Erle that wight was and worthie,
               And his men fought so manfullie:
               That who so had them séene that day,
               I trow forsooth, that he sould say,
               That they their deuoure did full well:
               So that their foes sould it féele.
            
            
               
               How Walter Stewart and Dowglas, Came with their battell that worthy was.
               WHen that thir two battells were,
               Assembled, as I said you aire:
               The Stewart Walter that then was,
               And good Sir Iames of Dowglas,
               
               In a battell when they saw,
               The Erle withoutten dread or aw,
               Assembled with his companie,
               On all tha folke so sturdelie,
               For to help him they held their way,
               With their battell in good array:
               And assembled so hardely,
               Beside the Erle a litle by:
               That their foes felt their comming well.
               For with weapons stalward of stéele,
               They dang on them with all their might,
               Their foes receiued them well I hight,
               With swordes, speares, and with Mas.
               The battell there so felloun was.
               And als so great spilling of blood:
               While on the eird the streames yoode,
               The Scottishmen so well them bare,
               And so great slaughter made they there:
               And fra so feill there liues they reft,
               That all the field was bloodie left:
               That time that the thrée battels were
               All side for side, feghting well néere:
               Then might men heare mony a dint,
               And weapons vpon armours stint.
               And so ouer tumbled Knights and Stéedes
               And mony one rich in Royall wéedes,
               
                  Defouled foullie vnder feete:
               Some held on loft, some tint the sweet.
               A long time thus they faught, and were
               That men no noise, nor crie might heare:
               There was noght els but graines & dints,
               They shooke the fire as men on flints:
               They faught ilkane so egerlie,
               That they made nouther noyse cry:
               But dang on other with their might,
               With weapons that were birneist bright:
               The arrowes als so thicke they flaw,
               That men might say well that them saw,
               That they an hiddeous shout can ma.
               For where they fell I vnderta.
               They left efter them takinning,
               That needed (as I trow) léeching,
               The English archers shot so fast,
               That if their shot might haue had last,
               It had beene hard to Scottishmen.
               But King Robert that can well ken,
               That their archerers were perilous:
               And their shot hard and grieuous,
               Ordained before the assemblie,
               His Marshall, with a greit Menyie,
               Fiue hundreth armed into stéele,
               That on light Hors were horsed well,
               To pricke among the archers,
               And so assailȝie them with Speares,
               That they no leasure had to shute,
               His Marshall that hereof I mute.
               That Sir Robert of Keith was calde,
               (As I before haue to you talde)
               When hee saw the battells so
               Assembled, and togidder goe,
               
                  And saw the archers shoot stoutlie,
               Then with them of his companie.
               In hy among them can hée ryde,
               And ouertooke them at a side.
               And rushed among them so rudely,
               Stryking them so dispiteouslie,
               And in sik fusioun dushing them downe,
               And slaying them without ransoun:
               That they them skailled euerilkane.
               And from that time foorth there were nane
               That assembled thicke shot to ma,
               When Scottish archers saw it was sa,
               They were rebuted, they woxt hardie,
               And with all their might shot egerlie,
               Among the Horsemen that their rade,
               And wounds wide to them they made:
               And slew of them a well greit deill.
               And bure them hardelie and well:
               For from their foes archers were,
               Skailled, as I said to you aire,
               That moe than they were by greit thing
               So that they dred not their shooting,
               They woxt so hardie, that they thought
               They should set all their foes at nought.
               THe Marshall and his companie,
               Was yet (as to you aire said I)
               Among the archers where they made,
               With speares rowm, where euer they rade
               And slew all that they might ouerta:
               For they right lightlie might doe so:
               For they had not an strake to stynt,
               Nor for to hold againe an dynt,
               Against armed men into the fight,
               May naked men haue litle might.
               
                  They skailled them on sik maner,
               That some to their greit battell were
               Withdrawen then, in full greit hy,
               And some were fled allutterly.
               But the folke that behind them was,
               That for their owne folke had no place,
               Yet then to come to the feghting,
               Againe right smertly can them ding.
               The Archers that they met fléeing,
               That then was made right recréeing
               That their heartes were tynt cleanely,
               I trow they shall not skaith greitlie,
               The Scottish men with shot that day:
               And the good King Robert that ay
               Was filled full of great bountie,
               Saw how that his battells three,
               So hardelie assembled were,
               And in the fight so well them bare
               And so fast on their foes can ding:
               That him thought none had abasing,
               And how the Archers were skailled then,
               Hée was all blyth: and to his men
               Hée said, Lordings, now looke that yée
               Worthie, and of good comfort bee,
               At this assemble, and hardy.
               And assemble you so sturdely,
               That nothing may before you stand,
               Our men so fiercely are feghtand.
               That they their foes hes cumbred sa:
               That bee they preassed, I vnderta
               A litle faster, yee shall sée
               That they discomfist soone shall bée,
               Now go wée on them so hardely,
               And ding on them so doughtely.
               
                  That they may feill at our comming,
               That wee them hate in méekle thing:
               For greit cause they haue vs made,
               That occupied our lands brade,
               And put all to subjectioun:
               Your goods made all theirs commoun:
               Our kin and friends for their owne,
               Despitteouslie hanged and drawne:
               And would destroy vs if they might,
               But I trow God through his foresight,
               This day hes granted vs his grace,
               To wreke vs on them in this place.
               When this was said, they held their way,
               And on ane side assembled they
               So stoutly, that at their méeting,
               Their foes were rushed a greit thing,
               Their men might sée them fiercelie fight,
               And they that worthie were and wight,
               Doe mony a worthie vassalage.
               They faught as they were in a rage.
               For when the Scots archerie,
               Saw their foes so sturdelie
               Stand in the battell them againe,
               With all their might, and all their maine,
               They laid on as men out of wit:
               And where they with full strake might hit
               There might none armour stint their strak
               They frushed all they might ouertake:
               And with axes sik dushes gaue,
               That they Heades, and Helmes claue.
               And their foes right hardelie,
               Met them, and dang on doggedlie,
               With weapons that were styth of stéele.
               There was a battell right cruell.
               
                  So great dinging there was of dynts,
               As weapons vpon armours stynts:
               And of speares sik bristing,
               And sik thrang, and sik thrysting:
               Sik graining, girnyng, that was so great,
               And noyse: that they can other beat:
               Crying Ensenyies on ilk side,
               Giuing and taking wounds wide,
               That it was hiddeous for to heare:
               All the foure battells with that weere
               Feghting in a front hailly,
               O mightie GOD, how doughtely,
               Sir Edward the Bruce and his men,
               Among their foes contéened them then?
               Feghting in so good conuyne:
               So worthy, hardy, and so fyne,
               That their Uangard rushed was,
               And magre theirs, left all the place.
               And to their great rout into warrand
               They went, that then had vpon hand
               So great noise, that they were affrayed
               For Scottish men that them hard assayed:
               That they were in a shiltrum all,
               Who hapned in that preasse to fall,
               I trow, againe he sall not rise.
               Their men might sée on mony wise,
               Hardements enchéeued doughtely:
               And men that wight were and worthy,
               Downe vnder feet lying all dead:
               Where all the field with blood was red:
               Armoures and coates that they bare,
               Were so with blood defouled there:
               That they might not described be,
               And who had then béene by to sée,
               
                  The Steward Walter, and all his rout,
               And the Lord Dowglas that was stout,
               Feghting into that stalwart stour,
               They sould say, that of all honour,
               They were worthie, that in that fight,
               So fast preassed their foes might:
               And rushed them where euer they yéed,
               Men might sée then so mony Stéede
               Fleeing on stray, that Lord had nane.
               O G
                     •
                  D, who then good tent had tane
               To the good Erle of Murray,
               
               And his, that so great dynts gaue:
               And so fast fought in that battell,
               Tholling sik paine, and sik trauell:
               That they, and theirs made sik debate,
               That where they came, they made them gaite,
               There men might heare Ensenyies crie:
               And Scottishmen cryed hardelie:
               On them, on them, on them they failyie:
               UUith that so hard they can assailyie,
               And slew all that they might ouerta.
               And the Scots Archers alswa,
               Shot among them right sturdelie,
               Engréeuing them so greetumlie:
               That what for them that with them faught
               And so great routs to them raught,
               And preassed them full egerlie:
               And what for arrowes, that fellounlie,
               Mony great wounds can them ma:
               And slew fast of their horse alswa:
               That they recooled a litle wie,
               They dread so greatly for to die:
               That their conuéene woxt worse than eir.
               For they that feghting with them were,
               
                  Set hardement, and strength, and will,
               And heart, and courage to fulfill:
               With all their mane, and all their might,
               To put them fullie to the flight.
            
            
               How Scottish Swaynes of sheetes made, Them Baners, and in battell rade.
               IN this time that I tell of héere,
               That thir battels on this manéere,
               Were stricken, where on ather side,
               Were mony men of méekle pride:
               Feghting they were full ernestly:
               They might haue seene who had bene by,
               Yeomen, and Swaynes, and Pedaill,
               That in the Parke to kéepe vittaile,
               Were left, when they wist but léesing,
               That their Lords with hard feghting,
               On there foes assembled were:
               One of themselues that was there,
               Capitane ouer them all they made,
               And sheetes, that were somedeill brade
               They made in stead of Baners,
               And fastned on long trées and speares:
               And said, that they would sée the fight,
               And help their Lords at their might:
               When hereto all assented were,
               In a rout they assembled are.
               Fifteene thousand they were, and ma.
               And then in great hy can they ga,
               UUith their Baners all in a rout,
               As they had bene men styth and stout,
               They came with all their assemblie,
               While that they might the battells sée.
               
                  Then all at ones they gaue a cry:
               Sla, sla, vpon them hardely:
               And therewithall comming were they,
               But they were yet well far away.
               And Englishmen that frushed were
               Through force of fight, as I said aire,
               UUhen they saw men with sik a cry
               Comming with sik a company,
               That they well néere als mony were,
               As they were feghting with them yare:
               And they before had not them séene:
               Then wit ye well withoutten wéene,
               They were abased so gretumly:
               That the best and the most hardy,
               That was into that Oast that day,
               Wald with his Mensk haue bene away,
               The King Robert by their reilling,
               Saw them well néere discomfiting,
               Then his Ensenyie he can fast cry
               And with them of his company,
               His foes he preassed so fast, that they
               Then were into so great affray:
               That they left place ay maire and maire.
               For all the Scottishmen that were there:
               When they saw them eschew the fight,
               Dang on them so with all their might:
               That they skailled in trowples seire,
               And till discomfiting drew neere.
               And some of them fled all plainely:
               But they that wight were and hardy,
               That shame letted to take the flight
               With great mischief maintained the fight,
               And stoutly in the stoure can stand.
               And when the King of England,
               
               
                  Saw his men flee in sundrie place,
               And saw his foes rout, that was
               Worthen so wight, and so worthie,
               That all his folke were haillelie
               So astoneyed, that they had no might,
               To stint their foes in that fight:
               Hée was abased so gretumlie,
               That hee, and in his companie,
               Fifteene hundreth armed men at right,
               Into that frush tooke all the flight:
               And to the Castell tooke their way.
               And I haue heard yet some men say,
               That of Vallance Sir Aymery,
               
               When hée the field saw vanquisht néere,
               By the renyie led away the King,
               Against his will from the feghting,
               And when Sir Geiles de Argentie,
               
               Saw the King with his Menȝie,
               Shape then to flée so speedily,
               Hee spéed then to the King in hy:
               And said (Sir), sen that yée will so,
               That yée thus gaite your way will goe,
               Haue good day: for againe will I,
               Yet fled I neuer sikkerlie.
               And I choose rather to bide and die,
               Then for to liue, and shamefullie flée,
               His bridle then but more abade:
               Hee turned and againe hée rade,
               As dread of no kin thing had hée:
               And pricked crying, Argentie
               
               Right on Sir Edward Bruces rout.
               That was so stalwart and so stout:
               And they right sturdely him met,
               And so feill Speares on him set,
               
                  That hée and Horse were charged so,
               And both downe to the eird can goe,
               And in that place there slaine was hée.
               And of his death was greit pitie.
               Hée was the third best Knight, perfay.
               That men wist liuing in this day:
               And did full mony faire journey,
               On Saracens three derenyies made hée:
               And into ilke derenyie of tha,
               Hée quickly vanquisht Saracens twa,
               His greit worship tooke their ending:
               And fra Sir Aymer, with the King,
               Was fled, there durst not one abide,
               But fléeing skailled on ilke side.
               And their foes preased them right fast,
               To say the sooth they were agast:
               And fled so done affrayedlie:
               That of them a greit companie,
               Fled in the Water of Forth, and there
               The most part of them drowned were:
               And Banockburne within the braes,
               Of Men and Horse so charged was:
               That upon drowned Horse, and Men,
               Folke might passe dry out ouer it then,
               And Laddes, Swaynes, they Rangall,
               When they saw vanquisht the battell,
               Ran among them, and so can sla
               Tha folke that no defence might ma,
               That it was pitie for to sée
               I neuer heard into no Countrie,
               Folkes at so greit mischife were stad,
               On ane side they their foes had:
               That slew them downe without mercy,
               And they had on the other party,
               
                  
                  Banockburne, that so cummersome was,
               For slike and déepnesse for to passe:
               That there might none out ouer it ride,
               But there behooued them to abide:
               So that some slaine some drowned were:
               Might none eschape that euer came there,
               But yet full mony gote away:
               That elsewhere fled, as I heare say,
               The King with them hée with him had,
               In a rout to the Castell rade:
               And would haue béene therein, for they
               Wist not what gate to get away.
               Sir Philip Mowbray said him till,
               The Castell Sir, is at your will,
               But come yée in it, yée shall sée
               That yée shall soone assieged bée:
               And there is none in all England,
               
               To make rescourse dare take in hand:
               And but rescourse may no Castell,
               Bée holden long, this wate yée well,
               Therefore comfort you and relie
               Your men about you, right straitlie:
               And hold about the Parke your way,
               Als sadlie knit, as euer yee may,
               For I trow that none shall haue might,
               That chooses with so feill to fight.
               And as hée counseld, so haue they done:
               And beneth the Castell went they soone.
               Right by the round table their way,
               And the new Parke enuironde they.
               And toward Linlithgow held in hy:
               But I trow they shall hastelie,
               Sée conuoyed, with sik folke that they,
               
                  
                     •
                   trow, might suffer well away.
               
                  For Sir Iames Lord of Dowglas,
               
               Came to the King, and asked the cace:
               And gaue to him lieue but abade.
               But all too few of Horse hée had:
               Hée had not in his rout sextie,
               But yet hée sped him hastelie:
               The way efter the King to ta.
               Now let him on his wayes ga,
               And efter this wée shall well tell,
               What to him in the chase befell.
            
            
               How the Erle of Hartfurd in Bothwell was. Tane ouer the walles, fled from the chase.
               WHen the greit battell on this wise,
               Was discomfist, as I deuise.
               Where threttie thousand well were dead,
               And drowned, and slaine into that stead,
               And some were into hands tane:
               And other some their gaite are gane.
               The Erle of Herfurde for that melle,
               Departed with a greit menyie:
               And straight to Bothwell held their way,
               That then was in Englishmens fay:
               Was holden as a place of wéere.
               Sir Walter Gilbertson was there
               Capitane, and it had in ward.
               The Erle of Herfurd hidder rade,
               And was tane in ouer the wall,
               And fiftie of his men withall:
               And set in Houses sinderlie,
               So that they had there no mastrie.
               The laue went toward England,
               
               But of that ro
                     •
                  t, I take on hand,
               
                  The thrid part were slaine, or tane:
               The laue with great paine hame are gane.
               Sir Morise also the Barclay,
               
               Fra the great Oast held his way.
               With a great 
                     •
                  out of Wales men,
               Where euer they rade, men might them ken:
               For they well néere all naked were,
               Or linnen claithes had but maire.
               They held their way in full great hy:
               But mony of their company,
               Ere they in England came were tane:
               And mony of them als were slaine.
               They fled als other wayes seite:
               But to the Castell that was néere,
               Of Striuiling, fled sik a Menyie,
               That it was wonder for to sée.
               For all the Craigges so heilled were
               About the Castell here and there:
               Of them that for strength of that sted,
               Hidderward to warrand fled.
               And for they were so feill, that there
               Fled vnder the Castell were.
               The King Robert that was wittie,
               Held ay his good men néere him by:
               For dread that rise againe sould they.
               This was the cause forsooth, to say,
               Wherethrough the King of England,
               
               Escaped home into his land,
               WHen that the field so cleane was made
               Of Englishmen, that none abade:
               The Scottishmen tooke soone in hand,
               So great riches there they fand.
               Siluer and gold, clothes and arming,
               And vessell, and all other thing,
               
                  That euer they might lay on their hand,
               So great a riches there they fand:
               That mony men were rich made,
               Of the riches that they there had.
               When this was done, that here say I,
               The King sent a great companie,
               Up to the Craigges them to assaile,
               That were fled from the great battaile:
               And they them yald without debate,
               And them in hand they tooke full haite:
               Syne to the King all brought were they,
               And they dispended hailly that day
               In riches, and in spraith taking:
               Fra end was made of the feghting.
               And when they naked spoyled were,
               That were slaine in the battell there,
               It was forsooth a great ferly,
               To sée so mony there dead to ly:
               Two hundreth paire of spurres red,
               Were tane of Knights that were dead.
               The Erle of Glocester dead was there,
               That men called, Sir Gilbert of Clare:
               And Geiles de Argentie alswa,
               And Payn Typont, and other ma:
               That there names not tell can I.
               And vpon Scottishmens partie,
               There was slaine worthie Knights twa,
               
                  William Wepont was one of tha:
               And Sir Walter of Rosse another,
               That Sir Edward the Kings brother
               Loued, and held in sik daintie,
               That as himselfe him loued he.
               And when he wist that he was dead,
               He was so wa, and will of read,
               
                  That he said, making full euill cheare.
               That him had rather the iourney were
               Undone, ere he so dead had bene.
               Outtaken him, men hes not séene,
               UUhen he for ony man made méening.
               And the cause was of his louing,
               That he his sister in Paramours
               Loued, and held at great retoures,
               His owne wife Dame Issabell:
               And therefore so great distance fell
               Betwixt him, and the Erle Dauy
               
               Of Atholl, brother to this Lady:
               That the Erle on Sanct Iohns night,
               When both the Kings were boun to fight
               In Cambuskynneth the Kings vittaile
               Tooke, and hardlie can assaile
               Sir William of Airth, and him slew,
               And with him men mo than enew.
               Therefore syne into England
               
               He was banisht, and all his land
               Was seazed, as forfeite to the King,
               That did thereof all his liking.
               ANd when the field, as I told aire,
               Was dispoyled, and made all bare.
               The King and all his companie,
               Glade, and ioyfull was, and merie
               Of the grace that them fallen was:
               Toward their Innes the wayes taes
               To rest them: for they wearie were.
               But for the Erle Gilbert of Clare
               
               That slaine was in the battell place,
               The King somedeill annoyed was:
               For to him néere sibbe was he,
               Then to a Kirk he gart him be
               
                  Brought, and walked all that night.
               And on the morne when day was light,
               The King raise as his vse was:
               And to an English Knight through cace
               Hapned, that he yéede wauerand:
               So that no man laid on him hand:
               And in a buske he hid his arming,
               And waited while he saw the King,
               In the morning come foorth earlie:
               Then is he went to him in hie,
               Sir Marmaduk the Twemane he hight:
               He raiked to the King full right,
               And hailsed him vpon his knée.
               Welcome Sir Marmaduk (said hée)
               To what man art thou prisoner?
               To none (he said) but to you here,
               I yéelde me at your will to be,
               And I receiue thée, Sir, said he.
               Then gart he treat him courteouslie.
               He dwelt long in his companie:
               And syne in England him sent he,
               Arrayed well but ransome frée:
               And gaue him great gifts thereto:
               A worthie man that so could do,
               Might make him greatly for to prise.
               When Marmaduk vpon this wise
               UUas yolden, as I to you say.
               Then came Sir Philip the Mowbray:
               And to the King yald the Castell,
               His cunnand hes he holden well
               Then with him treated so the King,
               That he beleft of his dwelling,
               And held him léelely his fay,
               To the last end of his life day,
            
            
               
               How Iames of Dowglas conuoyed the King Of England home but Sojourning,
               NOw speake we of the Lord Dowglas,
               
               And tell how hée followed the chase:
               And had whéene in his companie,
               But hee sped him in full greit hy,
               And as hée through the Torwood foore,
               Hée saw come riding ouer the Moore:
               Sir Lawrence of Abernethie,
               
               That with sextie in companie,
               Came for to helpe the Englishmen,
               For hée was Englishman yet then
               And when hée heard how that it was,
               Hée left the Englishmens peace,
               And to the Lord Dowglas there,
               For to bée léele and trew hée sware,
               And then they both followed the chase:
               And ere the King of England was
               Passed Linlithgow, they came so néere,
               With all the folke that with them were,
               That well among them shoot they might,
               But they thought them too few to fight,
               For five hundreth armed they were,
               In the greit rout that they had there,
               Togidder full surelie rade they,
               And held them vpon bridle aye,
               They were gouerned full wittelie:
               For it séemed they were aye ready,
               For to defend them at their might
               If they assailȝied were in fight.
               And the Lord Dowglas and his men,
               Thought it was not good purpose then,
               
                  To feght with them all openlie,
               Hee conuoyed them so narrowlie:
               That of the hindmest aye tooke hee,
               Might none behind his Fellowes bée,
               A pennie-stone-cast, but hee in hy,
               Was tane or slaine deliueredlie
               They no rescourse would to him ma,
               Although hée followed neuer sa,
               IN this mane
                     •
                   conuoyed them hée,
               While that the King and his Menyie,
               To Wincheburgh all commen are.
               Then lighted they all that there were,
               To baite their Horse that were wearie:
               And Dowglas and his companie,
               Bated also beside them néere.
               They were so feill withoutten wéere.
               And in armes so cleanelie dight:
               And so arayed for to fight,
               And h
                     •
                  e so wéene, and but gaddering,
               That hee would not in plaine feghting
               Assaillyie them, but rade them by,
               Waiting his time so eithandly,
               A litle while they baited there,
               And syne lap on, and foorth can fare,
               And hee was alwayes by them néere,
               And leete them not haue sik leiser
               As anes wa
                     •
                  er for to ma.
               And if that ony stad were sa,
               And behind left was 
                     〈◊〉
                   space:
               Seezed in hand als soone hee was,
               They conuoyed them vpon this wise
                     •
                  
               
               While that the King, and rout is
               Comde to the Castell of Dumbar.
               
               Where hée, and of his men so were,
               
                  Receiued right well, for yet than.
               The Erle Patricke was Englishman:
               That gart with meat and drinke alswa.
               Refresh them well, and syne can ta,
               A baite, and send the King by sey,
               To Bamburgh in his owne Countrie.
               Their Horse there left they all on stray,
               But léesed als soone in hand were they.
               The laue that liued were without.
               Addressed them into a rout:
               And held to Berwicke straight their way,
               In a rout, and the sooth shall say:
               They leaued of there men partly,
               Ere they came there, but not for thy
               They came to Barwicke soone, and there
               Into the towne receiued were:
               Else at greit mischiefe had they béene.
               And when the Lord Dowglas hes seene,
               That hee had léesed there his paine,
               Toward the King hée went againe.
               THe King escaped on this wise,
               (Loe what falding to Fortune lyes,
               That whiles vpon a man will smile,
               And pricke him syne another while:
               In no time stable can shee stand,
               This mightie King of England,
               
               Shee had set on her whéele at hight,
               When with so ferlifull a might,
               Of men, of armes and archers,
               And of foot men and Hobillers,
               Hée came riding out of his Land,
               As I before haue borne on hand:
               And in a night syne and a day,
               Shee set him into so hard assay,
               
                  That hée with few men in a baite,
               Faine was for to hold home his gaite:
               But of this ilke whéele turning,
               King Robert should make no mourning,
               For his side of the whéele on hight▪
               
               Rose, when the other downe can light,
               For two contrares yée may wit well,
               Set against other in a whéele▪
               
               When one is hie, another is law,
               And if it fall that Fortoun thraw
               The whéele about, it that on hight
               Was eir, on force it mon downe light:
               And it that laigh was vnder aire,
               Mon leape on hight in the contraire,
               So foore it of thir Kings two.
               For when King Robert stad was so,
               That in his greit mischiefe was hée,
               The other was in his Majestie.
               And when the King Edwards might
               Woxt lesse, then Roberts raise on hight:
               And now sik Fortoun came him till.
               That hée was hied and had his will.
               AT Striuiling was hée yet lyand,
               And the greit Lords that hée fand,
               Dead in the field, hée gart burie,
               In holie places honourablie.
               And the laue syne that dead were there,
               Into greit Pittes buried were.
               The Castell and the towres syne,
               Euen to the ground downe gart hée myne,
               And syne to Bothwell sent hée,
               Sir Edward with a greit Menyie,
               For they therein send to him word,
               That the rich Erle of Herfurd,
               
               
                  And other mightie als were there.
               So treated he with Sir Walter,
               
               That Erle, and Castell, and all the laue,
               Into Sir Edwards hand he gaue.
               Then to the King the Erle sent he,
               That gart him right well kéeped be.
               While at the last they treated sa:
               That he to England home sould ga,
               Without paying of ransome, frée:
               And that for him sould changed be,
               Bishop Robert that blinde was made,
               And the Quéene that they taken had
               In prison, as before said I,
               And her Doughter Dame Mariory.
               
               The Erle was changed for thir thrée:
               And when they commen were home al frée,
               The Kings doughter that was faire,
               And was als his appearand aire,
               With Walter Stewart can her wed:
               And they well soone got of their bed
               A man-childe through Gods grace,
               That efter his good old father was
               Called Robert, and syne was King,
               And had the land in gouerning,
               Efter his worthie sonne Dauy:
               That reigned nine yéeres and threttie,
               And in the time of the compyling
               Of this booke this last Robert was King:
               And of his Kinrik passed was
               Five yéeres, and was the yéere of grace,
               A thousand thrée hundreth and seuentie
               And fiue: and of his eild sextie.
               And that was efter the good King,
               
                  Robert was brought to his ending,
               
                  Sex and fourtie UUinter but maire.
               GOD grant, that they that commen are
               Of his ofspring, maintaine the land,
               And hold the folke well to warrand:
               And maintaine right, and eke lawtie,
               Als well as in his time did he,
            
            
               How King Robert rade in England, And brunt vp all Northumberland.
               
               KIng Robert now was well at hight,
               And ilk day thē grew more his might:
               His men wort rich, and his Countrie
               Abounded well of corne and fée:
               And of all kinde of other riches.
               And mirth, solace, and all vlythnes
               UUas in the haill land commonlie:
               For ilk man blyth was, and ioly.
               The King after this great iourney,
               Through réede and counsell of his priuie,
               In sundrie townes gart cry on hight,
               That who so clamed to haue right,
               To hold in Scotland land and fée,
               That within twelue moneths sould he
               Come and claime it: and then to do
               To the king, as pertained thereto.
               And gif they come not in that yéere,
               Then sould they wit withoutten wéere
               That hard thereafter none sould be,
               The King that was of great bountie,
               Had busi
                     •
                  es when this was done,
               One 
                     •
                  ast gact summond after soone,
               And went then into England,
               
               And ouer rade all Northumberland,
               
               
                  And brunt townes, and tooke their pray,
               And syne went home vpon their way.
               I let it shortly passe far by:
               For there was no great Cheualry
               Prooued, that is to speake of here.
               The King went oft in this manere
               In England, for to rich his men,
               That in riches abounded then.
            
            
               How Sir Edward tooke on hand, For to make weere into Ireland.
               
               THe Erle of Carrik Sir Edward,
               
               That stouter was than a Leopard,
               And had no will to liue at peace,
               Thought that Scotland too litle wes
               To his brother, and him alswa:
               Therefore to purpose can he ta,
               That he of Ireland would be King:
               Therefore he sent, and had treating,
               UUith the Irshry of Ireland,
               
               That in their lawtie tooke on hand,
               Of all Ireland to make him King:
               UUith thy, that he with hard feghting,
               Might ouercome the Englishmen,
               That in that land were winning then,
               And they sould helpe with all their might:
               And he that heard them make sik heght,
               Into his heart he had great liking.
               And with the consent of the King,
               Gathered him men of great bountie:
               And syne at Air shipped he.
               Into the neist moneth of May,
               To Ireland held he straight his way,
               
                  And had there in his companie,
               The Erle Thomas that was worthie:
               And good Sir Philip the Mowbray,
               
               That sikker was in hard assay:
               Sir Iohn Sowles that was wight,
               And Sir Iohn Stewart a good Knight:
               The Ramsay als of Oughterhous.
               
               That was right wise and Cheualrous.
               And Sir Fergus of Ardrossane,
               
               And other Knights mony ane.
               In Wolyngs Firth arriued they
               Saiflie, but bargane or assay,
               And sent their shippes home againe.
               A great thing haue they vndertane,
               That with so whéene as they were,
               That was seuen thousand men but maire,
               Shupe for to weirray all Ireland,
               
               Where they fall sée mony thousand,
               Come armed on them for to fight:
               But though they whéene were, they were wight,
               And without dread or affray.
               In two battells they tooke their way,
               Toward Craigfergus. it to sée.
               But the Lords of that Countrie,
               
                  Maundewile, Bisset, and Logane,
               
               Their men they sembled euerilkane.
               The Sauages als was with them there:
               And when they all assembled were,
               They were well néere twentie thousand.
               When that they wist, that in their land,
               Sik a Menyie arriued were,
               With all the folke that they had there,
               They went toward them in hy.
               And when Sir Edward wist surely,
               
                  That to him néere comming were they,
               His men right well hee gart array.
               The Uangard had the Erle Thomas,
               
               In the Réeregard Sir Edward was,
            
            
               The first battell that Sir Edward
Wan in Ireland, with feghting hard.
               THeir foes approached to the fighting,
               And they met them but abasing,
               There men might see a full greit melle,
               The Erle Thomas and his Menyie,
               Dang on their foes so doughtely,
               That in short time men might sée ly,
               An hundreth that all bloodie were,
               For hobynes that were sticked there.
               Reilled and flang, and greit rowme made;
               And kest them that vpon them rade,
               Sir Edward and his companie,
               Assembled then so hardelie,
               That they their foes their rushed all:
               Who happened in that feght to fall.
               It was greit perill of his rising.
               The Scottishmen in that feghting,
               So apertlie, and well them bare:
               That all their foes rushed were,
               And they haillie the flight hes tane,
               In the battell were taken and slaine,
               All haill the floure of Wollistar,
               
               The Erle of Murray greit prise had there
               For his right worthie Cheualrie,
               Comforted all his companie.
               This was a well faire beginning,
               For newlings at their arriuing.
               
                  In plaine feght they discomfist there
               These folke, that aye foure for ane were,
               Syne to Craigfergus are they gane,
               And in the towne hes Innes tane.
               The Castell new was stuffed then,
               Right well with vittaill and with men,
               Thereto they set a Siege in hy.
               And mony ishe full apertlie
               Made was, while the Siege there lay:
               While truce at the last tooke they.
               When that the folke of Wollister,
               
               To his peace hailly commen were.
               Then Sir Edward would take on hand,
               To ride farthermore in the land.
            
            
               The withletting of the passe of Endnellane
               
               ANd of the Kings of that Countrie.
               There came to him and made fewtie▪
               
               Well ten or twelue, as I heard say.
               But they hold him short while perfay.
               For two of them, one Makgoulchane,
               
               And another heght Macarthane,
               
               Umbeset him into his way,
               Where him behooued of néed to ga.
               With two thousand men with Speares,
               And als mony of their archers:
               And all the Cattell of the land.
               Were driuen hidder to warrand.
               Men called that place Endnellane,
               
               In all Ireland straitter is nane:
               For thy Sir Edward there kept they:
               And thought he should not passe that way.
               But hée his voyage straight hes tane,
               And euen toward the place is gane,
               
                  The Erle of Murray Sir Thomas,
               
               That first put him to all assayes,
               Hee lighted on foote with his Menȝie,
               And apertlie the place tooke hee.
               The Irish King, I spake of aire,
               That in the place embushed were,
               Met him sull stoutlie: But hée
               Assailed so with his Menȝie,
               That magre theirs hée wan the place,
               Slaine of their foes full mony was
               Throughout the Wood then chased they,
               And seezed in sik aboundance the Prey.
               That all the folke of their Host were,
               Refreshed well an wéeke or mair.
               At Kylsagart Sir Edward lay,
               And there well soone hée hes heard say:
               That at Dondalke was an assemblie,
               Made of the Lords of that Countrie,
               In Host they were assembled there
               There was first Richard of Clare
               
               That in all Ireland Lieuetenand
               Was to the King of England.
               
               The Erle of Desmound als was there.
               And the Erle also of Kildar.
               
               The Bryane eke, and the Wardane
               That were Lords of greit Renoun.
               The Butler also there was,
               And when Sir Morise le fitz Thomas,
               
               That with their men were commen there▪
               
               A right greit Host, forsooth they were,
               And when Sir Edward wist surelie,
               That there was sik a Cheualrie,
               In hy his Host hée gart array.
               And hidderward hée tooke his way,
               
                  And néere the towne tooke his Harbrie,
               But, for hee wist right perfitelie,
               That in the towne were mony men,
               His battells hee arrayed then:
               And stood arrayed in battaile,
               To keepe them, if they would assaile.
            
            
               The battell of Dondalk in Ireland. That Sir Edward tooke with his hand.
               ANd when that Sir Richard of Clare,
               
               And other Lords that were there:
               With that the Scottishmen so were neere,
               With their battells comming were,
               They tooke to counsell that at night:
               For it was late▪ they would not fight:
               But on the morne in the morning,
               Well soone efter the Sun-rising,
               They should ishe foorth all that there were
               Therefore that night they did no maire,
               But Harbred them on another partie,
               That night the Scots companie,
               Were watched right well at al their might▪
               
               And on the morne when day was light,
               In two battells they them arrayed.
               And stood with Baners in hand displayed,
               For the Battell all readie bowne,
               And they that were within the towne,
               When the Sun was risen shinning cleare,
               Send foorth of them that with them were,
               Fiftie to see the conteening
               Of Scottishmen, and their comming.
               And they rade foorth, and saw them soone,
               Syne come againe withoutten hone▪
               
               
                  And when that they all lighted were,
               Then told they to their Lords there,
               That Scottishmen seemed to be
               Worthie, and of right great bountie,
               But they are not withoutten weere:
               Halfe deill a Denner to vs are here.
               The Lords had of that tiding
               Great ioy, and great recomforting:
               And gart men through the Citie cry,
               That all sould arme them hastelie.
               When they were armed, and puruayed,
               And for the fight all haill arrayed,
               Then went they foorth in good array:
               Syne with their foes assembled they,
               That keeped them right hardelie.
               The stour began then cruellie.
               For at her partie set all their might,
               To rush their foes into that fight:
               And with all paine on other dang.
               That stalward stour lasted well lang:
               That men might not perceiue, nor sée
               Who most there at abone sould be:
               For fra soone efter the Sun rising,
               Till efter mid-noone the feghting
               Lasted, into sik a dout:
               But then Sir Edward that was stout,
               With all them of his companie,
               Shot vpon them so sturdelie:
               That they might thole no more the fight,
               All in a frush they tooke the flight.
               And they followed full egerlie,
               Into the toun all commonlie,
               They entred both Intermelle:
               There men might felloun slaughter sée.
               
                  For the right Noble Erle Thomas,
               
               That with his rout followed the chase.
               Made sik slaughter into the toun,
               And so felloun Decisioun:
               That all the Rewes bloodie were,
               Of slaine men that were lying there▪
               
               The Lords were gotten all away.
               And when the toun (as I heard say)
               Was through great force of feghting tane,
               And all their foes fled, or slaine,
               They harbred them within the toun,
               Where, of vittaile was sik fusioun,
               And so great aboundance of wine:
               That the good Erle had dout therein,
               That of their men sould drunken be,
               And make in drunkennesse some melle.
               Therefore he made of wine, Lewerie
               To ilk man that he payed sould be.
               And they had all inough perfay.
               That night right well at ease were thay,
               And right blyth of the great honour,
               That them befell for their valour.
            
            
               The third battell in Ireland, That good Sir Edward tooke on hand.
               EFter this fight they soiournde there,
               Into Dondalk thrée daies or maire:
               Then tooke they Southerward their way,
               Erle Thomas rade before them ay.
               And as they rade through the Countrie,
               They might vpon the hilles see,
               So mony men it was ferly.
               And when the Erle would sturdelie
               
                  Dresse him to them with his Baner:
               They would flee all that euer they were:
               So that in fight not one would byde.
               And they foorth on their wayes did ryde,
               While to a great Forrest came they,
               
                  Kylros it heght, as I heard say,
               And they tooke all their harbrie there.
               In all this time, Richard of Clare,
               
               That was the Kings Lieuetenand,
               Of all the barnage of Ireland,
               
               An great Oast there assembled had,
               That was fiue battells great and brade:
               And Sir Edward, and his men,
               Well néere him were they commen then.
               He gote soone witting, that they were
               In haill battell comming néere.
               His men addressed he them againe,
               And gart them stoutlie take the Plaine:
               And syne the Erle came them to sée:
               And Sir Philip de Mowbray sent he,
               And Sir Iohn Stewart went alswa,
               For to discouer the way they ta:
               And saw the Oast néere come at hand,
               That were to gesse fiftie thousand.
               Home to Sir Edward rade they then,
               And said, that they were mony men.
               He said againe: the ma they be,
               The more honour all out haue we,
               Gif that we beare vs manfully:
               UUe are here set in ieopardie,
               To win honour, or for to die,
               UUe are too far fra home to flée:
               Therefore let ilk man worthie be,
               Yone are but gaddered of this Countrie,
               
                  And they sall flée, I trow lightlie,
               Gif we assaile them manfullie.
               All they said then, they sould well do.
               With that they approched neere them to,
               Their battels readie for to fight,
               And they met them with meekle might.
               They were ten thousand worthie men,
               The Scottishmen all on foot were then,
               And they on S
                     •
                  eedes trapped well:
               Some heilled all in Yrne and Steele.
               But Scottishmen at their meeting,
               With speares pierced their arming:
               And sticked horse, and men downe bare,
               A felloun slaughter was then there:
               I can not tell their straikes all,
               Nor who in feght gart others fall:
               But in short time I vnderta,
               They of Ireland were cumbred sa:
               That they durst them abide no maire,
               But fled skailled all here and there.
               And leaued in the battell stead,
               UUell mony of their good men dead.
               Of weapons, arming, and dead men,
               The field was hailly ouerstrowed then:
               That great Oast rudely rushed was:
               But Sir Edward léete no man chase,
               But with prisoners that they had tane,
               Toward the Wood againe is gaine:
               Where that their harnesse leaued were,
               That night they made them merie cheare,
               And loued GOD fast of his grace.
               The good Knight that so worthie was,
               To Iudas Macchabeus might
               Be likened well, that into fight,
               
                  Forsooke no multitude of men,
               While hée had one against ten.
            
            
               How an Irish King false and froward, Leete out a Loch vpon Sir Edward.
               
               THus as I said, Richard of Clare,
               
               And his greit Host rebuted were:
               But hée about him nought for thy,
               Was gaddering men aye it handly,
               For hee thought yet to recouer his cast,
               It angred him euen felloun fast:
               That twise into battell was hée
               Discomfist with a few Menyie:
               And Scottishmen that to the Forrest,
               Were riding for to take their rest:
               All tha two nights there they lay,
               And made them mirth, solace and play,
               Toward Endrossy syne they rade,
               An Irish King that aith had made
               To Sir Edward of his fewtie
               For before that time him prayed hée
               To sée his land, and his vittaile,
               Nor not that they might helpe should faile.
               Sir Edward trowed into his hight,
               And with his rout rade hidder right,
               A greit Riuer hee gart him passe,
               And in a right faire place that was
               Laigh by a Burne, hée gart them ta
               Their Harbery, and said, hée would ga,
               To gar men vittaile to them bring,
               Hee held his way but more dwelling,
               For to betraise was all his thought.
               In sik a place hée hes them brought.
               
                  Wherefra two journeyes well and mare,
               All the Cattell withdrawne were,
               So that they in that land might get
               Nothing, that worth was for to eat.
               With hunger hée thought them to féeblish.
               Syne bring on them their enemies,
               This false treatour men had made,
               A litle South where hee harbred had,
               Sir Edward with the Scottishmen:
               The Ishe of a Loch to dem.
               And let it out within the night,
               The water then with sik a might,
               On Sir Edward, and his men came down
               That they in perrill were to drowne,
               For ere they wist, on flot were they,
               With méekle paine they got away,
               And held their liues, as God gaue grace:
               But of their Harnesse tint there was.
               Hée made them no good feast perfay,
               And not for thy auengh had they:
               For though they wanted of the meat,
               I warne you well, they were well wete
               In greit distresse there were they stad,
               For greit default of meate they had.
               And they betwixt greit Riuers two
               Were set, and might passe none of tho.
               The Ban, that is an arme of the sea,
               That with Horse may not passed bée,
               Was betwixt them and W
                        •
                     sister.
               
               They had béene in greit perill there.
               Were not a scummer of the Sea,
               
                  Thomas of Dun called was hée,
               Heard that the Host so straitlie than
               Was stad, hee sailled vp the Ban:
               
                  While that he came neere where they lay,
               They knew him well, and blyth were they
               Then with foure ships that hee had tane,
               Hee set them ouer the Ban ilkane,
               And when they came in bigged Land,
               Uittaile, and meat aneugh they 
                     •
                  and,
               And in a Wood them harbred they,
               None of the Land wist where they lay.
               They resset them, and made good cheare.
               Into that time beside them were,
               With a greit Host Richard of Clare,
               
               And other greit of Ireland, were
               Harbred into a Forrest side:
               And ilke day they gart men ride.
               To bring vittailes in seir maners
               To them from the towne of Cogners,
               
               That well neere ten miles was them froe,
               Ilke day as they would come and goe,
               They came the Scottishmens Host so néere,
               That but two mile betwixt them were,
            
            
               How Sir Thomas of Randell, Wan from the Irishmen their vit
                     •
                  all.
               ANd when the Erle Thomas perceuing
               Had, of their come, and their ganging
               Hee gat him a good companie,
               Thrée hundreth on horse wight and hardy,
               There was Sir Philip the Mowbray.
               
               And Sir Iohn Stewart als perfay,
               And Sir Allane Stewart alswa,
               Sir Robert Boyd, and other ma,
               They rade to méete the vittallers,
               That with their vittaile from Cogners.
               
               
                  Came, holding to their Host the way,
               So suddenlie on them set they:
               That they were so abased all,
               That all they let their weapons fall,
               And mercie pitteouslie can cry.
               And they tooke them in their mercie,
               And hes them vp so cleenelie tane,
               That of them all escaped nane.
               The Erle through them gat wittering:
               That of their Host in the Euening,
               Some would come out of the Wood-side,
               And for to méete their vitttaile ride,
               Hée thought on them a jeopardie,
               And gart his men all haillelie,
               Dight them in Prisoners array.
               Their Prisoners als with them tooke they:
               And while the night was neere the
                     •
                   bade,
               And syne toward the Host they rade.
               Some of their meekle Host hes séene
               Them come, and weind well they had béen
               Their vittaillers, therefore they rade
               Against them safelie: for they had
               No dread, that they their foes were.
               And als they hungred verie saire,
               Therefore they came abandounlie.
               And when they neere were, in greit hy
               The Erle, and all that with him were,
               Rushed on them with Weapons bare:
               And their Ensenyie hiely can cry.
               And they that saw so suddenly
               Their foes ding on them, were rad,
               That they none heart to helpe had,
               But to their Wood their way they ta,
               And they chased, and so feill can sla,
               
                  That all the fieldes ouerstrowed were.
               Moe then a thousand dead were there:
               Right to their Oast they can them chase,
               And syne againe their waies gaes.
               ON this wise was the vittaile tane,
               And of the Irish men mony slane:
               The Erle syne wi
                     •
                  h his companie,
               Prisoners, and vittaile haillelie,
               They brought all to Sir Edward swyth:
               And he was of their comming blyth.
               That night they made them merie cheare▪
               
               For they euen at their ease now were:
               They were all watched ay sickerlie.
               Their foes vpon the other partie,
               When they heard how their men were slaine,
               And how their vittaile als was tane:
               They tooke the counsell, that they would
               Their wayes toward Cogneres hold,
               And harbrie in the Citie ta.
               And in great hy they haue done sa,
               And rode by night to the Citie,
               They found their vittaile great plentie,
               And made them merie and good cheare:
               For in the towne all traist they were.
               Upon the morne they sent to spy,
               Where Scottishmen had tane harbry,
               But they were met with▪ and all tane:
               And brought vnto the Oast ilkane.
               The Erle of Murray right meekelie,
               Speered at one of their companie,
               Where their Oast lay, & what they thought
               To doe, and said, gif that he mought
               Find, that the sooth to him said he,
               He sould gang home but ransome frée.
               
                  He said, forsooth, I sall you say,
               They thinke the morne when it is day,
               To séeke you with all their Menyie.
               Gif they may get wit where ye be:
               They haue gart through the Citie cry,
               On paine of life full fellounly.
               That all the men of this Countrie,
               The morne into the Citie be,
               And truely they sall be so feill,
               That ye sall no wise with them deale.
            
            
               How Thomas Randell chased hame, The Scurreours, that fra Cogners came.
               
                  DE Pardew (said he) it may well be,
               To Sir Edward with that yéed he,
               And told him vtterly this tale,
               Then haue they tane for counsell haill,
               That they will ride to the Citie,
               That same night, so that they may be,
               Betwixt the toun with all their rout:
               And they that were the toun without,
               As they deuised: so haue they done,
               Before the toun they came all soone,
               And but halfe deill a mile of way
               Fra the toun, arest tooke they.
               And when the day was dawning light,
               Fiftie on Hobines that were wight,
               Came to a litle hill that was
               From the toun a litle space:
               And saw Sir Edwards harbrie,
               And of that sight had great ferlie:
               That so wheene vpon ony wise,
               Durst vndertake so hie emprise,
               
                  As for to come so hardilie,
               Upon all the great Cheualrie
               Of Ireland, to bide battaile:
               And so it was withoutten faile.
               For against them were gaddered there,
               With the Wardane, Richard of Clare,
               
               The Butlers, and the Erles twa,
               Of Desmound, and Kyldar alswa:
               
                  Brunhame, Wedoun, and Sir Waryne,
               
               And Sir Plastayne, a Florentyne,
               
               That was a Knight of Lombardie,
               
               And was of full great Cheualrie.
               And Maundewell was there alswa,
               
                  Bissatris, Loganes, and other ma.
               The Sauages als, and yet was ane,
               That heght Sir Michel of Kylcalaue,
               
               And with thir Lords so feill was then,
               That against one of the Scottishmen,
               I wate well they were fiue or ma.
               When their Discurreours hes séene sa
               The Scottish Dast, they went in hy,
               And told their Lords openly:
               How they to them were comming néere:
               To séeke them far was no mystéere.
               And when the Erle Thomas had séene:
               That tha men at the hill had béene,
               He tooke with him a great Menyie,
               On horse an hundreth they might be.
               And to the hill they tooke their way,
               And in a Slak enbushed they,
               And in short time fra the Citie,
               They saw come ryding a Menyie,
               For to discouer to the hill.
               They were blyth, and held them still,
               
                  UUhile they were commen to them neere:
               Then in a rush all that they were,
               They set vpon them hardelie:
               And they that saw so suddenlie
               Tha folke come on them, abased were,
               Yet notthelesse, some of them there
               Abade stoutlie to make debate:
               And other some are fled their gaite,
               And in short time were all tha,
               That made arest disrayed sa:
               That they fled hastelie their gaite,
               And they them chased to the yait:
               And one part of them hes slaine,
               And syne went to their Oast againe.
            
            
               The feird battell made in Ireland, That Sir Edward wan with strang hand.
               WHen they within hes séene so slaine
               Their men & chased home againe,
               They were all wa, and in great hy,
               To armes, highly can they cry.
               They armed them all that they were,
               And 
                     •
                  or the battell mad them yare,
               And ished out all well arrayed:
               In haill battell with Baner displayed,
               Boun on their wayes for to assaile
               Their foes into fell battaile.
               And when Sir Philip the Mowbray,
               
               Saw them ishe in so good array,
               To Sir Edward the Bruce went he.
               And said, Sir, it is good that we
               Shape for some slight that may auaile,
               To help vs in this great battaile.
               
                  Our men are good, but they haue will
               To doe more than they may fulfill.
               Therefore I réede, our Cariage
               Withoutten ony man or page,
               By themselues arrayed bee,
               And they shall séeme far moe than wée.
               Set wee before them our Baner,
               Yone folke that commeth out of Cogners
               
               When that out Baners they shall see,
               Shall trow trais
                     •
                  lie that they are wée,
               And hidder in greit hy shall ride,
               Come wee then on them at a side,
               And wee shall bée at a vantage,
               For fra they in our Cariage
               Bée entered, they shall cumbred bée:
               And then with all our might may wée,
               Lay on, and doe all that wée may,
               And as hée ordainde, done haue they,
               And they that came out of Cogners,
               
               Addressed them to the Baners:
               And strooke the Horse with spurres in hy,
               And rushed among them suddenly.
               The barrell ferrars that were there,
               Cumbred them fast that ryding were:
               And then the Erle and his battaile
               Came on, and sadlie can assaile.
               And Sir Edward a litle by,
               Assembled with his company.
               That mony a fey fell vnder féete.
               The field with blood woxt soone all wéete,
               With so greit fellony there they faught,
               And so greit routes to other raught:
               That it was hiddeous for to see,
               How they maintained that greit melle,
               
                  So kéenelie they faught on either side,
               Giuing, and taking routes red,
               That prime was past, or men might sée,
               What part soonest abone should bée,
               But soone efter that Prime was past,
               The Scottishmen dang on so fast:
               They set vpon them at aboundoun,
               As ilke man were a Scorpioun,
               That all their foes tooke the flight,
               Was none of them that was so wight,
               That euer durst abide his feere,
               But ilke man fled his wayes seere,
               To the towne fled, the most partie,
               And the Erle Thomas so egerlie,
               And his men chased with swords bare.
               That among them they mingled were,
               And all togidder came in the toun,
               Then was the slaughter so felloun,
               That all the rewes ran of the blood,
               Whom euer they gote, to death he yood,
               So that there were als feill dead,
               Well néere, as in the battell steed.
               The Swaryne was taken there,
               And so feared was Richard of Clare:
               That hee held to the South Countrie,
               All that Moneth I trow that hee,
               Shall haue no greit will for to fight.
               Sir Iohn Steward a Noble Knight
               Was wounded through the body there,
               With a speare that tight sharply share.
               But to Mount Peller went hee syne.
               And lay there long into Léeching:
               But at the last healed was hee,
               Sir Edward then with his Menȝie,
               
                  Tooke in the towne their Harbaie,
               That night they blyth were and jolie,
               For the victorie that they had there.
               And on the morne withoutten maire
               Sir Edward gart men gang and see,
               All the vittaile of that Citie:
               And they found sik fusioun therein
               Of corne, and floure and wax and win
                     •
                  :
               That they of it had greif ferlie,
               And Sir Edward gart haille lie
               To Craigfergus it caried bee,
               Syne hidder hee went with his Menȝie,
               And held the Siege full stalwartly,
               While Palme sunday was passed by▪
               
               Then to the Tuesday in Pasch Oulk,
               On either side they trewes tooke:
               So that they might that holy ti
                     •
                  e,
               In pennance and in prayed bide,
               But vpon Pasch Euen 
                     •
                  ight,
               To the Castell into the night,
               From Divilling came shippes fifteene,
               Charged with armour and men bedeene.
               Three thousand trow I well they were,
               That entred in the Castell there,
               The Maundwell also, and Sir Thomas
               
               Capitane of that Menȝie was:
               In the Castell full priuilie
               They entred: for they ga
                     ••
                   spy,
               That mony of Sir Edwards men,
               Were skailled in the Countrie then.
               Therfore they thought in the morning,
               To ishe but longer delaying.
               And to supprise them suddenly.
               For they thought they should tra
                     •
                  stly,
               
                  For the trewesse that taken were:
               But I trow falset euer maire
               Shall haue mischiefe, and euill ending.
               Sir Edward wist of this nothing:
               For of treason had hée no thought.
               But for the trewes hée letted nought
               To set watches to the Castell.
               Ilk night hée gart wake it full well:
               And Neill Fleming woke that night.
               And sextie worthie men and wight,
               And assoone as the day was cleare,
               They that within the Castell were,
               Had armed them, and made them bowne:
               And syne the draw-brig they lot downe:
               They ished then in greit plentie,
               And when Neill Fleming can them sée,
               Hée sent one to the King in hy,
               Syne said to them, that was him by:
               Now shall men sée, I vndertake,
               Who dar for his Lords sake,
               Now beare you well: for sikkerlie,
               With all yone Menȝie feght will I:
               Into bargane them hold shall wée,
               While that our Master armed bée.
               And with that word assembled they,
               That were all out too few perfay,
               With sik a greit rout for to fight:
               And not for thy with all their might,
               They dang on them so hardelie,
               That all their foes had greit ferlie,
               That they were all of sik manhéed:
               That they no dread had of their dead:
               But their feill foes so can assaile.
               That there might no worship auaile,
               
                  But they were slaine vp euerilkane,
               So cléene, that there escaped nane.
               And the man that went to the King,
               For to warne him of their ishing,
               Warned him in full great hy.
               Sir Edward was then commonly,
               Called the King of all Ireland.
               
               And when he had sik haste on hand,
               In full great haste he got his geare:
               Twelue with him in his chamber were:
               That armed them in full great hy
               Syne with his Baner hardely,
               The mids of the towne he taes.
               With that néere comming were his foes,
               That had delt all their men in thrée.
               The Maundewile with a great Menyie,
               Right throgh the town the way held down
               The laue on other side the towne,
               Held to méete them that fléeing were:
               They thought that all that they fand there
               Should die but ransome euerilkane:
               But otherwise the gyse is gane.
               For Sir Edward with his Banéere,
               And his twelue that I told of eir,
               On all the rout so hardelie
               Assembled, that it was ferlie.
               For Gib Harper before him yéed,
               That was the doughtiest of déed,
               That might be found of his estate:
               And with an Axe made him sik gaite,
               That he the first felled to the ground,
               And syne into a litle stound,
               The Mandewile by his arming
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   knew▪ and raught him sik a swing.
               
                  That he to eird past hastely,
               Sir Edward that was néere him by,
               Reuersed him, and with a knife,
               Right in that place he rest his life.
               With that of Ardrossane Sir Fergus,
               
               That was a wight Knight and courageous
               Assembled with sextie men and ma:
               They preassed then their foes sa:
               That they that saw their Lord slaine,
               Tint heart, and would haue bene againe,
               And ay as Scottishmen might be
               Armed, they came to the melle:
               And dang vpon their foes sa,
               That they haillie the backe can ta,
               And tha men chased to the yait,
               There was great fight and hard debaite.
               There slew Sir Edward with his hand
               A Knight, that of all Ireland,
               
               Was called best, and of most bountie,
               To surname Maundewile heght he,
               His proper name I can not say,
               But his folke to so hard assay
               Was set, that they of the Dungeoun,
               Durst open no yait, nor brig let doun.
               Sir Edward so then fought perfay,
               That ished foorth on him that day,
               That there escaped neuer ane,
               But they were either slaine or tane.
               For to the fight Manakill then
               Came, with two hundreth of speare-men,
               And they slew all they might to win,
               This ilk Manakill with a gin,
               Wan of their shippes foure or fiue,
               And hailly reft the men their life.
               
                  When end was made of that feghting,
               Yet then was life in Neill Fleming,
               
               Sir Edward went him for to sée,
               About him slaine lay his Menyie,
               All in a lump, on ather hand,
               And he to die readie thrawand,
               Sir Ed
                        •
                     ard of him had great pitie,
               And him full greatlie méened he:
               And 
                     •
                  egrated his great manhéed,
               His worship and his doughtie déede,
               Sik mone he made they had ferlie:
               For he was not customablie
               Wont, for to mene ony thing,
               Nor would not heare men make méening▪
               
               He stood there by while he was dead:
               And syne had him to hallowed Stéed:
               And syne with worship gart him be
               Eirded, with great solemnitie.
            
            
               How King Robert wan the Iles to hand, And gart his shippes saile on dry land,
               IN this wise ished Mandewile,
               
               But wit ye well that fraud and guile,
               Sall alwayes haue an euill ending,
               As well was séene by this ishing,
               In time of trewes ished they,
               And in sik time as on Pasch day,
               When Christ raise to saue mans kin,
               Fra weme of old Adames sin.
               Therefore so great mischance them fell,
               That ilk one (as ye heard me fell)
               Was slaine vp, or els taken there.
               And they that in the Castell were.
               
                  Were set in sik a fray that hour,
               That they could sée no where succour
               Sould come to relieue them, that day:
               That shortlie then treitted they,
               To yéeld the Castell to him free
               To saue their liues, and certes he
               Held them full well all his cunnand.
               The Castell tooke he in his hand,
               And vittailde it well, and in it set
               A good UUardane, it for to get,
               And there a while rested he.
               Of him no more now speake will we.
               BOt to King Robert will we gang,
               That we haue left vnspoken of lang:
               When he had conuoyed to the sea,
               His brother Edward with his Menyie,
               With his shippes he made him yare,
               Into the Iles for to fare.
               
                  Walter Stewart with him tooke he.
               His Maich, and with him great Menyie,
               And other men of great Noblay,
               To the Tarbarts they tooke their way
               In Gaillayes ordainde for their fare▪
               
               But them worthed their ships draw there.
               And a mile was betwixt the seas,
               And that is loned all with trees:
               The King his shippes there gart draw,
               And for the wind can stoutlie blaw,
               Upon their backe, as they can ga,
               He gart men Masts, and rapes ma,
               And set them in the shippes hie,
               And Sailes to the toppes tie.
               And gart men gang there by drawing,
               The wind them helped that was blawing:
               
                  So that into a litle space,
               Their flote all there ouer drawne was,
               And when they that in the Iles were.
               Heard tell, how that the good King there,
               Gart his shippes with Sailes gee.
               Out ouer betwixt the Tabarts two,
               They were abased alluterlie:
               For they wist through old Prophecy,
               That hée that should gar shippes so,
               Betwixt the seas with Sailes goe,
               Should win the Iles so to hand:
               That none with strength should him withstand:
               Therefore they came all to the King,
               Durst none gainstand his bidding,
               Ouertooke 
                     
                        •
                     ohn of Lorne allane,
               But well soone efter hée was tane,
               And presented right to the King,
               And they that were of his leading,
               That to the King haue broken fay,
               Were all destroyed and dead away.
               This Iohn of Lorne the King hes tane,
               And sent him foorth to Dumbartane,
               
               A while in prison for to bée:
               Syne to Lochleuen sent was hee,
               Where hée was long time in fasting,
               I trow hée made therein ending,
               The King when all the Iles were
               Brought to his liking lesse and maire,
               All that season there dwelt hée,
               At Hunting, and at game, and glée.
            
            
               
               Lord Dowglas with battell plaine, Reskewed the Prey, and brought againe▪
               
               WHen the King vpon this maner
               Hee daunted the Iles as I tell here
               The good Sir Iames Dowglas
               
               Into the Forrest dwelling was,
               Defending doughtelie the Land,
               That time in B
                        •
                     rwicke was winnand,
               
                  Edmound of Calhow a Gascoun,
               
               Hée was a Knight of greit Renoun:
               And into Gasconyie his Countrie,
               Lord of greit Senyeorie was hée:
               And had then Berwick in kéeping.
               Hée made a priuie gaddering,
               And gote him a greit companie,
               Of wight men armed jolelie▪
               
               All the nether end of Teuidall,
               
               Hée preyed into him all haill:
               And of the Mers a greit partie:
               Syne toward Barwicke went in hy.
               Sir Adam of Gordoun, that then
               Was becommen Scottishman,
               Saw them driue so away his fee,
               And weind they whéene were for that hée,
               Saw but the fléeing skaill perfey,
               And them that seezed on the Prey.
               That to Sir Iames of Dowglas,
               
               In full greit hy the way he 
                     •
                  aes:
               And told how Englishmen their Prey
               Had tane, and syne were went away:
               Toward Berwicke with all their fée,
               And said they wheene were: and if hee
               
                  Would speed him, hee should well lightly
               Win them, and rescue all the Ky.
               Sir Iames soone gaue his assent
               To follow them, and foorth is went:
               And followed them in full greit hy,
               And came well ne
                     •
                  re them hastelie,
               For ere they might fullie see,
               They came well neere with their Menyie.
               But then both forray and the staill.
               UUere knit into a sop all haill:
               Bot knaues & swaines that had no might,
               For to stand into field to fight,
               Before them gart they driue the Ky,
               They were a right faire companie,
               And all togidder in a staill.
               The Dowglas saw their lump all haill,
               And saw them of so good conuyne,
               And that they were so mony syne,
               That they for one of his were two,
               Lordings (hee said) sen it is so:
               That wée haue chaist on sik manéere,
               That wée are now commen so neere,
               That wée may not eschew the fight.
               But if wée fullie take the flight,
               Let ilke man of his life then méene,
               And how wee mony times haue béene
               In greit thrang, and commen well away.
               Thinke wée to doe right so this day:
               And take wée of this Foord héere by,
               Our auantage: for in greit hy,
               They shall come on vs for to fight,
               Get we then will, and strength and might,
               For to méete them right hardelie,
               And with that word full hastelie,
               
                  Hée hes displayed his Banéere,
               For his foes were comming neere.
               And when they saw they were so wheene.
               They thought all was their owne bedeene.
               And assembled full hardelie.
               Their men might see them feght fellie
               And a right cruell melle make,
               And mony strakes gaue, and take.
               The Dowglas there right hard was stad,
               But the greit hardement that hee had,
               Comforted them on sik a wise,
               That no man thought on Cowardise,
               But faught so fast with all their maine.
               That they feill of their foes haue slaine:
               And though they were full mony moe
               Then they: yet them they demained so:
               That Edmund de Callok was dead,
               Through Dowglas right in that ilke stead:
               And all the laue fra this was doone,
               Were all haill discomfist soone,
               And they that chased some hes slaine,
               And turned the Preyes haill againe.
               The hardest feghting this was,
               That euer the good Lord Dowglas
               
               Was in, and of so few Menyie.
               For had not beene his greit bountie,
               That slew their Chiftaine in the fight,
               His men to dead had beene all dight.
               But hée had into custome ay.
               When euer hee came to hard assay,
               Hée preassed the Chiftane for to sla:
               And heerefore hope I that hée did sa,
               That gart him haue victorie full syse,
               When Sir Edmund vpon this wise.
               
                  Was dead, the good Lord Dowglas,
               
               To the Forrest his way he tayes:
               His foes greatly can him dread,
               The word sprang far of his manhead.
               So that in England néere there by,
               Men spake of it right commonly.
            
            
               How Iames of Dowglas slew Newel, That vowed to meete him in battell.
               SIr Robert Newell at that tide
               Winned in Barwike there beside,
               The Marches where the Lord Dowglas
               
               In the Forrest repairing was,
               And had him in full great enuy,
               And for 
                     •
                  he saw him so manfully,
               Make his bounds ay more and maire:
               He heard the folke that with him were,
               Speake of the Lord Dowglas might,
               And how he forcie was in fight:
               And how him oft fell faire Fortoun,
               He wraithed him thereat full soone:
               And said, what wéene ye, is there nane
               That euer is woorth, but he allane:
               Ye set him as he were but Péere,
               But I avow before you héere,
               Gif euer he come into this land,
               He sall find me néere at his hand.
               And gif I euer his Banéere
               May sée displayed vpon wéere,
               I sall assemble it but dout,
               Although ye hold him neuer so stout.
               Of this avow soone Bodword was
               Brought, to Sir Iames of Dowglas,
               
               
                  That said, gif he will hold his heght,
               I sall doe so, he sall haue feght
               Of me, and of my company,
               Yet or oght long, well néere him by,
               His retinue then gaddered he,
               That were good men of great bountie:
               And to the March in good array,
               Upon a night he tooke the way,
               So that in the morning earely,
               He was with all his companie
               Before Barwike and there he made
               Men to display his Baner brade,
               And of his Menyie some sent he,
               For to burne townes two, or thrée:
               And bade them soone againe them spéed,
               So that at hand gif there come néed,
               They might before the feght be read.
               The Newell that wist verily,
               That Dowglas commen was so néere,
               And saw all brode stand his Banéere:
               Then with tha folke that he had there,
               That with him a great Menyie were:
               For all the good of that Countrie,
               Into that time with him had he:
               So that he with him there had then,
               UUell mo then were the Scottishmen.
               He held his way vp to an hill.
               And said, Lordings, it were my will,
               To make end of the great deray,
               That Dowglas does to vs ilk day.
               But me thinke it spéedfull that we
               Abide till that his Menyie be
               Skailled all, to take our Pray:
               Then fiercely set on them we ma
                     •
                  
               
               
                  And we sall haue them at our will.
               Then they gaue all assent theretill,
               And on the hill abade houand.
               The men fast gaddered of the land,
               And drew to him in full great hy:
               And Dowglas then that was worthy,
               Thought it was foly more to bide,
               Toward the hill then can he ride.
               And when the Newell saw, that they
               Would not passe foorth to the Forray:
               But preassed to him with all their might,
               He wist well then that he would fight:
               And to his Menyie can he say:
               Lordings, now hold we foorth our way:
               Here is the floure of this Countrie,
               And mo then they also are we.
               Assemble we then hardely,
               For Dowglas with yone Yemanry,
               Sall haue no might to vs, perfay,
               Then in a frush assembled they,
               That men might heare the speares brast,
               And ilkone dang on other fast,
               And blood brast out of wounds wide.
               They foght fast vpon ather side:
               For ather partie can them paine,
               To put their foes on back againe.
               The Lord the Newell, and Dowglas,
               
               When that the fighting fellest was,
               They fought felly with all their maught,
               Great routes ather to other raught.
               But Dowglas starke was I hight,
               And more vsed als in the fight,
               And set heart and will alswa:
               For to deliuer him of his fa:
               
                  While at the last through méekle mains
               Of forre, the Newell hes he slaine.
               Then his Ensenyie can he cry,
               And on the laue so hardely
               He rushed with all his Menyie,
               That in short time men might sée
               Their foes take on them the flight:
               And they them chaist with all their might,
               Sir Raph the Newell in that place,
               And the Baroun of Hiltonn was
               Taken, and other of méekle might.
               There was reill flaine into that fight,
               That worthie in their time had béene.
               And when the field was cleanged cléene:
               So that their foes euerilkane,
               Were slaine, or chaist away, or tane,
               Then gart he forray all the land,
               And séesed all that euer he fand:
               And burnt the townes in their way,
               Syne haill & feare home commen are they.
               The Pray among his Menyie,
               Efter their merites dealt hes he:
               And held nothing to his behooue,
               Sik déedes ought to gar men loue
               Their Lord, and so they did,, perfay.
               He treated them so wisely ay,
               And with so méekle loue alswa,
               And countenance, that he would ma,
               Of their déed, that the most Coward,
               He made stoutter then a Leopard.
               UUith cherissing this gaite made he
               His men wight, and of great bountie.
               When Newell thus was broght to ground
               And of Calhow Sir Edmound,
               
               
                  The dread of the good Lord Dowglas,
               
               And his Renowne so skailled was,
               Throughout the Marches of England,
               
               That all that were therein dwelland,
               Dred him as the selfe Deuit of Hell,
               And yet I haue heard oft syse tell,
               That hée so greitly dred was then,
               That when wiues wold their children ban
               They would euen with an angrie face,
               Betake them to the blacke Dowglas.
               
               Through his greit worship and bountie
               So with his foes dred was hee,
               That they growed to heare his Name,
               Hee may at ease now dwell at hame
               A while, for I trow hée shall nought,
               With foes mony dayes bée sought.
               Now let him in the Forrest bée,
               And of him speake no more will wée,
               But of Sir Edward the worthie,
               That with all his Cheualrie,
               Was at Craigfergus yet lyand,
               To speake more wée will take on hand.
            
            
               Here past in Ireland the Noble King, To his brother with great gaddering,
               WHen Sir Edward, as I said aire
               Had discom
                     •
                  
                  ̄st Richard of Clare,
               
               And of Ireland all the Barnage,
               Thrise through his worthie Uassalage.
               And syne with all his men of maine,
               To Craigfergus was comde againe.
               The good Erle of Murray Sir Thomas,
               
               Tooke lieue in Scotland for to passe:
               
                  And hee him left without grudging,
               And syne him charged to the King,
               To pray him speciallie, that hee
               Would come in Ireland him to sée.
               For were they both into that lan
                     •
                  .
               They should find none should them withstand.
               The Erle then foorth his way hes tane,
               And to his Shippes is hee gane,
               Hée sailled well out ouer the sea,
               In Scotland soone arriued hée,
               Syne to the King hee went in hy.
               And hée receiued him joyfully,
               And spéered of his brothers fare,
               And of his journeyes that they had there,
               And hée him told all but leesing:
               And when the King left had speaking,
               His charge to the King told hée;
               And hée said, Hée would blythlie sée
               His brother, and also the affaire
               Of the Countrie, and what it were,
               A greit Menȝie then gaddered hée,
               And two Lords of greit bountie,
               The one Walter Stewart was,
               The other Iames of Dowglas,
               
               Wardans in his absence made hee,
               For to maintaine well the Countrie,
               Syne to the sea hee tooke his way,
               And at Lochreane in Galloway,
               
               Hee shipped with all his Menȝie,
               To Craigfergus soone commen is hee,
               Sir Edward of hi
                     •
                   come was blyth▪
               
               And went downe for to meete him swyth:
               And welcommed him with gladsom cheare
               So did hee all that with him were,
               
                  And speciallie the Erle Thomas
               
               Of Murray, that his Neuoy was,
               Syne to the Castell went hee there,
               And made them meekle feast and fare:
               They sojournde therein dayes three,
               In mirth, solace and royaltie.
               KIng Robert now vpon this wise
               Into Ireland arriued is,
               And when into Craigfergus had hee
               With his men sojournde dayes three,
               Hee tooke counsell that hee wold,
               With all their folke their wayes hold,
               Through all Ireland from end to other.
               Sir Edward then the Kings brother,
               Before into the Uangard rade.
               The King himselfe the Reeregard had,
               That had into his companie,
               The Erle Thomas that was worthie,
               Their wayes fordward haue they tane,
               And soone passed euer ilkane.
            
            
               Here faught King Robert in Ireland, With 5. thousand against 40. thousand.
               THIS was in mids the mirthfull May,
               When Birds sings on ilke Spray:
               Making their Notes with seemlie soun:
               For softnesse of the sweet seasoun:
               And Leaues of the Branches spreeds,
               And bloomes bright about them breedes,
               And Fieldes strowed are with Flowres,
               Well sauouring of seir colours
               And all thing worthed blyth and gay,
               When that the good King tooke his way.
               
                  To ryde Southward, as I said aire,
               The Wardane then Richard of Clare,
               
               Wist the King was arriued sa:
               And wist hee shupe him for to ta
               His way, toward the South Countrie,
               Of all Ireland then gaddered hee:
               Both Burgesse and Cheualrie
               And Hobilers, and Yeamanrie,
               Till hee had neere fourtie thousand:
               But hee would not yet take on hand.
               With all his foes in field to fight,
               But vmbethought him of a slight,
               That hee with all that greit Menyie,
               Would in a Wood enbushed bee.
               All priuily beside the way:
               Where their foes behooues to ga,
               And let the Uangard passe far by,
               And assemble syne hardely:
               On the Reeregard with all his men,
               They did as hée deuised then,
               In a Wood they enbushed were.
               The Scottishmen rade by them neere,
               But they no showing to them made,
               Sir Edward well foorth before rade.
               With them that were of his Menyie:
               To the Réeregard no tent tooke hée:
               And Sir Richard of Clare in hy,
               When Sir Edward was passed by,
               Send light Yemen that well couth shoot,
               To bikker the Réeregarde vpon foot.
               Then two of them that sent foorth were
               At the Wood side them bikkered there,
               And shot among the Scottishmen.
               The King that with him there had then,
               
                  Well néere fiue thousand wight, and hardy
               Saw them two so aboundantly
               Shoot among them, and come so néere,
               He wist right well withoutten wéere:
               That they well neere some power had.
               Therefore a bidding hes he made,
               That no man sould be so hardy.
               To breake at them, bot sowerly.
               Ride readie ay into battaile,
               To defend gif men would assaile:
               For we sall soone, I vnderta,
               He said haue for to doe with ma.
               But Sir Coline Campbell that néere
               Was by, where tha two Yemen were,
               Shooting among them hardely,
               Preiked on them in full great hy:
               And soone the one he hes ouertane,
               And with a speare him syne hes slaine.
               The other turned, and shot againe:
               And at that shot his horse hes slaine.
               With that, the King came hastelie,
               And into his Melancholie,
               With a Truncheoun into his néefe,
               To Sir Coline sik dush did giue:
               That he fell downe on his Arsoun.
               Then bade he smertlie tit him doun.
               Bot other Lords that was him by,
               Hes meased the King in some party:
               Bot he said, breking of bidding,
               Might be cause of discomfiting.
               Weene ye yone Ribald durst assaile
               Us so here in our owne battaile:
               Bot gif they had supplee right néere,
               I wate right well withoutten wéere,
               
                  That we sall haue to doe in hy:
               Therefore looke ilk man be ready,
               With that well néere threttie and ma
               Of bow-men came, and bikkered sa:
               That they hurt of the Kings men.
               The King hes sent his Archers then
               To shoot, for to put them againe.
               UUith that they entred in the Plaine.
               And saw arrayed against them stand,
               In foure battels, fourtie thousand.
               The King said, Lordings, now let sée,
               UUho worthie in this fight sall be▪
               
               On them withoutten more abade.
               So stoutly with that on them they rade,
               And assembled so hardely:
               That of their foes a great party
               Were laid at eird, at their méeting,
               There was of speares sik a breisting,
               As ather vpon other rade:
               That it a full great frush hes made,
               Horse came there rushing head for head:
               So that feill on the ground lay dead.
               Mony a wight, and worthie man,
               As ather vpon other ran,
               Were dushed dead downe to the ground.
               That blood ran out at mony wound,
               In sik effusioun, that euen than,
               Of very blood the streames ran:
               With weapons that were bright and bar
                     •
                  
               
               That mony a good man died there.
               And they that worthie were, and wight,
               And stoutly with their foes can fight,
               Preassed them formest to be.
               There men might cruell battell sée,
               
                  And hard bargaine I take on hand.
               In all the wéere of Ireland,
               
               So great a feghting was not séene.
               And when of great victories ninetéene,
               Sir Edward had withoutten wéere,
               And that in lesse then in thrée yéere,
               And into sundrie battels of tha,
               He vanquisht twentie thousand and ma,
               With trapped horse euen to the féete,
               But in all that time he was yet,
               Ay one for fiue, when least was he:
               But the good King into this melle,
               Had alwayes eight of his fa men,
               For one, but he so bare him then:
               That his good déed, and his bountie,
               Comforted so all his Menyie:
               That the most Coward hardy was.
               For where he saw the thickest preasse,
               So hardely he on them rade:
               And so great roome about him made,
               That he slew all he might ouertake,
               And rudely rushed them aback.
               The Erle Thomas that was worthy,
               Was in all times néere him by,
               And foght as he were in a rage.
               So that through their great Uassallage:
               Their men sik hardement did take,
               That they no perill did forsake:
               But them abandouned so stoutly,
               And dang on them so hardely,
               Till all their foes affrayed were.
               And they that saw well by there fare,
               That they eschewed somedeill the fight,
               They dang on them with all their might,
               
                  And preassed dinging on them so fast:
               That they the back gaue at the last.
               And they that saw them take the flight,
               They dang on them with all their might:
               And in their fléeing feill can sla.
               The Kings men hes chased sa:
               That they discomfist them ilkane.
               
                  Richard of Clare the way hes tane
               To Deuiling in full great hy:
               With other Lords that fled him by,
               And garnisht both Castell and tounes,
               That were in their Possessiouns.
               They were so fellounly fleyed there:
               That as I trow, Richard of Clare,
               
               Sall haue no will to find his might,
               In battell, nor in field to fight,
               While King Robert, and his Menyie,
               Is dwelling into that Countrie.
               They stuffed strengths on this wise,
               And the King that was so to prise,
               Saw in the field right mony slaine.
               And one of them that there was tane,
               That was arrayed full worthely,
               He saw him wéepe right dulefully.
               He asked him why he made sik cheare?
               He said, Sir, withoutten wéere,
               It is no wonder that I gréete,
               I sée so mony slaine at my féete,
               The floure of all North Ireland,
               
               That hardiest was of heart and hand:
               And most douted in hard assay.
               Then said the King to him, perfay:
               Thou hast more cause myrths to ma,
               That thou the déed escaped sa.
               
                  
                  RIchard of Clare on this maner,
               And all his foes discomfist were,
               With few folkes as I haue to you told,
               And when Edward Bruce the sa bold
               Wist that the King had foughten so,
               With so mony, and hée therefro,
               Might no man sée a wraither man,
               But the good King said to him then:
               That it was in his owne folie:
               For hee rade so vnwittelie,
               So far before making no ward,
               To them that were in the Réeregard:
               For hee said, who on wéere would ride,
               In the Uangard hee should no tide.
               Passe from his Reeregard, far from sight:
               For greit perill so fall their might.
               Of this fight will I speake no maire,
               But the King, and all that were there,
               Rade forward in a better array,
               And néere togidder then euer held they.
               Through all the land they plainlie rade
               They fand none that them obstacle made
               They rade euen before Drochynda,
               
               And before Deuiling alswa:
               But to giue battell none they fand.
               Syne went they Southward in the land,
               And right to Lynrike held their way,
               That is the Southmest towne, perfay,
               That in all Ireland may founden bee,
               There lay hée dayes two or thrée,
               And busked syne againe to fare.
               And when that they all readie were,
               The King hes heard a woman cry,
               Hee asked what was that in hy?
               
                  It is a Lauender, Sir, said ane,
               That her child-euill héere hes tane:
               And mon leaue now behind you here.
               Therefore shée makes yone euill cheare,
               The King said, Certes, it were pitie,
               That shée in that time left should bée,
               For I trow Certes there is no man,
               But hée will rew of Women then.
               His Host then all arested hée,
               And gart a tent soone stented bée,
               And gart her gang in hastelie,
               And other Women bée her by:
               While shée deliuered was, hée bade,
               And syne foorth on his wayes rade,
               And how shee foorth should caried bée,
               Ere euer hée fure, ordained hee.
               This was a right greit courtesie,
               To sik a King, and so mightie,
               That gart his men dwell on sik maner,
               Only for a poore Lauender.
               Againe Norward they tooke their way,
               Through all Ireland then passed they.
               Through all Connoch, to Deviline,
               
               Through all Mich and Irrelle syne,
               Through Monaster, and Lawester,
               
               And syne hailly through all Vlsister
               
               To Craigfergus without battell,
               For there was none durst him assaile,
               The Kings of the Irishrie,
               Came to Sir Edward haillelie,
               And all manrent can to him ma,
               But if that it were one or twa,
               To Craigfergus they came againe,
               Into that way was no bargane:
               
                  But if it ony Skirmish were,
               That is not for to speake of héere.
               The Irish Kings euerilkane,
               Then home to their repaire are gane,
               And vndertooke in all kin thing,
               For to obey to the bidding
               Of Sir Edward, that their King called they,
               Hée was well set now in good way,
               To conquesse the land haillelie,
               For hée had now on his partie
               The Irishry, and all Vlsister,
               
               And hée was so foorth on his Wéere,
               That hée hes past through all Ireland,
               
               From end to end through strength of hand
               Could hée haue gouerned him with skill,
               And followed not too fast his will,
               But with measure haue led his déed:
               It was well like withoutten dréed:
               That hée might haue conqueissed well,
               The land of Ireland euerilk deill.
               And his outrageous succudry,
               And will that more was then hardy,
               Of purpose letted him perfay,
               As hereafter I shall you say.
            
            
               How Dowglas slew Richmond, syne at meat In battell their harbreours serued in seat.
               NOw leaue wee here the Noble King,
               All at ease, and his lyking:
               And speake wée of the Lord Dowglas,
               
               That left to kéepe the Marches was.
               Hee gart get Wrights that were slee,
               And in the hawgh of Lyntalle,
               
               
                  Hee gart them make a faire maner,
               And when the House bigged were,
               Hée gart puruay him right well there:
               For hée thought to make an Infare,
               And to make good cheare to his men.
               In Richemond there was winning then,
               An Erle that called was Sir Thomas,
               
               Hée had enuy at the Dowglas:
               And said, If that hée his Baner,
               Might sée displayed vpon wéere,
               That soone on it assemble should hee,
               Hée heard how Dowglas thought to bée.
               At Lyntalle a feast to ma.
               And hee gat witting well alswa,
               That the King, and a greit Menȝie,
               Were passed then off the Countrie:
               And the Erle of Murrray Thomas,
               
               Therefore hée thought the Countrie was
               Feele of men, for to withstand
               Men that them sought with stalwart hand
               And of the Marches then had hée
               The Gouernance and the paustie,
               Hée gaddered folke about him then,
               While hee was well ten thousand men:
               And Wood axes gart them take▪
               
               For hée thought hee and his men would make,
               To hew downe Iedburgh Forrest cléene,
               That no trée should therein bée séene.
               They held them foorth vpon their way:
               And the good Lord Dowglas, that ay,
               Had spyes out on euerilke side.
               Got good witting that they would ride,
               And come vpon them suddenlie,
               Then gaddered hée right hastelie,
               
                  Them that he might of his Menyie,
               I trow, that then with him had he
               Fiftie, that worthy were and wight,
               And at all point armed and dight:
               And of Archers a great Menyie,
               Assembled als with him had he,
               A place then was there in the way:
               Where he wist well that passe would they,
               That had wood vpon ather side.
               The entrie was well large and wide:
               And as a Shield it narrowed ay,
               UUhile that into a place, the way
               UUas not a penniestane-cast of bread.
               The good Lord Dowglas hidder yéed.
               When he wist they were néere cummand,
               In to a Cleugh on the one hand,
               All his Archers enbushed he:
               And bade they sould hold them priuie,
               Ay while they heard them raise the cry:
               And then sould they shoot hardely
               Among their foes, and saile them saire:
               While that he through them passed were:
               And then with him hold foorth sould they.
               Then byrkes on ather side the way,
               That young and thick were growing néere,
               They knit tegether on sik manéere:
               That men might not well through them ride.
               UUhen this was done, he can abide,
               Upon the other side of the way:
               And Richemond in good array,
               Came ryding in the first Eshell.
               The Lord Dowglas hes séene him well:
               And gart his men all hold them still,
               While at their hand they came them till.
               
                  And entred in the narrow way,
               Then with a shout on them set they:
               And cried on high, Dowglas, Dowglas.
               
               And Richemond that right worthie was,
               When he had heard so rise the cry,
               And Dowglas Baner saw plainely:
               He dressed him hidderwards in hy.
               And they came on so bardely,
               That through them haue they made their way,
               All that they met to eird dang they.
               The Richemond borne downe there was,
               And soone arested him Dowglas,
               
               And him reuersed with a knife,
               And in that place he left his life,
               An Hat vpon his Helme he bare,
               And that tooke Dowglas with him there,
               In takinning that it forced was.
               And syne in hy his wayes taes,
               While in the UUood they entred were.
               The Archers well hes tane them there:
               For well and hardely shot they.
               The Englishmen in great affray
               UUere set: for Dowglas suddenly
               With all them of his company,
               Ere euer they wist was in their rout:
               And thirled them well néere throughout.
               And had almost done his dead,
               Ere they to help them could take héede.
               And when they saw their Lord was slaine,
               They tooke him vp, and turned againe,
               To draw them fra the shot away,
               Then in a Plaine assembled they:
               And for their Lord that then was dead,
               They shupe them in that ilk stead,
               
                  For to take harbry all that night,
               And then the Dowglas that was wight,
               Gat wit that a Clerke Eleis,
               
               UUith well three hundreth enemies,
               All straight to Lyntalle were gane,
               And harbrie for their Oast had tane:
               Then hidder is he went in hy,
               With all them of his companie,
               And found Clerke Eleis at the meat,
               And all his rout about him set:
               And they came on them stoutlie there,
               And with swords that sharplie share,
               They serued them full egerlie.
               They were slaine downe so haillelie,
               That well néere there escaped nane.
               They serued them in full great wane,
               With shéering swords, and with kniues,
               That well néere all léesed their liues.
               They had a felloun Intermais,
               For that subcharge too charging was.
               They that escaped there through cace,
               To their great Oast the waies taes.
               And told, how that their men were slaine
               So cléene, that there escaped nane.
               And when they of the Oast had heard,
               How that Dowglas with them farde:
               That had their herbryours all slaine,
               And themselues rushed all againe:
               And slew their Lord in mids their rouf,
               There was none of them all so stout:
               That more will had them to assaile.
               Therefore they haue tane to counsaile,
               That time, and to purpose hes tane,
               To wend homeward, and home are gane:
               
                  And sped them so vpon their way,
               That to England soone commen are they,
               The Forrest left they standing still:
               To hew it then they had no will,
               And specially while the Dowglas,
               
               So neere hand by their neighbour was:
               And he that saw them turne againe,
               Perceiued well their Lord was slaine:
               And by the hat that he had tane,
               He wist right well also for ane
               That taken was said him surely,
               That Richemound ay commonly,
               UUas wont that furred Hat to wéere.
               Then Dowglas blyth that was than eir:
               For he wist well that Richemound,
               
               His felloun so was brought to ground.
               SIr Iames Dowglas on this wise
               Through his worship, and his emprise.
               Defended worthely the land.
               This point of wéere, I take on hand,
               UUes vndertane right apertly,
               And enchéeued right hardely,
               For he astoneyed withoutten wéere.
               Tha folke that well ten thousand were,
               With fiftie armed men but ma.
               I can als tell you other twa
               Points: that well encheeued were,
               With fiftie men: and but all wéere,
               They were all done so hardelie:
               That they were praised Souerainely,
               Attour all other points of weere:
               That in their time enchéeued were.
               This was the first: that with fiftie,
               UUas brought to end, and so stoutly,
               
                  In Galloway the other fell,
               When as yee heard mée before tell:
               How Sir Edward the Bruce with fiftie,
               Uanquisht of Sainct Iohn Sir Aymery:
               And fifteene hundreth men by taile.
               The third fell into Eskdaile,
               
               UUhen that Sir Iohn of Sowles, was
               The gouernour of all that place,
               And to Sir Andro Hardeclay,
               
               With fiftie men beset the way,
               That had néere in his companie,
               Thrée hundreth Horsed jolelie.
               This Sir Iohn into plaine Melle,
               Through Soueraigne hardement, and bountie,
               Uanquisht them sturdelie ilkeane,
               And Sir Andro in hands hes tane.
               I will not rehearse now the maner,
               For who so liketh they may heare.
               Young Women when they will play,
               Sing it among them euerilke day,
               Thir were the worthie points thrée,
               That I trow euermore shall bée
               Praised, while men may on them mene,
               It is well worth withoutten wene:
               That their names for euermaire,
               That in their time so worthie were,
               That men to heare hes yet daintie,
               That their worship, and their bountie,
               Bée alway lasting into louing.
               Where hée that is Almightie King,
               Bring them hie vp, to Heauens blisse,
               Where alwayes lasting louing is.
            
            
               
               How the Bishop of Dunkelden syne, Scomfist the shipmen beside Dumfermling.
               
               IN this time that the Richemound,
               
               Was on this maner brought to the ground.
               Men of the coastes of England.
               
               That dwelt in Homber, or neere hand,
               Gaddered them a greit Menyie,
               And went in shippes to the sea,
               And toward Scotland went in hy,
               And to the Firth came hastely,
               They went to haue had all their lyking:
               For they wist well that the King,
               Was then far out of the Countrie,
               And with him mony of greit bountie.
               Therefore into the Firth came they,
               And endland it held vp their way,
               While they beside Innerkething,
               
               On the West halfe toward Dumfermling
               
               Tooke Land, and fast begouth to reif.
               The Erle of Fyth, and the Shireffe,
               Saw to the Coast shippes approachand,
               They gaddered to defend the Land:
               And they forgane the shippes ay,
               As they sailled they tooke their way,
               And thought to let them land to take.
               And when the shipmen saw them make
               Sik countenance, and sik array,
               They said among them, that they
               Would not for them let land to ta,
               Then to the land they sped them sa,
               That they came there in full greit hy.
               And arriued full hardelie.
               
                  The Scottishmen saw their comming,
               And had thereof sike abasing:
               That they all haill did ride them fro,
               And the land but stop leet them to,
               They durst not feght with them for thy
               They with drew them all haillely,
               And yet they were fiue hundreth néere,
               When they away thus riding were,
               And no defence begouth to shape,
               Of Dunkeldin the good Bishop,
               That William was called the Sincler,
               
               Came with a rout on good maner,
               I trow on Horse they were sixtie,
               Himselfe was armed jolelie,
               Hée rade vpon a stalward Stéed,
               A Chimmer for to heill his wéed,
               Abone his armour had hee then,
               And armed also were his men.
               The Erle, and the Shireffe met hée.
               Riding away with their Menȝie,
               Hée asked them well soone, what hy,
               Made them to turne so hastely:
               They said, their foes with stalward hand
               Into sik fusion had taken land,
               That they thought them all out too feill,
               And they were few with them to deill.
               When the Bishop heard it was sa,
               Hée said, the King ought well to ma
               Of you, that takes so well on hand,
               In his absence to wéere his land
               Certes, if hee gart serue you well
               The gilt spurres right by the heill,
               Hée should in hy gar hew you fro.
               Right would, with Cowards men did so:
               
                  Who loues their Lord, and his Countrie,
               Turne smertlie now againe with mée:
               With that hée kest off his Chimmeere,
               And hint in hand a stalwart Speare:
               And rade toward his foes in hy,
               All turned with him haillelie:
               For hee had them reprooued so,
               That of them all none went them fro,
               Hee rade before them sturdelie,
               And they followed full manfullie,
               While that they were néere approachand,
               Untto their foes that had tane land.
               And soone were knit in good array,
               Then some were went to the Ferray.
               The good Bishop when hée them saw,
               Hee said, Lordings but dréed or aw,
               Pricke wée vpon them hardelie,
               And wée shall haue them well hastelie.
               If they sée vs, come but abasing,
               So that wee hea
                     •
                  e make no more stinting,
               They shall right soone discomfist bee,
               Now doe yee well, for men shall sée,
               Who loues the Kings Menske this dayr
               Then all togidder in good array,
               They preiked vpon them sturdely,
               The Bishop that was right hardelie,
               And méekle and starke, rade forward ay.
               Then in a frush assembled they:
               And they that at their first méeting,
               Felt of their speares so saire sowing,
               Uanisht, and would haue béene away,
               Toward their shippes in hy held they,
               And they them chased fellonlis,
               And slew them full despiteouslie,
               
                  That all the fields ouerstrowed were,
               Of Englishmen that slaine were there:
               And they that yet held vnslaine.
               Preassed them to the sea againe.
               And Scottishmen that chased sa:
               Slew all that euer they might ouerta:
               But they that fled yet not for thy
               So to their shippes can them hy:
               That in some baittes so feill can ga:
               For that their foes them chased sa:
               That they ouertumbled: and the men
               That were therein, were drowned then.
               There did an Englishman that day,
               A well great strength, as I heard say:
               For when he chased was to the bait,
               A Scottishman that him handled hait:
               He hint vp by the armes twa,
               And were he well, or were he wa:
               He euen vpon his backe him slang,
               And with him in the bait can gang:
               And kest him in euen magre his:
               This was a well great strength, I wis,
               The Englishmen that went away,
               Toward their shippes in hy went they,
               And sailed home angry and wa,
               That they had bene rebuted sa.
            
            
               The hame-come of King Robert, Out of Ireland fra Sir Edward.
               
               WHen the Shipmen on this wise,
               Was discomfist, as I deuise:
               
                  The Bishop that so well him bare,
               And had comforted all that were there,
               Was yet into the feghting slead,
               Where néere two hundreth wel were dead
               Withoutten them that drowned were.
               And when the field was spoyled baire:
               They went all home to their repaire.
               To the Bishop is it fallen faire:
               That through his praise and his bountie,
               Enchee
                     •
                  ed sik a great iourney,
               The King therefore ay fra that day,
               Him loued, and praised, and honoured ay:
               And had him into sik daintie:
               That his owne Bishop him called he.
               Thus they defended the Countrie,
               On both halfes of the Scots sea,
               While that the King out of the land
               UUas then, as 
                     •
                   haue borne on hand.
               Through all Ireland his course hes made,
               And againe to Craigfergus rade.
               And when his brother as he were King,
               Had all the Irishry at bidding:
               And haillely Vlsister alswa,
               He busked home his way to ga:
               And of his men that were most hardy▪
               
               And praised als of Cheualry,
               With his brother great part left he:
               And syne is went vnto the sea,
               When they their lieues on ather party
               Had tane, they went to ship in hy.
               The Erle Thomas with him he had,
               And raised Saile but more abade:
               And in the land of Galloway.
               
               UUithout perill arriued they.
               
                  The Lords of the land were fane,
               When they wist he was come againe,
               And to him went in full great hy,
               And he receiued them tenderly,
               And made them Feast & gladsome cheare:
               And then so wonder blyth they were
               Of his comming, as man might say,
               Great Feast to him for thy made they,
               Where euer he rade, all the Countrie
               Gaddered in daintie him for to sée.
               Great gladnesse was there in the land:
               All was then win vnto his hand:
               Fra the red Swyre vnto Orknay,
               
               Was none of Scotland fra his fay:
               Excepting Barwike it alane:
               That time therein winued ane,
               That Capitane then was of the toun,
               All Scottishmen into suspicioun
               He had, and treated them right ill:
               He had ay to them right ill will,
               And held them all at vnder ay:
               Till that it fell vpon a day:
               That a Burgesse, Sym of Spalding,
               
               Thought that it was right heauie thing,
               On sik sort to rebuted be.
               Therefore into his heart thought he,
               That he would slely make conuyne,
               With the Marshall, whose Cousyne
               He had wedded to his wife:
               And as he thought, he did belyfe:
               Letter to him he sent in hy,
               With a traist man full priuily:
               And set him time to come, one night
               With ladders▪ and good men, and wight,
               
                  To the Kow yet right priuily:
               And bade hint hold his tryst truely:
               And he sould méete them at the wall:
               For on that night his watch sould fall.
               When the letters the Marshall saw,
               He vmbethought him a litle thraw:
               For he wist by himselfe, that he
               Might nouther of might nor power be:
               For to encheeue so great a thing.
               And gif he tooke to his helping
               One another sould wraithed be.
               Therefore right to the King yeed he
               And shewed him betwixt them twa
               The letter, and the charge alswa,
               When the King heard that this traine
               UUas spoken into sik certaine:
               That him thought therein no fantise:
               He said him certes thou hes wrought wise
               That hes discouered it first to me.
               For gif thou had discouered thée,
               To my Neuoy the Erle Thomas,
               
               Thou sould displease the Lord Dowglas,
               
               And him also in the contrare,
               But I sall wirke on sik maner:
               That thou at thine intent sall be,
               And haue of them no magre.
               Thou sall take Kéepe well to thy day.
               And with them that thou purchase may,
               At Euen sall thou enbushed be,
               In Dunce Parke. but by priuie:
               And I sall gar the Erle Thomas,
               
               And the Lord also of Dowglas,
               
               Ather with a certaine of men
               Be there, to doe as thou sall ken,
               
                  The Marshall then but more delay,
               Tooke leaue, and held foorth on his way,
               And held his spéech priuie and still,
               Till the day that was set him till.
            
            
               The winning of Barwicke and the feghting That was in the towne at the winning.
               THen of the best of Lowthiane,
               
               Hée with him to his trysthes tane:
               For Shireffe then therefore was hee,
               To Dunce Parke with his Menȝie,
               Hée came at Euen full priuilie,
               And syne with a good companie,
               Soone efter came the Erle Thomas,
               
               That was met with the Lord▪ 
                  Dowglas,
               
               A right faire companie there were,
               When they were met togidder there.
               And when the Marshall the conuine,
               To both the Lords, syne by lyne
               Had told they went foorth on their way,
               Far from the towne their horse left they,
               To make it short, so wrought they then,
               That but séeing of ony man,
               (Out Sym of Spalding allane,
               That gart that thing bee vndertane)
               That set their Ladders to the Wall,
               And but perceiuing came in all:
               And held them in a nuke priuie,
               While that the night should passed bée,
               And ordainde that the most partie:
               Of their men should gang sikkerlie,
               With their Lords and hold a staill,
               And the remnand should all haill,
               
                  Skaill through the towne, and take sla,
               All the men they might ouerta.
               But soone his ordinance brake they,
               For als soone as it dawen was day,
               The two part of their men and moe,
               All skailled through the towne can goe,
               So gréedie for to get the good,
               That they ran euen as they were wood,
               And sieged Houses▪ and slew men,
               And they that saw their foes then,
               Come vpon them so suddenlie,
               Throughout the towne they raisde the cry,
               And shot togideer here and there,
               And aye as they assembled were
               They would abide and make debate:
               Had they béene warned well I wate,
               They should haue sold their liues deare,
               For they were good men: and als they were
               Far moe, then they were that them sought:
               But they were skailled so that they moght
               On no maner assembled bee.
               There was greit melles two or thrée:
               That their foes all rushed were
               But Scottishmen so well them bare:
               And disrayed at the last were sa:
               That they all haill the flight can ta.
               Some gat the Castell, but not all,
               And some were slidden ouer the wall,
               And some were into hands tane:
               And some were in the bargane slaine,
               On this wise them conteened they,
               Till it was néere noone of the day,
               Then they that in the Castell were,
               And other that fled were to them there.
               
                  That were a right greit companie,
               When they the Baners so simpillie
               Saw stand, and stuffed with so whéene,
               Their yaits haue they opened soone,
               And ished on them hardelie.
               The Erle Thomas that was worthie,
               And the good Lord als of Dowglas,
               
               With all the folke that with them was,
               Met them stoutlie with weapons seir,
               Then men might see who had beene néere,
               Men abandoun them hardely:
               And Englishmen faught cruelly,
               And with all mights can them paine,
               To rush the Scottishmen againe,
               I trow, they had done so perfay,
               For they were fewer far then they,
               Had it not béene a new made Knight,
               That to his name Sir William hight
               Of Keith, and of the Gallistoun,
               
               Hée heght through difference of Surnoun:
               That bare him right well that day.
               And put him to so hard assay,
               That hée sik dints about him dang,
               That where hee saw the thickest thrang,
               Hee preassed with so meekle might:
               And so enforcedlie can fight.
               That hée made to their Menyie way:
               And they that néere were to him ay,
               Dang on their foes so hardely:
               That they haue tane the backe in hy.
               And to the Castell held their way:
               With greit mischiefe there entred they:
               For they were pressed there so fast:
               That they left mony of the last.
               
                  But they that entred not for thy.
               Closed the yates right hastelie.
               And in hy to the walles ran:
               For they were not all sikker then.
            
            
               Here sent they word to the King, That come to the Castell yeelding,
               THe towne was tane vpon this wise▪
               
               Through greit worship and greit emprise:
               And all the good that they there fand:
               Was seesed haillie in their hand.
               Uittaile they fand in greit fusioun,
               And all that serued to stuffe a towne,
               That kéeped they from destroying.
               And syne hes sent word to the King,
               And hée was of that tything blyth.
               And sped him hidderward full swyth,
               And as hee through the Countrie rade,
               Men gaddered to him while hée had
               A meekle rout of worthie men,
               And the folke that were winning then,
               In the Mers and Teuidaile:
               And in the Forrest als all haill:
               And the East end of Lowthiane:
               Before that the King came, are gane
               To Barwike with a stalwart hand:
               That nane that was that time winnand,
               On yond side Tweede durst well appeare,
               And they that in the Castell were,
               When that their foes in sike plentie,
               Saw before them assembled bée,
               And had none hope of reskewing,
               They were abased in greit thing.
               
                  But they the Castell not for thy,
               Held fius daies right sturdely:
               And yaild it on the sext day.
               Syne to their Countrie home went they.
            
            
               Here Walter Stewart took of the King, Baith Towne, and Castell in keeping.
               THus was the Castell and the Toun,
               To Scottishmens possessioun
               Brought, and soone efter the King
               Came ryding with all his gaddering
               To Barwike: and in the Castell,
               He was harbred both fair and well:
               And his great Lords all him by.
               The remnand all commonly,
               To harbrie in the toun are gane.
               The King hes then to counsell tane,
               That he would not breake down the wall,
               But Castell and the toun withall:
               Stuffed well with men and with vittaile,
               And all kin other apparaile
               That might auaile, or yet mister:
               To hold Castel, or toun of weere.
               And Walter Stewart of Scotland,
               
               That then was young and vailyeand,
               And sonne in law to the good King,
               Had ay sik will, and sik yarning,
               Néere hand the Marches for to be.
               That Barwike in kéeping then tooke he,
               And receiued of the King the toun,
               And the Castell, and Dungeoun.
               The King gart men of great Nobilley,
               Ride in England for to take Pray,
               
                  And brought out great plentie of fée:
               And with some Countries trewes tooke he.
               For vittaile that in great fusioun,
               He gart bring smertly to the toun:
               So that both Toun and Castell were
               Stuffed well for one yéere or maire.
               ¶ The good Stewart of Scotland then,
               Sent for his freinds and his men,
               Till he had with him but Archers,
               And but Burgesses, and Aulisters,
               Fiue hundreth men wight and hardy,
               That bare armes of Ancestry.
               
                  Iohn Crab a Fleming als had he,
               That was of so great subteltie,
               To ordaine, and to make apparaile,
               For to defend and to assaile,
               Castell of wéere, or then Citie:
               That no sleear might founden be.
               He gart Ingines, and Traines ma,
               And puruayed great fires alswa,
               Fire-galdes, and shot on seir maners,
               That to defend Castell efféeres:
               He puruayed into full great wane.
               Bot gunnes for crackes had they nane:
               For yet in Scotland then but wéene
               The vse of them had not bene seene.
               And when the towne vpon this wise,
               UUas stuffed (as I here deuise)
               The Noble King his way hes tane,
               And ridden toward Louthiane:
               And Walter Stewart that was stout,
               He left in Barwike with a rout:
               And ordained fast for apparaile,
               To defend, gif men would assaile.
            
            
               
               The King of England his power, Gaddered to siege Barwike but weere.
               WHen to the King of England,
               
               Was told, how that with stalwart hand
               
                  Barwike was tane, and stuffed syne,
               With men, and armour, and vittaile fyne:
               He was annoyed gretumly.
               And gart be summond hastely
               His counsell, and hes tane to réed,
               That he his Oast would hidder lead:
               And with all might that he might get:
               Unto the toun a Siege set:
               And gart dyke them so stalwartly,
               That while they liked there to ly,
               They sould far out the surer be,
               And gif the men of the Countrie,
               With strength of folke would them assaile
               At their dykes in plaine battaile:
               They sould auantage haue greatly.
               Although forsooth it great foly
               UUere: for to assailyie into feghting,
               At their dykes so starke a King.
               UUhen his counsell on this maner
               Was tane, he gart men far and ner,
               His men hailly assembled be.
               A great Oast with him then had he,
               Of Longcastell the Erle Thomas,
               
               That syne was Sanct, as some men sayes,
               Into his companie was there.
               And all the Erles als that were
               In England worthy for to fight,
               And Barouns als of méekle might,
               
                  With him to that assiege had he:
               And gart the shippes by the sea,
               Bring shot, and other apparell,
               And great Garnisoun als of vittell,,
               To Barwik
                        •
                     
                   then with his Menyie
               And with his battels arriued came he.
               And to the Lords ilkane sundry,
               Ordainde a field for their harbry.
               Then men might see their Pauilliouns,
               Be stented on sindrie fassiouns,
               So feill that they a Toun made there,
               More then both Toun and Castell were,
               On ather halse syne, on the sea.
               Their shippes came in sik plentie,
               With vittaile arming▪ and with men,
               That all the hauen was stopped then.
               And when they that were in the toun,
               Saw their foes in sik fusioun,
               By sea and land come sturdely:
               Then they as wight men, and hardy,
               Shupe them soone to defend their Stéed,
               That they in auentour of their dead,
               Sould put them, or then rush againe
               Their foes: for their Capitaine
               Treated them so louingly:
               And therewith als the maist party
               Of them, that armed with him were,
               Were of his blood, or Sib-men néere:
               Or els they were of his ally.
               Of sik comfort men might them sée,
               And als so fair in their conteening:
               That none of them had abasing,
               Upon the day well armed were they,
               And in the nights well watched ay.
               
                  Well sex dayes they so abade,
               That they no full greit bargane had.
            
            
               How Englishmen dyked them about, And syne went to the Siege but dout,
               INto this time as I tell here,
               That they withoutten bargane were,
               The Englishmen so closed had,
               Their Host, with dykes that they made:
               That they were strengthned gretumlie,
               Syne with all hands busilie,
               They shup them with their apparell,
               Them of the towne for to assaile:
               And on our Ladies Euen Mary,
               
               That bure the birth that all can by,
               That men calls her Natiuitie:
               Soone in the morning men might sée
               The English Host armed them in hy,
               And display Baners sturdelie,
               And assemble to their Baners,
               With Instruments on seir maners:
               As Scaffolds, Ladders, and Couerings,
               Pikkes, Howes and eke staffe slings,
               To ilke Lord and his battell,
               Was ordained where they should assaile,
               And they within, when that they saw,
               These men so raying them on a raw,
               Ttheir wairdes they went in hy,
               That were stuffed so stalwardly,
               With stones, and shot, and other thing,
               That néeded to their defending.
               And into sik maner abade
               Their foes, that to them sailyie made.
               
                  When they without were all readie,
               They trumped to the assault in hy,
               And ilke man with his apparaile,
               Where hée should bee went to assaile.
               To ilke Kyrnell that there were,
               Archers to shoot assigned are.
               And when on this wise they were bowne,
               Then went in hy toward the towne,
               And filled the Oykes right hastelie,
               Syne to the walles right hardelie,
               They went with Ladders that they had.
               But they so greit defence hes made,
               That were aboue vpon the Wall:
               That both Ladders, and men withall,
               They gart fall flatlings to the ground.
               Then men might see in litle stound.
               Men assailing right hardelie,
               Preasing vp Ladders doughtelie:
               And them aboue defending well,
               Tumbling them downe to their vnseill.
               With greit annoy defended they
               Their towne: for if wée the sooth shall say.
               The walles of the towne they were
               So law: that a man with a Speare,
               Might stryke another vpon the face,
               And the shot als so thicke it was,
               That it were wonder for to sée▪
               
               And Walter Stewart with a Menȝie,
               Kade aye about for to see where
               That for to helpe most mister were▪
               
               And where men preassed most hee made
               Succours, to them that mister had,
               The mony 
                     •
                  olke that were without.
               Had inuironed the towne about:
               
                  So that no part of it was frée.
               Their men might the assailyeares sée,
               Abandoun them right hardelie:
               And the defenders doughtelie,
               With all their mights can them pain
                     •
                  ,
               To put their foes force againe.
               On this wise them contéened they,
               While Noone was passed of the day:
               Then they that in the shippes were▪
               
               Ordained a ship with full greit fare,
               To come with all their apparaile,
               Right to the wall for to assaile.
               To the mid Mast their baite they drew,
               With armed men therein anew:
               A brig they had for to let fall,
               Right from the baite vpon the wall:
               With Barges by they can her tow,
               They preassed her right fast to row,
               Beside the Brighouse to the Wall:
               On that intent they set them all:
               They brought her white she came well ne
                     •
                  
               
               Then men might see on seir maner,
               Some men defended, and some assaile,
               Full busilie, with hard battell.
               They of the towne so well them bare.
               That the shipmen so handled were:
               That they the shippe on no maner,
               Might gar come to the wall so nere:
               That their Fall-brig might réeke theretill▪
               
               
                  
                     •
                  o long abade they feghting still,
               While that shée ebbed to the ground,
               Their men might in a litle stound,
               
                  
                     •
                  ée them by farre of war conuine,
               Then they were euer that was therein,
               
                  And when the Sea was 
                     •
                  bbed so,
               That men all dry might to her goe.
               Out of the towne ished in h
                     •
                  
               
               To her a well greit companie:
               And fire in her hes kindled soone.
               Into short time so haue they done,
               That into fire they gart her birne,
               And mony slaine, that was therein:
               And some were fled and away gane,
               An Ingynour there haue they rane,
               That was sléest of that misteere.
               That men wist outher far, or néere
               Into the towne syne entred they,
               It fell them happilie that day:
               That they got in so hastely.
               For there came a gre
                     •
                  t company,
               In full greit hy vp by the sea,
               When they the shippe saw burning hie,
               But ere they came, the other was past,
               The yait they barred and closed fast,
               The folke assailyied fast that day,
               And they within defended a:
               On sik a wise, that they that were
               With sik a force assailyeing there,
               Might doe their will on no manéere.
               And when the Eu
                     •
                  nsong time was néere,
               The folke without that were wearie,
               And some wounded full cruellie.
               Sawe them within defend them sa.
               And saw it was not eith to ta
               The towne while sik defence were made,
               By them that within the stéering had,
               The Host saw that their ship was brynt,
               And of their men some in hy were tynt.
               
                  And their folke wounded and weary,
               They gart blew the retreat in hy,
               Fra the shipmen rebuted were,
               They leet the other assaile no maire:
               For through the shipmen they weind ilkane,
               That they the toun sould well haue tane,
               And men sayes, that mo
                     •
                  ships then sa,
               Preassed that time the toun to ta:
               But for that there was burnt, but ane,
               And the Ingynour therein was tane:
               Here therefore mention made I,
               But of one ship alanerlie.
               WHen they blowen had the retreat,
               Tha folk that tholed paines great:
               Withdrew them haillie 
                     •
                  ta the wall,
               The assault haue they left withall,
               And they within that wearie were,
               And monie of them wounded saire,
               Were blyth and glad when they them saw
               So in haill battell them withdraw:
               And fra they wist surelie, that they
               Held to their Pauillions the way:
               They set good Watches to their wall,
               
                  
                     •
                  yne to their Innes went they all:
               
                  
                     •
                  nd eased them that wearie were:
               And als them that were wounded saire,
               
                  
                     •
                  ad good léeches, forsooth I hight:
               That helped them with all their might,
               
                  
                     •
                  n ather side wearie were they:
               That night they did no more perfay.
               
                  
                     •
                  iue daies efter they were still,
               That none to other did great ill.
            
            
               
               Here sent King Robert in England, Dowglas & Murray with stalward hand.
               NOw leaue we thir folke here lyand,
               All still (as I haue borne on hand)
               And turne the course of our carping,
               To Sir Kobert the doughtie King:
               That assembled, both far and néere,
               An Dast, and when he wist but wéere,
               That the King so of England,
               
               Had assieged with stalward hand,
               
                  Barwike, where. Walter Stewart was:
               To purpose with his men he taes,
               That he would not sa soone assaile,
               The King of England with battaile,
               And at his dykes especially
               For it might well turne to foly.
               Therefore he ordainde Lords twa,
               The Erle of Murray was one of tha:
               The other was the Lord Dowglas,
               
               And fiftéene hundreth men, to passe
               In England, for to burne and 
                     ••
                  a:
               And so great ryote there to ma,
               That they that lay sieging the toun,
               UUhen they heare the destructioun,
               That they sould into England ma:
               Sould be so dréeding. and so wa:
               For their Children, and for their UUiues,
               That they sould dréed to losse their liues,
               And their goods also, that they
               Sould dreede they sould be had away,
               And they sould leaue the Siege in hy,
               And wend to reskew hastely
               
                  Their goods, their freinds, and their land;
               Therefore (as I haue borne on hand)
               Thir Lords sent he foorth in hy.
               And they their wayes held hastely,
               In England gart they burne and sla:
               And wrought therein so méekle wa:
               Ay as they fure through the Countrie,
               That it was pitie for to sée
               To them that would it ony good:
               For they destroyed all as they yoode.
               So long they rade destroying sa:
               That they trauersed off to and fra:
               So that they commen are to Repoun,
               And destroyed haillely that Toun.
               At Borrow brig their harbery
               They tooke, and at Midtoun there by.
               And when the men of that Countrie,
               Their men saw so destroyed be:
               They gaddered into full great hy.
               Archers, Burgesses, and Yemanry,
               Priests, Clarkes, Abbots, Fréeres,
               Husbands, and men of all misters,
               While they togidder assembled were,
               Well twentie thousand men, and maire:
               Right good armour aneugh they had.
               The Archbishop of Yorke they made
               Their Capitaine, and to counsaile
               Hes tane, that they in plaine battaile,
               Would assaile the Scottishmen,
               That far fewer than they were then.
               Then he displayed his Baner,
               And other Bishops that were there,
               Gart display their Baner alswa.
               And in a rout foorth can they ga,
               
                  Toward Mid
                        •
                     oun the readie way,
               And when the Scottishmen heard say,
               That they were to them comming néere:
               They busked them on their best maneere:
               And delt them into battels twa,
               
                  Dowg
                        •
                     as the Uangard can ma,
               And the Reeregard made Erle Thomas,
               
               (For Capitaine of the Oast he was)
               And so ordained in good array,
               Toward their foes they held the way,
               When that they had of other sight,
               They preassed on both the halfes to fight.
               The Englishmen came right sadly,
               With good countenance, and hardy,
               Right in a frount with their Baner,
               While that their foes came so ner:
               That they their visage well might sée.
               Thrée speare length, trow I it might be
               Betwixt them, then sik abaissing
               Tooke them that but assonyeing,
               They tooke the backe, and all to ga.
               When Scottishmen hes séene them sa
               Affrayedly flee all their way,
               In great hy vpon them set they,
               And 
                     •
                  lew, and tooke a great party:
               That the laue fled full effrayedly,
               As they best mought, to séeke warrand.
               They were chased to neere at hand,
               That well a thousand died there.
               And of tha yet thrée hundreth were
               Priests that died in that place.
               Therefore that bargaine called was,
               The Chapter of Midtoun: for there
               Slaine so monie Priests were.
            
            
               
               The other assault of Barwicke, That was right shape to the Scots kinrike.
               WHen that thir folke discomfist was,
               And Scottishmen had left the chase:
               They went then forward in the land,
               Slaying destroying, and burnand
               Then they that at the Siege lay,
               Ere it was past the fift day,
               Had made them sundrie apparaile,
               To gang eft soones to assaile▪
               
               Of greit Geistes a Sow they made,
               That stalward heilling outwith had:
               With armed men anew therein,
               And Instruments for to myne,
               Sundrie Scaffolds then made withall,
               That were far hier then the Wall,
               And ordainde als that by the sea,
               The towne should right well sailȝied bée:
               And they within▪ that them sa,
               So greit apparell to them ma,
               Through Crabbes counsell that was 
                     •
                  lée,
               A Crane they haue gart dresse vp hie,
               Rinning on wheeles, that they might bring
               It where that need were of helping:
               And picke, and far all haue they tane,
               And Lynt, and Hardes, and Brintstane,
               And drye treee that would well birne,
               And melled ather other in:
               And greit Faggots therefore they made,
               Girthed with Irne bands brade
               The Faggots well might measured bée,
               To a greit tunnes quantitie.
               
                  The Fagots burning in a baill,
               With their Cran thought they should auaile:
               And if the Sow come to the wall,
               To let it burning on her fall:
               And with a sta
                     •
                  ke Chenyie hold it there:
               While all were burnt vp that there were,
               Ingins also for to cast,
               They ordained, and made readie fast:
               And set ilke man to his ward.
               And Sir Walter the good Stewart
               
               With armed men should ride about,
               And sée where that ther was most dout,
               And succour there with his Menȝie,
               And when they into sike degree.
               Had made them for their assailyeing,
               On the Rood Euen in the dawing,
               The English Hoste blew to assaile.
               There might men see with seir apparaile,
               The greit Host come full sturdelie.
               The towne enuironed they in hy.
               And assailyied with full greit will:
               For all their might they set theretill,
               Fast they them preassed to the towne:
               But they that can them abandoun
               To dead, or then to wounds sair:
               So well hes them defended there.
               That Ladders to the ground they slang,
               And with stones so fast they dang
               Their foes, that feill they left lying,
               Some dead some hurt, & some swoouning,
               But they that held on foote, in hy,
               Drew them away deliuerly,
               And sojournde there for no 
                     •
                  in thing,
               But went stoutlie to assailyeing.
               
                  And they abo
                     •
                  e defended ay,
               And set them to so hard assay:
               While that feile of them wounded were,
               And they so greit defence made there.
               That they stinted their foes might,
               Upon sike maner can they fight:
               While it was neere Noone of the day,
               Then they without in greit array,
               Preassed their Sow toward the wall,
               And they within right soone gart call,
               The Inginer that taken was,
               And greit mannance to him maes:
               And swore that hee should die, but hée,
               Préeued on the Sow sik subteltie,
               That hée should frush her ilke daill:
               And hee that hes perceiued well,
               That the dead was néere him till,
               But if hée might fulfill their will,
               Thought, that he all his might would doe
               Bended in greit hy then was sho,
               And to the Sow was then euen set,
               In hy hee gart draw the Cleiket:
               And smertly swapped out a stone,
               That euen ouer the Sow is gone,
               And behind her a litle wie
               It fell: and then they cried hie,
               That were in her foorth to the wall,
               For dréedlesse it is ours all.
               The Ingynour then deliuerlie,
               Gart bind the gyne full hastelie,
               That kest the stone right smertly out.
               It flew ouer whiddering in a rout,
               And fell right euen before the Sow,
               Their heartes then begouth to grow.
               
                  But if they with their mights all,
               Preassed the sow toward the wall.
               And hes her set thereto cunningly,
               The Ingynour then gart bend in hy
               The gyn, and swakked out a stone,
               That euen towar
                     •
                   the Lift is gone,
               And with greit weight dushed downe,
               R
                     •
                  ght by the wall in a randoun,
               And hit the Sow in sik a maner,
               That it that was the most sower:
               And starkest for to stint straike,
               In sunder with that d
                     •
                  sh hee brake.
               The men ran foorth in full greit hy.
               And on the walles they can cry:
               That their Sow fecried was there.
               
                  Iohn Crab that had his geare all there.
               In the Faggots hes set a fire,
               And ouer the walles syne can it wyre.
               And brunt the Sow in brandes bare,
               With this all fast assailȝeing were
               The folke without with felloun fight.
               And they within with méekle might,
               Defended manfully that Stéed,
               Into greit auenture of their deed.
               The shipmen with greit apparaile.
               Came with their ships to assaile.
               With Topcasteles garnisht wel,
               And with men armed into stéele,
               Their baits v
                     •
                   in midds their Mast,
               Drawne well hie, and fastned fast,
               And preassed with their greit auenture,
               Toward the wall: but the Ingynour
               Hit an Aspine with a stone,
               That the men that were therein ilkane,
               
                  Came downe dushing on the land.
               Fra hinefoorth durst none take on hand,
               With shippes to preasse them to the wall,
               Bot the laue were assailyeing all.
               On euerlike side so egerlie:
               That Certes, it was great ferlie,
               That tha folke sik defence hes made.
               For the great mischief they then had:
               For their walles so low they were,
               That a man right with a speare,
               Might strike another vp in the face:
               As here before told to you it was.
               And feill of them were wounded saire:
               And the la
                     •
                  e so fast trauelling were:
               That none had laiser rest to ta▪
               
               Their aduersaries them assailyied sa:
               They were therein so straitly stad,
               That their Wardane with him had,
               An hundreth men in companie,
               Armed, that wight were and hardie,
               And rade about for to sée where,
               That his folke hardest preassed were:
               But he of his haill companie,
               Behooued to leaue a great partie.
               So that by he a course had made
               About of all his men he had
                     •
                  
               
               There was left with him onlie ane:
               For he had them left euerilkane,
               To relieue where he saw mister:
               And the folke that assailyeing were,
               At Mary yait, they hewed had▪
               
               The Barres and a fire had made
               At the Draw-brig, and brunt it doun:
               And were thringing in great susioun,
               
                  Right to the yait a fire to ma.
               And they within gart smertly ga,
               Right to the UUardane for to say,
               How they were set in hard assay.
               And when Sir Walter Stewart heard,
               How that his men so straitly farde,
               He gart come fra the Castell then,
               All that were there of armed men:
               For there that day assailyied nane.
               And with that rout in hy is gane,
               To Mary yait, and to the wall
               Is went, and saw the perill all.
               And vmbethought him suddenly,
               But gif great helpe were sent in hy
               Thereto, they sould burne vp the yait,
               UUith the fire that he found thereat.
               Therefore vpon great hardement,
               He suddenlie set his intent:
               And gart all wide set vp the yait,
               And the fire that he found thereat,
               With strength of men he put away.
               He set him in full great assay:
               For they that were assailyeing there
               Preassed on him with weapons bare:
               And he defended with all his might.
               There men might sée a felloun fight,
               With sticking, stopping, and straiking:
               There made they sturdy defending,
               Magre their foes, while the night:
               Gart them on both halfes leaue the fight.
               THey of the Dast, when night can fall,
               Fra the assault withdrew them all:
               Wounded, and wearie, and forbeft,
               With faintnesse there the Sault they left,
               
                  And to their Innes they went in hy,
               And set their Watches hastely.
               The laue them eased, as they might best:
               For they had great mister of rest.
               That night they spake all commonly,
               Of them within, and had ferly,
               That they so stout defence had made,
               Against the great assault they had:
               And they within on other party,
               UUhen they their foes so haillely
               Saw them withdraw, they were all blyth,
               And their Watches hes ordainde swyth:
               And syne are to their Innes gane.
               There was but few of them then slaine,
               Bot feill were wounded cruelly.
               The laue out of measure were weary.
               It was an hard assault, perfay:
               For certainely I heard men say,
               That no few men more defence had made:
               That so right sharpe assailyeing had,
               And of one thing that there befell,
               I haue ferly, that I of tell:
               That is, that into all that day,
               UUhen all the most assailyied they:
               And the shot thickest was with all,
               Women with bairnes, and children small.
               In armes full gaddered vp, and bare,
               To them that on the walles were,
               Arrowes, and not ane slaine was there.
               Nor yet wounded, and that was maire.
               To a miracle of GOD almightie,
               And to nought els it set can I.
               On ather side, that night they were
               All still, while on the morne but maire,
               
                  There came tythings out of England,
               
               To the Oast that was mislykand:
               How that at Borrowbrig by Midtoun,
               
               Their men were slaine & doungen down:
               And that the Scotishmen through the land,
               Rade yet burning, and slayand,
               And when the King hes heard this tale,
               His counsell he assembled hale:
               To see, whidder better were him till,
               Abide about the toun all still:
               And assaile while it winnen were:
               Or then in England for to fare:
               And reskew his land, and men.
               His counsell fast discorded then:
               For the South men would that he made
               Arest there, while he winnen had
               The Toun, and the Castell alswa.
               But North men would nothing swa:
               They dred their friends for to tyne,
               And most part of their goods syne,
               Through Scottishmens crueltie.
               They would he léet the Siege be,
               And ride for to reskew the land.
               Of Longcastell, I take on hand:
               The Erle Thomas was one of tha,
               That counseld the King home for to ga.
               And for that, more enclined he,
               To the folke of the North Countrie:
               Then to the Southeroun mens will,
               He tooke it to so méekle ill,
               That he gart turse his geare in hy,
               And with his battell haillely:
               That of the Oast néere third part was,
               To England home his waies taes,
               
                  But lieue 
                     •
                  ee home hes 
                     •
                  ane his gate:
               Therefore fell efter sik debate.
               Betwext him, and the King, that ay
               Lested, and Andro Hardeclay.
               
               That through the King was on him set,
               Tooke him syne, and into Pumfret,
               
               Into the Hill beside the towne
               Strake off his head but ransoun.
               Therefore syne hauged & drowned was he
               And with him a greit Menyie.
               Men syne said efter that this Thomas,
               
               That on this wise martyred was,
               Was syne a Sainct, mirackles did:
               But enuie then gart them bee hid.
               But whidder hee holie was or nane.
               At Pumfret thus gate was hee slaine.
               And syne the King of England,
               
               When that hée saw him take on hand,
               To passe his was so openlie.
               Hée thought that vecill it was foly▪
               
               His Harnesse therefore cursed hée:
               And with the laue of his Menȝie,
               To England home can bee fare.
               The Scottishmen that destroying were
               Throughout England full cruelly
               Burning and wasting right rigorouslie,
               When t at they haue heard tythings tell
               Of this greit Siege that was so fell:
               That they all skailed were and gane,
               Unto England home againe:
               So that their folkes relieued were,
               And set now frée from all danger:
               Then did they take Westward the way,
               And by Carlile returned are they,
               
                  With prise, and with prisoners,
               And other goods on seir maners,
               The Lords to the King are gane.
               The King (I wish) was wonder fane,
               That they returned haill and féere:
               And that they sped on that maneere,
               That they their foes discomfist had,
               And but tynsell of men had made
               Recourse to them, that in Barwike
               
               Were assieged right faire and thicke.
               That into full greit danger wes,
               Through strength of them that sieged hes.
               And when the King had spéered tithand,
               How they had farne into England,
               
               And of their journey what progresse,
               That they haue had; and what successe?
               And they haue told him all their fare,
               How Englishmen discomfist were,
               Right blith into his heart was hée,
               And made them Feast with game and glée.
               
                  Barwike was on this maner
               Reskewed, and they that therein were.
               Hée was worthie a Prince to bée,
               Through manhéede, and subtilitie,
               That could with wit so hie a thing,
               But tynsell bring to good ending.
               To Barwicke syne the King goes,
               And when hee heard syne how it was
               Defended so doone manfullie,
               Hée loued them that were there greitlie.
               
                  Walter Stewarts greit bountie,
               Attour the laue commended hée,
               For the right greit defence hée made,
               At the ȝet, where men brunt had
               
                  The brig, as yée heard mée deuise.
               And Certes, hee was meekle to praise:
               That so stoutlie with plaine feghting,
               At open Yate made sik defending,
               Might hee had liued, while hee had beene,
               Of persite eild, withoutten wene,
               His Renowne should haue streiked fer.
               But death that watches euer ner,
               Into the flour of his Youthheed,
               Made end of all his doughtie déede,
               As 
                     •
                   shall tell furthermare,
               When the King had a while beene there,
               Hee sent for Masouns far and néere,
               That sleest were of that mistéere:
               And gart well tenfoote hie the wall,
               About Barwike the towne ouer all.
               And syne toward Louthiane,
               
               With his Menȝie his gate hes tane,
               And syne hée gart ordaine in hy,
               Both armed men, and Yemanrie,
               Into Ireland in hy to fare,
               To helpe his brother that was there.
               But hée that rest annoyed ay,
               And would in trauell bee alway,
               Ane day before the arriuing
               Of them, were sent him from the King,
               Hée tooke his way Southward to fare,
               Magre them all that with him were,
               For hee had not then in that land,
               Of all men (I trow) two thousand.
               Except the Kings of the 
                     •
                  rishrie,
               That in greit routes rade him by.
               Toward Dondalk hee tooke his way:
               And when Richard of Clare heard say,
               
                  That hée came with a few Menȝie:
               All that hee might assembled hée:
               Of all Ireland of armed men.
               So that hée had there with him then,
               Of trapped Horses twentie thousand,
               By them that were on foot gangand:
               And held foorth Northward on his way,
               And when Sir Edward heard men say,
               That commen néere to him was hée,
               Hée sent Discurreours him to see,
               The Sowles and the Stewart were they
               And als Sir Philip the Mowbray,
               
               And when they séene had their comming,
               They went againe to tell tithing:
               And said, they were well mony men,
               In hy Sir Edward answered then:
               And said, that hee should feght that day,
               Though fiue, or sixe times moe were they
               Sir Iohn Stewart said sickerlie,
               I reede yee feght not in sike hy,
               Men sayes your brother is cummand,
               With fifteene hundreth men at hand.
               And were they knit with you, yee might
               Abide stalwartlie the fight.
               Sir Edward looked right angerlie
               And to the Sowles said in hy:
               What sayest thou? Sir, hee said, perfay,
               As my Fellow said Sir, I say,
               Then to Sir Philip the Mowbray said he,
               Sir (said hee) so our Lord mee see,
               Mee thought it folie for to byde
               Yone men, that speedes them to ride:
               For wee are few, our foes are feill▪
               
               God may right well our Weirds deill,
               
                  But it were wonder that our might
               Sould ouercome so feill in fight.
               Then with great ire (alace) said he,
               I weind neuer to haue heard that of thée:
               Now help who will, for sickerly
               This day but more bade fight will I.
               Sall no man say while that I die,
               That strength of men sall gar me flée.
               GOD shield that ony sould vs blame,
               That we deale our Noble fame.
               Now be it swagait then (said they)
               We sall take that GOD will puruay,
               And when the Kings of Irishry,
               Heard say, and wist it sickerly,
               That their King with so whéene wald fight
               Against so mony of méekle might:
               They came to him in full great hy,
               And counselde him full tenderly,
               For to abide his men, and they
               Sould hold their foes all that day
               Doing▪ and on the morne alswa,
               UUith their assaults that they sould ma.
               But there might no counsell auaile,
               He would all gaites to the battell.
               And when they saw he was so thra
               To fight, they said, ye may well ga:
               But we will quite vs vtterlie,
               To fight with yone great companie,
               For none of vs will stand to fight:
               Trust not therefore into our might:
               For our maner is in this land,
               To follow, and to fight flée and:
               And not to stand in plaine Melle.
               UUhile the one part discomfist be.
               
                  He said, sen that your custome is,
               I aske no more of you, but this,
               That is, that ye and your Menyie,
               UUould all togidder arrayed be,
               And stand on farre but departing,
               And see our feght, and our ending.
               They said, well, that they sould doe sa:
               And syne toward their foes can ga.
               They were well threttie thousand néere,
               
                  Edward, and they that with him were,
               They were not fully two thousand,
               Arrayed then stalwardly to stand,
               Against threttie thousand and ma.
               Sir Edward that day would not 
                     •
                  a
               His Coat-armour, bot Gib Harper
               
               That men held as withoutten peere,
               Of his estate, had on that day,
               All haill Sir Edwards array▪
               
               The feght abade they on this wise,
               And in great hy their enemies,
               Came to assemble all ready.
               And they met them right hardely.
               They were so few the sooth to say,
               That rushed with their foes were they:
               And they that most preassed to stand,
               Were slaine downe, and the remanand
               Fled to the Irishry for succour,
               Sir Edward that had sik valour
               Was dead, and Sir Iohn Stewart alswa,
               And Sir Iohn Sowles als with tha.
               And other of their company:
               They vanquisht were so suddenly,
               That few into the Plaine were slaine,
               For the laue hes their wayes tane:
               
                  To the Irish Kings that were there,
               That in haill battell howing were.
               
                  Iohn Thomson that was leader,
               Of them of Carrike that were there.
               When he saw the discomfiting,
               Withdrew him to an Irish King,
               That of his acquaintance had he:
               And he receiued him in daintie.
               And when Iohn commen was to the King
               He saw men lead fra the feghting,
               Sir Philip Mowbray the wight,
               That had bene discomfist in the fight:
               And by the armes led was he,
               With two men vpon the Caussey,
               That was betwixt them and the toun,
               That streiked long in a randoun:
               Toward the toun they held their way,
               And when in mids the Caussey were the
                     •
                  ,
               Sir Philip of his businesse
               Ouercome and perceiued he was
               Tane, and swagaites led with twa.
               The one he swakked soone him fra,
               And syne the other in great hy.
               He drew his sword deliuerly,
               And to the feght the way he taes,
               Endlang the Caussey that there was
               Filled into so great fusioun
               Of men, that went then to the toun.
               And he that met them can them ma,
               Sik payment, where he can them ta,
               That well an hundreth men gart he,
               Leaue magre theirs the Caussey,
               And Iohn Thomson said surelie,
               That saw his déedes all haillelie,
               
                  That toward the battell euen he yéede,
               
                  Iohn Thomson thereto tooke good héed,
               And cried to him in full great hy.
               That they were vanquisht all plainely:
               And said, come here: for there is nane
               On life for they are dead ilkane.
               Then stood he still a whyle, and saw
               That they were all done out of daw:
               Syne went he toward him sikkerlie.
               This Iohn wrought syne so wittelie,
               That all that hidder fled, they were
               Comde to Craigfergus haile and féere,
               Although they left some of their geare.
               And they that at the fighting were,
               Sought Sir Edward to get his head,
               Among the folke that there was dead:
               And found Gib Harper in his geare:
               And for so good his armings were,
               They strake his head off: and syne it,
               They haue gart salt into a Kit:
               And in a Present but hething
               In England sent it to the King.
               They weind Sir Edward it had béene:
               But for the arming that was shéene,
               They of the head deceiued were:
               Although Sir Edward died there.
               On this wise were the Noble men,
               Through wilfulnesse, all lossed then,
               And that was sin, and great pitie:
               For had their outragious bountie,
               Bene led with wit, and with measure,
               But gif the more misauenture
               Befell them it sould bene hard thing,
               Sould lead them to discomforting,
               
                  But greit outragious succudrie,
               Gart them all deare their worship buy:
               And they that fled from the Melle,
               Sped them in hy toward the Sea:
               And to Craigfergus commen are they:
               And they that were into the way,
               To Sir Edward, sent from the King,
               When they heard the discomfiting,
               To Craigfergus they went againe,
               And that was not withoutten paine,
               For they were mony times that day
               Assailyied with Irishrie: but they
               Held them togidder sikkerlie,
               Defending them so worthelie:
               That they escaped oft through might,
               And mony times oft by slight.
               For oft there to themselues gaue they,
               To let them skaithlesse passe away.
               And to Craigfergus came they sa,
               Then baits and shipmen they ta,
               And sailled to Scotland into hy,
               And arriued all their safelie.
               When they of Scotland had witting,
               Of Sir Edwards discomfiting:
               They méened him full tenderlie,
               Ouer all the land full commonly:
               And they that with him slaine were there.
               Full tender als méened they were.
               SIr Edward Bruce, as is said aire,
               Was discomfist on this maner:
               And when the fielde was cleanged cleene,
               So that no resistance there was séene.
               The Wardane then Richard of Clare
               
               With all the folkes that hee had there.
               
                  Toward Dondalke hes tane the way,
               So that no debate made they:
               At that time with the Irishry,
               But to the towne they held in hy,
               And syne hes sent to the King,
               That England had in gouerning,
               
                  Gib harpers head into a Kit,
               
                  Iohn Mowppas to the King had it:
               Whilke hée receiued in greit daintie,
               Right blith of that Present was hee.
               For hée was glad that hée was so
               Deliuered of sike a felloun foe,
               In heart thereof hée tooke sike pride,
               That in all haste hee would ride.
               With a greit Host into Scotland,
               
               To reuenge him with stalward hand,
               Of the tray, trauell and the teene,
               That done to him therein had béene.
               Then a right greit Host gaddered hée,
               And gart his shippes by the sea
               Come with greit fusioun of vittaile
               For at that time hee thought all haill,
               For to destroy so cleane Scotland,
               
               That none should bée therein liuand,
               And with his Host in greit array
               Toward Scotland hee tooke the way.
               And when King Robert wist that hée
               Came on him with sik a Menȝie,
               Hee gaddered men both far and néere,
               While so feill commen to him were,
               And was als for to come him to:
               That him thought hée should well doe:
               Hee gart with draw all the Cattell.
               Of Lowthiane euerilk deill.
               
                  And into strengths gart them bee led,
               And ordainde men to defend that stead:
               And with his Host all still hee lay,
               At Co
                        •
                     ros: for hee would assay,
               To gar his foes through fasting
               Bee feeble, and through long waking.
               And fra hee feeblished had heir might,
               Assemble with them hee would to fight.
               Hee thought to worke vpon this wise,
               And Englishmen through greit Maistries,
               Came with their Host to 
                     
                        •
                     outhiane,
               
               And then to Edinburgh
                  ▪ are they gane,
               And there abade dayes thrée.
               Their ships that were vpon the sea,
               Tad the wind contrare to them ay:
               So that vpon no maner of way,
               Power they had to the Firth to bring
               Their vittaile to relieue their King:
               And they of the Host that failyied meat.
               When they saw that they might not get
               Their vittailes to them by the sea,
               They sent then foorth a greit Menyie,
               For to forray all Louthiane.
               
               But Cattell haue they founden nane.
               Except a Kow that was haltand,
               That in Tranent towne they 
                     •
                  and.
               And when the Erle of Warrane,
               
               Saw their Forrayours come againe,
               And a Kow anerly come sa:
               Hee asked if they found no ma?
               And they haue said all to him. Nay.
               Then Certes said hee, I dare say,
               This is the dearest beast, that I
               Saw euer yet: for sikkerly
               
                  It cost a thousand pound and maire.
               And when the King, and they that were
               Of his counsell, saw they might get
               No Cattell to their Host to eat.
               Then they of fasting had greit paine.
               To England turned they home againe.
               At Melros shupe they for to ly,
               And sent before a company.
               Thrée hundreth néere of armed men:
               But the Lord Dowglas that was then,
               Beside into a Forrest neere,
               Wist of their comming and what they were
               And with them of his companie,
               Into Melros all haillelie,
               Hée howered into a bushment,
               And a right sturdie Fréere hes sent,
               Without the Yate their comming to see,
               And bade him hold him all priuie,
               While that hée saw them commen all,
               Right to the cunyie of the Wall:
               And cried on hie, Dowglas, Dowglas,
               
               The Fréere then foorth his wayes taes,
               That was right darfe, stout, and hardy,
               His méekle hoode couered haillely
               The arming that hée on him had.
               Upon a stalwart Horse hée rade,
               And in his hand hée had a Speare,
               And abade vpon that manéere,
               While that hée saw them commenner,
               And when the formest passed were
               The cunyie, he cried, Dowglas, Dowglas,
               
               Then to them all, a course hée maes,
               And bare one downe deliueredlie,
               Then Dowglas with his companie,
               
                  Ished vpon them with a shoute.
               And when they saw so great a rout,
               Come vpon them so suddenlie,
               They were abased gretumlie:
               And gaue the backe but more abade.
               The Scottishmen among them rade,
               And slew all them they might ouerta,
               And great martyrdome there can ma:
               And they that scaped were vnslaine:
               And to their Oast went home againe:
               And told them what good welcomming,
               
                  Dowglas then made at their comming,
               Conuoying them againe rudelie,
               And warned them the plaine harbrie.
            
            
               Here followed King Robert in hight, The English King with all his might.
               THe King of England, and his men,
               That saw their harbreours come then
               Rebuted on that great maner.
               Annoyed in their hearts they were:
               And thought it was a great folie,
               Into the wood to take harbrie.
               Therefore by Dryburgh in a Plaine:
               They harbried them, and syne againe,
               Are went to England but delay.
               And when the King Robert heard say:
               That they were turned home againe,
               And how their harbreours were slaine,
               In hy an Oast assembled he,
               And went foorth ouer the Scots sea:
               Eightie thousand he was, and ma,
               And eight battels he made of tha:
               
                  In ilk battell were ten thousand:
               Syne went he foorth to England,
               
               And in haill rout he followed fast
               The English King, while at the last,
               He came approaching by Byland,
               
               When at that time there was lyand,
               The King of Englan
                        •
                     
                   with his men,
               King Robert that had witting then,
               That he lay there with méekle might:
               Tranoynted so on him one night:
               That on the morne by it was day,
               Commen to the plaine field were they.
               Fra Byland a litle space:
               But betwixt them, and it there was,
               A craig bra streiked well lang:
               And a great Path vp for to gang.
               Otherwise might they not haue way,
               To passe to Bylands Abbay:
               Bot gif they passed far about.
               And when the méekle English rout,
               Heard that the King Robert was néere,
               The most part of them that were there,
               Went to the Path to take the bra,
               There thought they their defence to ma:
               Their Baners there they gart display,
               And their battels in brade array:
               And thought well to defend the place.
               When King Robert perceiued hes,
               That they them thought for to defend,
               Efter his counsell hes he send.
               And asked what was best to do?
               The Lord Dowglas answered him to:
               And said, Sir, I will vnderta,
               That in short time I sall doe sa:
               
                  That I sall win yone place plainely:
               Or then gar all yone company,
               Come downe to you into this Plaine:
               Or ye sall neuer trow me againe.
               The King then said great GOD thée spéed:
               And he on foorth his wayes yeede,
               And of the Oast the most partie,
               Put then into his companie▪
               
               And held their way toward the place,
               The Erle of Murray Sir Thomas,
               
               Left his battell, and in great hy,
               But with few men in company,
               Came to the Court of the Lord Dowglas,
               
               And ere he entred into the place,
               Before them all the place tooke he:
               For he would that men sould him sée.
               And when the good Lord Dowglas,
               
               Saw that he so commen was.
               He praised him thereof greatly,
               And welcommed him honorably.
               And to the place can togidder ga.
               When Englishmen saw them doe sa,
               They lighted, and against them yéed,
               Two Knights, that doughtie were indéed,
               
                  Thomas of Struthers heght one to name,
               And the other Sir Ralph of Cowban
                        •
                     
                  ?
               Thir two Knights of good degrée,
               Came downe before all their Menyie:
               They were both of full great bountie,
               And met their foes right manfullie.
               There might men sée well other assaile,
               And men defend with stout battaile:
               And arrowes flee in great fusioun,
               And they that aboue were, tumbled doun
               
                  Stones vpon them from the hight.
               But they that set both will and might,
               To wi
                     •
                   the Path, and preassed sa:
               That Sir Ralph Cowbane can ta
               The way, right to his Oast in hy,
               And left Sir Thomas manfully
               Defending with great might the place,
               UUhile that he so supprised was:
               That he was tane through hard fighting.
               And therefore syne while his ending,
               He was renouned the best of hand,
               Of one Knight, was in all England.
               
               For this ilk Sir Ralph of Cowbane,
               
               In all England he had the name:
               For the best Knight of that land.
               And for Sir Thomas dwelt still fightand,
               Where Sir Ralph (as before said we)
               Withdrew him, abone him prised was he.
            
            
               The discomfiting of Englishmen, At Bylands Path into the Glen.
               THus were they fighting in the place:
               And when King Robert, that was
               UUise in his deedes, and eke worthie,
               Saw his men ay so doughtelie,
               The Peth vpon their foes ta,
               And saw his foes defend them sa:
               Then gart he all the Irishry,
               That were into his company,
               Of Argyle, and Iles alswa,
               Spéede them in hy vnto the bra.
               He bade them leaue the Peth haillely,
               And climbe vp on the Craiges thereby:
               
                  And speed them fast the hight to ta,
               And in greit hy they haue done sa:
               And clambe as Gaites vp to the hight,
               And left not for their foes might.
               Magre their foes they bare them sa:
               That they are gotten abone the bra.
               Then faught they wonder fellounlie,
               And rushed their foes right sturdelie.
               There was a right perilous bargaine:
               For a Knight heght Sir Iohn of Britaine
               
               That lighted hes abone the bra,
               With his men greit defence can ma,
               But the Scottishmen can so assaille,
               And gaue to them so feill battaile:
               That they were set in sike effray,
               That they that flée might, fled away.
               Sir Iohn of Brittaine there was tane,
               And most part of his Menȝie s
                     •
                  aine,
               Of France there were tane Knights two,
               The Lord of Sowllie was one of tho:
               The other was the Marshall Britaine
               
               That was a right greit Lord at hame,
               The laue some dead were, and some slain,
               The remnand fled were euerilkane.
               And when the King of England,
               
               As yet at Byland was lyand:
               Saw his men discomfist plainlie,
               Hée tooke his way in full greit hy,
               And Southward fled in all his might,
               The Scots men chased him hard, I hight:
               And in the chase hes mony slaine:
               But hee quicklie away is gane,
               And the most part of his Menȝie,
               
                  Walter Stewart of greit bountie,
               
                  Set ay vpon hie Cheualrie.
               With fiue hundreth in companie,
               To Yorke Yates a chase can ma:
               And there some of their men can s
                     •
                  a:
               And abade while neere the night.
               To see if ony would ish to fight
               And when hee saw none would ish out,
               Hée turned againe wi
                     •
                  h all his rout:
               And to the Host they went in hy,
               That then had tane their harbery:
               Into the Abbay of Byland,
               
               And Rewes that were neere by lyand.
               They deal
                     •
                   among them that was there,
               And gaue the King of Englands geare:
               That hee had left into Byland,
               
               All gripped they into their hand:
               And made them glad, and eke merrie.
               And when the King had tane Harberie,
               They brought to him their prisoners
               All vnarmed, as it affeeres:
               And when hée saw Iohn of Brittaine,
               
               Hee had at him full greit disdaine:
               For hee of him would speake highly,
               At home, and too dispitefullie.
               Hée bade haue him away in hy,
               And looke hee kéeped were straitlie,
               And said, were it not that hée were
               A Capti
                     •
                  e, as hée then was there
               His words hee should full deare aby.
               And hée full fast can cry, mercy,
               They let him foorth withoutten maire,
               And kéept him well white that they were
               Commen home to their owne Countrie.
               Long efter syne ransomed was hee:
               
                  For twentie thousand pound to pay,
               As I haue heard among men say.
               WHen that the King this spéech had made,
               The French Knights they taken had.
               Were brought there before the King.
               And hee made them faire welcomming,
               And said, I wate right well that yée
               For your greit worship and bountie,
               Came for to sée this feghting héere:
               For sen yee in the Countrie were,
               Your strength, your worship & your might,
               Would not thole you eschew the fight,
               And sen that cause led you theretill,
               And nouther wrath, nor yet ill will,
               As friends yée shall receiued bee,
               And welcome bée all time to mée.
               They kneeled, and thanked him greitly▪
               
               And hee gart treat them courteously,
               A long while with him them held hée.
               And did them honour and bountie,
               And when they yarned to their land.
               Unto the King of France in Presand,
               Hée sent them quite, but ransome free,
               And gifts greit to them gaue hee,
               His friends thusgaite courteously,
               Hee could receiue, and right humbly,
               And his foes stoutlie astoney.
               At Byland all that night hee lay,
               For their victorie all blyth they were,
               And on the morne withoutten maire,
               They haue Southwards tane their way
               So far at that time trauelde they,
               Burning, slaying, and destroying
               Their foes, with all their might noying,
               
                  While to the wall commen were they,
               Syne North againe they tooke the way
               And syne homeward in their repare,
               They destroyed haill the wall of Bewar,
               
               And syne with prisoners and Cattell,
               Riches, and mony faire Iewell,
               To Scotland tooke they home their way,
               Blith and joyfull of their Prey.
               And ilke man went to his repaire,
               Thanking gre
                     •
                  t God of their wellfare,
               That they the King of England,
               
               Through worship and through strength of hand
               And through their Kings greit bountie,
               Discomfist had in his owne Countrie.
               THus was the Land a while at peace:
               But Couetise that cannot cease,
               To set men vpon fellony,
               To gar men come to Senyeorie,
               Greit Lords of full greit Renowne,
               Made a feill Conjuration,
               Against Robert the doughtie King,
               They thought to bring him to ending:
               And for to brooke efter his dead
               The K
                     •
                  nrike, and Reigne in his stead.
            
            
               Of the great Treasoun the ordaining, To Robert the Bruce the noble King▪
               
               THe Lord Sowles Sir Williame,
               
               Of this dead had most defame:
               For principall thereof was hee,
               Both of assent and crueltie:
               And had gotten with him sundrie,
               
                  Gilbert Malyerd, and Iohn of Logie,
               
               
                  They were Knights, I tell of here.
               And Richard Browne als a Squyer:
               And good Sir Dauid the Brechyne,
               
               UUas of this déed arested syne,
               And I sall tell you furthermare:
               But they ilkane discouered were,
               Through a Ladie (as I heard say)
               Ere to their purpose come might they:
               For she told hailly to the King,
               Their purpose, and their ordaining.
               And when that he sould haue bene dead.
               And Sowles King into his stead:
               And told him very takinning.
               That this purpose was soothfast thing,
               And when the King wist that it was sa,
               So subtle purpose can he ta:
               That he gart take them euerilkane.
               And where the Lord Sowles was tane,
               Thrée hundreth, and sextie had he,
               Of Squyers, cled in his Leuerie,
               At that time in his companie,
               Outtane Knights that were iolie.
               Into Barwike taken was he,
               Then might men all his Menyie sée,
               Sorie, and wo the sooth to say.
               The King léet them all passe away,
               And held them that he taken had.
               The Lord Sowles then efter made
               
                  
                     •
                  laine granting of that haill purpose.
               A Parliament therefore set was,
               And hidder brought that Menyie were.
               The Lord Sowles hes granted there
               The déede, into plaine Parliament,
               Therefore soone efter he was sent,
               
                  To his paines in Dumbartane,
               
               And died in that toun of stane.
               Sir Gilbert Malyerd, and Logie,
               
               And Richard Browne, thir three plainelie,
               Was with assise there ouertane,
               Therefore they were drawne ilkane,
               And hanged, and headed als thereto.
               As men them damned had to do.
               And good Sir Dauid the Brechine,
               
               They gart challenge thereafter syne:
               And he granted, that of that thing
               Was made to him discouering:
               But thereto gaue he no consent,
               But for he heilled their intent,
               And discouered it not to the King,
               Whome of he held all his holding,
               And had made to him fewtie:
               Iudged to hing, and drawne be
               He was, and as they drew him to hing▪
               
               The people farly fast can thring
               Him, and his mischiefe for to sée:
               That to behold was great pitie.
               Sir Ingrame Vmfrauile that then
               Was with the King a Scottishman:
               When he that great mischiefe did sée:
               He said, Lordings, whereto preasse yée,
               To sée the mischiefe of this Knight,
               That was so worthie and so wight?
               For I haue séene ma preasse to sée,
               Him for his Soueraigne bountie:
               Than now does for to sée him here,
               And when thir words spoken were,
               With sorie cheare he held him still,
               While men had done on him their will.
               
                  And syne with lieue of the King,
               He brought him menskfully to eirding:
               And syne to the King said he:
               One thing I pray you, Sir grant to me:
               That is, that ye of all my land,
               That is into Scotland lyand,
               Would giue me leaue to doe my will.
               The King soone hes said him till,
               I will well grant▪ that it so be:
               But tell me what annoyes thée?
               He said againe, grant me mercy,
               And I sall tell you it plainely.
               Mine heart giues me no more to be,
               With you dwelling in this Countrie.
               Therefore that it not you grieue,
               I pray you hartly of your lieue:
               For where so Noble and worthy a Knight,
               And so Cheualrous and so wigh
                     •
                  
                  ▪
               
               And so renouned of worship syne,
               As Sir Dauid the good Brechyne:
               And so fulfilled of all manhéede,
               UUas put to so villanous a dead:
               Mine heart forsooth may not giue me,
               To dwell for nothing that may be.
               The King said, sen that ye will sa
               When euer ye will ye may ga:
               And you sall haue good leaue thereto.
               Thy liking of thy land to do:
               And he him thanked gretumly,
               And of his land in full great hy,
               As him thought best, disponed he.
               Syne at the King of great bountie,
               Before them all that with him were,
               His lieue he tooke for euermaire.
               
                  And went in England to the King,
               And he him told all but leesing.
               How that the Knights destroyed were,
               And all as I told you aire:
               And of the Kings Courtesie,
               That leaued him debonerlie,
               To doe with his land his liking,
               In that time were sent fra the King,
               Of Scotland, Messingers to treat
               For peace, gif that they might it get,
               As there oftsyse before was send,
               Suppose they could not bring it to end.
               For the good King in his intent,
               Sen GOD sik grace to him had sent,
               That he had winnen all his land,
               Through strength of armes to his hand,
               That he peace in his land would ma,
               And all the land establisht sa:
               That his aire efter him sould be
               In peace, gif men held their lawtie.
               IN this time that the Vmfrauile,
               
               As I bare on hand aire whyle,
               Came to the King of England,
               
               The Scots Messengers there he fand,
               Of peace and rest to haue tretise.
               The King wist Sir Ingrame was wise,
               And asked his counsell thereto:
               What he would réede him for to do.
               For he said he was laith to ma
               Peace with King Robert Bruce his fa,
               While that he venged of him were.
               Sir Ingram
                        •
                     
                   made to him answere,
               And said, he dealt so courteously.
               With me, that on no wise sould I
               
                  Gaue counsell to his hurting:
               Thou behooues néedwise (said the King)
               To this thing say thine auise.
               Sir (said hee) sen your will it is,
               That I say, wit yée sikkerlie:
               For all your greit Cheualrie,
               To deale with them yee haue no might,
               His men so worthie are and wight,
               For long vsage of feghting,
               That haue beene nourished in sik thing,
               That ilke Yeman is so wight,
               Of his, that hée is worth a Knight.
               But if yée thinke your wéere to bring,
               To good purpose at your liking:
               Long trewes with him take yee:
               Then shall the most part of his Menȝie.
               That are but simple Yemanrie,
               Bee strenyied all commonlie,
               To win their meat with their trauill,
               And some of them of néed mon call
               With pleugh, and Borrow for to get.
               And other féere Craftes their daylie meat,
               So that their arming shall worth old,
               And bee rousted, destroyed, and sold,
               And feill that now of wéere are slée,
               Into these long trewes shall die,
               And others in their stead shall rise,
               That shall ken litle of sik maistries,
               And when they thus diffused are,
               Then may yée mooue on them were,
               To this assented they ilkane,
               And efter soone were trewes tane,
               Betwixt the two Kings that were,
               Taken to last for threttéene yéere.
               
                  And on the Marches gart them cry,
               The Scottishmen keeped them leelely,
               But Englishmen vpon the sea,
               Destroyed through greit crueltie.
               Marchant shippes that sailling were,
               From Scotland to Flanders with waire,
               And destroyed the men ilkane:
               And to their vse the goods hes tane.
               The King sent oft to haue redresse:
               But nought thereof redresse there was,
               And hee abade all time askand.
               The trewes on his halfe gart hée stand,
               Upon the Marches stabilly,
               And gart men keepe them léelely.
            
            
               
                  Walter Stewart here died hee, At Paslay eirded syne was hee.
               IN this time that the trewes were.
               Lesting on Marches (as I said aire)
               
                  Walter Stewart that worthie was,
               At Bathcat a greit sicknesse taes,
               His euill woxt ay more and more,
               While men perceiued by his sore,
               That hée of néed must pay the det,
               That no man for to pay may let.
               Shriuen and als repenting well,
               When all was done to him ilke deill.
               That Christen men ought for to haue
               As good Christen, the Gaist hée gaue.
               Then might men heare folk wéepe and cry
               And mony a Knight and faire Lady,
               Murning and making full euill chere,
               So did they all that euer were there,
               
                  All men him méened commonlie,
               For of his eild hée was worthie.
               When long tim they their dule had made
               The Corps to Paslay haue they had:
               And there with greit solemnitie,
               And with greit dule eirded was hée.
               GOD for his might his soule mot bring,
               Where Ioy aye lasteth but ending.
            
            
               The Erle of Murray and Dowglas, With their Host commen to Wardel was.
               AFter his death (as I said aire)
               The trewes that so taken were:
               For to haue lasted threttéene yéere,
               When two of them were passed néere,
               And an hailfe, I trow alswa:
               King Robert saw men would not ma
               Redresse of shippes that were tane:
               And of the men als that were slaine.
               But ay continued their prauitie,
               Where euer they met vpon the sea:
               Hee sent, and quit him all plainely,
               And gaue the trewes vp openly.
               And in vengeance of this trespasse,
               The Erle of Murray Sir Thomas.
               
               And Donald Erle of Mar alswa,
               And Iames of Dowglas with them twa,
               And Iames Stewart that leader was,
               Efter his good brothers decease,
               Of all his brethers men in wéere,
               Hée gart vpon their best maneere,
               With mony men boun them to ga,
               In England, for to to burne and sla,
               
                  And they held foorth soone to England,
               
               They were of good men ten thousand:
               And brunt and slew into their way,
               Their foes fast destroyed they.
               And thusegaite fordward can they fare,
               To Wardall Parke while they commen are
               That time Edward of Carnauerane
               
               The King, was dead, and laide in Lame.
               And Edward his sonne that was ying,
               In England crowned then was King:
               And surname had of Windsore,
               
               Hee had in France béene before,
               With his mother Dame Issobell,
               
               And was wedded (as I heard tell)
               To a young Ladie faire of face,
               That the Erles Doughter was
               Of Henault, and of that Countrie,
               Brought with him men of greit bountie
               That was right wise, and wight in wéere,
               Sir Iohn de Henault was leader,
               And in that time the Scots men were.
               At Wardall Parke (as I said aire)
               Into Yorke was hée new made King,
               And heard tell of the destroying,
               That Scottishmen made in his Countrie,
               A greit Host to him gaddered hée:
               Hée was well neere fiftie thousand,
               Then held hée Northward in the land,
               In haill battell with that Menȝie:
               Eighteene yéere old that time was hée,
               The Scots men they had all Cokdaill,
               
               From end to end they haryed haill:
               And Wardall againe they rade,
               Their Discurreours that sight hes hed,
               
                  Of comming of the Englishmen:
               To their Lords they told it then,
               Then the Lord Dowglas in a ling,
               Ride foorth for to sée their comming:
               And saw that seuen battels were they,
               That came riding in good array.
               When he the folke beholden had,
               Toward his Oast againe he rade.
               The Erle spéered gif he had séene
               The Oast? yea Sir (he said) but wéene.
               What folke are they? Sir, mony men.
               The Erle his aith hes made euen then:
               We sall fight with them, yea, though they were,
               Full mo by far, then they now are,
               Sir, loued be GOD, he said againe:
               That we haue sik a Capitane,
               That so great thing dar vnderta.
               Bot by Sanct Bryde, it bées not sa,
               Gif my counsell may trowed be:
               For fight on no maner sall we,
               But it be at our auantage,
               For me thinke it were no outrage,
               To fewer folkes against ma,
               A vantage when they may, to ta:
               As they were on this wise speaking,
               On an high rig they saw streiking,
               Toward them euen in battel brade,
               Baners anew displayed they had:
               And another comming efter néere,
               And right vpon the same manéere.
               They came while seuen battels brade,
               Out ouer that high Rig passed had.
               The Scottishmen were then lyand.
               On North halfe néere toward Scotland,
               
               
                  The daile was streiked well, I hight,
               On ather side there was an hight,
               And to the water downe somedeill stay,
               The Scottishmen in good array,
               On their best wise busked ilkane,
               Stood in their strength that they had tane:
               And that was far fra the Water of Wéere,
               A quarter of a mile well néere:
               Their stood they battell to abide▪
               
               The Englishmen there on ather side,
               Came ryding downward, while they were
               To Wéeres Water comming néere:
               And on the other halfe their foes were:
               Then haue they made a rest right there,
               And sent out Archers a thousand,
               With Hounds and Bowes in their hand:
               And gart them well drinke of the wyne:
               And bade them gang to bycker syne
               The Scottish Oast in a randoun:
               And looke gif they might ding them doun,
               For might they gar them breake array,
               To haue them at their will thought they:
               And armed men downe with them send
               Them at the UUater to defend.
               The Lord Dowglas hes séene their fare,
               And men that right well horsed were,
               And armed a great company,
               Behind the battell priuily,
               He gart hower to abide their comming.
               And when he made to them tokenning,
               They sould come pricking fast, and sla,
               With speares all that they might ouerta:
               
                  Donald of Mar their Chiftane was,
               And Archibald with him of Dowglas,
               
               
                  The Lord Dowglas toward them rade▪
               
               And a gowne on his arming had:
               And trauersed alwayes vp againe:
               Them néere his battell for to traine,
               And they that drunken had of wine,
               Came ay vp endlang in a line,
               While that the battels came so néere,
               That arrowes fallen among them were.
               
                  Robert of Ogill a good Squyar,
               Came pricking on a good Coursar:
               And on the archers cried againe,
               Ye wate not who makes you that traine.
               It is the Lord Dowglas, that will
               Of his playes ken some you till.
               When they heard speake of the Dowglas,
               
               The hardiest man effrayed was,
               And againe turned haillely.
               His taken then he made in hy,
               And the folke that enbushed were,
               So stoutly pricked on them there,
               That well thrée hundreth haue they slaine,
               And to the UUater home againe:
               The remanand all can they chase.
               Sir William of Erskin that was
               New made Knight the samine day,
               UUell horsed into good array,
               Chased with others that were there:
               So far-foorth, that his horse him bare
               Among the lumpe of Englishmen:
               And with strong hand he was taken then,
               But of him well soone change was made,
               Of other men that they taken had:
               Fra their English archers were slaine,
               Their folke rade to their Oast againe.
               
                  And right so did the Lord Dowglas,
               
               And when that he repaired was,
               They might among their foes sée,
               Their Pauillions soone stented be.
               Then they perceiued soone in hy.
               That they that night would take harbry.
               And shape to doe no more that day:
               Therefore them also harbred they:
               And stented Pauillions soone in hy,
               Tents and Lugges als there by,
               They gart make, and set all on raw,
               That day two new things they saw:
               That before in Scotland had bene nane,
               Tymbres for Helmes was the ane,
               That them thought then of great bountie,
               And also wonder for to sée.
               The other, Craikes were for wéere,
               That they before had neuer éere.
               Of thir two things they had ferlie.
               That night they watched stalwardlie:
               The most part of them armed lay,
               While on the morne that it was day.
               THe Englishmen then vmbethought,
               Upon what maner that they mought,
               Gar the Scots leaue their auantage:
               For they thought folie, and outrage,
               To gang vp to them to assaile
               Them, at their strength in plaine battaile:
               Therefore of good men a thousand,
               Armed on horse both foot and hand,
               They sent before, their foes to be.
               Enbushed into a valley:
               And shupe their battell as they would
               Upon them to the feghting hald.
               
                  For they thought Scotsmen of sik will,
               That they might not hold them still,
               For they knew them of sik courage:
               That they sould leaue strength & auantage
               And meete them in the field plainely.
               Then should their bushment hastely,
               Behind breke on them at the backe,
               So thoght theywel they sould them wrack
               And make them to repent their play,
               Their enbushment fooorth sent they,
               And them enbushed priuily.
               And on the morne some deill airly,
               Into the Host soone trumped they:
               And gart their battells brade array,
               And held toward the Water right,
               And well arrayed for to fight.
               The Scottishmen that saw them sa,
               Bowne on their best wise can them ma.
               And in their battell well arrayed,
               With Baners to the wind displayed,
               They left their strength and all plainely
               To feght they shupe them hastely.
               In als good maner as they mought.
               Right as their foes before had thought.
               But the Lord Dowglas, that ay where,
               Set out watches héere and there.
               To wit of their enbushment,
               Then in greit hy soone is hee went,
               Before the battalls, and sturdelie,
               Hée bade ilk man turne them in hy.
               Right as they stood, them turned hee so
               Up to the Strength hée bade them go:
               So that no let bee therein made▪
               
               And they did as they bidding had.
               
                  Then turned they with méekle paine,
               While to their strength they came againe:
               And stood ready to giue battaile,
               If their foes would them assaile.
               When Englishmen hes séene them so,
               Toward their strength againe vp go.
               They cried hie, they flée away.
               Sir Iohn of Henault said, perfay
               Yone fléeing is right Tragedie,
               Their armed men behind I sée,
               And their Baners so that they there,
               Shall turne them, as they standing were:
               And bee arrayed for the fight.
               If ony would them preasse with might,
               They haue seene our enbushment,
               And againe to their strength are went.
               Yone folke are gouerned wittelie.
               For hée that leades them is worthie,
               For auise, wit, and wisedome,
               To gouerne the Empire of Rome.
               
               This spake that worthie Knight that day:
               And the enbushment, so that they
               Saw that they so discouered were
               Toward their Host againe they fare,
               And the battels of Englishmen,
               When they saw that they failȝied then
               Of their purpose, to their Harbrie
               They went, and ludged them in hy.
               On either halfe right so did they.
               They made no more debate that day.
               WHen they that day ouerdriuen had,
               Fires in greit fusion they made:
               Als soone as night fallen was,
               Then the good Lord of Dowglas,
               
               
                  That spied had a place there by▪
               
               That two myle hine where most trustly,
               The Scottishmen might harbrie ta:
               And defend them better alswa,
               Then els, into ony place them by,
               It was a Parke, that haillely
               Was 
                     •
                  nnuoned about with wall,
               It was neere full of trees all:
               But a greit Plaine into it was.
               Hidder thought the Lord Dowglas
               
               By night all their Host to bring:
               Therefore without more dwelling,
               They bet their fires, and made them yar
                     •
                  :
               And syne togidder foorth can fare.
               And to the Parke without tinsall
               They came, and harbred them all haill
               Upon the water, and als néere
               To it, as they before were.
               And on the morne when it was day,
               The English Host missed away
               The Scottishmen, and had ferlie,
               And gart Discurreours hastely
               Passe to sée where they were away,
               And by their fires perceiued they,
               That they in the Parke of Wardaill,
               
               Had gart harbry their Host all haill:
               Therefore their Host but more abade
               Busked, and euen anent them rade,
               On other side the Water of Weere,
               
               Gart stint their Pauiliouns all néere,
               As of before stinted were they.
               Eight dayes on this wise they lay:
               That Englishmen durst not assaile,
               The Scottishmen in plaine battaill.
               
                  For strength of eird that they had there,
               There was ilke day justing of wéere,
               And skirmishing full apartly.
               And men tane on either party,
               And they that tane were on ane day,
               On another changed were they.
               But other deedes were not done.
               That greitlie heere are for to mone,
               While it fell on the ninth day,
               The Lord Dowglas hes spied a way,
               How that hee might about them ride.
               And come on them at the Forrest side,
               And at Euen puruayed hée,
               And tooke with him a greit Menȝie:
               Fiue hundreth on Horse wight and hardy,
               And on the night all priuilie,
               Without noyse or din hee rade,
               While that hée néere enuironed had
               Their Host, and on the Forrest syde,
               Toward them sléelie can hee ryde
               And the maist part that with him were:
               Bare in their hands swords bare,
               And bade them hew Pauilions in twa,
               That they the Pauilions might ma,
               To fall on them that in them were:
               Then should the laue that Forrayours are
               Strike downe with speares sturdely,
               And when they heard his Horne in hy,
               To the Water held downe the way:
               When this was said (as I heard say)
               Toward their foes fast they ride,
               That on that side no Marches had.
               And as they were neere approaching,
               An Englishman that lay beeking
               
                  Him by a fire, said to his Feere:
               I wate not what may tide vs héere:
               But a great groouing me taes:
               I dreede me sore for blacke Dowglas,
               
               And he that heard him, said perfay,
               Thou salt haue cause, gif that I may.
               By that, with all his company,
               He rusted on them hardely,
               And proud Pauillions downe he bare,
               And with speares that sharply share,
               They sticked men despiteously.
               The noise soone raise, and als the skry:
               They stobbed, sticked, and they slew
               And mony Pauillions downe they threw:
               And felloun slaughter made they there.
               For they that lying naked were,
               Had no power defence to ma,
               And but pitie they can them sla,
               They gart them wit that great foly
               UUas, néere there foes for to ly
               But gif they straitly watched were.
               The Scottishmen were slaying there
               Their foes, 
                     •
                  n this wise, while the cry
               Was through the Oast all commonly,
               That Lords, and others were on stéere,
               And when the Dowglas wist they were
               Armed, then all commonly,
               He blew his horne then to rely
               His men, and bade them hold their way,
               Toward the Water, and so did they.
               And he abade hindmest to sée,
               Lest ony of his leaued sould be.
               And as he abade so howand,
               There came a Carle with Club in hand,
               
                  And so great routtes to him raught,
               That had not beene his méekle maught,
               And his right Soueraigne great manhead,
               Into that place he had bene dead.
               His men that to the UUater doun
               Were ridden right in a randoun,
               Missed their Lord, when they came there.
               They were dreading for him full saire.
               Ilkone at other speered tything,
               But yet of him they heard nothing.
               Then can they counsell togidder ta,
               That they to seeke him vp would ga:
               And as they were in that effray,
               A towting of his horne heard they.
               And they that haue it knowne swyth,
               Were of his comming wonder blyth:
               And spéered at him of his abade?
               And he told how a Carle him made.
               With his Club so felloun pay,
               That met him stoutlie on the way:
               That had not God helped him the maire,
               He had bene in great perill there.
               Thus gaite speaking they held their way,
               While to their Oast commen are they:
               That on foot armed on them bade,
               For to help gif they mister had,
               And assoone as the Lord Dowglas,
               
               Met with the Erle of Murray was,
               The Erle spéered at him tything,
               How he had farde in his outting:
               Sir (said he) we haue drawen blood:
               The Erle that was of Noble moode,
               Said, and we all had hidder gane,
               We had destroyed them ilkane,
               
                  It might haue fallen well (said he)
               But sikkerly anew were we,
               To put vs in yone auenture:
               For had they made discomfiture
               On vs▪ that yonder passed were,
               It might haue stonisht them that are here.
               The Erle said, sen it so is
               That we may not with ieopardies,
               Our felloun foes force assaile:
               We sall it doe in plaine battaile,
               The Lord Dowglas 
                  
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  d, by Sanct Bryde,
               
               It were great foly at this tide
               To vs, with sik an Oast to fight:
               That ilk day growes of more might,
               And vittaile hes at all plentie:
               And in the Countrie here are we,
               Where there may come to vs no succours
               Hard is to make vs here recourse,
               Nor we not forray may to get meat,
               Sik as we haue here, mon we eat.
               Doe we with our foes therefore,
               That are lying here vs before:
               As I heard tell this other yéere.
               How that a Foxe did with a fisher,
               How did the Foxe the Erle can say?
               He said, a Fisher whylum lay,
               Beside a Riuer fish to get,
               His nets then he had there set,
               A litle Ludge there had he made,
               And there within a bed he had,
               And eke a litle fire alswa
               And one doore was withoutten ma.
               One night his nettes for to sée,
               He raise, and well long dwelt he,
               
                  And when he had done his déede,
               Towards his Ludge againe he yéede,
               And with the light of the li
                     •
                  le fire,
               That in the Ludge was burning shyre,
               Into the Ludge a Foxe he saw,
               That fast in can a Salmond draw,
               Then to the doore he went in hy,
               And drew a sword deliuerly:
               And said, Traitour, thou mon here lout.
               The Foxe that was in full great dout:
               Looked about him hole to sée,
               Bot none ishe foorth there could get he:
               Bot where the man stood sturdely.
               A Mantle he perceiued him by,
               Lying vpon the bed, he saw,
               And with his téeth he can it draw
               Out ouer the fire, and when the man
               Saw his Mantle ly burning then,
               To rid it ran he hastely,
               The Foxe gat out then in great hy,
               And held his way his warrand till.
               The man thought him beguiled ill,
               That he his Salmond so hes tint,
               And also had his Mantle brint:
               And the Foxe harmelesse got away.
               This Example I may well say,
               By yone folke, and vs that are here.
               We are the Foxe, they are the Fisher,
               That stéekes before vs the way,
               They thinke we may not get away:
               But right where that they ly Parde,
               Yet as they thinke, it sall not be.
               For I haue gart spy vs a gaite,
               Suppose that it be somedeill wat,
               
                  That not a Page of ours shall tine,
               Our foes for this small tranoynting,
               Wéenes that wée shall pride vs sa,
               That wée plainlie on hand shall ta,
               To giue them open plaine battell.
               But at this time their thought shall faill:
               For wée the morne and all this day,
               Shall make als merie as wée may:
               And make vs bowne against the night,
               And then gar make our fires bright,
               And blaw our Hornes, and make fare,
               As all the World our owne it were,
               While that the night well fallen bée,
               And then with all our Harnesse wée
               Shall take our way homeward in hy:
               And altogidder hold sickerlie,
               While wée bée out of their danger,
               That thinkes vs now enclosed here:
               And wée shall bee at our owne will,
               And wée shall thinke them trumped ill,
               Fra they wit well wée bée away.
               To this haillely assented they,
               And made them good cheare all that night
               While on the morne that day was light.
               ¶ Upon the morne all priuilie,
               They turst Harnesse, and made ready,
               So that ere E
                     •
                  en all bowne were they.
               Their foes that against them lay,
               Gart haue their men that were there dead,
               In Carts to an hallowed Stéed.
               The Hosts both all that day were
               In peace till that the night was néere.
               The Scots Host that lying were
               Into the Parke made Feast and Fare.
               
                  And blew Hornes, and fires made,
               And gart them burne both bright & brade:
               So that their fires that night was maire,
               Than ony time before there were.
               And when the night was fallen well,
               With all their Harnesse euerilke deille,
               All priuilie they rade their way,
               Syne in a Mosse soone entred they:
               That was well two mile of bread,
               Out ouer the Mosse on foote they yéede:
               And in their hand their Horse led they,
               It was a full greit noysome way,
               But Flaikes in the Wood they made
               Of wands, and them with them had:
               And sykes therewith brigged they:
               And so had well their horse away.
               On sik wise, that all that there were,
               Come through the Mosse both haill & féere:
               And tint but litle of their geare,
               But if it were any olde Sowméere:
               That in the Mosse was left lyand,
               When all (as I haue borne on hand)
               Out ouer the Mosse that was so brade
               Were commen, greit gladnesse they had,
               And rade foorth homeward on their way.
               And on the morne when it was day.
               Ahe Englishmen saw the Harbrie,
               Where Scottishmen before can ly.
               All voide: and wondred greitlie then,
               And sent foorth sundrie of their men.
               While at the last their trace fand they,
               And syne when they were goneaway.
               That to a méekle Mosse them had,
               That was so hiddeous for to waid:
               
                  That auenture of them durst none:
               But to their Host againe is gone,
               And told how that they passed were.
               Where neuer man had passed aire.
               When Englishmen heard it was sa,
               In hy to counsell can they ta:
               That they would follow them no maire:
               Their Host right then they skailed there,
               And ilke man to his owne they rade,
               King Robert then that witting had,
               That his men so in the Parke lay,
               And what mischiefe then at were they:
               An Host assembled hee in h
                     ••
                  ,
               Ten thousand men wight and hardy:
               And sent them foorth with Erles two.
               Of Stratherne, and Angus were they,
               The Host in Wardaile to relieue:
               And if they might so well enchéeue:
               That samine night that meete might they,
               They thought their foes to assay,
               So fell it on that samine day,
               That the Mosse (as yee heard mee say)
               Was past: the Discurreours that there.
               Ryding before the Hosts were,
               On ather Host hes gotten a sight.
               And they that worthie were and wight,
               At their méeting juste
                     •
                   of wéere:
               Ensenȝies hie they cried their,
               And by their cry perceiued they:
               That they were friends, and no fay.
               Then might men sée them glad and blyth,
               And told it to their Lords swyth.
               The Hosts met both togidder syne,
               There was right homelie welcomming,
               
                  Made among greit Lords there:
               Of their méeting joyfull they were:
               The Erle Patricke, and his Menȝie.
               Had vittaile with greit plentie.
               And gaue it to them with glad cheare,
               Thus went they hameward all in feare:
               Destroying the Countrie in their way,
               In Scotland well commen are they.
               The Lords went then all to the King,
               That made them right faire welcoming,
               For of their comming right glad was hée:
               And that they 
                     •
                  ith sik propertie,
               Withoutten tinsall escaped had,
               They were blith, merie and glad.
            
            
               How King Robert assembled there, Three Hosts in England for to fare.
               SOone efter that, the Erle Thomas,
               
               From Wardall thus repaired was:
               The King assembled all his might.
               And left none that was worthie to fight.
               A greit Host there assembled hee,
               And dealt his Host in parts thrée.
               Ane part of Norame went but let.
               And there a stalward Siege they set:
               And held them right in at their dyke,
               Another part vnto Anuike
               
               Is went, and there a Siege set they,
               And while that there the Siege lay,
               At the Castell (as I said aire)
               Part of assaults made they there:
               And mony fairè Cheualrie
               Enchéeued was full doughtely,
               The King at the Castell lyand
               Left his folke (as I boore on hand)
               
                  And with the third Oast held his way,
               Fra Parke to Parke, him for to play:
               Hoouing, as all his owne it were.
               And to them that were with him there,
               The lands of Northumberland,
               
               That next to Scotland was lyand
               In fée, and heritage gaue hée:
               And they payed for the Seales fée.
               On this wise rade he destroyand,
               While that the King of England:
               Through counsell of the Mortymer,
               
               And his Mother, that at that time were,
               Leaders to him, that then young was,
               To King Robert, to treat of peace,
               Sent Messengers, and so sped they:
               That he assented on this way,
               Then a perpetuall peace to take.
               And they a marriage sould make,
               With King Roberts sonne Dauy,
               
               That fiue yéeres old was then surely,
               And of Dame Iane als of the towre,
               That syne was of great valour:
               Sister she was to the young King,
               That England had in gouerning,
               That had in eild then seuen yéere:
               And King Robert for skaithes feare,
               That he did to them of England,
               
               Had done in weere through stalward hand
               Twentie thousand pound sall pay,
               Of siluer, and gold, and good money.
               When men thir things spoken had,
               And with Seales, and othes made,
               Séesing of friendship and of peace,
               For ony cause it sould neuer cease,
               
                  The Marriage then gart ordaine they,
               To be in Barwike, and the day
               They haue set when that it sould be:
               Syne went ilk man to his Countrie,
               Thus made was peace, where wéere was aire:
               And syne the Sieges raised were.
               The King ordained for to pay,
               The Siluer, and against the day,
               He gart well for the Maugery,
               Ordaine, when his sonne Dauy,
               
               Sould wedded be: and the Erle Thomas,
               
               And als the good Lord of Dowglas,
               
               Into his stead syne ordainde he,
               Deuisers of the Feast to be:
               For his sicknesse tooke him so saire:
               That on no wise might he be there.
               His sicknesse came of a fundying,
               He had tane through his cold lying.
               When in his great mischiefe was he,
               He felt that hard perplexitie.
               At Cardrosse all that time he lay.
               And when néere commen was the day,
               That ordainde for the wedding was:
               The Erle▪ and the Lord Dowglas,
               
               To Barwik
                        •
                     
                   came with méekle fare,
               And brought young Dauid with them there,
               The Quéene, and with her the Mortimer,
               
               On the other partie commen were,
               With great efféere and Royaltie.
               The young Ladie of great beautie,
               Hidder came with rich afféere,
               The wedding haue they made right there:
               With great feast and solemnitie.
               There might men myrth, and gladnesse sée:
               
                  For full great Feast made they there,
               And Scottishmen, and English were,
               Togidder in ioy, and solace:
               No felloun speech betwixt them was,
               The Feast a well long time held they.
               And when they busked to fare away,
               The Queene hes her Doughter left there,
               With great riches, and Royall fare.
               I trow that long time no Lady
               To house was giuen so richly,
               The Erle, and the Lord Dowglas,
               
               Her in great daintie receiued hes,
               As it was worthy sickerly.
               For she was syne the best Ladie,
               And the fairest that men might sée.
               Efter this great solemnitie,
               When on both sides the lieue was tane,
               The Quéene to England home is gane:
               And had with her the Mortymer,
               
               The Erle, and they that leaued were,
               When a whyle they her conuoyed had,
               Toward Barwike againe they rade:
               And syne with all their company,
               Toward the King they went in hy:
               And had with them the young Dauy,
               
               And als Dame Iane the young Lady.
               The King made them faire welcomming,
               And efter but long delaying,
               He hes gart set a Parliament,
               And hidder with mony men is went:
               For he thought he would in his life,
               Crowne his young Sonne, and his Wife,
               At that Parliament, and so did he,
               With great fare, and solemnitie.
               
                  The King Dauid was crowned there,
               And all his Lords that there were:
               And also all the Commountie,
               Made him homage, and fewtie:
               And before that they crowned were,
               King Robert gart ordaine there:
               Gif it fell that his sonne Dauy,
               
               Died but Aire Male of his body:
               That Robert Stewart sould be
               King, and brooke the Royaltie,
               That his Doughter bare in Mariage.
               And that this Tailyie sould leelely
               Be holden, all the Lords sware,
               And with their Seales affirmed if there.
               And gif it hapned Robert the King,
               To passe to GOD while they were ying:
               The good Erle of Murray Sir Thomas,
               
               With the Lord also of Dowglas,
               
               While they had wit to stéere their Reigne,
               Sould haue them into gouerning.
               And then the Lordship they sould ta,
               Hereto their aithes can they ma:
               And all the Lords that were there,
               To tha twa Wardanes aithes sware,
               To obey them into Lawtie,
               Gif it hapned them UUardanes to be.
               WHen all this thing thus treated was,
               And affirmed with sickernes:
               The King to Cardros went in hy,
               And there him tooke so suddenly
               His sicknesse, and him trauelde sa:
               That he wist him behooued ma,
               Of all this life the common end.
               That is the death, when GOD will send.
               
                  Therefore his▪ Letters soone sent hée,
               For all the Lords of his Countrie:
               And they came as hee bidden had.
               His Testament then hes hee made,
               Before both Lords and Prelats,
               And to Religions of seir Estates,
               For haill of his soule gaue hee
               Siluer into greit quantitie.
               Hee ordainde for his soule right well:
               And when this was done ilk deill:
               Lords (hee said) so it is gone
               With mée, that there is nought but one,
               That is the death withoutten dreed,
               That ilke man shall thole on need,
               And I thanke God that hes mée sent
               Space in our life here to repent.
               For through mée and my wéering,
               Of blood there hes beene greit spilling:
               Where mony saklesse man was slaine,
               Therefore this sicknesse and this paine,
               I take in thanke for my trespasse,
               And mine heart firmlie set was,
               And when I was in prosperitie,
               From my sinnes to saued bée:
               To trauell vpon Gods faes,
               And sen hée mee now to him taes,
               That the body may on no wise,
               Performe that the heart can deuise,
               I would mine heart were hidder sent,
               Wherein conceiued was that intent,
               Therefore I pray you euerilkane,
               That yee among you all chuse ane,
               That bée honest wise and wight,
               And of his hands a Noble Knight,
               
                  On Gods foes mine Heart to beare,
               When soule and bodie disseuered are
               For I would it were worthelie
               Had there: sen God will nought, that I,
               Had power hidderward to goe:
               Then were their hearts all so woe,
               That none might hold them from gréeting
               Hee bade them leaue their sorrowing,
               For it (hée said) might not reliue,
               And might themselues greitlie grieue.
               Hee prayed them in hy to do
               The thing that they were charged to.
               Then went they foorth with drerie moode
               And among them that thought it good.
               That the worthie Lord Dowglas,
               
               Whom in both wit and worship was.
               Should take the trauell vpon hand,
               Héereto they were all accordand,
               And to the King they went in hy,
               And told him that they thought truely:
               That the doughtie Lord Dowglas,
               
               Best ordainde for that trauell was,
               And when the King heard, that they sa
               Had ordainde him his Heart to ta,
               That hee most yarned should it haue,
               (Hee said) so God himselfe mée the saue,
               I hold mee right well payed, that yee,
               Haue chosen him for his bountie,
               For Certes it hes béene my yarning.
               Ay sen I thought to doe this thing:
               That he mine heart should with him beare
               And sen yee all assented are
               It is the more liking to mée,
               Let see now what thereto sayes hée,
               
                  And when the Lord of Dowglas,
               
               Wist that the King thus spoken hes,
               Hée 
                     ••
                  me, and knéeled to the King,
               And on this wise made his talking,
               I thanke you greitly (Lord) said hee,
               Of mony larges and greit bountie,
               That yée haue done to mée feill syse,
               Sen first I came to your seruice:
               But ouer all thing, I make thanking,
               That yée so digne and worthie a thing,
               As your heart, that illuminate was,
               With all bountie and worthinesse.
               Will that I in my kéeping take.
               For you right blithly will I make
               This trauell, if God will mée giue
               Laiser, and space so long to liue.
               The King him thanked tenderlie,
               There was none in that companie,
               That wéeped not for greit pitie,
               That was greit sorrow for to sée.
            
            
               Here died King Robert, and was syne Solemnedly buried in Dumfermling,
               
               WHen the Lord Dowglas, in this wise,
               Hes vndertane so hie Emprise:
               As the good Kings Heart to beare,
               On Gods foes for to weare:
               Praised for his Emprise was hée.
               And the King
                     •
                   infirmitie▪
               
               Was more and more, while at the last,
               The dulefull death approached fast,
               And when hée had gart doe him to,
               All that good Christen men should do.
               
                  With true repentance then hée gaue
               The gaist whilke GOD to Heauen mot haue,
               Among his Chosen for to bee,
               In Ioye, solace, and Angels glée:
               And fra his folke wist hée was dead,
               The sorrow that raise from stead to stead,
               There might men sée men riue their haire,
               And comlie Knights gréete full saire,
               And their hands togidder driue,
               And as wood men their claithes ryue.
               Regarding his worthie bountie,
               His wit, his strength, and honestie:
               And ouer all the greit companie,
               That hee oft made them courteouslie.
               All our defence they said, alas,
               And hee that haill our comfort was,
               Our wit, our heale, our gouerning,
               Is brought alace here to ending.
               His worship, and his méekle might,
               Made all that were with him so wight.
               That they might neuer abased bée,
               While before them they might him sée.
               Alace, what shall wee doe or say?
               For in life while hee lasted ay
               With all our foes dred were wée:
               And into mony other Countrie.
               Of our Worship ran the Renowne:
               And that was all for his Persoun.
               With sike words they made their mane.
               And sickerlie wonder was nane:
               For better Gouernour than hée,
               Might in no Countrie founden bee:
               I hope that none that is on life.
               The lament, and sorrow can descriue,
               
                  That tha folke for their Lord made.
               And when that they long sorrowed had,
               And he bowelled was cleanely,
               And balmed syne full richly,
               The worthy Lord, the good Dowglas,
               
               His Heart (as it forespoken was)
               Hes receiued in great dayntie,
               UUith great faire and Solemnitie,
               They haue him had to Dunfermelyne,
               
               And him solemnedly eirded syne.
               And in a faire Tombe in the Queire,
               Bishops and Prelats they there were
               Assolyied him when the Seruice
               Was done, as they could best deuise:
               And syne vpon the other day,
               Sorie, and wa they went away.
            
            
               Here bouned the Lord Dowglas forwart, To the haly Land with the Bruces Heart.
               WHen that the good King buried was,
               The Erle of Murray Sir Thomas,
               
               Tooke all the land in gouerning,
               And all obeyed to his bidding,
               And the good Lord of Dowglas syne,
               Gart make a Case of gold right fyne;
               Enamalled through subtiltie.
               Therein the Kings heart put he,
               And ay about his halse it bare,
               And fast he bouned him for to fare.
               His Testament deuised he,
               And ordained his lands sould be
               Gouerned, while his gaine-comming,
               By friends, and all other thing,
               
                  That to him pertained ony wise,
               With sik foresight as men could deuise,
               Ere his foorth passing ordained he,
               That nothing might amended be,
               And when that he his lieue hes tane,
               To shippe at Barwike is he gane:
               And with him a Noble company,
               Of Knights, and of Squyery,
               He put him in hy to the Sea,
               A long way fordward sailed he,
               Betwixt Cornewall, and Bartanyie,
               
               He sailed, and left the ground of Spainyie,
               
               On North-halfe him, and held their way,
               While to Massillie ground came they.
               But greatly was his men, and he,
               Trauelled with tempests on the Sea:
               Bot though they greatly grieued were,
               Haill and feere they commen are,
               And landed at the great Sibille,
               
               And efter it a litle whyle,
               Their horse to land they drew ilkane,
               And in the toun hes harbery tane:
               And him conteened right richly:
               For he had a faire company,
               And gold enough for to dispend.
               The King Alphous efter him send,
               And him right well receiued he,
               And proffered him in great plentie,
               Gold and siluer, horse and arming:
               Bot he thereof would take nothing:
               For he said, he tooke that veyage,
               To passe into his pilgrimage,
               On Gods foes, that his trauell
               Might efter to his Saull auaile.
               
                  And sen he wist that he had wéere
               With Saracens that dwelled there,
               To help him was his will hailly.
               The King him thanked courteously,
               And betaught him good men that were
               Well knowne with the lands wéere:
               And the maner of the land alswa,
               Syne to his Innes can he ga.
               And well good Soiourne there he made,
               And méekle treating als he had.
               Knights that came of far Countrie,
               Came in great routtes him to sée,
               And honoured him full gretumly:
               And ouer all men most Souerainely,
               The English Knights that were there,
               Him honoured, and great company bare:
               Among them all was one strong Knight,
               That was holden so wonder wight,
               That for one of the best was he,
               Praised of all Christaintie.
               So fast to Heauen was all his face,
               That it well néere all wounded was.
               Ere he the Lord Dowglas had séene,
               He weind his face had all wounded bene:
               But neuer a hurt in it had he.
               When he vnwounded can it sée,
               He said, that he had great ferly,
               That sik a Knight and so worthy,
               And praised of so great bountie,
               Might in his face vnwounded be.
               And méekely thereto answered he,
               And said, GOD lent me hands to beare,
               Wherewith I might my head wéere,
               Thus made he courteous answering,
               
                  With a right hie vnderstanding:
               That for default of Fence it was,
               That so euill hewen was his face.
               The good Knights that then were by,
               Praised his answere gretumly:
               For it was made with small speaking,
               And had right hie vnderstanding.
            
            
               The iudging of the Lord Dowglas, That in his time sa worthie was.
               VPon this maner still they lay,
               While through the Countrie they heard say,
               That the King of Palmeryn,
               
               UUith mony a moody Saracene.
               
               UUas entred in the land of Spaine:
               All haill the Countrie to demaine.
               The King of Spaine on the other party,
               Gaddered his Oast deliuerly,
               And delt them into battels thrée.
               And to the Lord Dowglas gaue he,
               The Uangard for to lead and stéere,
               And all the strangers that with him were:
               And the great Maister of Sanct Iake,
               
               The other battell gart he take.
               The Réeregard made himselfe there,
               And thus deuised, foorth they fare,
               To méete their foes that in battaile
               Arrayed was, ready to assaile,
               And came against them full sturdely.
               The Dowglas then that was worthy,
               UUhen he to them of his leading,
               Had made a faire admonishing,
               To doe well, and no dead to dréede,
               For Heauens blisse sould be their meede,
               
                  If that they died in Gods seruice,
               Then as good wéerryours, and wise.
               With them stoutlie assembled hée.
               There men might felloun feghting sée,
               For all they were wight and hardie,
               That were on the Christian partie.
               But ere they joyned in battell.
               What the Dowglas did, I shall you tell.
               ¶ The Bruces Heart that on his brest
               Was hinging, in the field hée kest,
               Upon a stone-cast, and well more before
               And said, Now passe thou foorth before,
               As thou was wont in field to bee,
               And I shall follow, or else die:
               And so hee did withoutten ho,
               Hée faught euen while hee came it to,
               And tooke it vp in greit
                     •
                   daintie,
               And euer in field this vsed hée,
               So fast they faught with all their maine:
               That of their seruants mony were 
                     •
                  laine,
               The whilke with mony 
                     •
                  ell fusio
                     •
                  n,
               Mony a Christian dang they downe,
               But at the last the Lord Dowglas,
               
               And the Christians that with him was,
               Preassed vpon the Saracenes sa,
               That they haillie the flight can ta.
               And they chased with all their maine,
               And mony in the chase was slaine.
               So farre chased the Lord Dowglas,
               
               With few folkes that hée passed was,
               Foorth fare from them that chased then,
               Hee had not with him, but skant ten,
               Of all men that were with him there,
               When hee saw all repared were:
               
                  Toward his Hust syne turned hée.
               And as hée turned, can well sée,
               That all the Chaissers turned againe:
               And they réelled with méekle paine.
               And as the good Lord of Dowglas.
               
               (As I said aire) repairing was,
               So saw hée right before him néere,
               Where that Sir William de Sincleere,
               
               With a greit rout inuironed was.
               Hée was annoyed, and said, alas,
               Yone worthie Knight will soone bee dead,
               But he haue helpe through our manhead,
               Let vs then helpe him now in hy,
               Sen that wee are so néere him by,
               And I wate well our intent is,
               To liue and die in Gods seruice.
               His will in all thing doe shall wee.
               There shall no perill eschewed bée,
               While hée bee put out of yone paine
               Or then wée shall bée with him slaine.
               With that with speares right spéedely,
               They strake the Horse in full greit hy
                     •
                  
               
               Among the Saracenes they rade,
               And roome about them haue they made.
               They dang on fast with all their might,
               And feill of them to death were dight.
               Greiter defence made neuer so whéene,
               Against so feill, it was right seene,
               While the
                     •
                   might last to giue battaile,
               There might no worship there auaile,
               That time, for slaine was ilkane there:
               The Saracenes so mony were,
               That they were twentie large for ane.
               The good Lord Dowglas there was slaine,
               
                  And Sir William Sinclare alswa:
               And other worthie Knights twa,
               Sir Robert Logane, heght the ane,
               And the other Walter Logane.
               
               Wherefore our Lord with méekle might,
               Their soules haue to the Heauens hight.
               THe good Lord Dowglas thus was dead,
               And the Saracenes on that stead,
               Abade no more, but held their way,
               Their Knights dead there soone liue they,
               Some of the good Lord Dowglas men,
               That their Lord dead had founden then,
               Yéed néere all wood for dule and woe,
               Long for him they sorrowed so,
               And syne with greit dule home him bare,
               And the Kings Heart haue they found there.
               And that home with them haue they tane,
               And are toward their Innes gane,
               With gréeting and with euill cheare,
               That sorrow and griefe it was to heare:
               And of Keith good Sir Williame,
               
               That all that day had beene at hame:
               For at so greit disease was hée,
               That hee came not to that Iournie,
               For his arme was broken in twa,
               When hée tha folkes sik dule saw ma,
               Hee asked what it was in hy,
               And they told him all openly,
               How that their doughtie Lord was slaine,
               With Saracenes that had turned againe,
               And when hée wist that it was so,
               Attour all other hée was most woe:
               And made a wonder euill cheare,
               That all wondred that by him were.
               
                  But to tell of their sorrowing,
               Annoyes, and helpes but litle thing,
               Men might well wit thogh none them told
               What dule and sorrow men make wold,
               For to tine sike a Lord as hée
               Was vnto them of his Menȝie,
               For hée was swéete and debonaire,
               And well could treat his friendes faire,
               And his foes right fellounlie,
               Astonish through his greit Cheualrie:
               For of full litle feare was hée:
               But ouer all thing hee loued Lawtie:
               At treasoun groowed so greitly,
               That no traitour might bee him by,
               But hée should wit that hée should bee
               Well punisht for his traitourie▪
               
               I trow the Lord Fabricius,
               
               That from Rome to wéerray Pirrhus,
               
               Was sent with a greit Menyie,
               Hated treasoun no lesse than hée.
               The whilke when that Pirrhus had
               On him, and on his Menȝie made,
               An outragious discomfiture,
               When hée escaped through auenture
               And mony of his men were slaine:
               And hée had gaddered his Host againe,
               A greit master of Medicine,
               That Pirrhus had in gouerning,
               Profered vnto Fabritius,
               
               In treasoun for to slay Pirrhus,
               
               For in his first potatioun,
               Hée should giue him deadly poysoun,
               
                  Fabricius that wonder had,
               That hée sik proffer to him made:
               
                  Said, Certes, Rome is méekle of might,
               Through strength of armes for to fight,
               To vanquish well their foes though they
               Consent to Treasoun by no way:
               And for thou would doe that Treasoun,
               Thou salt go fetch the warisoun,
               Euen at Pirrhus, and let him do
               UUhat euer him lies in heart thereto.
               Then to Pirrhus he sent in hy
               This Maister, and gart him openly,
               From end to end, tell all his tale.
               UUhen Pirrhus had it heard all haill:
               He said, was neuer man that sa,
               For Lawtie bure him to his fa:
               As here Fabricius beares to me.
               It is als ill to gar him be
               Turned fra way of righteousnesse,
               Or to consent to wickednesse,
               As at midday to turne againe
               The sunne, that rinnes his course all plaine
               Thus said he of Fabricius,
               
               That syne vanquisht this same Pirrhus,
               
               In plaine battell through hard fighting:
               His honest lawtie gart me bring
               In this Example now, for he
               Had Soueraigne praise of true Lawtie:
               And right so had the Lord Dowglas,
               
               That honest, léele, and worthy was,
               That was dead, as before said we.
               Men méened him in ilk Countrie:
               When his men had made mourning,
               They bowelled him but delaying,
               And gart séeth him, that might be tane
               The flesh all quite euen fra the bane.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  The Corps there in a holy place,
               Eirded with great worship was.
               The bones haue they with them tane,
               And syne are to their shipps gane.
               When they were leaued of the King,
               That dule had of their seuering,
               To Sea they went, good wind they had,
               Their course to England haue they made,
               And there safely arriued they.
               Syne toward Scotland held their way,
               And there they are commen in great hy,
               And the bones right honourably,
               Into the Kirk of Dowglas there
               Eirded, with dule and méekle care.
               Sir Archibald his sonne gart syne,
               Of Allabast both faire and fine,
               Ordaine a Tombe full richly:
               As it efféered to so worthy.
            
            
               The Erle of Murray died here, Through Poysoun giuen by a false Frere.
               WHen that on this wise Sir Williame
               
               Of Keith, had brought the bones hame,
               And the good Kings Heart alswa,
               And had gart men richly ma,
               With saire afféere, a Sepulture:
               The Erle of Murray that the cure
               That time of Scotland had ha
                     •
                  lly,
               With great worship hes gart bury
               The Kings Heart in the Abbay,
               Of Melros, where men do pray ay,
               That he, and his haue Paradise.
               UUhen this was done, as I deuise,
               
                  The good Erle gouerned all the land,
               And held the poore well to warrand,
               The Lawes so well maintained he,
               And held in peace so the Countrie,
               That it was neuer led ere his day
               So well, as I heard old men say▪
               
               Bot syne alas poysoned was ho,
               By a false Monk full traiterously.
               Thir Lords died vpon this wise,
               He that Lord of all thing is,
               Up to his ioyfull blisse them bring,
               And grant vs grace, that their ofspring
               Lead well the land: and intentife
               Be, for to follow in all their life:
               Their Noble Elders great bountie.
               The onefald GOD in Trinitie,
               May bring vs vp to Heauens blisse,
               Where alway ioy and resting is. AMEN.
               
            
         
         
            Here endes the Booke of the Noble King,
            That euer in Scotland yet did ring,
            Called King Robert the Bruce,
            
            That was maist worthie of all ruce,
            And of the Noble and good Lord Dowglas,
            And mony ma that with him was.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A TABLE.
            
               OF the Contention that araise after the death of King Alexander, who should succede to the Crowne
               Fol. 2
               How by the consent of all the Estates, King Edward of England was elected as a friendly Compositour of this contention.
               3
               How King Edward after the attempting the mindes of the Bruce & the Ballioll, declared the Ballioll King.
               6
               Of the pleasures and commodities of Libertie, and the heauinesse and hurtes of seruitude of strangers.
               8
               How sir William Dowglas was put in prison, and his lands giuen to the Clifford: and of his sonne Iames Dowglas.
               9
               How the said Iames past in France, and returning againe in Scotland after his fathers death, dwelt with the Bishop of Sainctandros.
               12
               Of the commoning and band made betwixt the Bruce, and Cumming, and how the cumming shew the Indentour to King Edward
               16
               How Bruce was examined before the Parliament, and howe hee escaped, and slewe the cumming in the Kirke of Dumfreis.
               18
               Of the meeting of sir Iames Dowglas with Robert Bruce and of his coronation.
               23
               How King Robert came to Pearth, and sought battell of sir Aymer Wallance.
               26
               The Iudging of King Robert in the Parke of Methwen.
               29
               Of the battell of Methwen, and discomfiture of King Robert, where mony Noble men were tane.
               31
               Of the distresse that King Robert and his folks tholled in the Mountaines
               35
               How King Robert was discomfist by Iohn of Lorne.
               38
               
                  Howe King Robert slew the three men that swore his death.
               Fol. 41
               How the Queene and the Erle of Athole departed fra the King to Kildromy.
               48
               How the King past to Lochlowmound.
               50
               Of the meeting of the Erle of Lennox with the King.
               52
               How the King past to the sea.
               55
               How the Erle of Lennox was chaist on the sea.
               56
               How the King was receiued of Angus of the Iles, and was gent
                     •
                  y entreated of him,
               58
               How the Queene and her other Ladies were tane and prisoned, and her men slaine.
               61
               Of the siege of Kildromie, and how it was betraised to the Englishmen.
               62
               Of the death of King Edward of England.
               66
               The illusion of the Deuill made to the mother of Ferrand Erle of Flanders, and of the successe of the battell that followed thereafter.
               68
               How Iames of Dowglas past in Arrane, and gart vittall and armour there.
               71
               How the King sent a spy in Carrik to spy wha were his friends there.
               76
               Of the fire the King saw burning
               79
               Of the Kings hanselling at his first arriuing in Carrik.
               83
               How Iames of Dowglas wan his Castell of Dowglas.
               97
               How a man of Carrik with twa sonnes, tooke in hand to slay the King Robert.
               97
               How King Robert slew the three Traitours
               101
               How King Robert discomfist twa hundreth Gallowaymen, and slew fifteene of them.
               105
               Howe Tydeus slewe fourtie nine men, and their Captaine.
               108
               How Iames of Dowglas slew Thriswall, the Captaine of Dowglas,
               114
               Howe sir Aymer and Iohn of Lorne searched the King with a sleuthhound.
               118
               How King Robert slew ye 
                  
                     •
                  . men that followed him.
               121
               Howe the King was sairlie sought by the sleuthhound▪
                  
and how the sleuthhound was slaine.
               123
               How the three Thieues came to the King, and fainyied that they would bee his men.
               126
               How the Kings Foster-brother was slaine, and himselfe in great danger, and how hee slew the three Thieues.
               128
               How the King after his great troubles, effrayed the English companie.
               133
               How the King & his hounds slew ye 3 men in ye wood.
               136
               How the King discomfist sir Aymer in Glentroll.
               140
               How sir Iames Dowglas discomfist sir Philip Mowbray with his companie at Ederfurd.
               143
               How the King discomfist sir Aymer, and his men vnder Lowdoun hill.
               147
               How sir Iames Dowglas slew sir Iohn Webtoun and w
                     •
                   the Castell of Dowglas, and syne cast it downe.
               156
               How the King past ouer the Month, and fell sick by the way.
               159
               Howe the Kings men defended him during the time of his sicknesse.
               162
               How ye King discōfist the Erle of Buchane at Enrowry
               165
               Of the heirship of Buchane, and howe the Castle of Forfare was tane.
               168
               How the King wan sainct Iohnstoun, and cast downe all the Tower thereof.
               169
               Of the French Knight that was with King Robert at the winning of sainct Iohnstoun.
               171
               How sir Edward Bruce discomfist sir Aymer, and sir Ingrame Vmfrauile at the Water of Cree.
               174
               How sir Edward Bruce with fiftie in company, discomfist sir Aymer with fifteene hundreth.
               176
               Howe sir Iames Dowglas tooke Thomas Randell, and Alexander Stewart.
               180
               How ye King discomfist Iohn of Lornes mē at Cre
                     •
                  labē
               
               182
               Howe William Binny wanne the Peill of Linlithgowe▪ through the bringing in of hay to it.
               182
               How Thomas Randell was recounselled with the King, and was made Erle of Murray.
               190
               How Thomas Randel sieged the Castel of Edinburgh.
               191
               How Sir Iames Dowglas by the conuoy of Sym of Lydhouse, wan the Castell of Roxburgh.
               193
               
                  Howe Erle Thomas Randell wanne the Castell of Edinburgh, by the conuoying of William Frances.
               198
               Howe sir Edward Bruce wanne the Peill of Ruglyn, and syne wanne Dundie.
               206
               Howe sir Edward Bruce sieged Sttiuiling, and of the 
                     •
                  rewes tane thereat.
               207
               How King Edward gaddered a puissant armie to relieue St
                     •
                  iuiling.
               208
               Howe King Edward diuided his battels, and tooke harbry in Edinburgh,
               213
               How King Robert gaddered his folkes, and ordered his battels, to resist king Edward.
               216
               Howe king Robert gart make deepe pots in the field, & ouercouered them with e
                     •
                  rd.
               218
               How king Robert disseuered his vitaillers, and carriage men fra his campe, and set Erle Thomas Randell to keep the gaite beside the Kirke.
               220
               How the Erle of Murray with an hundreth in company, discomfist eight hundreth Englishmen.
               224
               How king Robert slew sir Henrie Bowme in the face of 
                     •
                  aith the Oasts.
               228
               Of the comfort giuen by king Robert to his folks.
               233
               Of the battell of Bannocburne.
               242
               How the Scottish vittallers and carriage men, made them baners of s
                     •
                  eetes, and presented thēselues to the field.
               253
               The valiantnes and death of sir Geiles de Argentie.
               255
               How the Erle of Herfurd after the battell was receiued in Bothwell.
               258
               Howe the king gart honourably bury the Erle of Glocester, and the Castell of Striuiling was randered, and sir Philip Mowbray became the kings man.
               262
               Howe sir Iames Dowglas chased king Edward to Dum
                  
                     •
                  ar, and his company to Barwike.
               263
               How the Castell of Bothwell, & the Erle of Herfurd were randred to sir Edward Bruce, & the Erle interchanged for the Queene, and her Daughter that were prisoners.
               267
               How king Robert rade in England, and brunt Northumberland.
               268
               Howe sir Edward Bruce with a great companie past in 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               269
               
                  Of the first three battels sir Edward wan in Ireland.
               271
               How the Irishmen treasonably leet our a Lo
                     •
                  h on sir Edward and his company.
               279
               Howe Erle Thomas Randell conqueissed the Irishmens vittailes,
               287
               How Erle Thomas chased the Scurreours that came fra Cogneres.
               284
               Of the fourth battell sir Edward wan in Ireland.
               286
               Howe king Robert danted the Iles, and tooke Iohn of Lorne.
               296
               Howe sir Iames Dowglas reskewed the Pray tane by Englishmen, and slewe sir Edmund Calhow Capitane of Barwike.
               296
               How sir Iames Dowglas slew the Lord Newell.
               299
               Howe king Robert past in Ireland to support his brother.
               303
               How king Robert faught in Ireland against a great number of men, and discomfist them.
               305
               How sir Iames Dowglas in absenee of king Robert with a few company slew the Erle of Richmond.
               313
               How sir Iames Dowglas slew Clerke Eleis and his company.
               317
               How sir Iames Dowglas in absence of King Robert, defended valiantly the Countrie.
               318
               Howe the Bishop of Dunkeld, and the Erle of Fife discomfist the Englishmen beside Dumfermeling.
               320
               Of the returning of king Robert from Ireland.
               323
               How Barwik was win by the moyen of Sim of Spaldin.
               327
               Howe the King receiued the Castell of Barwike, and made Walter Stewart Capitane thereof.
               330
               How the King of England assembled his power to siege Barwike.
               333
               Of the siege of Barwike.
               345
               How Erle Thomas Randell and sir Iames Dowglas past and burnt in England to raise the siege from Barwike.
               340
               Of the second assault of Barwike.
               343
               How the siege of Barwike was skailled, and the towne relieued.
               350
               Of the death of sir Edward in Ireland, and mony noble men with him.
               356
               How King Edward againe inuaded Scotland, and how

sundrie of his men were slaine by sir Iames Dowglas.
               363
               How Englishmen were discomfist at Byland.
               366
               Of the conspiracie deuised against King Robert.
               370
               Of the Trewes tane betwixt Scotland and England, and of the death of walter Stewart.
               376
               How the Erle of Murray, and sir Iames Dowglas brunt in England till they came to Wardall Parke, and of the death of King Edward of Carnauer, and of his sonne Edward of Windesore.
               377
               How Sir Iames Dowglas entred in the English Host, and slew mony in their Tents.
               386
               Howe the Scottish Host, by the conuoy of Sir Iames Dowglas returned in Scotland without battell.
               391
               How King Robert to relieue his 
                     •
                  olkes, assembled his Host, and entred into England in three parts.
               394
               Of the peace tane, and of the Mariage of Edwards sister, with Dauid King Roberts sonne.
               395
               How King Robert tooke sicknesse in Cardrosse, & sent for his Lords.
               398
               How the Lord Dowglas was chosen to passe to the haly Land, with the Bruces Heart, and of the death of King Robert, and how hee was buried in Dumfermling.
               401
               How the Lord Dowglas past to the haly Land with the Kings heart.
               403
               Of the great prowesse and valliantnesse done by the Lord Dowglas in Spaine.
               406
               How the Lord Dowglas in relieuing Sir William Sinclar, were both slaine by 
                     •
                  uge multitude of Saracenes.
               408
               Of the noble vertues of the Lord Dowglas, and a comparison betwixt him and the Romane Fabricius.
               410
               Howe Sir William Keith brought the Lord Dowglas banes in Scotland, and buried them in the Kirke of Dowglas,
               412
               Of the death of sir Thomas Randell Gouernour of Scotland by poyson,
               Fol, eodem.
            
            FINIS TABVLAE.
            
         
      
   