
      
         
            
            
            CERTEINE
comfortable Expositions
of the constant Martyr
of Christ, M. Iohn Hooper,
Bishop of Glocester and Worcester,
written in the time of his tribulation and
imprisonment, vpon the XXIII. LXII.
LXXIII. and LXXVII. Psalmes
of the Prophet Dauid. Newly recognised, and neuer
before published.
            
               MATTH. 24. 13. ¶Who so continueth to the end
shall be saued.
            AT LONDON,
Printed by Henrie Middleton
ANNO 1580.
         
         
            
            
            TO ALL THE FAITHfull
flocke of Christ, grace and
peace from God the Creatour, Christ the
Redeemer, and the holy Ghost the
comforter.
            
               MAnie are the monuments
(beloued in the
bowels of Christ Iesus)
and volumes of
the faithfull left as legacies
to the Church
of Christ: which as
they are ye true riches
(for they are spirituall:)
so ought they to
be reuerenced, not onely with outward seruice of
body, but also with inward submission of soule.
Among which monumentes, being the treasure
of the Church, and such iewels in deede as the
price of them is inualuable: this excellent worke,
(though wanting bignesse, yet ful of brightnesse)
of that most learned, godlie, faithfull, zelous, constant,
and in all points praise worthie Protestant,
Maister Iohn Hooper, Bishop of Glocester and
worcester, challengeth no small title of dignitie.

For, if the wordes of our Sauiour be true, (which
to improue what incestuous mouth, without
horrible blasphemie, a trespasse vnpardonable,
dare presume, seeing he is the verie substance of
truth it selfe?)Constancie & continuance required in the professours of the trueth. that he is a true disciple of Christ,
which continueth to the end: then is it the dutie
of vs all, except we hide our profession vnder the
hiue of hypocrisie: not onely by looking at the
life of such a loadesman, to reforme our deformities:
but also, by tracing ouer and through the
testimonies of the trueth (such godlie bookes I
meane as are left in writing to the worlde, as vndoubted
assurances of an vnspotted conscience) to
thanke God for so singular an instrument of his
Gospell: & to beseech him to worke in vs the like
loue his law, that we may be partakers of such
glorie, as (no doubt) this notable Martyr of God
doth immortally enioy. Of whom breefly to insert
and say somewhat (because the brightnesse of
such a glittering starre, cannot bee ouercast with
the cloudes of obscuritie and darkenesse) shall be
a meanes to make the worke more commendable,
although (in very deed) precious things haue
their proper price, and therefore consequently wil
haue their deserued praise.An abridgment of Bishoppe Hoopers life, and death, trulie gathered in circūstances. And first to touch his
blessed beginning, blessed (I say) euen frō aboue
with the dewe of Gods grace, his education in
Oxford, his prosperous proceeding in the knowledge
of Diuinitie, his forsaking not onely of the
Vniuersitie, but also his common Countrie, his
flight into Germanie, his returne into Englande,

his painefulnesse in preaching, his fame and credit
among the people, his obteined fauour with
the Kings maiestie,Bishop Hooper in estimation with King Edward ye sixt. his aduauncemēt to more thā
a Bishoplike dignitie, his dispensatiō for his ceremonious
consecration, his secret enimies the supporters
of papistrie, his supplantation by their priuie
cōspiraces, his faithfull continuance notwithstanding
in sowing sincere doctrine, his painfulnesse
in hearing publike controuersies, his visiting
of scholes and founteines of learning, his maintaining
of godlie discipline, his want of parcialitie
in iudgement betwixt person and person, his
Bishoplike behauiour abrode in his Dioces, his fatherly
affection at home towardes his house and
familie, &c. do warrant him the name of a Saint
vpō earth: & surely God hath registred him in the
Kalendar of his chosen seruāts in heauen. Againe
the falling away of his fauourers when religion
languished, the malicious practises of his aduersaries
threatening his destructiō, the bloudthirstie
broching of his persecution, his appearing before
the Queene and her Councell, the tyrannicall cō
               tumelies
of his Archenimie,Stephen Gardiner Bishop of Winchester, Bishop Hoopers professed enimie. his spitefull accusation,
his milde purgation, his vndeserued depriuation,
his cruell imprisonment, his harde intertainment,
his lamentable lodging, his succourles sicknesse,
his pitifull complaintes, his restlesse tribulations,
his streight examinations, his apologeticall
aduouchments, the cōmitting of him to the
Fleete, the tossing of him from the Fleete to the
Counter in Southwarke, from the Counter in

Southwarke to the Clinke, from the Clinke to
Newgate, his vniust degradation, his cruell condemnation,
and his lamentable execution, &c. all
these pageantes considered, as they were done,
woulde make a flintie heart to mealt, and stonie
eyes to sweate, not onely water, but also bloude:
and to be short, the whole bodie, though all the
lims thereof were as strong as steele, euen for pities
sake to tremble. This comming within the
compasse of my poore consideration,If Christe the heade haue bene persecuted euen to the death, the members must needes bee subiect to affliction. I remembred
that Christ Iesus, the onely begotten sonne
of the almightie & eternal God, had passed the like
yea and worse perilles: as by the historie of his
death and passion may appeare: that the Protomartyr,
S. Steeuen had his tormenters, S. Paule
the Apostle his persecuters, and other of Christes
disciples their afflicters: then thought I, that these
sanctified vessels made their vocation honourable,
euen by their deathes, which were opprobrious:
and therefore, howe can it bee, but that this
our Martyr, worthie Bishop Hooper, offering
vp his body a burnt sacrifice, liuely, reasonable, &
acceptable vnto God, shoulde giue good credit to
his doctrine, assure his profession, affirme his vocation,
& liue in euerlasting memorie, by the dispersion
of his bookes, though his fauour be forgotten,
and his body consumed? Of such a souldier,
so valiantly fighting vnder the ensigne of his
Capteine, I cannot say sufficient. Of this I am resolued,
that although his earthly tabernacle bee
destroyed:2. Cor. 5. yet hath hee a building giuen him of

God, euen an house not made with handes, but
eternall in the heauens, where God graunt vs all
to reigne,The laying down of his life for the Gospels sake, deserueth be liefe and reuerence. as ioynt heires with Christ his annointed.
To proceede and approch neerer to our purpose
(for the premisses are effectuall enough, to
breed beleefe, and to kindle reuerence, in the heart
of any true Christian, towardes this our excellent
Martyr, replenished with the abundance of Gods
holy spirit) I commende vnto thy minde (good
reader,) a good work of this so good a mā: namely,
Certaine expositions vpon the 23. 62. 72. and 77. Psalmes
of the Prophet Dauid, of the which the three
last (being gathered together by a godly professor
of the trueth M. Henrie Bull) were neuer before
printed. Their beginnings are vsually read in this
maner. 23. The Lord feedeth me, & I shal lack nothing 62.
My soule truly waiteth vpon God. 72. Truly God is louing
vnto Israel, euen vnto such as are of a cleane hart. 77. I wil
crie vnto God with my voice, euē to God will I crie with my
voice, & he shall hearken vnto me. The expositions of
which psalmes to be pithie, & profitable, this may
be a substantial proofe: because they were written
in the time of his trouble, whē (no doubt) he was
talking in spirit with God: & being so occupied,
his exercises could not but be heuenly, & therfore
effectuall, fruitfull, and comfortable. Come therefore
yu sorrowing soule, which gronest for reliefe
to this spring. Come hither, & heare what a good
man wrote ex carcere & vinculis, out of bonds and
imprisonment, for thy consolation. Heare him
once, heare him twise, heare him often, for thou

for thou canst not heare him enough. He giueth
thee a pleasaunt Pomander, vouchsafe it the
smelling: he soundeth swete musicke, it deserueth
good dansing: he bidds thee to a sumptuous banquet,
bee not deintie in feeding: he presenteth vnto
thee a pretious diamond, it is worth the taking:
Oh giue God thanks for all, & glorifie the Lords
name, whome it hath pleased to plant in his vineyeard
so fruitefull a vine, which beareth grapes
Gods plentie, of whose iuice ô Christ vouchsafe
vs to tast, that our vessels beeing seasoned with
true sanctification, they may be made sweete to
receiue and preserue the water of the riuer of life,
flowing from the liuely rocke Christ Iesus: to
whom, with the Father, and the Holy ghost,
one Trinitie in Vnitie, be all laud
and praise euerlasting,
Amen.
            
               Thine in Christ,
A. F.
            
         
      
      
         
            
CERTEINE EXPOsitions
of the constant Martyr
of Christ, Maister IOHN HOOPER, somtime
Bishop of Gloucester and Worcester, vpon
the 23. the 62. the 72. and the 77. Psalmes
of the Prophet DAVID.
         
            vpon the xxiij. Psalme.
            
               
               THE ARGVMENT OR MATTER,
which the Prophete chiefly intreateth
of in this Psalme.
               IT should seeme, by the meruellous and wonderfull description
and setting foorth of almightie God, by the Prophete
and King DAVID in this Psalme, that he was inflamed with
the holy Ghost, being deliuered from all his enemies, to declare
vnto all the world howe faithfull and mightie a defender and
keeper God is, of as many as put their trust in him. He was in
great daunger, and specially in the warres that he made against
the AMMONITES, the euent and successe whereof it seemeth
by the 20. Psalme his subiectes greatly feared: wherefore they
commended their king (as true subiectes alwayes vse) with earnest
prayer vnto God. And that battell and many other daungers
more ended (wherein the godly king found alwayes
the protection and defence of the heauenly father ready and at
hand) nowe being at rest, he would haue this mercifull defence
of GOD knowne to all others, that as he, in all his aduersities,
put his trust in the Lorde, and had the ouerhand of all his enimies:
euen so by his example, all other men should learne to
doe the same, and assure them selues to finde (as he found) the
Lorde of heauen to be the succour and defence of the troubled,
and their keeper from all euill.
               And bicause the hearers and readers of this most diuine &
godly Hymne, should the better vnderstand the same, and the
sooner take credite thereof in the heart, he calleth the heauenly
father (the God of all consolation) in this Psalme, a shepheard
or heardman feeding his flocke: and the people (with him selfe)
he calleth sheepe pastured and fed by the shepheard. And by
these two meanes, as by a most conuenient Allegorie or Translation
meete for the purpose, from the office of a shepheard, &
the nature of sheepe, he setteth out meruellously the safegard of
man by Gods prouidence, and goodwill towardes man. And in
the same Allegorie or Translation, he occupieth the foure first
verses in this Psalme. In the first verse, and so to the ende of the
Psalme, he declareth stil one matter and argument of Gods defence
towardes man, and howe man is preserued. But yet it seemeth,
that he expresseth the same by other words and by an other
translation, shewing the nature of God almightie, in feding
and nourishing of man vnder the name of a Lord or King, that

hath prepared a table and plentie of meats to feede the hungrie
and needie: and setteth foorth man poore and destitute of consolation
and necessarie helpe, vnder the name of guestes and bidden
folkes to a Kings table, where is plentie of all things necessarie,
not onely to satisfie hunger, and to quench thirst, but
also to expell and remoue them, that the poore man shall neuer
hunger nor thirst againe: and only that, but also for euer
world without end, this poore man shall dwell and inherite, by
the mercy of his heauenly king, the ioyes euerlasting. And this
last Translation or Allegorie is in maner not only a repetition
of the first in other wordes, but also a declaration, and more
plaine opening of the Prophetes minde, what he meaneth
in this celestiall Hymne.
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        The partes of the
Psalme.
                        The texte of the
Psalme.
                     
                     
                        1 Who it is that hath the
cure and charge of mans
life and saluation.
                        
                           The Lord feedeth me.
&c.
                        
                     
                     
                        2 Wherein the life and saluation
of man consisteth.
                        
                           In pleasaunt pastures,
&c.
                        
                     
                     
                        3 Howe man is brought to
the knowledge of life and
saluation.
                        
                           Hee shall conuert my
soule. &c.
                        
                     
                     
                        4 Wherefore man is brought
to life and saluation.
                        
                           For his names sake. &c.
                        
                     
                     
                        5 What trouble may happen
to suche as haue life
and saluation.
                        
                           Althoughe I walke
through the vallie
&c.
                        
                     
                     
                        6 Whereby the trouble of
Gods people is ouercome.
                        
                           For thou arte with me.
&c.
                        
                     
                     
                        7 What the ende of Gods
troubled & afflicted people
shall be.
                        
                           I wil dwel in the house
of the Lord. &c.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  ¶The first part of the Psalme.
                  
                     1 Who it is that hath the cure and charge of
mans life and saluation.
                  
                  THE FIRST VERSE.
                  
                     The Lord feedeth me, and I shall want nothing.
                  
                  
                     KIng Dauid saith,Or, The Lorde is my shepheard: as saith the common, and the Geneua translation. the Lorde féedeth
him: wherfore he can lacke
nothing to liue a vertuous and
godly life. In this first part some
thinges are to be considered.
First, of God that féedeth: and
next of man that is fed. GOD
that féedeth, Dauid calleth by the name of a shepherd,
and his people he calleth by the name of shéep.
By this name of a shepheard, the Prophet openeth
and discloseth the nature of God to al his miserable
and lost creatures, that he is content, not onely to
wish and desire man that is lost, to be found and restored
againe: but also doth séeke and trauell to restore
and bring him home againe: as it is written
in Esaie the Prophete,Esaie. 40. 11. 
                     He shall gather together his
lambes in his arme.
                     Ezech. 34. And in Ezechiel the Prophet, the
Lorde saith, Behold, I will require my flocke of the
shepheards, &c. And I will deliuer my flocke from

their mouth, and they shall be no more their meate:
for thus saith the Lord: Behold, I will search out my
sheepe, and will visite them as a shepheard doth visite
his sheepe, when he is in the middest of his scattered
shepe, so will I visite my shepe, and deliuer them
from all places whereas they haue bene scattered, &c.
And Ieremie the Prophet in the same sorte,Iere. 31. declareth
the nature of God towards the lost flocke, saying:
He that dispersed Israel shal gather him together
againe, and keepe him as the shepheard keepeth his
flocke. Christ our Sauiour nameth him selfe a good
shepheard,Iohn. 10. and saith, that He was sent to call such
as were not shéepe of the vtter marke and signe in
the world, to be his shéepe. This nature of the heauenly
father sawe king Dauid, when he saide at the
beginning of this heauenly Hymne: The Lord feedeth
me, &c.
                  
                  When he is assured of Gods mercifull nature,
that séeketh the lost shéepe, he openeth further the
nature of God, what he wil do with the shéep, which
he findeth: féede him (saith the Prophet Dauid,) and
putteth him selfe for an example. Here is the mercy
of the great shepheard further declared, that he killeth
not his shéepe, robbeth them not, but féedeth and
nourisheth them.Ezech. 34. Of this speaketh the Prophet Ezechiel,
in the person of almightie God: I my selfe
will feede my sheepe, and make that they shall rest
quietly, saith the Lord God. That which is lost I wil
seeke, such as goe astray I will bring againe, such as
be wounded I will binde vp, such as be weake I will
make strong, but such as be fat and strong those will
I roote out, and I will feede my sheepe in reason and
iudgement.
                     Iohn. 10. And the great shepheard Christe saith,
whether his shéepe goe in or out, they shall finde pasture.
                  
                     
After that this king hath opened in this Hymne,
that Gods nature is not only to séeke the lost shéep,
but also when he hath found him to féede him, then
he addeth in his Hymne, after what sort he féedeth
him: So that I shal lacke nothing, saith the Prophet.
Here is the declaring of the great shepheards pasture,
wherwith he féedeth the flocke of his pasture.
Christ expresseth the same wonderfully, in the opening
of his office and doctrine vnto the world in S.
Iohn saying:Ioh. 10. 4. 6 
                     I came that they might haue life, and
haue it most abundantly. And talking with the poore
woman of Samaria, he told her yt the drink he would
giue her should be water of life. And to the Capernaites
he said, that meate which he would giue them
should worke eternall saluation. As these properties
be in God the shepheard, (as the Prophete hath
marked,) euen in the like sort be the contrarie conditions
in man, the shéepe he speaketh of: for as the
nature of God is to séeke, so is the nature of man to
go astray.Psal. 119. As the Prophete saith: I haue strayed like
a wandering sheepe.
                     Esaie. 53. And euen so doth Esaie write
of all mankind: All we haue erred (saith he) as shepe
going astray.
                     Matth. 9. Christe our Sauiour also in S. Matthewe
doth bewayle the people of the worlde, that
stray as sheepe that had no shepheard. S. Peter likewise
saith vnto his countrimen that he writeth vnto,
Ye were as sheepe that went astray,
                     1. Pet. 2. 
                     but ye conuerted
now vnto the shepheard and pastoure of your
soules.
                     2. 3. Reg 22. And as the nature of man is to stray from
GOD, so is it likewise to féede vpon all vnholsome
and infected pastures: to beléeue euery false Prophete
that can do nothing but lye. In the Prophete
Esaie the Lorde saith,Esaie. 28. 
                     The nature of sheepe is to be
deceiued, and their pastours to be dronke, that neyther
knowe nor see the pastures of the word of God.
                     
And in the same Prophete, there is a most horrible
plague vpon man for sinne,Esaie. 29 for, The pastours shal be
vnable to feede, and all the foode of life shall be as a
booke fast clasped and shut. This going astray and
féeding vpon euill pasture, is wonderfully set foorth
by Saint Paule:2. Thes. 2. for when men will not féede vpon
the truth, it is Gods iust iudgement they should féed
vpon falshoode. And as Gods nature is not onely to
féede, but fully to satisfie and to replenishe with all
goodnesse, so that nothing may lacke for a godly and
vertuous life:Iohn. 4. 6. 3. in like manner, the nature of man is
not only to féede, but also to replenish it selfe with all
infected & contagious doctrine,Rom. 1. vntill such time yt he
despise and contemne God and al his holesome laws.
This we may sée in the holy Prophete Esaie:Esaie. 30. 
                     The
people (saith the Lorde) prouoketh me vnto anger, a
lying nation that will not heare the lawe of GOD,
they say to their Prophets, Prophesie not, looke not
out for vs things that be right, speake pleasant things
vnto vs, &c. And this replenishing of man with corrupt
pasture,Iohn. 7. is horribly set foorth in Sainte Iohn,
when the wicked priestes and Phariseis would not
beléeue the shepheardes voyce Christe, no not their
owne seruaunts that tolde them the truth, nor yet
Nichodemus one of their own court and profession.
Thus in the first part of this celestial Hymne, is the
nature of God and man described, vnder the name of
a shepheard and of shéepe.
                  Of this part of the Psalme,What is to bee noted out of this part of the psalme Rom. 19. what the Prophete
hath saide of God and of man, we must for our owne
doctrine and learning, gather some thinges to be the
better by. For S. Paule saith, What so euer is written,
is written for our learning. Two thinges we
learne of this first place: The one, a certeintie that
God hath the cure and charge of vs: and the other, a

consolation and comfort, that we & all ours be vnder
his protection and gouernaunce. The first doctrine
to be certein and sure of Gods defence, and care ouer
vs, maketh vs constant and strong to suffer & beare
all aduersities and troubles that God shall sende vs.
And the second doctrine shall cause vs patiently and
thankfully to beare our crosse, and to follow Christ.
Both these doctrines the Prophet Dauid expresseth
in the third and fourth verse of this Psalme: If I
should (saith he) trauel and passe through places contagious
and infected, where appeareth nothing but
the image and shadowe of death, or be compelled to
passe through the handes and tyrannie of mine enimies,
I wil not feare, for thou art with me (O GOD)
and defendest me.
                     Psal. 91. In the 91. Psalme, he setteth foorth
the assurance and felicitie of all them that put their
whole trust in the mercy of God, and therein also the
Prophet reckoneth vp a wonderfull sort of dangers,
and layeth them before the eyes of the faithfull, that
he may by the sight and knowledge of the daungers,
fixe and place the more constantly his faith and trust
in God, that hath the charge and cure of him: Hee
shal (saith he) defend vs from pestilence most infectiue:
from fleeing arrowes in the day, &c. By the
which the Prophet vnderstandeth all kinde of euils,
that may come vnto vs, by the meanes of the diuell,
or of wicked men. And these things the faithful shall
escape (saith the Prophet) bicause they say from their
hearts vnto GOD,The assuraunce of Gods defence and comfort in troubles; must bee lerned out of Gods word. 
                     Quoniam tu es spes mea, that is to
say, For thou art my hope: euen as he saide in the
beginning of this Psalme, The Lorde feedeth me,
and I shall want nothing. Such certeintie and assurance
of Gods defence, and such consolation in troubles
of this life, we must learne & pray to haue out
of Gods word, or else it were as good neuer to heare

nor to reade it.
                  And from this first part of the Psalme, euery estate
of the world may learne wisedome and consolation.
If the Lorde féede and gouerne him, he shall haue
God to his maister and teacher, that shall giue him
holesome and commodious doctrine, meete for the
state of the life he hath chosen to liue in this world.
For all that shall be saued in time to come, followe
not one kinde of life, Some be Magistrates and Rulers,
& appointed to sée both the laws of the realme,
and the goodes and commodities thereof, to be vsed
and applyed to the vse and profit of such as be vnder
them. Some giue them selues to studie and contemplation
of heauenly and diuine things, not busying
them selues with trauels of the body, but to knowe
them selues the way of life, and to be teachers of the
same to others. Some be giuen to apply the lawes
of the Common wealth: some to exercise the trade
and course of merchandize: some one kinde of liuing,
and some an other. But of what art, facultie, science
or kinde of liuing so euer he be, that is not contrarie
to Gods honour or honestie, he may vse therein to
serue God, to obserue iustice, to exercise truth, kéepe
temperance, and be acceptable to God, who hath giuen
lawes méete and conuenient to Publicans and
Souldiers, seruants and maisters, parentes & children,
husbandes and wiues, and so to all other: but
all these sortes of people must assuredly knowe, that
in euery of these vocations be more daungers, then
he that must liue in them is able to beare. Therfore
from the bottome of his heart, he must be assured of
this beginning of king Dauids Hymne: The Lord
feedeth me, and I shal lacke nothing. And in déede the
Lorde hath not only saide, He will féede and defende
him from all daungers, but also saith, He wil teach

him howe to liue vertuously & reuerently towards
God, and honestly and quietly towardes man, what
state or vocation so euer he choose to liue in, so it be
not against Gods lawes, and the lawe of nature.
So saith king Dauid:Psal. 25. 
                     God hath appointed a lawe
to rule and teach the man that feareth him, what soeuer
kind of liuing he appointeth him selfe to liue in.
What treasure is there to be compared vnto this,
that man is not onely fed and mainteined by God,
but also taught and instructed in euery craft and
science that he appointeth him selfe to liue in? Blessed
therefore is the man, that in the entrailes and
déepe cogitations of his hart, can say, beléeue, & féele
this to be true, that Dauid saith: The Lorde ruleth
me, and careth for me, and I shall lacke nothing. But
yet there is almost nothing spoken, that this king
would haue chiefly knowne. Howbeit doubtlesse,
they be wonderfull things, that preserue and teache
all persons both men and women, in what so euer
kinde of liuing honestly they appoint themselues to
liue in. He him selfe knew this to be true right wel,
as it appeareth when he saith:Psal. 144. 
                     Blessed be the Lorde
my strength, that taught my handes to battel. For if
the Lord had not taught and ruled him, he had bene
ouerthrowne many times, bycause there was not
onely more strength then he had of him selfe against
him: but also more wit, more policie, more experience.
But what things can ouercom that man, that
is couered with this shielde, Dominus regit me, The
Lord ruleth me? Doubtlesse nothing at all, whether
it be in heauen aboue, or in the earth beneath, or in
hell vnder the earth. Notwithstanding, this is not
all that this doctrine, The Lord ruleth me, doth for
the poore shéepe that is ruled. But here must the reader
and hearer of this Psalme followe king Dauid,

and desire to haue the eye of his minde purged and
made cleane: for if the scales of infidelitie, and the
loue and delight to sinne remaine, or else the minde
be otherwise occupied then vpon the vnderstanding
of the Hymne: he shall heare it, or sing it, as the vngodly
Colleges of Priestes doe, that daily bo-o and
rore the holy Scriptures out of their mouthes, and
vnderstand no more the meaning thereof, then the
walles which they sing and speake vnto. We must
therfore do as king Dauid did, lift vp the eyes of our
mindes into heauen, and fire our faith (as he saith)
fast in the Lord:Psalm. 25. 128. and then shall we sée the vnspeakable
treasures and wisedome, that lyeth hid in this
meruellous and comfortable head and beginning of
this Psalme: The Lord feedeth me, &c.
                  
                  Our Sauiour Christ openeth plainely in Saint
Iohn, what it is to be the shéepe of God, and to be
fed by him, and saith, They wil heare the shepheards
voyce, but no straungers voyce: and bycause they
heare the shepheards voyce, the shepheard will giue
them euerlasting life, and no man shall take them
out of the shepheards hands.The inwarde and spirituall comforte, treasurie, and riches, which this doctrine bringeth. There is the greatest
treasure and most necessarie riches for the shéepe of
God vttered, which is not the knowledge of God alone
to be preserued in this life, and to lacke nothing
that is expedient and necessarie for the preseruation
thereof: but also to vnderstand, which wayes
the heauenly father teacheth and leadeth vs to the
mansion and dwelling place of life euerlasting.
And if man were wise, he might soone perceiue, how
much the life to come is better then the life present:
yea, be it neuer so fauourably fed and preserued by
the heauenly father our shepheard and gouernour.
For his tuition here of vs, although it be sure, and
so strong, that none can take vs out of his handes:

yet is our safegard and life troubled and mingled
with aduersities, subiect to persecution and also vnto
death: but in the life to come, Gods tuition is all
ioy, all myrth, all solace, with all perpetuitie, and
endlesse felicitie. And of this treasure Dauid chiefly
meant in the forefront of the Psalme, when he said:
And I shal lacke nothing.
                     1. Peter. 4. For as we sée (vntill this
life be taken from vs) most troubles and most care
beginneth and tarrieth in the house of GOD amongest
his shéepe, whiche be as lambes among
woolues.Matth. 10. Wherefore, the voyce and teaching of the
shepheard, doth heale the mindes of the shéepe, Gods
deare elect, and pulleth from them all vnprofitable
feare and carefulnesse: it quencheth all flames of
lust and concupiscence: it maketh and giueth a man
a noble and valiant minde, to contemne al worldly
things: it bringeth a man in loue with Gods true
honour, maketh him ioyfull in trouble, quiet in aduersitie,
and sure that the end of Gods people shal be
glorious and ioyfull: and also that this fauour of
the shephearde shall be his guide into the place of
blisse, whereas be crownes of euerlasting glorie, for
such as haue bene led by the Lorde, and there they
shall lacke nothing. For there is neither eye can sée,
nor toung can speake, nor minde can comprehend
these ioyes and glorie. And therefore the Prophete
both constantly and chearefully saide: The Lorde
feedeth me, and I shal lacke nothing: for all thinges
of this world be but trifles, in comparison of things
to come. Although it be a singular fauour of God, to
vnderstand his goodnesse and mercie towards vs, in
things belonging to this life: yet is it not to be compared
to the other, as Dauid wonderfully declareth
in the 25. Psal. When he hath numbred a great many
of Gods benefites, which he doth bestow vpon his

poore seruants in this life, he in ye end maketh mention
of one specially that passeth them all, in these
woordes, Arcanum Domini timentibus illum, & testamentum
suum manifestabit illis: That is to say, The
Lord openeth to suche as feare him his secretes, and
his testament, The Lorde openeth to his faithfull
seruaunt the mysteries and secretes of his pleasure,
and the knowledge of his lawes. And these treasures,
the knowledge and right vnderstanding of Gods
moste holie woorde, he sayth, was more swéete vnto
him, then honie or the honie combe, and more he esstéemed
the vertue of it, then he did precious stones.
Of all giftes this was the principall, that God gaue
vnto him a right and true knowledge of him selfe:
Wherefore, it shall be moste expedient and necessarie,
for euerie Christian man, to labour, studie, and
pray, that he may earnestly, and with a faithfull
heart knowe him selfe to be no better, then a séelie
poore shéepe, that hath nothing of him selfe, nor of any
other, to saue his bodie and soule: but onely the
mercie of his shéepehearde, the heauenly father, and
to be assured also, that his only mercie and goodnesse
alone in Christ, and none other besides him, is able
to féede him, so that he shall lacke nothing necessarie
in this life, nor in the life to come.
               
               
                  ¶The second part of the Psalme.
                  
                     Wherein the life and saluation of
man consisteth.
                  
                  THE SECOND VERSE.
                  
                     He shall feede me in pleasant pastures, and he shall
leade me by the riuers side.
                  
                  
                     
                     HE shal set me in the pastures most pleasant
and rich of his doctrine, and in the
contemplation of heauenly thinges,
wherewithall the minds of godly men
are nourished, and fed with vnspeakeble
ioy, & néere vnto the plentious flouds of the holy
Ghost, and the swéete waters of the holy Scriptures
he will féede me: in the which places the shéepe of the
Lord are nourished to eternall life, abounding with
milke, and bringing foorth most blessed fruite.Iohn. 20. The
Scripture of God vseth this word (feede) in many
significations. Sometime to teach and instruct,Actes. 20. some
time to rule and gouerne,Ieremi. 3. as magistrates rule their
people as wel by lawe,Ezech. 34. as by strength.2. Reg. 57. Sometime to
punish and correct,Mich. 5. &c. But in this place, the Prophet
vseth (feeding) as wel for instruction by Gods word,
as also for defence and safegard of Gods people, by
Gods most mightie power.Iohn. 10. He vseth this word (pasture)
for the word of God it selfe,Psalm. 74. 79. 95. as a thing which is
the onely foode of a mans soule to liue vppon,Ieremi. 3. 
                           ••
                        . as the
meate and drinke is for the body.Ezech. 34. He vseth this word
(leade) for conducting, that the man which is ledd,Ioel. 1. at
no time goe out of the way,Matth. 4. but alwayes may know
where he is, and whither he is going: as in many
other of his Psalmes, he vseth the same manner of
speaking. The (riuers of refection) he vseth, for the
plentifull giftes of the holy Ghost, wherewithall the
faithfull man is replenished. His saying therefore is
as much,Psalme. 60. 73. 7. as if he had spoken without Allegorie or
Translation thus, He instructeth me with his word,
                     Apoc. 7.
                     and conducteth me with his holy spirite,
                     Esaie. 55. 
                     that I cannot
erre nor perish.
                     Ioan. 4.
                  
                  In this part of the Psalme be many things worthie
to be noted. First, it is declared, that the life of
man consisteth in the foode of Gods word: then, that

there is none that giueth the same to be eaten, but
God our heauenly shepheard: the next, that none can
eate of this meate of Gods word, but such as the holy
Ghost féedeth with the word.Matth. 4. Our sauiour Christ
declareth, that Man liueth not by bread alone, but of
euery woord that proceedeth out of the mouthe of
God.
                     We can no more liue in GOD without GODS word, then in the worlde without worldly foode. Iohn 6. Whereby he teacheth vs, that as the body liueth
by externall meates, so doeth the soule by the
word of God. And no more possible is it for a man
to liue in God without the word of God, then in the
world without the meate of the world. And S. Peter
confesseth the same. For when the Capernaites,
and many of Christes owne disciples had satisfied
their bodies with externall meates, they cared not
for their souls, neither could they abide to be fed nor
to heare the meate of the soule spoken of, althoughe
Christ did dresse it most holsomely with many godly
and swéet words: they would not tarrie vntil Christ
had made that meate readie for them: they could be
contented to féede their bellies with his meates, but
their soules they would not commit to his diet, but
departed as hungrie as they came, thorough their
owne follie. Christ was leading them from the fiue
barlie loaues and two fishes, wherwith they had filled
their bellies, vnto the pleasaunt pastures of the
heauenly word, that shewed neither barlie loaues
nor fishe, but his owne pretious bloud and painefull
passion to be the meate of their soules: how be it, they
could not come in to this pasture, nor tast in any case
of the swéet herbes and nourishment of their soules.
When Christ perceiued they would not be ledd into
this pleasaunt pasture, he let them goe whither they
would, and to féede vppon what pasture they would,
And then he asked of his twelue that tarried, saying:
Will ye depart also? Peter, as one that had fedd both

body and soule, as his fellowes had, perceiued that
the body was but halfe the man, and that béeing fed,
there was but halfe a man fedd, and also that such
meates as went into the mouth, satisfied no more
then the body, that the mouth was made for: he felt
moreouer, that his soule was fedd by Christes doctrine,
& that the hunger of sinn, the ire of God, the accusation
of the lawe, and the demaund and claime of
the diuel, were quenched and taken away: he perceiued
likewise, that the meat which brought this nourishment,
was the heauenly doctrine that Christe
spake of, touching his death and passion: and he vnderstoode
also, that this meate passed not into the body
by the mouth, but into the soule by faith, and by
the presence of Gods spirite with his spirite, that the
body also should be partaker as wel of the grace that
was in it, as of the life. So that he felt himselfe not
onely to haue a body and a soule aliue, but also that
they were gratiously replenished with the pastures &
food of Gods fauour. Wherefore he said vnto Christ,
To whom shal we go? thou hast the words of euerlasting
life. Which wordes in effecte sound no other
thing then this Psalme doeth, where Dauid saith:
The Lord feedeth me and I shal want nothing, for he
leadeth mee into his pleasant pastures, and pastureth
mee by the riuers side. Wherein it appeareth manifestly,
that the word of God is the life of the soule.
                  The Prophete Dauid doeth meruellously open
this thing, in the repeating so many times the word
of God, in a Psalme worthie much reading, and
more marking of the thinges conteyned therein. For
he intreateth all the Psalme thorough, that a godly
life doeth consist in the obseruation of Gods lawes,
and therefore doth he so many times in the Psalme,Psalm 119.
pray God to illuminate and indue his spirite and

hearte with these two vertues, Knowledge and
Loue of his word, wherewith he may both knowe
howe to serue God, and at all times to be acceptable
vnto him. And our sauiour Christ himselfe in Saint
Luke saith vnto a woman,Luke 11. 
                     Blessed be they that heare
the word of God and kepe it. And in S. Iohn,Iohn. 5. Christ
exhorteth all men to the reading and exercising of the
Scripture.And yet our blinde guids say, that ignoraunce is the mother of godlines. Amos. 8. For the ignorance of Gods word bringeth
with it a murren and rott of the soule: yet for
the sinnes of the people, God said, He would sende a
hunger and famine amongst men, not a hunger of
bread nor water, but of hearing Gods word. King
Dauid therefore, as one assured both of the Authour
of life, & also of the foode wherewith the life is mainteyned,
stayeth himselfe with Gods benediction and
fauour, that he is assured God féedeth him with his
word. And he sheweth also that none is the authour
of this word, neither can any giue it, but God alone.
For when the first fall of Adam and Eue by eating
forbidden meates, had poysoned & infected both body
and soule with sinne and Gods displeasure, so that
he was destitute both of Gods fauour & wisedome:
none but God could tell him where remedie and help
lay, nor yet could any deliuer him the help but God.
For till God made promise that the séed of a woman
should make whole, and saue that which the diuel
and man had made sicke and lost, by reason of sinne,
and also made open the remedie vnto Adam, and inclined
his heart to beléeue the remedie: Adam was
dead in sinne and vtterly cast away. Then the pittie
of the heauenly shéepheard said, He should notwithstanding
in time be brought into the same pasture againe,
Iohn. 10. and none should deceiue him, nor bring him
any more out of the pastures of life.
                  But onely God gaue this meate, which was his

holy word and promise,Ephes. 2. and also the mouth of fayth
to eate these promises of Gods onely gift. And the
same appeareth throughout the whole Bible, that
onely God, by sending of his worde and preachers,
brought knowledge of euerlasting life, to the people
that were in ignoraunce. As Saint Paule sayth:Heb. 1.
                     God before time spake vnto our fathers by the Prophets,
and in these latter dayes vnto vs, by his sonne,
and after the ascension of his sonne, by his Apostles
and Euangelistes,
                     Matth. 28. in so much that none of the Prophetes-euer
spake of Gods worde, that mainteined
the life of the soule, otherwise then they receiued it
of the high shepheard, almightie God, as Saint Peter
saith:2. Pet. 1. Prophesie came not by the wil of man, but
the holy men of God spake as they were taught by
the holy Ghost. So that God is the onely authour
and founteine of his true word,Iames. 1. the foode of all mens
soules. In like manner, he is the onely giuer of the
same: as he is the giuer of it, and none but him selfe:
so none can eate it, but such as haue the same deliuered
vnto them by the holy Ghost. So our Sauiour
Christ likewise in the Gospell of Saint Iohn telleth
Nichodemus,Iohn. 5. that it was not possible to vnderstand
and to knowe the grace of redemption, except he
were borne from aboue. And when Saint Paule
preached the worde of God at Philippos, amongest
the women by the water side, the Lorde opened the
heart of Lidia, to vnderstande the things spoken of
by Paule.Actes. 16. And when Christe preached among the
Iewes, and wrought wonderfull miracles, yet they
vnderstoode nothing, neither were they anything
the better. And Christe sheweth the cause, Proptereà
vos non auditis,
                     Iohn. 8. 
                     quia ex Deo non estis, that is to say,
Therefore ye heare not, bicause ye be not of GOD.
But the fault was not in God, but in the obstinacie

and frowardnesse of their owne heartes, as ye may
sée in Saint Matthewe.Matth. 23. Christ offered him selfe, but
yet the malice of man rebelled at all times. Sainte
Paule to the Corinthians wonderfully setteth foorth
mans vnablenesse,1. Cor. 2. and saith: The naturall man is
not able to comprehend the thinges that be of God.
                     Iohn. 6.
And in Saint Iohn, Christ saith, No man can come
vnto him, except the heauenly father drawe him, for
they must be all taught of God. Nowe as the Prophete
sawe these things for him selfe and his saluation
in Gods worde: euen so must euery Christian
man take héede, that he learne the same doctrine, or
else it were no commoditie to haue the scripture of
God deliuered and taught vnto vs. And euery reader
and hearer must learn of this Psalme, that there
is none other foode nor meate for the soule, but Gods
word, And who so euer doe refuse it, when it is offered
or preached: or when they knowe the truth therof,
doe yet of malice, feare, lucre and gaine of the
world, or any other way repugne it, they be vnworthy
of al mercy and forgiuenesse. Let euery man and
woman therefore examine their owne conscience,
without flattering of them selues, and they shal find
that the most part of this realme of England in the
time of our holy and blessed king Edward the sixt,
were fed with this holy foode of Gods worde, or else
might haue bene fed with it. For it was offered and
sent vnto them, as well by most godly statutes and
lawes of Parleament, as by many Noble men, and
vertuous learned Preachers. If they fed not vpon
it accordingly, or now their téeth stand on edge, and
their stomachs be cloyed with it, to their perill be it.
Thus Christ saith:Iohn. 15. 
                     They haue nothing wherby iustly
to excuse them selues of their sin. And likewise he
faith, that Whosoeuer hateth him, hateth also his father.
                     
By which words it appeareth manifestly, that
no man can hate Christes doctrine, but he must hate
Christe him selfe: and no man can hate Christe, but
he must also hate the father of heauen. Wherefore,
it is expedient for euery man to marke such places.
For it was not Christes name, nor Christes person,
that the Iewes hated so mortally Christe for: but
they hated him to death for his doctrine sake, and
it was Christes doctrine that condemned the world,
and shewed the life and learning of the worlde to be
euill,Iohn. 3. and could not abide the light of Gods worde,
and therefore in no case they could abide to heare of
it: as ye sée the like in his poore Preachers.Mark whithe preachers of God are contemned of the world. For his
wordes sake they be lesse passed of, then dogges or
brute beastes: for they be hated to death, and more
fauour doeth Barrabas the murtherer finde, then
Peter the preacher of Christe, that would leade the
flocke redéemed with Christes pretious bloud, into
the pastures of Gods word with the Prophete Dauid:
and yet in this hatred of Gods worde the foode
of Gods shéepe, they would be séene, and none but
they, to loue and honour God, but it is not so in their
heartes: for they haue a contempt of God, as their
fruites well declare. And Christe saith, They hate
both him and his father, yea, and that without cause.
                  
                  But thou (Christian reader) sée thou féede thyPsal. 35.
soule with no other meate,Iohn. 15. then with the holesome
pastures of Gods word, what so euer the world shal
say or doe.Iohn. 15. Looke vppon this text of Saint Iohn:
When the comforter shall come, whome I shall send
from my father, euen the spirit of trueth, which doth
proceede from the father, he shall testifie and beare
recorde of me. Weigh that place, and thinke,
wherefore the sonne of man referred him selfe to
the witnesse of the holy Ghoste, and ye shall knowe,

that it was for no vntruth that was in the authour
being Christe, or in the doctrine that he preached:
but only to make the disciples to be of good comfort,
and that they should not estéeme the Gospel he preached
vnto them any thing the lesse, although it had
many aduersaries and enimies, and was spoken against
in maner euery where: for against the furie
and false iudgement of the world that cōtemned the
Gospell, they should haue the testimonie of the holy
Ghoste, to allowe and warrant the Gospell. Let vs
therfore pray to the heauenly shepheard, that he will
giue vs his holy spirit, to testifie for the word of God
the only foode of our soules, that it is true that God
saith, and onely good that he appointeth to féede vs.
And this we may be assured of, that in this heauie
and sorrowfull time, there is nothing can testifie for
the truth of Gods word, and kéepe vs in the pleasant
pasture thereof, but the very spirite of God, whiche
we must set against all the tumults and daungers
of the world. For if we make this veritie of GOD
subiect to the iudgement of the world, our faith shall
quaile and faint euery houre as mens iudgements
varie. Wherefore, let vs pray to haue alwayes in
vs the spirite of adoption, whereby when our faith
shall be assaulted, we may cry, Father, father, and the
same helpe for the maintenaunce of trueth, God
promised by his holy Prophete Esaie, saying:Esaie. 59. 
                     This
is my couenant with them (saith the Lord,) my spirit
which is in thee, and my wordes which I haue put in
thy mouth, shall not depart from thy mouthe, nor
from the mouth of thy seede, nor from the mouth of
the seede of thy seede, from hencefoorth vntill the
world end.
                  
                  Here doth the almightie God set foorth, what a
treasure and singular gift his worde is, and that it

shall not depart from his people, vntill the worldes
end. And in these wordes is this parte of Dauids
Psalme meruellously opened and set foorth. It is the
Lorde alone that feedeth and instructeth (saith Esaie
the Prophet.) It was not mans owne imagination
and intention, nor the wisedome and religion of his
fathers (what so euer they were:) but it was the
Lord that spake, and made the couenant with man,
and put his spirite in man, to vnderstande the couenaunt,
and by his worde, and none other worde, he
instructed man and saide, that by this meanes all
men should till the worldes ende,What thinges we receiue by feeding vppon Gods promises in this life. féede and eate of
Gods blessed promises. For in his word he hath expressed
and opened to euery man what he shal haue,
euen the remission of sinne, the acceptation into his
fatherly fauour, grace to liue well in this life, and at
the end to be receiued into the euerlasting life. Of
these things the reader may knowe what mainteineth
life, euen the word of God,Matth. 4. as Christe saith:Psal. 19. 119 
                     If
ye abide in me and my words abide in you,
                     2. Tim. 3. 
                     aske what
ye will, and ye shall haue it.
                     Heb. 1. He shall learne also, that
it is not Generall counsell, Prouinciall counsell,1. Pet. 1. the
determination and agréement of men, that can be
the authour of this foode, but only God.Gala. 1. And as God
is the only authour of this foode: euen so is his holy
spirite, he that féedeth the poore simple soule of the
Christian man with his blessed pasture,Iohn. 6. and not the
wisedome of man,Esaie. 54. mens sacrifices, or mens doings.
But as touching the foode of mans soule,Iohn. 15. to be the
only word of God, I will (if it be Gods blessed pleasure,
to whom in the bitter and painefull passion of
Christe, I commit my will, with my life and death)
open vnto the shéepe and lambes of God at large in
an other booke.
               
               
                  
                  ¶The third part of the Psalme.
                  
                     Howe man is brought to the knowledge of life and saluation:
which part sheweth what man is of him selfe,
and howe he is brought into this life, and to
feede in the pleasant pastures of
Gods worde.
                  
                  THE THIRD VERSE.
                  
                     He shall conuert my soule, and bring me into the
pathes of righteousnesse, for his names sake.
                  
                  
                     MY soule erred and went astray from
the right way of godly liuing, but the
Lord conuerted me from mine errors
& faultes of liuing, and brought me to
the obseruation of his holy lawes,
wherein is conteined all iustice, trueth, and godlinesse.
Here is to be noted, what degrées and orders
the Lord and heauenly shepheard doth vse, in bringing
his shéepe vnto the pasture of life. First, he conuerteth
the man that is gone astray, by his wicked
wayes and sinnefull maner of liuing. If he were an
Infidel, he bringeth him first to knowe, féele, and
hate his infidelitie, and afterwardes to a true faith.
If he be a persecuter, he sheweth him first his tyrannie,
and afterward how to vse him selfe méekely. If
he be a sinful man that liueth cōtrarie to his knowledge
& profession, he bringeth him first to the knowledge
and hatred of his sinne, and afterwards to the
forgiuenes of the same. As Christ our sauiour wonderfully
teacheth in Saint Iohn,Iohn. 16. where he saith:
The holy Ghost, when he commeth, shall rebuke the
world of sinne, iustice, and iudgement. By the which
wordes he declareth, that the faithfull of God, can
not profite in the Gospell of Christ, neither loue nor
exercise iustice and vertue, except they be taught, and

made to féele the burthen and daunger of sinne, and
be brought to humble them selues, as men that be
of them selues nothing but sinne. And therefore the
lawe and threatenings of God be verie wholesome,
whose nature and propertie is to cite and call mens
conscience vnto the iudgment of God, and to wound
the spirite of man with terrour and feare. Wherefore,
Christe vseth a wonderfull way, and teacheth
the same vnto his Apostles, that neither him selfe
for that present time, nor they in time to come,
could preach profitably the Gospell, wherewith men
are led into the swéete and pleasant fieldes of Gods
promises by his word, except they vse this order: to
leade them from sinne to iustice, and from death to
life. And as iustice and life commeth by Christe,
shewed vnto vs in his bitter passion,The consciēce that feeleth the sting of death by sinn, thirsteth for life. death, and glorious
resurrection: so doeth sinne and death both
appeare and be felt by the spirite of God, shewed vnto
vs in the lawe. This order also fawe the holy
Prophet, when he saide: The Lorde conuerteth my
soule, and leadeth me into the pathes of righteousnes.
This is a wonderfull sentence, and much and déepely
to be considered and weighed of the Christian
man. The Lorde conuerteth my foule, saith
Dauid. He féeleth in him selfe, that as long as
the diuell and sinne haue the rule and kingdome
in man, the soule of man being Gods creature, is
deformed, foule, horrible, and so troubled, that it is
like vnto all things, more then vnto God and vertue,
whervnto it was created: but when the wicked
diuel & deformed sinne, be by the victorie of Christ ouercome
& expelled, the soule waxeth faire, amiable,
swéete, louing, pleasant, & like vnto God againe, and
cōmeth into order & obeisance vnto his creatour, & so
brought into ye pathes of righteousnes, féedeth with

the rest of Gods well ordered flocke vppon she pastures
and foode of his holy worde, to doe his blessed
will.
                  Oh that we would, in the glasse of Gods worde,
looke vpon our owne soules, when they be in the tyrannie
of the diuell, vnder the kingdome of sinne, as
this king did: we should more loathe and detest our
owne soule, and the companie that our soule is accompanied
withall, then if we should for all our life
time, be put into sties with hogges, and alwayes
be bound during our life, to liue with them, féede as
they féede, sléepe and wake as they do, and be as they
be in all things.Luke. 15. Looke in the Gospel of Saint Luke,
and there shall ye sée a man by sinne, so foule, so disordered,
so accompanied with swine, so hungerbaned,
so rent and torne, so beggerly, so wretched, so
vile, so loathsome, and so stinking, that the very
swine were better for their condition, then he was.
But sée howe the heauenly shepheard behelde from
his heauenly throne, the place of the euerlasting
ioyes, this poore strayed shéepe, féeding not amongst
shéepe, but amongest swine, and yet could not be satisfied
therewith. And no meruell, for swine féede
not vpon the meate of shéepe, nor yet doe shéepe fill
them selues with hogges draffe and swillinges:
but this shephearde vsed his olde wonted clemencie,
and strake the heart of his shéepe, making him
to wéepe and bewayle his condition, a man to come
to suche dishonour to be coupled and matched with
swine, to féede like swine, eate like swine such meate
as swine eate, remembring that the worst in his
fathers house was a Prince and noble King, in comparison
& respect of him: then also being persuaded of
his fathers mercy, he returned, & his father brought
him into his pleasant & swéete pastures, & gaue him

his old fauor & accustomed apparel againe, as a man
to kéepe companie with men, & no more with adulterous
men, and vncleane swine: howbeit, he came
not to his old honour againe, till the Lord had practised
in him, that he practised in this Prophete king
Dauid, Ammam meam conuertit, He conuerted and
turned my soule.
                  
                  It is but a follie for a man to flatter himselfe, as
though he were a Christian man, when his hart and
soule is not turned vnto the Lord. He shal neuer féed
in the pastures of life, but be an hypocrite all the
days of his life, as the most part of the world be that
professe Christes name at this present day. They say
they be conuerted from the world to God, when there
is nothing within the pastures of Gods word, but
that they wil contemne rather, then to haue as much
as an euil looke of the world for it. They say they be
conuerted to God, when they be contented with the
world to honour that for God, that is but bread and
wine in the matter and substance, as the scripture of
God, and the holy Church of Christ haue taught and
beléeued, these thousand and fiue hundreth yeares
and more. Oh Lord, be these men turned to thée? Be
these the men that shall dwell with thée, in thy holy
mount of Sion,
                     Psalme. 24. and stand in thy holy place? Nay
doubtlesse, for they be not turned to thée, but from
thée, & be not with thée, but against thée. They speak
with thée, and yet their déedes dishonour thée, they
talke of trueth and practise lies. What (good Lord)
shall thy simple & poore vnlearned shéepe do? Where
shall they séeke thy trueth? For the shéepeheards say
and sing this Psalme euery wéeke, and at euery dirige
for the dead, and yet they be not conuerted in
their spirits to thée, that thou mightest lead them into
the pathes of righteousnes. But (Lord) there is no

man nowe (in manner) that dare accuse them: they
destroy themselues and thy shéepe, and no man can
be suffered with Gods word to remedie it. Notwithstanding,
(good Lord) although in this world none
may accuse them, yet they in the world to come shal
haue king Dauid (whose Psalmes they daily reade,
and in whom they most glorie,) to accuse them, both
of heresie and blasphemie: as Moses shall accuse the
wicked Iewes, whome they most glorie of. For as
the Iewes read the scripture of Moses, and yet were
neuer the better: so these priests of Antichrist reade
the holy scripture, & yet neither the people, nor they
themselues, are any thing the better. And in this
they passe ye abhomination of the Iewes & Turkes:
for they were, and yet be content, that their bookes
of religion shal be vsed in their churches in the vulgar
and common tongue: but these enimies of God
and man, would not haue the word that God hath
appointed for all mens saluation, to be vsed in any
tongue but in the Latine.
                  The God therefore of peace, that brought againe
from death to life, the great shéepheard of the
shéepe, by the bloud of the euerlasting testament, our
Lord Iesus Christ, conuert the soules and heartes
of all those, that cause the shéepe of God thus to eate
and féed vppon the carrine and infected pastures of
mens traditions. Amen.
                  Nowe, as king Dauid in this text hath wonderfully
set foorth ye miserable nature of al Gods shéepe,
and put himself for an example, that the nature and
condition of all men is corrupt, wicked, and damnable,
so that it cannot be partaker of Gods benediction
and euerlasting grace, except it be borne a newe,
amended, restored, and instructed: so likewise he sheweth,
that none conuerteth the soule of man, but

the heauenly father the great shéepeheard, that both
séeth the loste state of his shéepe, and willeth of his
mercie the saluation and calling of the shéepe home
againe: and then he procéedeth further, and sheweth
what the heauenly shéepeheard will doe with his
shéepe. He saith, Hee will lead them into the pathes
of iustice. Wherein the Prophete declareth, that it
is not onely God that conuerteth the man from euill,
but also he alone that kéepeth him in goodnes
and vertue. And therein is shewed a wonderfull
miserie and wretchednesse in the soule and body of
man, that can neither beginne nor yet continue in a
life acceptable vnto God, except that GOD wholy
worketh the same himselfe.
                  And as it declareth the wonderfull wretchednes
of man, so doeth it manifest and set foorth a wonderful
and vnspeakeable mercie and compassion of God
towardes man, that so meruellously and gratiously
he canne be content to helpe and saue his enimie
and very aduersarie. But herein is required of
as many as the Lorde conuerseth from iniquitie
and sinnefull liuing, that they walke in the same
lawe, and vse their conuersation in equitie and
iustice, as it béecommeth obedient men and women
redéemed with the shéepeheardes most pretious
bloud.
                  For the Lord doth not teach his shéepe the truth,
that they should liue in falsehood: neither giueth he
them the remission of their sinnes, that they should
returne to the same againe: but because they should
studiously applie and diligently exercise themselues
in vertuous woorks,Psalme. 1. to the honor of almightie God.Matth. 5.
There be two sortes of people that the Lorde will
iudge and punish in the latter day, with extreme ire
and iustice.
                  
                     
The one sort be called vpon to learne the knowledge
of God and of Gods honour, as Gods word commandeth:
but they will not heare, nor obey the calling,
but knowe God and learne God, as the custome and
maner of the world is to know him and learne him,
though it be neuer so farre from the trueth. And the
other sort be contented to heare and learne to knowe
God, and to serue him as he teacheth in his holy and
most pure word, but in their heartes consent not to
their knowledge: but contrary to it they do outward
seruice to a false God, and frame their conuersation,
both in religion toward God,Woefull are these dayes whē in so cleare lighte of the trueth, the professours therof are so faithlesse and fruitlesse. Esaie 65. and their maners toward
men, as men of the world do. So that God hath
no more reuerence of him that knoweth the trueth,
then of him that is ignorant of the trueth.
                  Esaie the Prophet speaketh against the first sort
of men, that will not heare when they be called, nor
learne when they be taught, and saith: When other
men shall laughe, they shall weepe: when other bee
merrie, they shal be sorrie: when other be whole, they
shalbe sicke: when other men shal liue, they shall die:
and when other men reioyce in mirthe, they shall lament
in sorowe. And good cause why saith S. Paule:
For,Rom. 10. 
                     the Lord hath stretched forth his hand alwayes
to a rebellious and obstinate people, that will not
learne nor knowe his holy will. Againe, the other sort
that knowe and haue learned the Lordes will and
pleasure, and yet prepare not themselues to doe his
will,Luke 12. shall be beaten with many stripes (saith our sauiour
Christ.) And the Lord in S. Matthewe doeth
wonderfully charge both such as ignorantly doe offend,
and those that doe with knowledge offend, those
also that be called vppon to amendment in faith and
charitie, and those that be not called vppon by preaching
of the trueth, and saith: The greater damnanation

is vppon such as know or might knowe, or els
when they do knowe, they be nothing the better for
their knowledge. He putteth foorth there foure cities,
Chorozaim and Bethsaida, Tire and Sidon: two of
them many times admonished by Christ to amend:
the other two not so called vppon, neuerthelesse both
of them the Lord will iudge, but most seuerely such
as neglect the word of God when it is offered. Therfore,
it is not ynough for a man to hearken or heare,
read or learne Gods word, but he must be ruled by
Gods word, frame his whole life after Gods word,
and before all things auoyd idolatrie by Gods word:
as king Dauid saith in this Psalme, that The Lord
did not onely conuert his soule, but brought him into
the pathes of iustice.
                  Let euery man and woman therfore thinke with
themselues, what knowledge they haue receiued of
God: for he that hath receiued most, shall make accompt
for most: and the more he knoweth, and abuseth
his knowledge, the more shalbe his damnation:
and in case they knowe nothing at all, and be neuer
the better for all the preaching of the Lordes word,
let them take héede what persons they be, and in
what place they haue dwelled. In case their pouertie
was such, that they could not heare, and their
dwelling where as was no preaching at all: yet be
they vnder the iudgement and damnation of God,
because they knowe not, as Tire and Sidon were. If
they were of such state, as they might haue come if
they would, and had preachers to tel them the truth,
in case they would haue heard the trueth, such men
and women shall be the more in daunger of Gods seuere
and iust iudgement.GOD requireth not only a compt of that hath beene receiued, but of that might haue bene receiued. For God doth not onely
take an accompt of that which men haue receiued, if
they vse not Gods giftes well: but also straightly requireth

of them, that might haue learned the thing,
that either willingly or obstinately they refused to
learne: as ye may sée by Choroazim and Bethsaida.
God will as well take an accompt of him that refused
to receiue the gift of Gods word, as he requireth
an accompt of him that hath receiued it, and abused
it.Matth. 11. Whereby we learne,Luke. 12 that not onely the man that
abuseth Gods word shalbe damned, but also he that
will not learne Gods word. King Dauid had the
word offered, he receiued it, and was carried thereby
into the pathes of iustice, and liued godly thereafter.
Nowe he goeth foorth, and sheweth, wherefore man
is brought to life and saluation.
               
               
                  ¶The fourth part of the Psalme.
                  
                     Wherefore man is brought to life
and saluation.
                  
                  THE THIRD VERSE continued.
                  
                     For his names sake.
                  
                  
                     HE brought not me to life and saluation
(saith the Prophet,) for any merits or
deseruinges of mine, but for his owne
infinite goodnes sake. And whatsoeuer
euill hath béene done, and sinne committed,
all these thinges I ascribe to my corrupt nature,
and accuse my selfe to be the doer of them: but if
any thing haue béene thought, said, or done, that is
vertuous and godly, that I wholy ascribe and attribute
vnto the mercie of God, that gaue me a good
minde to wish to do wel, and also strength to doe the
thinges, that he gaue me will to wishe.
                  Of this part of the Psalme we learne, that man

can neither wishe, nor speake, nor doe any thing, nor
yet vnderstand any thing that good is, but onely
throughe the mercie of God, who maketh of an ignorant
man a man of knowledge, of an vnwilling
man a willing man, of an euill speaker a good speaker,
and of an euill doer a good doer. Therefore S.
Paule, when he séeth that the nature of man will
take vppon her to be the authour of any good thing,
he accuseth and condemneth her of arrogancie and
pride, saying, What hast thou that thou hast not receiued?
                     1. Cor 4.
                     If thou hast receiued, why doest thou glorie
as though thou receiuedst not? And in the same Epistle
he saith, that Hee preached Christ crucified,
                     1. Cor. 1.
                     which was a slaunder to the Iewes, and a foolishnesse
to the Gentiles: Yet, (saith he,) The foolishnesse of
God is wiser then men, and the weakenesse of God
is stronger then men. And that had king Dauid good
experience of, when he said, The Lord ruleth me, and
I lacke nothing, hee putteth mee in a sweete pasture
and leadeth mee by the riuers side, hee turneth my
soule, and conducteth mee into the way and pathe of
iustice for his names sake, and for his mercies sake.
He sawe the diuel, the world, his flesh, and sinne, all
conquered by the power of God, and for his names
sake brought both to liue, & also vertuously to liue,
to his honour that gaue the life, and to his owne saluation
that receiued the life.
                  All our teaching a great many of yeares, and also
your whole labours, haue béene chiefly to knowe the
miserie of man, and the mercie of Almightie God.
Wherefore, it shal not néed long to tarrie in opening
of this place of the Psalme: for ye be riche in God in
these 2. points, God giue you grace wel to vse them.
Yet in any case we must remember, that our soules
be turned from sinne, & we accepted as the people of

euerlasting life, only for Gods mercies sake. So doth
king Dauid wonderfully open vnto vs in the 32.
Psalme, where he saith, Blessed be they whose sinnes
are forgiuen,
                     Psalm. 32. 
                     and whose transgressions be couered:
blessed is the man to whome the Lord imputeth not
his sinne. Of the which wordes we learne, that the
godly king called those happie and blessed, not that
be cleane and pure without sinne, (for there is no
such man in this life:) but those be blessed, whose
sinnes the mercie of God forgiueth: and they be onely
such, as vnfeignedly acknowledge their sinne, and
stedfastly from their heartes beleeue, that the death
and passion of Iesus Christ is the onely expiation
and purging thereof: as S. Paule wonderfully expoundeth
Dauids woordes in his Epistle to the Romanes.
As the Prophete by these wordes, (For his
names sake,)Rom. 4. declareth, that there is nothing in him,
nor in any other man, wherefore God should turne
the soule of man from death to life, from errour to
trueth, from the hatred of God to Gods loue, from
wandring a stray to a stablished continuance in the
veritie of Gods word, but only Gods mercie: so doth
he in other of his Psalmes always, when he intreateth
of Gods mercie & of mans sinne, set foorth man
so naked and vile, as a thing most destitute of all
health and saluation, and sheweth that none of these
giftes, remission of sinne, acceptation into Gods loue
and fauour, pasturing of them with his most blessed
word, can happen vnto any other, sauing vnto such
as do knowe, and earnestly confesse, that they be sinners
and infected with many contagious & daungerous
infirmities, And therfore he sayth in the 2. verse
of ye psalme aboue mentioned, Blessed is he to whom
the Lord imputeth no sinne,
                     Psalme. 32. 
                     & in whose spirite there
is no guile. For there is no greater guile, nor more

danger in man, then to think himself to be somwhat,
when he is nothing in déede: or else to thinke him
selfe to be of such puritie of minde, as though he néeded
not this frée remission and fauour of God. And
as there is nothing more proude and arrogant, then
such a minde: so there is nothing in man more detestable
and miserable. Of the contrarie part, they be
blessed that hunger and thirst for iustice:Matth. 5. for, God
filleth the hungrie with good thinges,
                     Luke. 1. 
                     but the proud
he sendeth away emptie. And that knewe this holie
Prophete right well, that it was humilitie and
the casting downe of him selfe that was most acceptable
vnto God, and the séeking of health and saluation
onely for his names sake, that is to say,
for his mercie promised in the death and passion of
his onely sonne our Sauiour Christe. In the end of
the .xxxij. psalme, king Dauid that had thus humbled
himselfe,Psal. 32. bringeth in God that speaketh vnto
him, whiles he is thus making his complaint of his
corrupt nature and sinneful life, saying in this manner,
Intellectum tibi dabo, &c. that is to say, I will giue
thee vnderstanding, & instruct thee in the way thou
shalt goe, and will haue mine eyes euer vppon thee.
Wherein he declareth, that suche humbled men and
lowly persons, as knowe their iniquitie, shall haue
vnderstanding of God, and shall not swarue from
the right wayes: not for their déedes and their deseruinges,
but for his mercie that vouchsafeth to instruct
& teach them. And so likewise doeth this godlie
king shew in this Psalme: The Lorde ruleth me
and I lacke nothing, he feedeth me in sweet pastures
and leadeth me by the riuers side, he turneth my
soule, and bringeth me into the pathes of righteousnesse,
and all for his names sake. When he hath opened
the saluation of man, and also the cause thereof,

and wherein it consisteth: he procéedeth to the fifte
parte of his oration and holie Hymne.
               
               
                  ¶The fifte parte of the Psalme.
                  
                     What trouble may happen to such as God giueth
life and saluation vnto.
                  
                  THE FOVRTH VERSE.
                  
                     Although I walke thorough the vallie and shadowe
of death, I will feare no euill, for thou art with me,
thy rodde and thy staffe comfort me.
                  
                  
                     SEing I haue suche a guide and defender,
there is no difficultie of perill,
nor feare of death, that I will
passe of. For what harme can death
do to him, that hath God the authour
of all life with him? Or what can the tyrannie
of man do, where as God is the defender?
                  In this fifte part, King Dauid sheweth, howe the
Lord God doeth exercise his shéepe, whom he féedeth
with his blessed worde, in daungers and troubles: &
also how he will defende them in the middest of their
troubles, what so euer they be. In the first wordes of
the fift part of this sacred and holy Hymne, the prophet
declareth that the life of Gods shéepe and people
in this worlde, can not be without daungers and
troubles. Therefore Christ sayeth, that He came to
put fire in the worlde, and that the same fire should
burne, meaning that he came to preache suche a doctrine,
as shoulde moue dissention and discorde betwéene
friend and friend,The wicked make the Gospel of peace an occasion of discord. the father and the sonne,
and sette them at debate. Not that his worde is a
learning or doctrine of dissention and discorde of it

selfe, but that by the malice of men, that can not abide
to be rebuked by the worde of God, they will be
alwayes at discorde and variaunce with the worde
of God,Luke 12. and with any friende or foe that teacheth it.
And the same doeth Christ our heauenly shéepeheard
shewe vs,Iohn. 7. 8. 9. 10. 16. both in his doctrine and in his life, who
was hated and troubled more then any man before
or sithens his time,The crosse is the sure badge of Gods children. and assureth all his to haue troubles
in this world, yea and death also. But it forceth
not, for he sayth, I haue ouercome the worlde. And
whatsoeuer the dangers bée, and howe horrible soeuer
they séeme,Iohn. 16. Christe being with vs, we néede not
to feare. Therefore in this pointe the prophete correcteth
the foolish opinion of man, that woulde liue as
one of the shéepe of God in this world without troubles.
It is contrarie both to the person that professeth
God, and also to the religion that he is professed
vnto, for in ye worlde both shall be (as Christ sayth)
hated:) of which hatred commeth persecution and
troubles, so that the people of God shal, whether they
will or will not, passe through many daungers, and
no lesse perillous then the shadowes, and verie image
of death, as here King Dauid sheweth in this
wholesome and blessed Hymne.
                  And as he séeth right well, that the state and condition
of Gods people and shéepe, is to be troubled
for Christe and his worde:Zachar. 11. euen so did Zacharie the
prophet speake of Christe and his people,Matth. 16. howe that
not onely the shéepe should be troubled and scattered
abroade, but also the shéepehearde should be stricken
with the sworde, that both shéepe and shéepehearde
shoulde be condemned in this worlde. But nowe, as
Dauid and Zacharie declare, that the life and condition
of Christe and his shéepe be troublous in the
world: so do they both declare, that whatsoeuer the

troubles be, they be both knowen and appointed vppon
whom they shall fall, and in what time they shal
trouble the shéepe of God: so that they can come no
sooner then God appointeth, nor do any more harme
then the heauenly shéepeheard shall appoint them to
do. And this we may sée and learne as wel in Christ,
as in his shéepe. Howe many times did the Priestes
and Phariseis conspire Christes death? Yet because
his time was not come, they had not their purpose:
but when the time of God was come, Christ said to
his shéepe: Ye shalbe all troubled this night for my
cause,
                     Iohn 18. 
                     for the sheepeheard shall bee stricken, and the
sheepe shalbe scattered abroade. Then, as God had
appointed the time, it could be no longer deferred.
And because they should not misse of him, whose
death they sought, he came and met them and offered
himselfe vnto them, and said, that He was the same
man Iesus of Nazareth, whom they sought. And
when they had taken him, and vsed as much crueltie
towards him, as their wicked malice and diuellishe
hatred could deuise, they killed him, and made him to
passe not onely the shadowe and image of death, but
also death it selfe.Matth. 27 They thought then they had him
where as they would,Marke. 15 and said, He hath saued other,
let him now saue himselfe,
                     Luke 23. 
                     if he can.
                  
                  When he was layed in the graue with his fathers,Iohn 19.
they thought to execute their plagues and tyrannie
towardes him being dead, purposing that as
they had brought him to death and killed him: so
likewise they woulde kéepe him downe still, that
he shoulde neuer sée life againe, but rotte in the
earth like a wretche, vntill wormes had eaten him.
And for the performance of this purpose, to doe all
their whole willes to the vttermost, they came to
Pilate and said, that The deceiuer of the people that

lay in the graue, made his bost whiles he was aliue,
that the third day after his death he would rise againe,
but if it should be so, it would be worse with
them after, then it was before. Appoint therefore
souldiers (said they) and watchmen to kéepe the Sepulchre
till the thirde daye be past.Matth. 27. Whiles they
yet minded to lay as much euil and contempt vppon
Christ our shéepheard, as they ment vnto him, came
the heauenly father, that suffereth no more ignominie
to fall vpon his, nor will suffer them to continue
any longer then him pleaseth, with this inhibition
and stay of further procéedings in dishonouring and
persecuting his onely sonne, and said: I am redijt lux
tertia, surge sepulte meus, That is as much to say,
Nowe is come the thirde day, arise mine owne deare
sonne buried. And then was the sorrowe & contempt
of this our persecuted shéepeheard not onely ended,
but also turned into endlesse & vnspeakable ioyes: he
passed with his forefather Dauid most bitter paines
and also most vile death, but he feared not because
God was with him.A doctrine of Gods prouidēce most comfortable to all his afflicted. Psalme 2. The same appointment also
hath the heauenly father made with al dangers and
troubles that shall happen vnto vs his poore and afflicted
shéepe, taken daily (as it were to the shambles)
to suffer what Gods enimies can deuise. But the
heauenly shéepeheard doth sée all their doings out of
heauen, and mocketh them to scorne: for they shall
neuer do as much as they would, against Christ and
his people, but as much as God will suffer them.
Dauid afterwardes in his 37. Psalme, teacheth vs
the same with meruellous woordes and diuine sentences:
Commite Domino viam tuam, & spera in eum
&c. Laye (saith he) thy care vppon the Lord, and trust
in him, and he shall helpe thee.
                  
                  It is most necessarie therefore for euery troubled

man, to knowe in his minde, and féele in his heart,
that there are no troubles that happen vnto man,
whatsoeuer they be, come they by chaunce or Fortune,
as many men say and thinke, but that they
come by the prouidence of God: yea, the very winds
of the aire, tempestes in the cloudes, trembling of
the earth, rages in the sea, or any other that come,
howe soudaine or howe vnlooked for soeuer they appeare:
as ye may read in the 29. Psalme of this Prophete,
wherein be wonderfull tempestes,Psalme. 29 and troublesome
thinges spoken of, as well done in the wators,
as vppon the drie land.
                  But here (alas) is our nature and knowledge
much to be lamented and complained vppon: for as
the knowledge we haue of Gods fauour and gentlenesse
towardes vs in Christ, (for the most part) consisteth
in the vnderstanding of the minde, and talke
with the mouth, but the vertue, strength and operation
of the same fauour of God is not sealed in our
heartes and consciences: euen so be the troubles and
aduersities,The cause why there be so fewe sincere and true professours of the Gospel. which God threateneth for sinne, spoken
and talked of with the tongue, and knowen in the
minde, but they be not earnestly nor féelingly sealed
in our conscience and heart. And of this commeth
it, that we neither loue God, nor reioyce in his promises
as we ought to doe, when we heare or read
them, neither yet hate sinne, nor be sorrowfull for
Gods displeasure, as sinne and Gods displeasure
should be sorrowed and mourned for of Christian
men. Hereof also commeth it, (dearely beloued) that
we loue no further, then in knowledge and tongue,
nor hate vice but in knowledge and tongue. But
(alas) how miserable is this our state and condition,
that knoweth neither life nor death, vertue nor vice,
trueth nor falsehood, God nor the diuel, heauen nor

hell, but halfe as much as they ought of Christian
men to be knowen? Read you therefore and marke
the 37. Psalme,Psal. 37. and you shall knowe, that it is not
ynough for Christian men, to vnderstand and speake
of vertue and vice, but that the vertue must be sealed
in the conscience and loued, and the vice kept out
of the conscience and hated, as Dauid saith: Leaue
doing of euill and doe good. So like wise he speaketh
of a féeling Christian man, whose conscience hath
tasted howe swéete and amiable God is. Taste and
feele (saith the Prophete) howe sweete the Lord is.
And this assure your selues, that when ye féele your
sinnes, and bewaile the daunger and damnation of
them, the spirite of God hath wrought that féeling,Psal. 53.
And that troubled and broken heart God wil not despise.
And there is no doubt nor mistrust of a sensible
and féeling sinner:Here is thy cōfort thou broken harted and afflicted of the Lord. but in case he can finde in himselfe
no loue to the obedience of God, nor desire to do
his will by hearing of his word, nor any féeling at
all of sinne, nor desire to be ridde from it by hearing
of the lawe: he hath knowledge in the minde, and
speache in the mouth: but no consent and féeling in
his heart and conscience. And this knowledge liueth
with sinne, and speaketh with vertue: whereas the
heart & conscience consenteth to good, and abhorreth
euil, if the vertue & nature of Gods woord by Gods
spirite be sealed in the conscience. And this doth S.
Paule teach wonderfully, as wel by faith, that commeth
by hearing of Gods woord, as also of his pretious
Supper, the Sacrament of his bodie and bloud
and passion.Rom. 10. He saith, that The heart beleeuēth to
righteousnesse,
                     What it is to beleeue vnto righteousnes. that is to say, The conscience and
heart of him that is sealed, and assured of the vertue
and grace of Gods premises in Christ, beléeueth to
righteousnesse, or is ascerteined and knoweth it selfe

to be righteous and iust and before God, because it hath
consented, and receiued the mercie of God offered in
the Gospel thorough the merites of Christ: and then
the same faith,Faith sealed once in the heart with the assurance of Gods mercy, can bee no more with out the fruite of wel doing, then fire without heate. which God hath sealed in the heart,
breaketh foorth by confession, whiche confession is a
very fruite of faith to saluation, as it is written by
S. Paule in the same place. And where this faith is
so kindled in the heart, there can be none other but
such a fruite following it. And as possible it is to
haue fire without heate or flame, as this vertue,
Faith, without the fruite of well doing. And that is
it that S. Paule saith to the Corinthians: As often
as ye eate of this bread and drinke of this cupp, shew
ye the Lordes death vntill he come. Wherein Saint
Paule requireth a knowledge of Christ in the receiuer,
not onely in his minde that he knowe Christ
died for his sinne, and the sinne of the world, and to
speake and declare the same death with his tongue
vnto others: but this is the chiefest and most principall
commoditie of Christes holy Supper, (whiche
men nowe vngodly call the Masse,) that the vertue
and benefite of Christes death, as it is appointed for
the remission of his sinnes,1. Cor. 11. be sealed and fully consented
vnto in his conscience. And this knowledge
of Christes death,Whē right knowlege & assured sense of Gods mercie are ioyned together, note what they worke. with the assurance of the vertue,
strengthe and power thereof in the heart, will and
ought to inflame vs to thankesgiuing, and to preach
and teach vnto others those commodities of Christs
death, that we knowe and féele first in our selues
within our owne spirite and heart.
                  Thus I haue tarried longer then I thought in
this matter, bicause I would bring my selfe and all
others (as much as lyeth in me) to féele that knowledge
and talke of vertue and vice, of Gods fauour
and of Gods punishment, is not sufficient: and to

bring my selfe and all men from knowledge and
talke,Knowlege and talke without the feling of Gods fruitfull working spirit is not of God. to féeling, consenting, and a full surrendring
of our selues, vnto the profite and vauntage of the
things which we speake and knowe, or else knowledge
and speaking please not God, nor profite our
selues, as Christe saith: Not euery man that saith
Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdome of heauen.
Therefore did Dauid both knowe, speake, and féele
signed in his heart,Matth. 7. the fauour, helpe, and assistaunce
of God, to be with him into what troubles so euer he
should fall, and in that féeling (did say) He would not
feare. But it may fortune I haue so written of vertue
and vice to be knowne of in the minde, spoke of
with the mouth, and felt in the heart: that ye may
iudge and féele in your selues, neuer to haue come to
this perfection. For this is out of doubt, he that hath
Gods loue and feare thus sealed in his heart, liueth
in this life rather an Angelicall life, then the life of a
mortall man: and yet it is euident by king Dauid
in this Psalme,Psal. 121. and by his 121. Psalme, and in many
more, that he was so sure, and so well ascertained of
Gods present helpe in his troubles, that he cared nothing
for death, or any other aduersities that could
happen. And doubtlesse, we perceiue by his Psalmes
in many places, yt his faith was as strong as stéele,
and he trembled not nor doubted any thing, but was
in manner without all kinde of mistrust, and nothing
troubled what so euer he sawe contrarie to
Gods promises, and he passed ouer them, as things
that could not once withdraw his cogitations from
the trueth and veritie of Gods promises, which he
beleued.Gene. 22. As Abraham likewise did, he staggered not,
but with constancie of faith would haue killed his
owne sonne, so strong was his faith. But as the gift
of faith is a treasure incomparable, thus to knowe

and féele faith to ouercome all daungers: so maketh
it the heart of him that is sealed with such a faith, to
féele the ioyes and mirth vnspeakable. But as this
faith is the gift of God, and cōmeth only from him:
so is it in him only to appoint the time when it shall
come, & how much and how strongly it shal be giuen
at al times, which is not at all times like, but sometimes
so strong, that nothing can make the faithfull
man afraid, no not death it selfe, and sometimes it is
so strong, that it maketh the man afflicted to be contented
to suffer: yea, death it selfe, rather then to offend
God. But yet it is with much cōflict, great troubles,
many heauie & meruelous cogitations, & somtime
with such a feare, as the man hath much ado to
sée, & féele, in the latter end of his heauie conflict, the
victorie and vpper hand of the temptation. And at
an other time the Christian man shal finde such heauinesse,
oppression of sinne, and troubles, that he shal
not féele as much (in manner) as one sparke of faith
to comfort him selfe in the trouble of his minde,The state of Gods children beaten downwith the sense & horrour of sin and dread of gods iudgments. (as
he thinketh:) but that all the floudes and dreadfull
assaultes of desperation haue their course through
his conscience. Nothing féeleth he, but his owne
minde and poore conscience, one so to eate the other,
that the conflict is more paine to him then death it
selfe: he vnderstandeth that GOD is able to doe all
thinges, he confesseth with the knowledge of his
minde, and with his toung in his head, that God is
true and mercifull, he would haue his conscience
and heart to agrée therevnto and be quiet: but the
conscience is pricked and oppressed so muche with
feare & doubtfulnesse of Gods ire for sinne, that he
thinketh God can be mercifull vnto other, but not
vnto him. And thus doth his knowlege for the time
of temptation, rather trouble him, then ease him,

bicause his heart doth not, or rather can not consent
vnto the knowledge: yet would he rather then his
life, he could consent vnto God, loue God, hate sinne,
& be Gods altogether, although he suffered for it al ye
paines of the worlde. I haue knowne in many good
men, and many good women, this trouble and heauinesse
of the spirit for the time, as though God had
cleane hid him self from the afflicted person, and had
cleane forsaken him: yet at length, the day of light
from aboue, and the comfort of the holy spirite hath
appeared, that lay couered vnder the veile and couert
of bitter cogitations of Gods iust iudgements
against sinne.The comfort of the afflicted euen when God seemeth to haue forsaken them. Therefore, séeing that faith at al times
hath not like strength in man, I doe not speake to
discomfort such as at all times finde not their faith
as strong as Dauid did in this Psalme: for I know
in the holy Saints them selues, it was not alwayes
like, but euen in them as in others. And although
we can not compare with them in all things in the
perfection of their faith, yet may they compare them
selues with vs in the weakenesse of our faith, as ye
may sée by the scriptures.
                  In this Psalme and in many other, ye shall perceiue,
that Dauid by the constancie and suretie he
felt in the promises of God, was so strong, so ioyfull,
and comfortable in the middest of all daungers and
troubles of death: that he did not only contemne
troubles and death, but also desired death, and to be
dissolued out of this world, as Saint Paule and others
did. At an other time ye shall perceiue him to
be strong in faith, but not so ioyful, nor yet the troubles
so easie vnto him, but that he suffered great battell
and conflict with his troubles, and of the cause
of all troubles, sinne, and transgression of Gods
lawes,Psal. 6. as ye may sée in the sixt Psalme, whereas he

cryed out and saide: Lord chasten me not in thy furie,
nor punishe me in thy wrath: my soule is sore
troubled, but how long Lord wilt thou deferre help?
And of such troubled consciences with conflictes, ye
shall finde oftentimes in the booke of Psalmes, and
in the rest of Gods scriptures: yet shall ye finde the
end of the temptation to be ioyfull and comfortable
to the weake man that was so sore troubled. For,
although God suffer a long fight betwéene his poore
souldier and the diuell: yet he giueth the victorie to
his seruant, as ye may sée in king Dauid. When he
cryed out, that both his body and soule was wearied
with the crosse of Gods punishment: yet he saide at
the last, Discedite à me operarij iniquitatis, quoniam exaudiuit
Dominus vocem fletus mei, Depart from me
ye workers of iniquitie,
                     Psal. 6. 
                     for the Lorde hath heard the
voyce of my weeping. And in other of his Psalmes,
ye shall perceiue his faith more weake, and his soule
troubled with such anguish and sorrowe, that it shal
séeme there is no consolation in his soule, nor any
shewe of Gods carefulnesse towardes him. In this
state ye may sée him in the 13. Psalme, where as a
man in manner destitute of all consolation, he maketh
his complaint saying, How long wilt thou forget
me? The same may ye read also in the 43. Psal.
where he sheweth that he, his most iust cause, and
the doctrine that he professed, was like altogether to
haue bene ouercome, so that his spirite was in manner
all comfortlesse.Psal. 42. 43 Then he said to his owne soule,
Quare tristis es anima mea, & quare conturbas me? Why
art thou so heauie my soule, & why doest thou trouble
mee? Trust in the Lord, &c. And in the 42.
Psalm he setteth foorth wonderfully the bitter fight,
and sorrowfull conflicte, betwéene hope and desperation.
Wherin he complayneth also of his own soule,

that was so much discomforted, and biddeth it trust
in the lord. Of the which two places ye may learne,
that no man had euer faith at all times like, but
sometimes more strong, sometimes more weake, as
it pleased God to giue it. Let no man therefore despaire,
although he finde weaknesse of faith: for it
shall make him to humble him selfe the more, and to
be the more diligent to pray to haue helpe, when
he perceiueth his owne weakenesse: and doubtlesse
at length, the weake man by the strong GOD
shal be brought to this point, that he shal in al troubles
& aduersities say with the Prophet, If I should
goe through the shadowe and daungers of death, I
would not feare what troubles soeuer happen. And
he sheweth his good assurance in the text that followeth,
which is the sixt part of this holy and blessed
Hymne.
               
               
                  ¶The sixt part of the Psalme.
                  
                     Whereby the troubles of Gods elect be-ouercome.
                  
                  The fourth verse continued: and the fift
verse expounded.
                  
                     
                        For thou art with me, thy rod and thy staffe comfort
me.
                        Thou shalt prepare a table before me, against thē
that trouble me, thou hast annoynted my head
with oyle, and my cup shall be full.
                     
                  
                  
                     SEeing thou art with me, at whose
power and will all troubles goe and
come, I doubt not but to haue the
victorie and ouerhand of them, howe
many and daungerous so euer they
be, for thy rod chasteneth me when I
goe astray, and thy staffe stayeth me when I should
fall. Two things most necessarie for me (good Lord)
the one to call me from my fault and errour, and the

other to kéepe me in thy trueth and veritie. What
can be more blessed, then to be susteined and kept
from falling by the staffe and strength of the most
highest? And what can be more profitable, then to be
beaten with his merciful rod, when we goe astray?
For, He chasteneth as many as he loueth, and beateth
as many as he receiueth into his holy profession. Notwithstanding,
whilest we be here in this life, he féedeth
vs with the swéete pastures of holsome herbes
of his holy word, vntill we come to eternall life, and
when we put off these bodies, and come into heuen,
and knowe the blessed fruition and riches of his
kingdome, then shall we not only be his shéepe, but
also the guestes of his euerlasting banquet. The
which (Lorde) thou settest before all them that loue
thée in this worlde, and doest so annoynt and make
glad our mindes with thine holy spirite, that no aduersities
nor troubles can make vs sorrie.
                  In this sixt part the prophet declareth the old saying
amongest wise men, Non minor est virtus quàm
quaerere parta tueri, that is to say, It is no lesse maistrie
to keepe the thing that is wonne, then it was to
winne it. King Dauid perceiueth right well the
same, and therefore as before in the Psalme he said,
The Lorde turned his soule, and lead him into the
pleasant pastures, whereas vertue and iustice reigned,
for his names sake, and not for any righteousnesse
of his owne: so saith he now, That being brought
into the pastures of trueth, and into the fauour
of the almightie, and accounted and taken for one of
his shéepe, it is onely GOD that kéepeth and mainteineth
him in the same state, condition, and grace.
For he could not passe through the troubles and shadowe
of death (as he & al Gods elect people must do:)
but only by the assistance of God, and therefore he

saith, he passed through al peril, bicause he was with
him. Of this part of the Psalme we learne, that all
the strength of man is vnable to resist the troubles
and persecutions of Gods people, and that the grace
and presence of God is able to defend his people, and
nothing but it. Therefore doth Saint Paule bid the
Ephesians be strong through the Lord, and through
the might of his strength,Ephes. 6. for he saith, that Great and
many be our aduersaries, strong and mightie, which
goe about not onely to weaken vs, but also to ouercome
vs, & we of our selues haue no power to withstand.
Wherefore he willeth vs to depend and stay
onely vpon Gods strength.1. Pet. 5. And Saint Peter also,
when he hath declared the force and malice of the
diuell, he willeth vs to resist him strongly in faith.
And Saint Iohn saith,1. Iohn. 5. that This is the victorie that
ouercommeth the world, euen our faith. And our sauiour
Christ, when the time was come that he shuld
depart out of the world corporally, and perceiued
howe maliciously and strongly the diuell and the
world were bent against his disciples, that he should
leaue in the world as shéepe amongest woolues, and
howe little strength his poore flocke had against such
maruellous troubles: he made his most holy and
effectuall prayer for them present, and them in trouble,
and likewise for vs that be nowe, and also in
trouble in this sorte:Matth. 10. 
                     Pater sancte serua eos, per nomen
tuum, quos dedisti mihi, &c. That is to say, Holy father,
keepe them for thy names sake, whome thou
hast giuen me.
                  
                  Here hath euery one of Gods people suche learning,Psal. 120.
as teacheth that our help is only in the name
of the Lorde, who made heauen and earth. And
in this learning we shall vnderstand two necessarie
lessons. The first, that none can defende vs,

but God alone, who is our protectour and none but
he. And by this learning, he will beware to aske or
séeke helpe any other where, sauing of God, as we
be instructed by his holy word. And herein we honour
him, to knowe and confesse, that there is none
that can preserue nor saue vs, but he alone. The other
lesson is, that our conscience vnderstanding
that God can and will helpe vs, shall cause vs in all
trouble to commend our selues vnto him, and so
more strongly and patiently beare & suffer all troubles
and aduersities, being assured that we shall ouercome
them through him, or else be taken by them
from this world, into a world whereas is no trouble
at all. So said this holy Prophet and King Dauid,
If I walke in the shadow of death, I wil not feare,
for thou art with me. Nowe in that he saith (he will
not feare) he meaneth not that a man may sée and
suffer these perils without all perils: (for then were
a man rather a perfect spirite, then a mortall creature:)
but he meaneth that feare shall not ouercome
him. For Christe him selfe feared death,Matth. 26. neyther is
there any man that shall suffer imprisonment for
Christes sake, but that he shall féele the paines: neuerthelesse,
Gods spirit shall giue strength to beare
them, and also in Christe to ouercome them. There
is no man that can haue faith, but sometimes, and
vpon some occasion, it may be troubled and assaulted
with mistrust: no man such charitie, but that it may
be, yea and is troubled with hatred: no man such patience,
but yt it may at times féele impatience: no
man such veritie, but that it may be troubled with
falshoode: howbeit, in the people of God, by Gods
helpe, the best ouercommeth the worst, and the vertue
the sinne. But in case the worst preuaile and ouercome,
the man of God is neuer quiet, vntill he be

restored vnto God againe, & vnto the same vertues,
that he lost by sinne: as ye may sée in this king by
many of his Psalmes, that he beléeued, and found
God to defend him, howe so euer his state was, and
therefore attributeth vnto him the whole victorie &
prayse of his deliuerance, saying: Thou art with me,
and doest ouercome.
                  
                  But nowe the Prophete declareth, howe and by
what means God is with him, and doth deliuer him
from all troubles. And this means of Gods presence
and defence, he openeth by diuers Allegories and
Translations, wonderfull méete and apt to expresse
the thing that he would shew to the world. The first
Translation or Allegorie, he taketh of the nature of
a rod: the second, of a staffe, and saith, They did
comfort him and defend him: the third, he taketh of
a table, which he saith the great shepheard prepared
before his face, against as many as troubled him:
the fourth, he taketh from the nature of oyle, and of
a cup that was alwayes full, wherwith he was not
onely satisfied, but also ioyfully replenished in all
times, and all troubles whatsoeuer they were. By
the rod, is many times in the scripture vnderstanded
the punishment and correction that God vseth, to cal
home againe, & to amend his elect & beloued people,
when they offend him: He punisheth them, and yet
killeth them not, he beateth them, vntill they know
their faults, but casteth them not away: as he saide to
king Dauid,2. Reg. 7. that whē he dyed, his kingdome should
come vnto one of his own children: & in case he went
astray from his lawe, he would correct him with the
rod of other Princes, and with the plagues of the
sonnes of men, but my mercy (saith God) I will not
take from him, as I did from Saule. This same
manner of speache may ye reade also in his. 89.

Psalme, and in the Prouerbes of his sonne king
Solomon ye haue the same doctrine:Prou. 10. 
                     He that wanteth
a heart, must haue his backe beaten with a rod.
And in the same booke he saith, He that spareth the
rod, hateth the childe. So doeth king Dauid here
confesse, that it is a very necessarie and requisite
way, to kéepe the shéepe of God from perishing, to be
chastened and corrected when they waxe wanton,
and will not heare the voyce of their shephearde.
And it is the part of euery wise godly man, to loue
this correction and chastisement of the Lord, as Solomon
saith:Prou. 12. 
                     He that loueth discipline and correction,
loueth knowledge: he that hateth to be rebuked, is
a foole. And king Dauid saith, It is to my great good
commoditie,
                     Psal. 119. 
                     that the Lorde chasteneth me. This
rod of correction, Dauid saith, is one of the instruments
and meanes, wherewithall God preserueth
his shéepe from straying. Nowe in the scripture
somtimes the rod is taken, not for a correction that
amendeth a man: but for the punishment and vtter
destruction of man,Psal. 2. as Dauid saith of Christ: Thou
shalt breake them with an yron rod:
                     Apoc. 12. and in the Apocalypse
ye may sée the same. But I will speake of the
Metaphors and Translations none otherwise, then
Dauid doeth vse them in this place, for his purpose.
                  The staffe which he speaketh of in the scripture,
is taken for strength, power, and dominion: which
staffe is spoken of, as ye may sée, in the bookes of the
Kinges, howe the Embassadours and men of warre
sent from the king of the Assyrians to Ezechias at
Hierusalem,4. Reg. 18. called the strength & power of the Aegyptians,
and also of the almightie God, a staffe of
réede,Esai. 10. 14 28. 39 and a broken weapon, not able to withstande
the king of the Assyrians:
                     Ezech. 29. and of suche manner of

speach ye may reade many times in the Prophetes.
But in this place Dauid confesseth, that the staffe of
the Lorde, that is to say, Gods power, is so strong,
that nothing is able to ouercome it: his wisdome is
such, that no man can make it foolishnesse: his trueth
is so true, that no man can make it false: his promise
is so certeine and sure, that no man can cause
him to breake or alter it: his loue is so constant, that
no man can withdraw it: his prouidence is so wise,
that no man can beguile him: his care is so great for
his flocke, that they can want nothing: his folde is
so strong, that no beast can breake it: he letteth his
shéepe so in and out, that no man can deceiue him:
he hath suche a care of all, as he neglecteth not one:
he so loueth the one, that he hateth not the other: he
so teacheth all, as none is left ignoraunt: he so calleth
one, as all should be aduertised: he so chasteneth
one, as all should beware: he so receiueth one, as all
should take hope and consolation: he so preserueth
one, as all the rest may be assured, that he vseth his
staffe and force to comfort one king Dauid (as he
saith, Thy rod and thy staffe, they comfort me,) as
all other should assure them selues to be safe vnder
his protection.
                  In this Metaphore and Translation, vnder the
name of a staffe, king Dauid hath declared the power
of God to be such, that in case he should passe by
and through thousandes of perilles, he would not
care, for GOD is with him with his rodde and
staffe.
                  Then he setteth foorth the thirde Allegorie, and
expresseth an other meanes, which God vseth for
the defence and consolation of his poore shéepe,
and saith, that GOD hath prepared a table in
his sight, against all those that trouble him. By the

name of a table, he setteth foorth the familiar, and (in
manner) fellowlike loue, that the God omnipotent
hath towardes his shéepe, with whome he vseth not
only friendship, but also familiaritie, and disdaineth
not (being the King of Kings) to admit and receiue
vnto his table, vile and beggarly sinners, scabbed &
rotten shéepe.The frendship and familiaritie of God the heuenly shepheard towardes his sheepe. That friendship and familiaritie is
meruellously set foorth in this, that he made a table
for Dauid: as though Dauid had saide, Who is he
that can hurt me, when the Lorde of Lordes doeth
not onely loue me, but admitteth me to be alwayes
familiarly in his companie? The same manner of
speache is vsed of king Dauid, towardes Miphiboseth
Ionathas sonne,2. Reg. 9. when he saide he shoulde not
only haue the fieldes againe of Saule his grandfather,
but also be enterteined at his owne table, that
is to say, vsed friendly, honourably, and familiarly.
This worde (Table) is diuersly otherwayes taken
many times in the Scripture, but in this place it is
néerest to the mind of king Dauid, to take it in this
signification that I haue noted. And our Sauiour
Christe taketh it in the same signification, in Saint
Lukes Gospell where he saith, his disciples shall
eate with him at his table in the kingdome of God.
                  The fourth meanes that the heauenly shepheard
vseth in kéeping of his shéepe, the Prophete setteth
foorth vnder the name of oyle, and a full cuppe. In
the worde of God these wordes haue also comfortable
significations and meanings extending to Dauids
purpose. Isaac, when he had giuen the blessing
from Esau to Iacob, sayde to Iacob, God shall
giue thee of the deaw frō heauen,
                     Gen. 27. 
                     and from the fruitfull
ground thou shalt haue aboundance of corne, of
wine, and oyle, &c. By the which blessing, he meaneth
that Iacob should lacke nothing to serue his

néedes, and to make him merrie. And if we take
Dauid that he meaneth by (Oyle) as Isaac did, that
at the Lordes table was all plentie, myrth and solace,
we take him not amisse: for so many times
oyle is taken for consolation and ioy in the Scriptures.
When Christe had purged the hurt mans
woundes, first with smarting wine, he afterwardes
put into them swéete oyle, to ease the smarte and
sharpnesse of the wine. And so likewise saith our sauiour
Christ to Simon the Pharisée,Luke. 10 that gaue him
meat enough to his dinner, but gaue him no myrth:
Since I came into thy house, thou gauest me no water
for my feete, nor oyle for my heade, this poore
woman neuer ceassed to wash my feete with the tears
of her eyes,
                     Luke. 7. 
                     and to annoynt them with oyle. But in
many Psalmes king Dauid vseth this word (Oyle)
to signifie the holy Ghoste, as when he speaketh of
our Sauiour Christe:Psal. 45. 
                     Thou hast loued iustice and
hated iniquitie, therefore hath God annoynted thee
with the oyle of ioye aboue thy fellowes. And this
oyle is not the materiall oyle that kings and priests
were annoynted withall in the old time of the lawe,
of whose confection we reade in the booke of the Leuites:
but this is the oyle by whose efficacie, strength
and power, all things were made, that is to say, the
holy Ghost.Psal. 89. And in his 89. Psalme, he speaketh of
the oyle in the same signification. Therefore I take
king Dauid here, when he saith, God hath annoynted
his head with oyle, that God hath illuminated
his spirite with the holy Ghost. And so is this place
taken of godly men,The work of the holi Ghoste in the hearts of the saith full. his head taken for his minde,
and oyle for the holy Ghost. And as oyle nourisheth
light, mitigateth labours and paines, and exhilerateth
the countenaunce: so doth the holy Ghost nourish
the light and knowledge of the minde, replenisheth

it with Gods giftes, and reioyceth the heart:
therefore the holy Ghoste is called the oyle of mirth
and consolation. And this consolation commeth vnto
king Dauid, and to all Gods liuely members, by
the meanes of Christ,1. Pet. 2. as Saint Peter saith: We be
people chosen, and a princely priesthoode, &c. By
the word (Cup) in this verse he meaneth, that he is
fully instructed in all godly knowledge, to liue vertuously
and godly for the time of this mortall life,
and so is the cup in the scripture taken for any thing
that can happen vnto vs, whether it be aduersitie or
prosperitie, for they be called cuppes: as Christ said
of his death,Matth. 26. 
                     Father, if it be possible, take this cuppe
from me.
                     Psal. 16. And Dauid in the 16. Psalme vseth it for
mans prosperitie in God: The Lord (saith he) is the
portion of mine inheritaunce, and of my cuppe. And
therein he speaketh in the name of Christ, whose inheritaunce
is the whole number of the faithfull, and
saith, that His inheritance which is the Church, by
Gods appointment is blessed and happie, for no aduersitie
can destroy it. This is meant by Dauids
words (The rod, the staffe, the table, the oyle, and the
cup:) and he vseth all these wordes, to declare the
carefulnesse, loue, and defence of God towardes miserable
man. And he could the better speake thereof
vnto others, bicause he had so many times felt, and
had experience that God was both strong and faithfull
towards him in al time of daunger & aduersitie.
                  And here is to be noted, that the daungers that
man is subiect vnto in this life, be not alone such as
heretofore king Dauid hath made mention of, as
sicknesse, treason, sedition, warre, pouertie, banishment,
and the death of the body: but he felt also (as
euery man of God shall féele and perceiue) that there
be greater perills and daungers that man standeth

in ieopardie of, then these be, by occasion of sinne, the
mother of all mans aduersitie.What sinn bringeth a man vnto. Sinne bringeth a
man into the displeasure and indignation of God,
the indignation of God bringeth a man into the hatred
of God, the hatred of God bringeth a man into
despaire and doutfulnesse of Gods forgiuenesse, despaire
bringeth a man into euerlasting paine, and euerlasting
paine continueth and punisheth the damned
creature with fire neuer to be quenched, with
Gods anger & displeasure which can not be reconciled
nor pacified. These be the troubles of al troubles,
& sorrowes of al sorrowes, as our sauiour Christ declareth
in his most heauenly prayer in S. Iohn,Iohn. 17. 
                     Non
rogo vt tollas eos è mundo, sed vt serues eos à malo. That
is to say, I do not (saith Christ to his heauenly father)
pray, that thou shouldest take those that I pray for
out of the worlde, but that thou preserue them from
euil. And in this prayer he hath wonderfully taught
vs, that a Christian man is subiect to two troubles,
one of the body, and an other of the soule, one of
the worlde, and another of the diuell. As for the
troubles of the world he saith,It is not expedient that we be without troubles, least we seeke our selues and forget god It is not so expedient,
that Christian men be deliuered from them, least in
idlenesse we should séeke our selues, and not God, as
ye children of Israel did: but this he knewe was most
necessa
                        ••
                     e, that the father should preserue vs in the
midst of these troubles with his help, from al sinne, &
transgression of his holy lawes: & this he assured his
disciples of, & al other that put their trust in him: not
that they should in this life be preserued & kept from
troubles and aduersities: but that the heauenly father
should alwayes giue vnto his, suche strength
and vertue against all the enimies of GOD, and
mans saluation, that they should not be ouer come
with troubles, that put their trust in him.
                  
                     
For God suffereth and appointeth his to fight and
make warre with sinne, and with all troubles and
sorrowes that sinne bringeth with it: but God will
neuer permit his, to be deadly and mortally wounded.
It is therefore expedient that man knowe who
he his greatest foes, & do worke him most daunger.
                  There be diuers Psalmes, wherein he setteth
foorth the perill that he was in, as well in his body
as in his soule: as when he complaineth of his banishment,
amongst not onely cruell people, but also
vngodly, that sought to take both his mortall life
from him, and also his religion and trust that he had
in Gods worde. Wherefore he compareth them to
the Tartarians and Arabians,
                     Psal. 120. men without pitie or
religion. And the like doth he afterwards in another
Psalme, where as giuing thankes for his deliuerie,
he saith, that, sinners froad vpon his backe, and many
times warred against him, and he should haue
bene ouerthrowne,Psal. 129. if GOD had not holpen him.
Where in he speaketh, not onely of battell with the
sworde against the body but also of heresie and false
doctrine against the soule. As ye may sée howe Senacherib
and Iulius the Apostata, two Emperours,
fought against the people of God, not onely to take
from them their liues: but also their religion and
true honouring of GOD. And of all battells that
is the cruellest, and of all enimies the principall,
that would take the soule of man from Gods word,
& bring it to the word of man. And that persecution
& trouble openly against Gods word cōtinued many
yeres, vntill Christ was preached abroad, & princes
made Christians. Then thought the diuell his kingdome
to haue bene ouerthrowne, and Christian men
might liue in Christes religiō, without any trouble
or warre for religion: howbeit at length for sinne,

the diuel entered by subtile meanes, not onely to corrupt
true religion, but also persecuted the true professours
thereof vnder the name of true religion, and
therein vsed a meruellous policie and craft, by men
that walked inordinately amongest the Christians
themselues.2. Thes. 3. From whose companies, sectes, and conuersation,
S. Paule willed vs to refraine by these
wordes: Wee commaund you brethren in the name
of our Lord Iesus Christ, that ye refraine from euery
one that is accompted a brother, that vseth himselfe
inordinately, and not according to the institution he
receiued of vs. And because ye haue not taken héede
of his holy commaundement, and kept your selues
from danger and peril of heresie, sinne, idolatrie, and
superstition, by the rod and staffe of God, nor haue
not eaten your meate of religion at Gods table, nor
your mindes haue béene annoynted with the holy
Ghost, (as Dauid in this Psalme saith that he was
against all troubles, by these meanes, defended and
mainteyned, that no perill of the bodie by the sword,
nor perill of ye soule by false doctrine could hurt him:)
therefore marke a little, and see the daungers that
haue hurted both you and your conscience also, not
like to be healed (as farre as I can sée) but more hurt
hereafter. For the way to heale a man is to expell
and put away sicknesse, and not to increase and continue
the sickenesse. From whome thinke ye that S.
Paule commaunded you to restraine in the name of
our Lord Iesus Christ? He saith, From him that behaueth
himselfe inordinately. Who is that think ye?
S. Paule saith, He that ruleth not himselfe after the
rule and institution that he himselfe had taught the
Thessalonians. So ye we must refraine then from all
such,Gala. 1. as conforme not them selues to ye institution of
S. Paule: yea, although he be an angel from heauen.
                  
                     
This departure from such as haue ruled and put
foorth errours and lies, is not newe, but hath béene
vsed in England of English men, more then twentie
yeares since we departed from the sea of Rome, for
the ambition of the Romish bishops that transgressed
both this ordinance of S. Paul and also of Christ.
Of the which deadly and pestilent ambition, the prophet
Ezechiel prophesied,Ezech. 34. and so did also S. Paule, if
prophesies by God,Actes. 20. and commaundements by his holy
Apostles had any thing preuailed in our dull and
naughtie heartes. Read the places, & sée your selues,
what is spoken of such a wicked shéepeheard. I doe
put you in minde of this wicked sea, because I do sée,
that contrarie to the word of God, contrarie to the
lawes of the realme most godly against the Popes
supremacie, against all our othes that be Englishmen,
and against all the old godly writers: this Antichrist
& member of the diuel, is not vnlike to haue
the regiment of your soules againe, which God forbid.
I doe exhort all men (therefore) to beware of
him, as of one that came naughtily to such vsurped
authoritie, and whose authoritie is not onely the
trouble of all Christian realmes and princes, but also
of all Christian soules. And as he hath béene alwayes
a trouble vnto the one, so hath he béene a destruction
to the other: as I will a little declare vnto
you, that ye may know him the better, and so by the
rodde and staffe of Gods word, defende your selues
from him.
                  The Gréeke Church for this ambition of the Romishe
bishop, separated her selfe from the Church of
Rome, and would not haue to do with her. For after
that the Gréekes knewe, that the bishops of Rome
ment to take from them their liberties, they would
not indure it: yet did the Romish bishops alwayes,

to come to the supremacie, picke quarels and maters
to fall out vpon, first with the Clergie and then with
the Laitie. Platina writeth howe Pius bishop of
Rome, béeing deceiued by one Hermes a very euill
man, began a new order about the kéeping of Easter
day, and altered the time that the Apostles and their
disciples vsed, vntill Pius dayes, which was to celebrate
and kepe the day of the resurrection of our Sauiour
Christ the fourtéenth moone of ye first moneth,
which is with the Iewes our March. And although
it be wel done to kéepe it vpon the Sunday, yet was
this an horrible presumption vpon so light a cause,
to excommunicate the Gréeke Church, and to make
diuision where before was vnion. It came to passe
in Victors time the first, which was about the yeare
of our Lord two hundred, and in the time of Iraeneus,
the bishop of Lugdune the disciple of Iohn the Euangelist,
this Victor would haue cōdemned the Gréeke
Church, & procéeded with excommunication against
it, had not Iraeneus letted it: yet was it the elder
Church, and had continued in the doctrine of the Apostles
from Christes time, and had Iohn the Euangelist
amongest them for the space of thréescore and
eight yeares after Christes ascension. And notwithstanding
the Gréeke Church was the elder Church:
yet the Romane Church to be equall with them, according
to the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, &
also according to the decrée that was made in the generall
Counsell at Nice. And the Gréeke Church neuer
contented with the Romish Church for the Supremacie,
vntill a proud and arrogant Moncke that
feigned humilitie, was preferred to be bishop of Cō
                        stantinople,
which came to such arrogancie of spirit,
that he would haue béene taken for the vniuersall
head of ye Church: which was a very marke to know

that he was of Antichrist, and not of Christ, as Gregorie
the great writeth to Constantia the Empresse,Antoninus histor. tit. 13. 3. 23. 13.
and at length this proud Monke at a Synod kept at
Constantinople, created himselfe the vniuersall head
of the Church. Although before his time one Menna,
and other archbishops of Constantinople, for the dignitie
of the imperial state being there, were called vniuersal
Patriarches: yet that was by name alone,
and without execution of authoritie in any foreigne
bishopricke or Church. But such was the ambition
of these bishops, that walked (as S. Paule saith) inordinately,
that they would haue the head and principalitie
of religion and of the Church, at Constantinople,
because there was the head and principalitie
of the worldly kingdome, and so they began betime
to confound the ciuil policie, with the policie of the
Churche, vntill they brought themselues not onely
to be heads of the Church, but also Lords of all Emperours
and kings, and at the last of God and Gods
word: as ruthfully it appeareth in mens conscience
at this present day. Which abhomination and pride
Pelagius the second bishop of Rome,Distinct. 99. nullus. both spake and
wrote against, and would that he nor any man els
should haue the name of a generall bishop.Antoninus tit. 12. cap. 3. And S.
Gregorie doeth confirme the same godly sentence of
his predecessour Pelagius, and would not, when he
was commaunded by the Emperour, whome Iohn
the bishop had abused, take the Archbishop of Constantinople
for the vniuersall head, nor condescend
vnto the Emperours commaundement, and wrote
to the Empresse that it was contrarie to the ordinance
of Christ and his Apostles, and contrarie to
the Counsell of Nice. He said also, that such new arrogancie
was a very token, that the time of Antichrist
drew nigh. And Gregorie did not onely write

and speake against this arrogancie and pride, but
suffered also great danger (as Platina writeth,) and
so did al Rome by the Lombards that Mauricius the
Emperour made to besiege Rome, because Gregorie
refused to obey the Archbishop of Constantinople
as the head of the Church.
                  But although Pelagius, Gregorie, and other godly
men, detested and abhorred this wicked arrogancie
to be the vniuersall head of the Churche: yet the
bishop of Rauenna, began amongst the Latines to
prepare the way to Antichrist,De gestis Longobard. lib. 3. cap. 12. as Paulus Diaconus
saith, and separated himselfe from the societie of other
Churches, to the intent he might come to bee a
head himselfe. But what at length came of it, Platina
writeth. And within a short time after, Boniface
the third being the bishop of Rome,In Leon. 2. about the yeare
of our Lord sixe hundred and seuen, Phocas the Emperour
iudged him to be head of the Church, against
both the bishop of Constantinople, & also of Rauenna,
and such a sentence was méet for such an arbitrour.
Phocas was a wicked man, a couetous man, an adulterer,
and a traiterous murtherer of his Lord &
maister Mauricius:
                     Platina in Bonifac. 3. and this man to make God and
the Romans amends, gaue sentence that the bishop
of Rome should be the vniuersal head of the Church.Paulus Diaconus de gestis Long. lib. 4. cap. 11.
But here was contemned the sentence and doctrine
of Christ and his Apostles, and also the decrées of the
holy Counsell of Nice. And no meruell: for they condemned
both partes of arrogancie and vsurpation,
and not only these Counsels, but all other for many
yeares, which decréed, that although one seate was
named before the other, yet the bishop of the principall
seate should not be the chiefest priest, or head of
the rest, but onely he should be called, The bishop of
the chiefest seate. And how much it is against S. Cyprian,
                     
they may sée that wil read works,De simplicitate clericorum. and also
against S. Hierome. But what lawe can rule wickednesse?
                  This wicked sea contended stil after Phocas had
giuen sentence with it for the supremacie, yet were
the bishops of Rome alwayes subiect to the Emperours,
as well of Constantinople as of Fraunce, for
the time of their reigne: yea, foure hundred yeares
and odde, after the iudgement of Phocas, they were
in this obedience, and were made by the Emperors,
vntill the time of Gregorie the seuenth, who in the
time of great sedition, translated the Empire into
Germanie, and neuer vsed iurisdiction in Emperours
and kinges, nor yet in the citizens of Rome:
but onely desired to haue all bishoppes causes to be
discerned by the sea of Rome, yet could not obteine
so much at those dayes: as appeareth by the Counsell
of Africa, whereas Boniface the first, could not
obteine with craft, nor with his lyes, that he made
of the Cannons decreed in the Counsell of Nice, to
haue causes deferred to the sea of Rome. And as for
this name (Pope,)To be called Pope, was at the first generall to all bishops. was a generall name to all bishopps,
as it appeareth in the Epistles of Cyprian,
Hierome, Augustine, and of other old bishoppes and
doctours, which were more holy and better learned,
then these latter ambitious and glorious enimies of
Christ & Christes church. Read the text. Distinct. 50.
C. De eo tamen,
                     Histor. lib. 
                     &c. Absit. And there shall ye sée,
that the Cleargie of Rome,2. cap. 27. in their letters, called
Cyprian Pope, and Clodoueus the king of Fraunce
named the bishop of Rome, as he did other bishops,
A bishoppe.
                  This was the state of the primatiue Churche,
which was both néere vnto Christ in time, and like
vnto him in doctrine,Gal. 2. and kept S. Pauls equalitie,

where as he saith, He was appointed amongest the
Gentiles, as Peter was amongest the Iewes. And
although the bishops in the time of Constantine the
great, obteined that, amongest bishops, there should
be some that should be called Archbishops and Metropolitanes:
yet,Con. Nicen. cap. 6. all they were not instituted to be
heades generally of the Church, but to the ende they
should take more paines, to sée the Church well ordered
and instructed: and yet this preeminence was
at the libertie and discretion of princes, and not always
bound vnto one place and one sort of prelats,
as the wickednes of our time beléeueth: as ye may
sée in the Counsels of Calcedon and Africa. So that
it is manifest, this superiour preeminence is not of
Gods lawes, but of mans, instituted for a ciuil policie:
and so was the church of Constantinople equal
with the Church of Rome. And in our dayes Erasmus
Roterodame writeth and saith, this name (To
be high bishop of the world) was not knowen to the
old Church: but this was vsed, that bishops were all
called Highe priestes: and that name gaue Vrban
the first vnto all bishops, as it is written in Distinct.
59. cap. Si officia. Anno Dom. 226. But as for one to
be head of all, it was not admitted. And the Gréeke
Church did neuer agrée to this wicked supremacie,
nor obeyed it, vntill the yeare of our Lord one thousand
two hundred and two, compelled therevnto by
one Baldwine, that brought the Frenchmen by the
helpe of the Venetians vnto Constantinople, to restore
one Alexius vnto the Empire, vppon this condition,
that he should subdue the Gréeke Church to
the Church of Rome. But this came to passe, that
the Pope, neuer after he had gotten by almes and
helpe of princes to be ouer them, passed one iote for
the Emperour of Constantinople, further then he

serued his turne. So that ye may sée both his beginning
and procéedinges to be of the diuel, which if ye
kill not with the staffe of Gods woord, and beate
him from your conscience, he will double kill your
soules.
                  Nowe within one hundred and fiftie yeares after
Phocas had made the bishop of Rome head of the
Church, the bishop of Rome contemned the Emperour
of Constantinople, and deuised to bring the empire
into Fraunce, and to giue the king of Fraunce
the same authoritie ouer ye bishop of Rome, that before
the Emperour had, as it appeareth in Charles
the great, and his successours a long time: and yet
was the bishop of Rome vnder the princes, and not
(as he is now) an idol exempt from all order and obedience.
For princes made the bishops of Rome,
and all other bishops within their realmes, and so
continued the making of the Pope in the Emperors
authoritie, vntill it was about the yeare of our Lord
one thousand one hundred & tenne. After that Henrie
the fift being sore molested by sedition moued against
him by the Pope Paschalis the second,Hee meaneth here authoritie to electe bishops, & to haue power of bothe swords. was
constreined at length to surrender his authoritie
vnto him, who turned the face of his bishopricke into
manifest warres. What followed when ye Pope
was thus frée, and liued without obedience to the
Christian Magistrates, I will not in this treatise
make mention, but put you in remembraunce that
for certeintie there followed such trouble amongest
Christian princes, as neuer was before, as it is to
be séene by the doing of the wicked man Gregorie
the seuenth, who toke then vpon him to haue authoritie
to vse two swordes, the spirituall and the temporall,
in so much that Henrie the fourth was compelled
thréescore and two times to make warre in

his life,Alberus Crantzius ecclesiast. histor. li. 6. by the meanes of the bishop of Rome. And
as it is written, this wicked bishop stirred vppe the
Emperours owne brother in lawe Radulphus the
Duke of Sueuia to warre against him, and sent him
a crowne of Golde with this verse grauen in it, Petradedit
Petro, Petrus diadema Radulpho. That is to
say, Christ gaue the Empire to Peter, Peter giueth it
to Radulphe. Meaning that Christe had giuen the
Empire worldly to the bishop of Rome, and he gaue
it to Radulphe. Ye may sée what a rodde the Emperours
made for their owne tayle. For, after they
had made the bishop of Rome head of the Church, the
bishops made themselues shortly after the heades of
Emperours and kings. A iust plague of God for all
them that will exalt such to rule, as God said should
be ruled.
                  These bishops be not onely proude, but also vnthankefull.
For whereas all the worlde knoweth
the bishops authoritie to come from the Emperour
in worldly things,Abbas Vspergensis in suo chronico. and not from God, but against
God: this monster Gregorie the seuenth saide, that
Christ gaue him the Empire of Rome, and he giueth
it to the Duke of Sueuia Radulphe, to kill his good
brother Henrie the fourth. He that will know more
of this wicked man, and of his brethren bishops of
Rome, let him read Benno the Cardinal that writeth
in his historie of the Popes, that he saw of Iohn
the twentieth, Benedict the ninth, Siluester the third,
Gregorie the sixte,Platina in Alex. 3. 
                     Leo the ninth, Alexander the seconde.
But in his olde dayes he sawe and writeth
horrible & execrable thinges of Gregorie the seuenth.
Yet was Englande free from this beaste of Rome
then, in respecte of that it was before the idol was
expelled in king Henrie the 8. time. But Alexander
the third, neuer rested to moue men to sedition, vntil

such time as king Henrie the seuenth was content
to be vnder him as other were: And all this suffered
England for Thomas Becket the Popes Martyr.
                  When they were crept vp into this high authoritie,
all their owne creatures bishops of their secte,
Cardinals, priestes, monkes, and friers, could neuer
be contented to be vnder the obedience of the
princes: and to say the trueth, princes durst not (in
maner) require it, for they were in danger of goods
and life. And ye Emperour Henrie the seuenth, was
poysoned by a monke, that poysoned the idol of the
Masse, both a god and minister méete to poyson men,
and both of the Popes making. And what conscience
did they make of this thinke ye? Doubtlesse none at
all, for the Pope saith, and so do al his children, that
he can dispense, and absolue themselues, and al men,
from what othes soeuer they haue made to God or
man. This enimie, with his false doctrine, is to be
resisted and ouercome by the word of God, or els he
wil destroy both bodie and soule. Therefore, against
all his craftes and abhominations, we must haue
the Rodd, the Staffe, the Table, the Oyle, the Cup
that Dauid speaketh of, in a readinesse to defend our
selues with all. Now followeth the last part of this
holy Hymne.
               
               
                  ¶The seuenth part of the Psalme.
                  
                     What the ende of Gods troubled
people shalbe.
                  
                  THE SIXT VERSE.
                  
                     The louing kindnesse shal followe me all the dayes
of my life, and I will dwell in the house of the
Lord for euer.
                  
                  
                     
                     I Will in the middest of all troubles be
strong and of good chéere, for I am assured,
that thy mercie and goodnesse will
neuer forsake me, but will continually
preserue me in all dangers of this life:
and when I shall depart from this bodily life, thy
mercie wil bring me into that house of thine eternal
ioyes, whereas I shall liue with thée in euerlasting
felicitie.
                  Of this part we learne, that the dangers of this
life, be no more then God can and will put from vs,
or preserue vs in them, when they come vnto vs
without danger: also that the troubles of this world
be not perpetuall nor damnable for euer, but that
they be for a time onely sent from God, to exercise
and proue our faith and patience. At the last we
learne, that the troubles being ended, we begin and
shall continue for euer in endlesse pleasure and consolation,
as Dauid sheweth at the end of his Psalm.
So doeth Christe make an ende with his disciples,
when he hath committed them, for the time of this
life, to the tuition of the heauenly father, whiles he
is bodily absent: he saith at length they shalbe where
he is himselfe in heauen for euer. For in this life, all
be it the faithfull of God, haue consolation in Gods
promises, yet is their ioy very darke and obscure, by
reason of troubles both without and within: outwardly
by persequution: inwardly by temptation.
Therefore, Christ desireth his father, to lead and
conduct his Church in trueth and veritie, whiles it
is here in fight & persequution with the diuel, vntill
it come to a perfect and absolute consolation, where
as no trouble may molest it. For then, and not before
(to what perfection soeuer we come) shall wee
be satisfied, as Dauid saith:Psalm. 16. 
                     The plentifulnesse of

pleasure and ioy is in the sight and contemplation of
thee, ô Lord. For, Then shal the minde of man fully
be satisfied, when he being present, may presently beholde
the glorious maiestie of God:
                     2 Cor. 13. 
                     for God hath
then al ioyes present to him that is present with him,
& then man knoweth God, as he is knowen of God,
These ioyes in the end of troubles, should giue the
troubled man the more courage to beare troubles
patiently,Rom. 8. and be persuaded (as S. Paule teacheth,)
that The troubles of this present life, be not worthie
of the ioyes to come, whiche shall be reuealed to vs,
when Christ commeth to iudge the quick and the
dead. To whome with the father and
the holy Ghost, be all honour and
praise, world without
end. Amen.
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶AN EXPOSITION
vppon the 62. Psalme, made by
the constant Martyr of Christe, Maister
IOHN HOOPER, Bishop of Glocester
and Worcester.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               THe Prophete in this Psalme doeth declare (by his owne experience,)
how the trueth of Gods worde, and such as fauour
and followe the same, be esteemed and vsed in the worlde,
of worldly men: the trueth it selfe reiected: and the louers
thereof slaundered and persequuted. And seeing trueth and true
men before the Prophetes time, in his time, and after his time,
were thus miserably afflicted: in this psalme he writeth his own
condition and miseries, with certeine and most comfortable remedies,
whiche wayes the afflicted person may best comforte
him selfe, and passe ouer the bitternesse and daungers of his
troubles, and suffer them, as long as God layeth them vppon
him, patiently. So that whosoeuer from the feeling of his heart
can say this Psalme, and vse the remedies prescribed therein, by
the spirite of God: doubtlesse he shall be able to beare the
troubles bothe of the diuell and man patiently, and contemne
them strongly.
            
            
               
                  ¶The partes of the Psalme be in number
generally two.
                  1 In the first is conteyned: how that the fauour of God,
and his helpe, is able to remedie all aduersities.
                  2 In the second is conteyned: how that the fauour of man,
and his helpe, is able to redresse no aduersities.
                  
                     The first part comprehendeth eight verses of the
Psalme.
                  
                  
                     
                     The second part conteyneth the other foure verses
that next followe to the end of the Psalme.
                  
               
               
                  ¶These two generall partes doe conteine
more particular partes in them, in
number sixe.
                  1 First what is to be done, by the Christian man, that is
afflicted.
                  2 The seconde parte sheweth, why the troubled man in
trouble, looketh for helpe of God.
                  3 The third parte declareth, how soudenly God can destroy
the persquuters of the trueth.
                  4 The fourth part conteyneth the repetition of the first and
the second part, with more causes shewed: why patiently
trouble is to be borne, and faithfully to be beleeued,
that God can and will remedie it.
                  5 The fifte part declareth, that mans power is not to be
feared, nor his friendshippe to be trusted vnto: for no
man is able to damne or saue.
                  6 The sixte parte setteth foorth, how that God hath
promised to helpe the afflicted: and will assuredly perfourme
it.
               
               
                  ¶The Psalme with the partes before named,
where they beginne: and where
they ende.
                  1 My soule truely wayteth still vpon God.
                  
                     The first parte teacheth a man to flie vnto God
in the time of oppression and trouble.
                  
                  2 For of him commeth my saluation. He verily is
my strength and my saluation: hee is my defence, so
shall I not greatly fall.
                  
                     The second part of the Psalme that declareth, why the

troubled man trusteth in God.
                  
                  3 How long will ye imagine mischiefe against euerie
man? Ye shalbe slayne all the sorte of you: yea as
a tottering wall shall ye be, and like a broken hedge.
                  4 Their deuise is onely how to put him out, whom
God will exalte: their delight is in lyes: they giu
                        •
                     
good wordes with their mouth, but curse with thei
                        •
                     
heart. Selah.
                  
                     The thirde parte of the Psalme: wherein is shewed, th
                           •
                        
soudenly thy persequuters of the innocent shall peris
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  5 Neuerthelesse, my soule wayt thou stil vpon Go
                        •
                     
for my hope is in him.
                  6 He truely is my strength, and my saluation, he 
                        •
                     
my defence, so that I shall not fall.
                  7 In God is my health, and my glorie, the rocke 
                        ••
                     
might: and in God is my trust.
                  8 O put your trust in him always (ye people) pow
                        •
                     
out your harts before him, for God is our hope. Sela
                        •
                     
                  
                  
                     In these foure verses is conteyned the fourth part: whe
                           •
                        
in is mentioned the repetition of the two first verse
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  9 As for the children of men, they are but vaine, th
                        •
                     
children of men are deceiptfull vpon the weightes▪
they are altogether lighter then vanitie it selfe.
                  10 O trust not in wrong and robberie, giue not you
                        •
                     
selues to vanitie: if riches increase, sette not you
                        •
                     
heartes vpon them.
                  
                     Here is the fifte parte, that teacheth no trust to be put 
                           〈◊〉
                        
man: for he is not able to damne nor saue.
                  
                  11 God spake once, and twise, I haue also heard t
                        ••
                     
same: that power belongeth vnto God.
                  12 And that thou Lorde art mercifull: for thou r
                        ••
                     
wardest euerie man according to his worke.
                  
                     In these two verses is comprehended the sixt parte, whi
                           ••
                        
is, that God hath promised to be mercifull in helpi
                           ••
                        
the afflicted: and that he will performe his promises.
                  
               
            
            
               
               A briefe explanation of the Psalme
generally.
               
                  
                     MY soule doubtlesse wayteth still
vpon God, &c. Be my troubles
neuer so great and daungerous:
yet my soule shall trust continually
and constantly in the Lorde,
that can and will remedie them.
For he is my strength, and my
saluation: and he is my defence.
               
                  So shall I not greatly fall. Although good Lorde by
reason of mine infirmitie and sinne, which is in all
men, my soule is weake and féeble, that it wilbe oppressed
with the lightest of all thy troubles, whiche
thou layest vpon man for his sinne: yet, when it
taketh holde of thy mercie, it waxeth strong. And although
it be weake and trembling by reason of infirmitie:
yet doth it not cleane fall from the trust of
constancie and hope.
               And let the wicked imagine their wicked imaginations
against thy poore seruauntes, O God: yet at
length shall they come to shame and destruction: as
the tottering wall doth fall, and the rotten hedge is
consumed with fire. For that they go about, they
shal neuer bring to passe: because they deuise to put
him to shame, that God hath purposed to exalt and
magnifie. And what so euer doublenesse they vse, to
speake faire with their mouthe, and yet haue false
and hollowe heartes: it shall not bring their intent
to their purposed end. Sela. God be thanked, of
whom dependeth al the hope of my saluation. And
he is my strength, my saluation, and my defence: so
that I shal not fall.
               Wherefore, all Christian and afflicted persons

(saith the Prophet) follow mine example, and put al
your hope and trust in the mercie of God: who onely
saue vs from euill, and blesse vs with all goodnesse.
               Powre out therefore before him all your cares
and heauines: and looke assuredly for help from him:
for doubtlesse the helpe of man is nothing worthe.
For, If man and vanitie were bothe weighed in a
paire of balance: vanitie it selfe would be weightier
then man. How then can so light a thing as man is,
helpe in the time of trouble? And as a man is but
vanitie, or else rather more vaine then vanitie: so be
al worldly riches that man possesseth, and as little, or
lesse able to helpe an afflicted, as man is vnable
to helpe himselfe.
               And this I knowe (sayeth the Prophete) not by
mans wisdome, but by the mouth of God, that what
so euer helpe man looketh for, besides God: he may
be assured at all times, to be both helpelesse and comfortlesse:
and trusting to God, he shall be at all times
both holpen and comforted. For so saith the Lorde:
whose sayings no power is able to falsifie, nor to
resist.
            
            
               ¶What things are to be noted out of euerie particular part
of this Psalme, for the edifying and comfort of him,
that shall vse to say, sing, or meditate
this Psalme.
               
                  THE FIRST PARTE.
                  
                     My soule truely wayteth vpon God.
                  
                  
                     OVt of the first part (wherein is conteyned,
what the Christian should doe in
the time of trouble) is to be noted,
what it is for a man to haue his soule
wayting still vppon God: or else to

haue silence alwayes in his soule towardes God, in
the dayes of aduersitie. As this Psalme speaketh.
                  When the Christian man or woman in the time
of sorrowe and heauinesse,When doth the soule of man waite vpon the Lorde in the dayes of trouble or els hath silence? without grudge or impatience
looketh for the helpe of God, and giueth not
himselfe to quarelling or complayning of God, as
thoughe hée did him wrong and punished him too
muche: then doth the soule waite vpon the Lord, or
else hath silence towardes God. As wee maye sée
by Iob: where his soule attended stil vpon the Lord.
When his goodes, cattell, house, and children, were
taken from him, he said after this sorte:Iob. 1. 
                     The Lord
gaue them, the Lorde hath taken them away: as the
Lorde is pleased, so is it done: The name of the Lord
be blessed, All this while hee bore the crosse of God
without murmur or grudge: and had his soule still
wayting vpon God, as this Prophet here saith. But
when he was burdened further, and from the sole
of the foote to the top of the head, was stricken with
sores and botches: he cursed the day that he was
borne in,Iob. 3. and the night wherein he was conceiued,
with many more vnquiet and lamentable wordes,
as it appeareth in his Booke.
                  The like example we haue before of king Dauid
in the Booke of the Psalmes,Psalm. 31.
                     Iob. 13. 17.
                     Psalm. 23. where be these wordes.
In trouble and aduersitie, I said: I was cast away from
the sight of thine eyes, ô God. And as Iob sometime
saide, If he should die, yet he would trust in the
Lord. So sayde Dauid a litle before, If he should goe
in the middest of the shadowe of death he would not
feare. In the whiche Psalme ye may sée, how constantly
his soule wayted vpon the Lorde: yet in the
31 Psalme his troubles were so great, that in them
he saide, I am cast from the sight of thee, ô God. So
that these testimonies and examples of the Scriptures

do declare, that to haue the soule to wayte vppon
the Lord,What it is to haue the soule to waite vpon the Lorde in the time of trouble? is to be assured that God will helpe in
trouble, and patiently to beare the trouble without
grudge, vntill God sende remedie and helpe for it.
                  The second thing to be gathered of the first parte,
is to marke and sée, that in the verie electes of God,
and most excellent personages amongest holie men:
there is sometime, quiet, patient, and thankfull sufferance
of aduersitie strongly, that it séemeth in the
soule of him that is troubled, there is so constant and
strong faith, that it maketh all sorrowes and troubles
rather pleasaunt and swéete, then heauie, burdenous,
or painefull. At another time troubles séeme
vnto them so heynous and grieuous, that the burden
of them is as great a paine, as death: not onely
vnquieting the bodie, but also verie sore vexing of
the spirite, with these and like cogitations,Psalm. 31. 42. 43. 77. Increase and decrease of faith in the faythfull. Wisdome to be learned of the premisses. 
                     God hath
cast me out of his sight, God will haue mercie vppon
me no more, My soule is heauie and troubled. And
this diuersitie of increase and decrease of faith and
hope of holie men and women before our time, teacheth
vs great wisedome and consolation: wisdome,
in that we sée, faith and hope be not naturall qualities
in man, although he be neuer so vertuous, or
neuer so gratiously elected by God, to eternal saluation:
but they be the mercifull giftes of God, giuen
vnto man for Christes sake: and wrought by the holie
Ghost, aboue mans deseruings.
                  We learne also that the giftes of God,faith, hope charitie, &c. be not at al times of like strength. faith, hope,
and charitie, patience, and sufferance, with such like
vertues: be not at all times of like condition and
strength in man: but at sometime so strong, that nothing
can feare vs: and at another time so weake,
that all thinges do make vs dismayed, and fearefull.
Now and then it is so doubtfull, that we cannot tell

whether it were best to suffer for the trueth: or else
to be released consenting vnto falshoode. Thus
God vseth his giftes in vs, not alwayes after one
sorte, partely for our sinnes: and partely, to proue
vs, and to bring vs to a certeine knowledge of our
infirmitie and weakenesse. From Saule, Iudas,
and Caine, he tooke his spirite cleane: to punishe
their iniquitie, and wickednesse. And from Iob to
attempte his patience, and to make his féele, that
of him selfe, he coulde beare nothing.
                  We learne consolation out of this texte,Consolation. in this,
that in our troubles the Lord forsaketh vs not, but
comforteth vs.The Lord forsaketh not his people in trouble. Psalme. 44. And the more our troubles and aduersities
be: the more is his grace and fauour towardes
vs. As the Prophet sayth in another of his
Psalmes, As aduersities oppressed my heart: so thy
consolations, Lorde, reioyced me. In the whiche
Psalme ye may sée, what consolation the afflicted
conscience taketh in aduersities.
                  The Psalme is made against the wicked oppressoures,
and persequutors of the poore. Wherein they
say, As the tyrannie of the wicked troubleth vs: so
thy consolations (good Lorde) do reioyce and comfort
vs. and the same sayth Saint Paule to the Corinthians,2. Corin. 1.
                     As the afflictions of Christe doe abounde in
vs: euen so by Christe aboundeth our consolation.
                  
                  There is also to be noted, in that the prophete
sayeth: (His soule wayteth vpon the Lorde.)
                  Many men can dissemble iniuries,Mat. 10. 26 wrongs, and
oppressions outwardely.Iohn. 11. 18 Some times, when they
be not able to reuenge:Luke. 19 and some tunes, when they
dare not reuenge, for lacke of opportunitie and occasion,
lest more harme mighte insue of that their enterprise.
As the Iewes durst not kill Christ a great
while, for feare of the people: yet were they murderers

in their hearts before God, the fact outwardly
not then being don. Some againe reuenge not, bicause
they thinke, dissembled patience will gaine
worldly commodites & riches. Howbeit, this quietnesse
& refraining from reuenging: is nothing worth
before God. But when the hart & soul waiteth vpon
God,Note. & is contented to be as God maketh it: yt wayting
& seruice of the soul, the Lord delighteth in, and
is pleased withall. This is a godlie doctrine & much
to be desired, to haue the minde contented with such
things, as be troublesome and painefull to the bodie
outwardly. And where the minde wayteth not patiently
vpon the Lorde in trouble: it will appeare
diuers wayes. Sometime, many yeres after the displeasure
is done, the man that suffered the displeasure,
reuengeth it wrongfully,The impatience of the minde, is many ways knowen. and cruelly: as the
Phariseis and the highe priestes, deferred the bloudie
fact in the killing of Christ, vntil they had gotten
time and opportunitie for their purpose. Sometime
the impatience and vnquietnesse of the minde, appeareth
with checkes and taunting aunsweres vnto
God:Caine. Gene 4. as when God asked Caine, Where his brother
Abel was? he asked God againe, Whether he were
his brothers kéeper, or no? The same wayes appeared
Pharaoes vnquietnesse.Pharao. Exod. 5. When God would haue
had him to dismisse his people: he asked, What God
he was, vnto whome he should doe such homage and
seruice? Somtime it appeareth, by desperate weighing
the greatenesse of trouble: not considering the
mercie of God that is greater then sinne.Gene. 4. Abel. As Caines
vnquieted soule for the killing of Abel, brought his
tongue to blaspheme the mercie of God, saying: that
His iniquitie was greater then the mercie of God
could forgiue.Iudas. Matth. 27. So did the wicked soule of Iudas that
betrayed Christ, make his tongue confesse before the

Pharisées his treason and wickednesse: and neuer
to call vpon Christe for remission thereof.
                  Sometime the impatience of the mind, is knowen
outwardly: by finding fault with Gods workes.
As when Adams minde was vnquieted for the eating
of the apple,Adam. Gene. 3. he said vnto God: that his wife the
woman that he gaue vnto him, deceiued him. Achab
the wicked king being impatient,Achab. 3. Reg. 18. with the scourges
that God sent vpon his Realme, for his owne sinnes
and the peoples: picked a quarell with the good prophete
Elias, & saide: that he troubled all his Realme.
So saide the Iewes against Paule:Iewes. Act. 21. 23. 
                     This is he that
troubleth all the worlde.
                  
                  This is daily séene, when so euer the minde and
the soule is vnquieted: the fault is laide vpon Gods
worke. As if the higher powers hang a true man,
and saue a théefe: deliuer Barabbas, & hang Christ:
streight way the tongue walketh, that He is set in
authoritie by God. In déede so he is, but yet to punishe
the euill, and to mainteine the good: and not
to molest the good, and mainteine the euill, as commonly
now a dayes is séene.Simon Magus. Simon Magus shalbe
at libertie: and Simon Peter in chaines. Annas and
Caiphas shall rule like Lordes: Christe and Saint
Paule shalbe ruled, and suffer death: althoughe not
personally in their owne bodies, yet in their members
and disciples.
                  Let the minde of the théefe be touched for thefte:Theefe.
streightway pouertie, the worke of GOD, beareth
the blame.Whoremongers. Let whoredome vexe the whoremongers
minde: immediately the tongue complayneth vpon
Gods worke,Couetous men. youth, strength, and such other. Let the
minde be troubled with couetousnesse: by and by
Gods worke, wife, children be alledged for excuse.
For they must be prouided for, saith the couetous

man: when he hath enoughe for himselfe and tenne
times as many moe children, as God hath sent him,
if it were thankfully vsed towardes God, and liberally
towardes the worlde. So that if any man be
touched with anguish or heauinesse for sinne: immediately
the tongue saith, He was borne vnder an euill
Planet,Gene. 1. or in an euill houre, and so findeth fault
with the worke of God, which God made excellent
good. Thus may ye sée, where as the soule of man
wayteth not vppon God: the impatient man accuseth
God, and all his workes, both in heauen and in
earth.Prou. 18. The godly feeling the rod of God, doe accuse thē
                        selues: acknowledging their offences to haue merited the same. Mich. 7. But the godly féeling the rodde of God for
sinne and iniquitie (as GOD neuer punisheth
withoute iuste cause,) he firste accuseth him selfe,
and acknowledgeth his owne offences: and then
sayeth with the Prophete Micheas, I will suffer the
indignation of God, for I haue deserued it.
                  
                  To this wayting vpon the Lorde without quarelling
and desperate lamenting, exhorted Ieremie
the prophete the children of Israel, for the time of
their being in seruitude and captiuitie of Babylon:
bidding them to plante and grafte trées, and so to
prouide for themselues vntil the time were expired,
of their affliction and captiuitie.
                  Men may mourne and lament their sinnes and
troubles, that they suffer for sinne: as we may sée
howe the Psalme of the Prophet,Psal. 137. conteineth the bewailing
and wéeping of the people, that sate heauily
and lamentably by the riuer side in Babylon.
And the like may ye reade in the Lamentations of
Ieremie. But this mourning was without desperation
and quarelling, as the letters and bookes do
recorde. Besides these thinges, the cause of their bewailing
and lamenting, whiles their soules waited
vpon the Lorde, differeth from the moste forte of

mourners and bewaylers nowe a dayes. For we
may sée nowe a dayes, if the wife bewaile the death
of her husbande: it is moste commonly, because she
hath taken from her a louing head and gouernour.Note.
If the husbande lament the departure of his wife:
it is because he is bereaued of a faithfull healper. If
the sonne mourne for the death of his father: it is
because there is taken from him, not onely his father,
but also his patrone and defender. If the parentes
be sorrie for the taking away of their children:
it is because they want their daliaunce, sport
and pastime with them, or such other worldly affections.
If the prince take gréeuously, the calling away
of his subiecte from this worlde: it is because
he lacketh a trustie souldier, a faithful capteine, a
wise counseller, or profitable officer. If the subiect
lamente the death of his prince: it is because he
hath lost his aduauntage, authoritie, or estimation.
If the seruaunt wéepe for his maister: it is because
with his maister is departed his commoditie, and
trust of wordly riches and friendship. If the maister
mourne for his seruaunt: it is because there
is taken from him, a skilfull, a diligente, or a faithfull
doer of his businesse. And such like causes, as
men gréeuously of euerie sort féele and lament. If
the Parson lament his parishioner: it is most commonly
because he séeth the breach of an honest housholde
decayeth his tenthes and profite. And if the
parishioner mourne for his pastour: most commonly
it is, because he loss a good companiō or profitable
friend. If the Bishoppe bewaile the death of suche
as dy in his diocesse: it is most commonly because he
is destitute of suche a one, as fauoured much affection,
to set fourth and doe suche thinges as he worldly
desired shoulde goe forewardes: or else perchaunce

such manner of one as coulde excuse him, what negligence
or faulte so euer he shoulde perpetrate or
committe for the time he were in office. If the diocesse
be sorrie for the death of the Bishoppe: it
is because the one parte (which is the Clergie) doth
feare, leaste there shall come another, that wilbe
more diligent and quicke in doing his office, and
sée that they shall do the same. The other partie (called
the Temporaltie) lamente, because they haue
loste such a one, as peraduenture fedd well their belies
with bread and béefe, or else was so remisse, that
he woulde suffer all sinne vnpunished, and rather
be a bearer of the euill, then a mainteiner of the good.
Nowe this is suche béewayling and mourning, as
Ethnickes, Publicanes, and Infidels may haue. But
wherefore the Christian soule that wayteth vppon
the Lord (without quarell or desperation) doth wéep
& lament: reade you the Psalme before named, and
the lamentations of Ieremie: and there shall you
finde in the Psalme these words: We sate by the riuers
of Babylon and wepte, when wee remembred
thee (ô Sion).
                  
                  The chiefest cause of their wéeping was, because
the worde of God was not preached, the sacraments
ministred,Why sate the people by the riuer side of Babilon nor the Almightie God lauded and
praised in the temple of Hierusalem: as God had
commaunded by his worde. This is a moste iust,
& also a moste worthie cause to wéepe for, whiles
God punisheth vs: that for our sinnes, not onely our
quietnesse & wealth, but also the worde of God (whiche
is greater) is taken away, and his due honour
giuen vnto idols. A iust cause of lamentation.For the children of Israel perceiuing,
that Gods honor was defaced for their sinns,
they wepte as often as they remembred it: as God
giue vs grace to doe the same. The like did Saint

Peter.Peter. He lamented not, because he leafte all his
goods for Christes sake: but wept that by his deniall
of Christe,Matth. 27. he felte him selfe not constant
in the faith and loue of his Maister.Marie Magdalen. Luke. 7. So did Marie
Magdalene bewayle that she hadde offended
Christ: and not because the world knewe her to be
a sinner.Io. Chrysost. in Epist. ad Rom. c 1. 2. Psal. 73.
                  
                  Saint Iohn Chrysostome hath a notable saying,
He that feareth more hell, then Christ: is worthie of
hell. And that ment the prophet when he cryed out,
What is there in heauen or in earth, that I preferre
before thee, O Lord. As though he had saide: There
is nothing can make me as gladde as thy loue towardes
me, nor any thing so sorrie, as thy displeasure,
(good Lorde.)
                  Thus doth the soule of the verie Christian, waite
vpon the Lord in all troubles and aduersities: and
patiently doth beare the punishmentes of sinne: and
not only beare patiently the paine, but also considereth,
what is the greatest losse that may happen vnto
him, by reason of troubles. Not the losse of worldly
richesse, landes, and promotions, nor the losse of
health of bodie by sicknesse, neither the lesse of the
bodie it selfe by death,What is the gretest losse that a Christian cōsidereth. ne yet the losse of the soule into
eternall paines. But the greatest losse that he
weigheth, is the losse of the good will of him that
made him, and of greate mercie redéemed him, and
with much kindenesse alwayes nourished him.The prodigall son. Luke. 15.
                  
                  That is to be séene in the prodigall sonne, whiche
when he had spent all his goodes lecherously,
and brought him selfe to moste miserable pouertie,
& to such extreame famine, that he would haue bene
glad to haue eaten the meate prepared for the pigs,
besides the great heauines of hart, that weighed the
time of prosperitie, and conferred it with his estate

of so extreame miserie: yet nothing made him so sorie
and pensiue, as the calling to his remembrance,
howe vnreuerently he had vsed his moste gentle,
louing, and benigne father, who was not onely liberall
and frée to his children, but also to his hirelings
that lacked nothing.
                  This consideration of his offence towards his father,
made him a great deale more sorrie: then al the
paines he otherwise susteined. And thus must euerie
Christian waite vpon the Lord, and then doubtlesse
consolation shall followe: as it appeareth by
the same prodigal sonne, and by this Psalme of the
Prophet.
                  Moreouer, if we marke, with what dangers and
troubles the soule séeketh her Lorde and spouse Iesus
Christ, in the mysticall booke of Solomons Ballads:
we shall sée, with what attendaunce, diligence,
and patience the soule waiteth vpon Christ.Canti. 5.
                     I sought him (saith the soule,) but I found him not.
I called him, and he woulde not aunswere me. The
watchmen of the citie found me, and beatte mee, and
wounded me. They tooke my robe from me that
kepte the walles. I require you ye daughters of Hierusalem,
if ye find my spouse, tell him that I am sicke
with loue.
                  
                  Note these wordes,Note. 
                     I sought him, (saith the soule)
& found him not. I called him, and he answered not.
Was not this ynough to haue cleane discomforted
the heauie, sicke, and troubled soule, that ranne
and cryed to her loue and husband Iesus Christe,
and yet for the time, neuer the neare? Further,
in running and calling for him: the soule fell
into the handes of her enimies, that robbed her of
her mantell. And yet notwithstanding these daungers,
she cryed out vnto all that she mette: that incase

they founde her spouse,Note diligently. What dangers a christian shall fall in, and his duetie in seeking Christ prescribed. A notable example. The soule that hath a feruent loue to Christ, the troubles she susteineth in seking him greeueth her not: but the not finding of her spouse, is the onely cause of her sorrowe. The woman of Canaan. Matth. 15. Patient expectation of redresse taketh all scourges and troubles in good part. they woulde tell him
that she was sicke with his loue.
                  Ponder these thinges altogether, first to trauell
and crye, and not to profit. Next, in trauelling and
crying to lose all her goodes, yea the mantell that
she went in. Thirdly, to putte her life in daunger
with confessing Christe to be her spouse, before such
as hated him mortally. And yet howe did this Christian
creature? Doubtlesse wayted vpon the Lorde,
without murmur or grudge. And in all these troubles,
note there is no complaint nor quarell made
of her prayers that were not heard, of the paines
that for the time profited not, of ye losse of her goodes
and apparell, nor yet of the daunger that she was
in, of her and Christe her spouses enimies. But
here was the wéeping, lamentation, and sorrowe,
that Christ her spouse could not be found. In whose
loue she burned so ardently, that all aduersities
gréeued her not, neither did shée any thing at all estéeme
them: but onely the want of Christe was her
gréefe and sorowe. Yet was she patient, and trusted
still in the Lorde.
                  The like may ye sée by the woman of Canaan,
howe she called vpon the Lord for her daughter: vnto
whome Christe made no worde of answere. Further,
his disciples wer troubled and wearied, by her
importunate suite. Also Christe called her in maner
no better then a dogge: yet was there neither the
bitternesse of his wordes, nor the inhumanitie of
his Apostles, that she passed for, but she wayted still
vppon the Lorde, and was nothing sorrowfull for
all the sharpe words she suffered: but onely, because
the helpe of the Lord was not extended and bestowed
vppon her daughter, as she desired. But what insueth
of suche a patient expectation, and sorrowfulnesse

of Gods absence? Marke what the Prophete
sayeth.
               
               
                  The seconde part of the Psalme.
                  
                     
                        1 For of him commeth my saluation.
                        2 He verily is my strength and my saluation: hee is
my defence, so shall I not greatly fall.
                     
                  
                  
                     The seconde parte declareth: why the troubled person,
seeketh health of God.
                  
                  
                     HEere firste be thrée doctrines to be noted.Three doctrines to be noted.
                  
                  Firste to knowe by Gods worde,
that God can helpe. The second, that
God will helpe. And the thirde, that
the afflicted is bounde, boldely to require helpe of
God. Whereof the troubled person muste be assured
by the scripture, or else he shall neuer finde consolation.
                  Now to the firste parte, that God can helpe:
this scripture is to be marked,God is omnipotent. that saith, God is omnipotent,
that is to witt, able to do all thinges. So
said he to Abraham, when he eftsoones promised him
the land of Canaan:Gene. 17. 
                     I am the God omnipotent, walk
before me and be perfect. The same saide Iacob,
when Beniamin his young sonne, was so instantly
desired by his brethren, to go into Egypt, when they
lacked corne: My God omnipotent (saide Iacob)
can make the prince of Aegypt fauourable vnto you.
                     Gene. 43.
So did God tell Moses, that he was the Lorde that
appeared vnto Abraham,Exod. 6. Isahac, and Iacob, euen
the almightie God. The like is in the same booke,
when God had drowned Pharao and his hoaff:Pharao. Moses
gaue thankes,Exod. 15. and sayde, His name was almightie.

Thus in the word of God we may learne euery
where, as well by his name, as by his most meruellous
works: that he is omnipotent, and there is nothing
impossible vnto him.
                  
                     As God is able: so is he willing to saue.Euen so doth the word of God declare, that as he
is omnipotent and can saue: in like manner is he
willing and will saue. King Dauid saith,Psalm. 26. that He saueth
both man and beast. In another Psalme he
saith,Psalme. 34. God saked him from all aduersities. And againe
he saith,Psalme. 36 He wil saue all that trust in him. And
not onely saue: but also saue for nothing.Psalm. 56. So God
saith by the prophet Esaie: I will saue thy children.
And in the same booke it is declared, that Gods hand
is not weakened: but that he can saue and wil saue.Esaie. 49. and 59.
                  
                  This willing nature of God to saue, is manifestly
opened vnto vs in al the Prophets.Iere. 15. 23. Ezech. 34. Daniel. 12. Ose. 1. Sophon. 3. Zachar. 8. 9. 10.  And in Saint
Matthewe Christe saith:Matth. 18. Hee came to saue such as
were lost. The same is to be séene in S. Luke,Luke 9. howe
that The sonne of man came not to damne, but to
saue. S. Iohn the Euangelist saith:Iohn 3. His comming
was to saue the world. And S. Paul saith,1. Tim 2. He would
all men to be saued.
                  
                     As God can & will helpe: so doth hee command vs to call vnto him for helpe.Now as the word of God and the examples conteined
in the same, declare that God can & will helpe
in the time of trouble and aduersitie: so doeth it declare
that men be bound, to call and séeke for helpe
in the time of aduersitie. As we read in Esaie the
Prophet, where God cryeth out, in this sort:Esaie. 55. 
                     Ye that
be a thirst, come to the waters, &c. In S. Matthewe
Christ commaundeth all men that be troubled, to
come vnto him.Matth. 11. Also in the Psalmes, He biddeth all
men call vpon him in the dayes of their heauinesse:
and he will heare them, and deliuer them.Psalm. 50. Againe,
He willeth vs to aske and it shalbe giuen vnto vs.Matt. 7. 18. Marke. 11. Luke. 11. Ioan. 14. 15 16. 1. Ioh. 5.
                  
                  Nowe, as these thrée doctrines are to be marked

in the almightie God, so must they be grounded in
the heart of the troubled person. God alone is able to saue: and none but he.And first he must
giue this honour vnto God: that he alone is able to
saue, and none but he: as the Prophet Esay sayth of
him.
                  Then being thus persuaded, the afflicted person
will not séeke helpe at dead Saintes,Esaie. 45. nor at any other
creatures hande:No helpe to be soght at dead saincts, &c. but onely of God. God is inclined of himselfe to haue mercie. but at Gods onely. And as
none giueth God the strength able to helpe, but is of
it selfe in God and with God: so is there none that
can giue God a wil to helpe: but he of himselfe is inclined
to haue mercie vppon the afflicted, and his
mercie is most prone and readie to helpe the poore
and miserable.
                  Hereof learneth the afflicted Christian, that none
inclineth God to be mercifull, but his owne gentle
and pitifull nature. So that the sinners may boldely
in Christ resort vnto him firste, because he is mercie
it selfe: and not to goe astray to séeke firste mercie
at dead Saintes handes, and by their meanes at
laste finde God mercifull and readie to helpe him.
                  
                     The afflicted, by the commandement of God: taketh and acitie to approch to his mercie.And when the afflicted perceiueth, by the word of
God, that he commandeth him to call vpon him and
vppon none other: he may take a courage and audacitie
to be bolde to come vnto him, be his sinnes
neuer so many, horrible, or filthie: yea, if in number
they excéeded the grauell of the sea, yet be they fewer
alwayes then his mercie. If they be as redde as
scarlet: yet shall they be made as white as snowe.Esaie. 1.
The booke of wisedome sayth euen so,Sapient. 15. 
                     Although we
haue sinned, Lord we be thine: knowing thy greatnesse.
                  
                  And whereas these doctrines be grounded: sée
what followeth. In all the depth of anguishe and
sorrowe this followeth, (as this Psalme sayth,)Psalm. 62. 
                     Of

him commeth my saluation. He is my strength, my
saluation, and my defence, &c. The same may we sée
also in the Dialogue betwéen the Christian soule, or
Christes Churche and Christe, in the booke of Solomons
Ballads: were she neuer so blacke and burned
with the sunne, were she neuer so troubled with
the vanities of the worlde, she cried out and saide
boldely vnto Christe,Cantic. 1. 
                     Drawe me, we will runne after
thee.
                  
                  And although the poore wretched soule be enuironed
and compassed about with sinne, troubles and
aduersities, as the faire Lillie is hedged about with
thornes: yet she trusteth in her husband, that he will
helpe her.Consolation. And in déede most comfortably her spouse
Christ comforteth her, with these maruelous words.
Arise, haste thee my spouse, my faire one, and come.
Nowe Winter is past, the rayne is gone and ceassed.
                  
                  That Booke of Solomon is to be read,Read the booke of Solomons Ballads. to sée how
mercifully God comforteth a troubled and deformed
soule by sinne: and yet God layeth it not to the soules
charge, that hath Christe to her husband. Also there
is to be séene, that the soule is bolde to séeke and call
for help of God her husband, and goeth to no strange
God for ayde or succour, althoughe she be burned
with the sunne, and a miserable sinner.
                  The like is to be séene in the Prodigall sonne.
Although he was neuer so beggerly,Prodigall sonne. miserable, sinful,
wretched,Luke. 15. and vnkinde to his father: yet he said,
Euen as I am with my miseries,Let vs not bee ashamed to go to our heauenly father and confesse our sinnes, be they neuer so horrible: for when soeuer we return from our wickednes, he remēbreth no more our transgressions, but embraceth vs as his deare children. I will go to my
father and tel him, that I haue offended against him
and against Heauen.
                  The father, when he sawe him, spatte not at him,
reuiled him not, asked no accomptes of the goods he
had viciously spent, laide not to his charge his filthie
conuersation with whores and harlots, neither did

he cast into his téethe, howe he had dishonoured him
and his familie: but when he sawe him a farre off,
hee was moued with compassion towardes him,
ranne to méete him, tooke him about the necke, and
kissed him. The sonne confessed his fault: and the father
minding more the comforte of his lowsie and
beggerly sonne, then the repetition of his transgressions:
commaunded his seruantes spéedily to fetche
him robes and to clothe him, gaue him a ring vpon
his finger, and shooes to his féete, killed his fat calfe,
and made merrie and reioyced with his loste sonne,
that he was found againe. Here is the state and condition
of a soule, that wayteth (as Asaph saith) for a
time vpon the Lorde in trouble and heauinesse, meruellously
sett foorth.
                  Sée this wretched man spoyled of al his goods, destitute
of all friendes, shutte out of all honest cōmpanie,
of a Gentleman become a swineheard, of one
that had once men to waite vppon him, become now
a waiter vpon pigges: once he gaue others meate,
and nowe all men refuse to féede him: erst a man
that scarse delicate dishes coulde contente his appetite,
nowe his stomache yrketh till it be filled with
swines foode: yet more ouer then that, he sawe nothing
behinde him, nor before him: but miserie and
wretchednesse. Behind him he left al his goods spent
riottously, his estimation, parentage, such frends as
he had: when mony was plentie, lost & also (as farre
as reason could sée) his fathers vtter displeasure and
the reproch & ignominie of his alliaunce and kinsefolke
purchased for euer. Before him he saw hunger
and scarsitie, a sorte of filthie swine, and the best
meate, draffe & chaffe for the sustenance and maintenaunce
of his piggishe life, in case he might haue
béene so mainteyned: yet in the middest of these sorrowes,

attending in his spirite vpon the mercie of
his father: meruelously in the filthe of a pigges slie,
and in the paines and anguishe of miserie: hearke
what a wonderfull doctrine he bloweth out: Oh
what abundance of bred is there in my fathers house,
and I starue here for hunger? I will arise and gette me
to him, and confesse my fault, &c. He saieth not, Oh
what abundaunce of bread hath my brother and my
kinsefolke: but, What abundance of bread is there in
my fathers house. He said not, I will make my complaint
to my brother: but said, To my father.
                  Whereof is learned,The heauenly father is to be resorted vnto in the dayes of necessitie & hunger: for he only hath the breade of mercy to seede his children. that all penitent Christian
sinners doe know, that the heauenlie father hath the
bread of mercie, to satisfie their hungrie desire: and
that he is to be resorted vnto in such sinnefull and
troublesome state, and not any other in heauen, but
he alone through Iesus Christe, who was killed to
redéeme and saue the penitent faithfull sinners of
the worlde.
                  Sée now how this Prodigall & outragious sonne
knew, why he should séeke helpe of his father, in the
time of his vile miserie and wretchednesse.
                  First he knewe his fathers power, and therefore
saide:What caused the prodigal sonn to resort vnto his father in the time of miserie. 
                     Oh, how great plentie of bread is there in my
fathers house? beléeuing that his father was able to
giue him meate sufficient. Next he was assured that
his father was mercifull, and would giue him suche
thinges as he lacked: & being thus persuaded, boldly
he returned vnto his father, and to him he vttered al
his griefe: who was a great deale more prest & readie
to helpe, then his sonne was readie to aske helpe.
                  Of the same minde,The woman of Canaan. was the woman of Canaan.
For although she founde little comfort at the firste:
yet she argued so from the nature of man to the nature
of Christ, that Christe cried out vpon her,

and sayde:They that come vnto christ must debase thē selues with humilitie. 
                     Oh woman greate is thy faith, be it vnto
thee, as thou desirest. For when she saide the dogges
did eate of the crumbes that fell from their maisters
table: she knewe that she her selfe, and all men in respect
of God, were no more, nor yet so much as dogs
in the respect of man. And when she perceiued, that
man could be contented, to spare his crumbes to the
dogges: she knewe right well, that man was not so
mercifull and liberall vnto dogges, as God vnto sinners.
Wherefore she stoode stil with Christ constantly,
and least not calling, vntill Christe gaue her to
witte, that she was in déede a verie well persuaded
woman, both of his power able to helpe, and of his
good will readie to helpe. For in déede, although she
was a Cananite, she knewe, that if a man shut not
out dogges from his table, Christe woulde not shut
from his mercie a sinnefull Cananite.
                  The same persuasion made Marie Magdalene
créepe vnder the boorde to his féete with teares:Marie Magdelen.
there to receiue and eate of his mercie, to quenche
the hunger and smarte of her sinnes.
                  These examples do declare, why the troubled
may put their trust in God.God is both omnipotent and mercifull. Because he is omnipotent,
and can doe all thinges: and he is mercifull,
and will help all penitent and faithfull sinners. And
so sayd this Prophete Asaph, Of him commeth my
saluatiō. And he sheweth the cause why: For he is my
rocke, my saluation, and my defence.
                  
                  These thrée woordes declare meruellousty, the
nature of God, that alone helpeth: and also the faith
of him that calleth for helpe.
                  As for God, whome the Prophet calleth first his
(Rocke:) by this worde,Rocke. he openeth meruellously,
how strong, firme, and sure, and howe inuincible he
is against all troubles, aduersities, and tempestes,

as well of the bodie as of the soule.Matth. 7. He that buildeth vpon the rocke is wise. In Saint Matthewe,
the man that buildeth his house vppon the
rocke or stone, is called wise: and the cause is, that
what windes soeuer blowe, and what tempestes so
euer arise: they cannot cast downe the house, nor ouerthrow
the building: for it is grounded vpon the
stone.What is the rocke. The stone is God and his worde, the builder
is the Christian man, and the building is the religion
that he hath learned of God by his worde. And
although we sée God our rocke and sure stone, is not
assaulted with stormie and tempestuous shoures &
rayne: yet the builder and the building, that is to
say,If the rock were not sure: the builder & building woulde come to ruine. the Christian man and his religion, be blowen
at, and suche shoures of trouble fall vpon them, that
were not the rocke firme and sure, all the building
and the builder also, (for mans parte) would surely
fall, and come to vtter ruine.
                  The experience of the same windes and floudes,
we may sée in the Actes of the Apostles. For when
Peter & the rest builded the house of God,To builde the house of God: is to teache saluation in Christe. that is to
say, taught men their saluation by the merites and
passion of Christ: there arose such winds and flouds,
that the builders were put into prison, and the building
in great danger. When S. Stéeuen builded
the congregation with Gods word in Christ,Act. 5. whiles
he was building,Act. 7. such windes and floudes of malice
assaulted him, yt his braines were knocked out. Whē
Ananias and the rest planted & builded the house of
God, yt is to say, conuerted the infidels vnto the faith
of Christ at Damascus:Act. 9. there arose such windes and
tempests at Hierusalem, that Saul came frō thence
towards Damascus, with commission from the high
priestes, to kill the builders, & to ouerthrow all they
had builded. Let vs leaue off the examples of holie
men, & sée what hapned to the head & chiefe capteine

al Saints & good builders,If Christe had not bene the rocke of strength it selfe: he had bene cast down. our sauiour Iesus Christ.
When he called the worlde from ignorance to
knowledge, from death to life, and from damnation
to saluation: there arose such winds and storms,
that, had he not béene the rocke it selfe of strength
and inuincible power, he had béene ouerthrowen
cleane, and his buildings turned vpside downe. For
before he was of age to be borne,Christ was slandered before he was borne Matth. 1. 2 Christ per sequuted as soone as he was borne. in his mothers bellie,
ye diuel went about to slaunder him as a bastard:
and woulde haue persuaded the same to the godlie
man Ioseph, spoused in marriage to the blessed virgin
Marie. He had no sooner put his head out of his
mothers bellie: but streight way Herodes sworde
was whette and bent to kill him. Within a little
while after, the diuell stirred vp his owne kinse-folke
& countriemen,Christes own kinse folke were raised against him Luke. 4. to cast him downe from a hill
toppe, and to breake his necke: and at length killed
him indéede. But what was the outgoing of this
builder? Forsoothe, Father into thy handes I commend
my spirite. And what was the assuraunce of
his building,Christe slaine. that is to say, in what suretie stoode his
disciples and folowers in the middest of these winds
& great stormes?Luke. 23. Doubtles,Christe commended his disciples to the protection of his Father, Iohn. 17. Christ commended them
to the custodie and protection of his heauenly father
the rocke & sure stone of all saluation: from whome
windes, floudes, temptations, persequution, death,
sinne, nor the diuell himselfe, with all his companie
of wicked spirites, be able to remoue the simplest of
all Christes flocke. In the Reuelations of Saint
Iohn,Math. 16. there is a meruellous doctrine, what windes
and floudes shall blowe and ouerflowe this rocke
in the bulding,Apoc. 12. and builders, for the time of this
life. There is a woman that had broughte foorth a
man childe, and by and by there was a foule greate
red dragon with seuen heads and seuen hornes, that

would haue deuoured this childe, before he had come
to his inheritaunce and kingdome appointed vnto
him. And when he saw he could not preuaile against
the childe, he caste out of his mouth water, as it had
bene a greate streame, after the Mother: but there
was giuen her winges to escape. For the rocke that
she was builded vppon, was sure: that what soeuer
windes or waters (that is to say, what troubles soeuer)
should happen,Hee that hath God for his rock, is assured of a sauiour. nothing could ouerthrowe her.
And so sayeth Asaph here, God being my rocke and
sure fortresse, my soule nor my bodie shal neuer be
confounded. As he declareth more openly by the
two words that followe, He is my strength and my
saluation also, sayth the Prophet. As though he had
sayd,Application of gods strength by faith, to his owne defence. I do not onely knowe God to be sure, strong, &
inuincible: but also I know this his might, strength
and surenesse, is my wealth and my saluation.
                  For many men knowe, that GOD is the rocke
and strength of all powers: but none doeth knowe
that this power and strength, is saluation for him
selfe, but such as be Gods in déede.
                  Therefore,Faith is the gift of God. séeing this faith that beléeueth God
particularly to saue a priuate person is onely Gods
gifte, and commeth not of man: let vs pray, that
when we sée howe God hath bene the rocke of saluation
to others, that he will be so vnto vs likewise.
For it is a singular gifte of God, to say boldely,
stedfastly, and merrily from the bottome of the
heart vnto him:Hee that feeleth in himselfe God to be his saluation, hath the greatest treasure of all. 
                     Thou Lorde art my rocke, my saluation,
and my comfort. And he that féeleth in him
selfe for him selfe, GOD to be his saluation, hath
suche a treasure, that all treasures besides it, are
nothing to be estéemed: and he will not passe of
goodes, landes, nor life, for this faithes sake.
                  But faith, as long as it cōmeth no nearer the hart

then the eare, the lippes, the téeth, or the tongue: it
is but an easie mater to beléeue. As we sée these rumblers
vp of the Psalmes, & the rest of Gods word, at
this time in the church, where they that say them,
nor they yt heare them, vnderstand any thing at all,
or be any deale y• more edified for that which is done
or said in the church.The abuse of Gods word prouoketh this vengeance. And I am assured, if the priests
felt in their heartes, the vengeance of God to come,
for this abusing the word of God, & the people knew
what an incomparable treasure they haue lost, by ye
taking away of ye word of God in the vulgar tonge:
the priest would wéepe water of his eyes as often as
he said his seruice,Gods word in an vnknowne tongue amongest the people to be lamented. & the people wold sigh ful heauily
as oft as they hard it, & vnderstood not what it ment.
Wherefore let euery man pray to God, that he may
know him, as the Prophet Asaph doth, that he is the
rock & saluation, to him that so calleth vppon him.
                  The thirde word is (Defence.) By the which the
Prophet noteth two meruellous doctrines. The one
touching God: and the other touching man. The
thing touching God is this.Defence. Two doctrines. Looke as in himself God
is omnipotent: so is he of power both in body & soule,
to do all things for his creatures in general. And as
generally he can doe all things for his creatures: so
particularly he is saluation, to all that by faith beléeue
in him. And as he is also saluation, particularly
to such as beléeue in him: euen so particularly is
he a defence,Note. buckler & protection of such as shall be
saued: that neither sinne, the diuel, or any troubles
of the body:Nothing can hurt him that is in Christ Iesu. nor troubles, doubtfulnesse, anguish, perplexitie,
or heauinesse of minde, shal hurt or danme
him. The doctrine touching man by this word (Defence)
is this. Looke as the faithfull man hath in
him selfe this generall knowledge with all men,
that God is Almightie to doe all thinges, as he lust,

with his creatures generally: so particularly he
beléeueth, that he is able, and will saue such as particularly
beléeue their saluation in him.The faith full beleeueth, that as God is able to saue generally: so is he to saue particularly. And as the
faithfull particularly beléeueth his saluation to be
onely in God: so doeth he also beléeue and challenge
particularly with the rest of his brethren in Christe,
maintenaunce, perfection, and defence from all
misseaduentures, ieopardies and dangers, that may
happen in this life, before he come to euerlasting
ioyes. God (therefore) giue vs grace with the Prophete
Asaph to say faithfully vnto him, Thou art my
strength, my saluation, and my defence: then doubtlesse
we shall be assured of that, which followeth, So
shall I not greatly fall.
                  
                  Of these wordes, (So shall I not greatly fall, we
be also taught and instructed verie necessarie lessons,
and doctrines. Firste, what difference there is
betwéene the defence of God towardes his people in
this life, and in the life to come.
                  As touching the defence of God towards his people
in this life:Defence of God towards his people in this life. it is meruellously set foorth by Christ
in his prayer, a little before his death: where he
prayed vnto his father, not to take his Apostles out
of this worlde:Iohn. 17. but to preserue them in this worlde
from sinne.They that wil liue in Christe must suffer persequution Iohn. 16. So that he woulde his friendes with
Gods defence, shoulde abide for a time in the world.
And what they shuld haue in the world for all Gods
defence, Christe tolde them: In the worlde (sayeth
he) ye shall suffer affliction: and ye shall weepe,
and the world shal laugh. Againe,Matth. 10. he said vnto them,
that He sent them foorth as shéepe amongest woolues.
Whereby we may sée, that Gods fauour and
Gods defence saueth not his verie elects in this life
from troubles and afflictions. For (Saint Paule
saith,) As many as will liue godly, shall suffer persequution.
                     
Therefore the holy Ghost placeth the faithfull
congregation, the spouse of Christ (whome God
loueth and defendeth) amongst thornes, and brambles:
Cant. 2. Matt. 13. 7, The faithfull congregation is likened to a shipp, a house, & a woman trauelling with child, &c.and sometime likeneth the faithfull congregation
vnto a ship, tossed vpon the sea with daunger of
drowning: sometime vnto a house, wherevppon
bloweth all windes and weather: and sometime to a
woman trauelling with child, before whom standeth
a foule dragon readie to deuour both childe and mother.
So that by this prophet Asaphes wordes that
saith,Apoc. 12. 
                     He shal not greatly fall, and by these other places,
we learne, that in this life, such as God loueth &
defendeth from the eternall fire of hell, he (notwithstanding
for this life) vnder great crosses, and wonderfull
troubles: yet Christ willeth vs to be of good
comfort, for He hath ouercome the world. And ye prophet
saith,Iohn. 17. 
                     God is my rocke and my saluation: I shall
not greatly fall. 
                     Who doe suffer in this world greatest troubles. Prouerb. 3. Hebr. 12. Apocal. 3. 1. Peter. 4. Rom. 8.And to consider the trueth, such as
God most strongly defendeth, and best loueth in this
world, suffer many times, greatest troubles. Yea,
and God beginneth with his friends somtimes first,
and most sharply: as S. Peter saith. And S. Paule
saith, We be praedestinate to be made like vnto Christ
in troubles, whiles we be in this troublesome world:
But the defence of God and his loue in the world to
come, is voyd from al bitternes and paine, and from
all troubles and aduersities. Consolation.As it is most comfortably
and ioyfully written in the Balads of Solomon:Cantic. 2.
where (for a time) the Lord defended his spouse that
stood in the middest of sharpe and pricking briers and
thornes: at length he calleth her to perpetuall rest &
consolation, assuring her that the winter is gone,
and ye tempestuous shoures past. The swéet floures
do appeare, and the pleasant voyce of the Turtle is
heard. Meaning, that such as be loued and kept by

God in the world of blisse to come:They whō God calleth of mercie out of this life, be voyd of all troubles. be sequestred,
and departed from all troubles and aduersities.
                  
                     Apoc. 21. The description of the heauenly ioyes.The like may you sée in the Reuelations of S.
Iohn, wherein he mystically to set foorth the pleasantnes
and vnspeakeable ioyes of heauen, saith: It is
paued with pretious stones, and the gates thereof be
also of pearles. And moreouer, There is a light more
lighter then the Sunne or Moone, for the claritie of
God lighteneth it, and the brightnes is the lambe of
God. There shall the electes dwell for euer, and the
gates shall neuer be shutt, neither shall there be any
night there to trouble it.
                  
                  
                     The defence of God towards his in the life to come. Esaie. 66.The same is to be séene also in Esaie the prophet,
how in that life Gods defence is in such as be saued,
without all kindes of troubles and aduersities.
                  
                     The fauour of God towardes his in this world, is annexed with troubles.Nowe here is to be noted, that as Gods fauour
and defence in ye world to come, in such as be saued,
is voyd of all troubles & aduersities: euen so Gods
fauour and his defence in this world in such as shalbe
saued, is ioyned and annexed with troubles and
aduersities. Let vs therefore be content with trouble
& persequution in his fauour here in this life: or
els doubtlesse we shall neuer haue his fauour and
defence in the life to come, in ioye and euerlasting
consolation.
                  
                     Trouble shall not ouercome Gods children.There is yet another learning in these wordes: I
shall not greatly fall: That is, that the children of
God shal not perish for any kinde of trouble: and yet
in this world they can lacke no kinde of affliction. All
shall they suffer: and yet at length ouercome all, as
this prophet Asaphe did. He was troubled, but yet
not ouercome: he fell, but not so farre that he arose
not againe: and he was so troubled with the crosse
that God sent him, that he could speaks nothing for
the time: yet at lengthe he said, God was his sure

rocke, and his saluation. Thus God tempteth his,
but desperation he leaueth to his enimies.Desperation, God leaueth only to his enimies. God suffereth
his to féele in this world the punishment of
sinne: but he reserueth the paine therof in the world
to come to his enimies, and to the reprobates. He
maketh his to be sorie for sinne in this world: but
such as be not his,Note the difference betweene Gods children, and such as be not his. he suffereth to be carelesse & painelesse
of sinne in this life, that their damnation maye
be the more dolorous, in the world to come. Therefore
blessed be such as fall and feare, as the Prophete
Asaphe saith: but not too farre vnto all wickednesse
and wantonnesse of life.
               
               
                  THE THIRD PART.
                  
                     
                        3 Howe long will ye imagine mischiefe against a
man? Ye shall be slaine all the sort of you: yea as
a rottering wal shal ye be, & like a broken hedge.
                        4. Their deuise is onely how to put him out, whome
God will exalt, their delight is in lies: They giue
good woordes with their mouth, but curse with
their heartes.
                     
                  
                  
                     The third part sheweth, how the persequuters of the
innocent shall soudeinly perishe.
                  
                  
                     The wicked persequuters be as a tottering wall, soudeinly ouerthrowen, in their most prosperitie.
                     BY the similitude and Metaphore of a
tottering or quiuering wall, the Prophet
declareth, how lightly and sodeinly
ye Lord wil destroy the persequnters
of his people. For as the wall that is
tottering and quiuering, with euerie winde & weather,
is easily and soudeinly ouerthrowen: euen so be
the wicked and tyrannical persecuters soudeinly destroyed:
yea when they be in their owne conceites,
most strong and valiant. As it may be séene by the

mightie host of Zenecharib and Benedab:Zenecharib. the armie
of king Pharao and such other, that persequuted the
people of God:Beuedab. 3. Reg. 20. 4. Reg. 8. 18. 19. verily supposing their strengthe to
haue béene able vtterly to haue oppressed Gods people,
whom they hated. The like is to be séene where
Hester and Iudith two séelie and poore women,Exod. 14. were
instrumentes to ouertumble and destroy the wickedHester. 7.
Am
                        •
                     n and Proud Holofernes.Iudith. 13. So by this we learne,
that the strength & persequutions of ye wicked,Holofernes. be not
permanent nor strong,The presence of Gods fauour towards his: is the destruction of the wicked. but transitorie and féeble, destroyed
& vanquished with the presence of Gods fauour
towards his, as often as it pleaseth him to punish
the malice and mischiefe of the wicked.
                  But there is one learning particularly to be noted
in this similitude of a trembling or tottering wall:
wherewithall the Prophet setteth foorth the fall and
confusion of the wicked, which is this: that when the
wicked persequuteth the godly, & that the least resistance
of ye world is stirred vp by God against them,
the Lord that stirreth vp the plague to punish them,
striketh also their heartes with such trembling and
feare,God doth so strike the heartes of the wicked with feare, that one man in a good cause, is able to withstand tenne. that one man in a good cause shalbe able, to wt
                     stand
ten such wicked persecuters, whose conscience
God hath so feared, that they are not able to beare
the countenance of a man: no, not able to ouercome
the terrour of their owne spirite, which beareth them
record, that as they in time past haue fought against
God & his cause: so now God iustly fighteth against
them, both with the feare of hell fire towardes their
soules, and with outward aduersities towards their
bodies. So God said, he would send such trembling &
feare vnto such as neither loued,Note. nor kept his lawes:
as it is written by the holy Prophet Moses.Deut. 28. The example
whereof ye may read also in Daniel the Prophet:
that the Emperor of the Caldées,Daniel. 5. when he was

in the middest of his strength, mirth, banquets, and
iollitie,A hand writing in the wall feared the Emperour of the Caldees in his most iollitie. sawe no more but a poore little hand write in
the wal of his palace, that neuer spake word, shewed
no terrible sight of men of warre, nor gaue any blow
in his palace: yet fell the Emperor into such a trembling
& feare at the sight thereof, that all his limmes
(in maner) stoode him in no stéede. Christ neuer gaue
blow, but modestly asked his murderers whom they
sought for: and yet fell they flatt and prostrate to the
ground.Iohn. 18. So that the wicked persecuters of the godly,
be aptly and properly likened and compared to a totteringChrist asking his murderers whome thei soght: they fell vppon the ground.
and trembling wall. For as soone as euer the
blastes of Gods ire and iudgement be moued & kindled
against them: they be so quiuering and comfortlesse,
yt they would take them to be most their frends
that soonest would dispatch them out of the world. As
Christ said aptly of them, they shold pray the mounteines
to fall vppon them.Luke 23. As long as God feigneth
himselfe a sléepe, and suffereth the blessed to fall into
the hands of the wicked to be crucified and slaine, as
they please,Note diligently. they be more strong, and more cruel then
Lions: but when God ariseth & taketh the defence of
his poore people, then they be more feareful then the
Hart, or trembling Hare. As we may sée, when séelie
harmlesse Iacob,Iacob. passed homeward into his countrie
from Mesopotamia, such as he neuer gaue blow nor
spake foule word vnto,Genesis. 43 trembled at his comming, as
though he had bene in battel with thousands of souldiers.
The like may we sée by the brothers of Ioseph
when he spake most gently vnto them,Ioseph. yea and tolde
them that he was their brother: there was such a terrour
and feare strake their consciences for persecuting
of him,The children of Israel. that they could make no word of aunswere.
When the children of Israel should come into
the land of Canaan, the Lord said he would sende

before them his feare,Exod. 23. to amaze and astonish the people
of the countrie, that their strength should do them
no harme.
                  The furie of the wicked may séeme in his owne
eyes to be stable, firme & constant: but in déede there
is nothing more trembling nor tottering. As wée
may sée at this present day.They that persequute Christes flocke at this present, haue no assurance but flesh and bloud. Such as persequute the
liuely and séelie flocke of Christ, and tyrānously hold
the necke of the godly vnder the yoke of idolatrie:
they haue no groūd, no certeintie, nor any assurance
more then flesh & bloud, that fauour them, by whose
fauour they oppresse the trueth, & persequute the louers
of it. So that in case flesh & bloud should faile
them, then would they be in such trembling & quiuering,
that they would do whatsoeuer they were commanded
to do, to be deliuered from feare and terror.
                  As we may marke and sée in the bishop of Winchester
Gardener,
                     Stephen Gardener. Edmund Boner. and also Boner the bishop of London.
When king Henrie the eight suspected them
both to be fauourers of the Pope, (the capital enimie
of Christ and his church) Winchester fell into such a
trembling and feare, that with all hast he wrote his
purgation in a booke named,A booke, De vera obedientia. 
                     True obedience: and
Boner set an epistle before it, both they crying our against
the Pope, as against a tyrant, and false vsurper
of authoritie in this Realme, (although they
thought nothing lesse.) Thus we may sée how incō
                     stant,
trembling, and quaking these tottering wicked
persequuters of Gods word be.Read Tunstals sermon against the bishop of Rome, & the treason of Cardinal Pole.
                  
                  I could declare more of their religion to be of the
same conditions: but because these two and Tunstal
the bishop of Duresme be knowen openly to ye world,
by their bookes to be such, I speake onely of them.
When the prophet hath declared that the persequuters
of the godly shall soudenly perish, he telleth the

cause why they shall perish,Why shal the persequuters of the godly perish? 
                     Because they deuise how
to put him downe (saith he) whome God will exalt.
And after that the Prophete hath shewed, that the
cause of their fall and punishment, is their conspiracie
against Gods elect: he setteth foorth by what meanes
the wicked vse to depose, persequute, & tumble
downe the people of God: By what meanes do the wicked put downe the people of God?
                     By lies (saith the Prophet)
and by imagining of falshod and vntruth. And when
he hath declared, that the wicked do purpose, to bring
their case and matter against the godly with lies: he
sheweth after what sort and fashion lies by wicked
men be vsed (To bring mischiefe to purpose.) This
is the letter of the Psalme concerning the third part
of it. Now there is in euery of these sentences profite
to be gathered by the reader or hearer of it.
                  First is to be noted the conspiracie and treason of
the wicked against God. If it please the Lord, to fauour
and aduaunce one: the nature of the wicked is,
as much to deface that God would haue honoured, as
may be.Caine. Abel. Genesis. 4. As God bare fauour and aduaunced Abel:
Cain wrought treason and killed his brother, for the
loue that God did beare him. The Lord appointed
Samuel to rule:1. Reg. 8. the wicked people misliked that,
which God best approued.1. Reg. 18. God would exalt Dauid:
Saule,3. Reg. 15. Absolon, and Achitophel, would prefer themselues.
Againe, the Lord appointed Noah to teache
the people to beware of the vniuersall floud:Gene. 6. 7. the people
preferred liers, vnto whom God neuer gaue his
holy spirite.Ierem. 20. God elected Ieremie the true prophete:
the people aduaunced Passur the false prophete. The
Lord exalted his deare sonne, and willed the world to
learne of him:Matth. 3. 17. 28. the people preferred the Pharisées, &
desired the Iudge to hange Christ. God commanded
his word onely to be taught: but the world plucketh
it so downe,Iohn. 5. that either they cleane refuse the word,

or els they will haue it none other wise then it is authorized,
and made true by man. God saith,1. Cor. 1. 
                     That
which is wisedome before the world, is foolishnes
before him. The world recompenseth most arrogantly
God, with the like, & accompteth all his wisedome
and learning foolishnes, in respecte of worldly
wisedome, counsell, and religion. What shal become of the controllers of God.But what saith the
Prophet Asaphe shall become of these Nemrods and
controllers of God? They shal (saith he) quickly fall,
and be destroyed as a tottering wall.
                  
                  Here we sée howe controlling, and amending of
Gods workes at length spéedeth: and what is the
end of these persecuting Giants of Gods afflicted.
They fight,GOD laughteth the intent of the wicked to scorne. Psalme. 2. they fare foule, they moue heauen and
earth to alter the purpose and minde of God: but, He
that sitteth in heauen laugheth them to scorne. And
they themselues that thus wickedly vse Christe and
his members, fal downe and come to nought, as old,
rotten, and dustie walles.
                  And in the other part that these shameles tyrants
conspire thus against Christ and his people,So the wicked maye obteine their purpose: they care not by what meanes. by lies
and falshoode, is declared the filthines of their conscience:
that be so farre past shame and honestie, that
they care not (so they may obteine their wicked purpose,)
howe craftily or falsly they lie or calumniate
any sayinges or doinges of God or man. As the diuel
their father, when God had exalted man into Paradise,
he wished him out of it,Genesis. 3. and began to worke
mans destruction,By what meanes the diuel deceiued Adam. with calumniating and false lying
vppon Gods owne word. When God had set vp
Dauid to reigne: Absolon his owne sonne thinking
the better to pull his father downe, lied falsly vppon
him to the people, & said, that There was no Iudge
appointed in Israel to heare causes,Dauid. Absolon. 3. Reg. 15. and to end them
betwene man and man. So slaundered he his father,

a man of good iustice: and aduaunced himselfe, that
neuer knewe what iustice ment. Elias. Achab.The good Prophet
Elias likewise, whome God appointed to warne the
people to beware of sinne:3. Reg. 18. king Achab to disgrace
him, lied falsly vppon him, and said, that He was the
troubler of the common wealth. Christ. The wicked sort of the world.So Christ, whom
God had elected to saue the world from death and
damnation: the wicked sort of the world said, Hee
hath saued others, but he cannot saue himselfe. Againe,Matth. 27.
God sent him to be amongest the troubled to
comfort them,Matth. 8. but such as wanted consolation,Mark. 5. when
they sawe him,Luke. 8. prayed him to depart out of their
countrie: because with his presence, they loste their
swine. Paule. Tertullus, &c.God said that Paule was the chosen vessell,
to beare the name of him thorough all the Gentiles:Actes. 24.
                     Tertullus and the other Iewes said,Whome God do exalt to say the truth: the wicked condemne as heretiques. He was one
that molested all the world. Euen so at this time,
there is neither honest nor vertuous man, that God
exalteth to speake the trueth: but the wicked saith,
He is an heretique, a scismatique, & a traitour. But
séeing it is none other then alwayes hath béene accustomed,
falsly to be layed to such as God loueth: it
must be borne patiently.
                  
                     Howe doe the wicked vse their lyes.But nowe the Prophet sheweth, how these liers
and enuious persecuters vse their lies. They giue
faire woordes with their mouth, (saith the prophet,)
but they curse with their heart. By these wordes we
may learne, that there are thrée maner of ways that
lies do harme.
                  
                     Three maner of wais doe lyes harme.The one, when they be openly and plainly vsed.
The other when open falshoode outwardly, is cloked
with pretended trueth. And the third when they be
dissembled outwardly, & yet in the heart they lie hid,
tarying for a time when they may be put abroad, to
do mischiefe, & to worke the destruction of the godly.
                  
                     
But for as muche as the diuell the father of all
lyes,Iohn. 8. knoweth that such as he inspireth with lyes,
can not do harme with his lyes, except they be vsed
as the persons be qualified, amongst whom the lyes
must be sowen: he teacheth his disciples to vse them
as opportunitie and occasion shall serue.
                  Manifest and vncouered lyes he causeth to be vsed,Manifest lyes amōg the ignorant.
amongest suche as doe not knowe nor loue the
trueth. For those lyes shall stablishe and confirme
the wicked in their errour, and wickednesse. As for
example.Example. Absolon and Achitophel tolde the people,
as many lyes (in maner) as they did words,1. Reg. 15. against
king Dauid: and when they were by Absolons faire
wordes alienated from king Dauid, and bent vnto
his sonne, bicause he promised to vse instice to euery
man and lawfull fauour: after Absolon came to
Hebron, and had of his side Achitophel his fathers
chéefe counseler, he lyed openly, and the people more
and more were stablished in errour and treason.
                  The like is to be séene in the booke of the Numbers,Num. 14.
that when such as returned out of the lande of
Canaan, whither they were sent, to viewe the goodnesse
and strength of the countrie: tenne of the
twelue espies, brought the people into such a terror
and feare, that they thought it impossible to recouer
the land. Thus being in an errour: manifest lyes against
God,Moses. Iosua. Caleb. Moses, Iosua, and Caleb, might be vsed
well enough and preuaile.
                  In matters of religion is the same,Manifest lies in matters of religion. amongst such
as be deceiued and in errour: manifest lyes do take
place, and do as much harme, as the diuel requireth
to be wrought by them.
                  As amongest the Caldées, such as most commended
the idol of fire:Gene. 11. were most estéemed. Amongest
the Egyptians,Exo. 6. 7. 8. suche as most blasphemously could

speake in the defence of witchcraft and sorcerie:
were taken for the best men.3. Reg. 16. 17. 18. Such as could best defend
the honour of Baal, amongest the idolatricall
Iewes:Matth. 15. had most reuerence and honour. Amongest
the Phariseis, he that could most speake for the
maintenaunce of mens traditions: was taken for
the worthiest man.Amongest the papists defenders of idolatrie be proferred. And nowe amongest the Papistes,
he that can best defende Papisticall idolatrie
and supersition, is highest preferred. But (as I said)
this vse of lyes and falshood, takes place in none but
in such as the diuell (the God of this world) will not
suffer,2. Cor. 4. to haue the word of trueth knowne. And this
vse of lyes and flashoode, doeth not trame men vnto
errour and heresie: but stablisheth men in them, that
do not knowe the trueth.
                  There is an other sort of people, which be the
faithfull: at whome the diuel hath indignation, and
laboreth with al diligence to deceiue: against whom
the vse of manifest lyes (he knoweth) can not preuaile:
for such as doe knowe and loue the trueth, do
abhorre falshoode. Wherefore, if the diuell preuaile
against them: it is by another vse of lyes, then he vsed
to the other sort of the world.
                  This vse of lyes is of two sortes:The vse of lyes amongest the faithfullesse. as we sée by
the word of God. The one is to make an euill thing
to appeare good, vnder the pretence of good: and a
false thing to appeare true, vnder the pretence of
trueth.Gene. 3. 4. As we may sée, how the diuell vnder the pretence
of good and profite vnto Eue,Eue. Caine. made her eate of
the apple, which was forbidden. Caine vnder the
pretence of friendship, brought Abel into the fielde
and killed him.1. Reg. 17. Saule vnder the pretence of amitie,Saule.
bade Dauid to feast: and so meant to haue staine
him.Absolon. Absolon vnder the colour of iustice and loue to
the Common wealth:3. Reg. 15. sought his fathers death, and

made his subiects traitours. With many more such
examples in the word of God. Whereby is declared,
that the diuell by his disciples, vseth lyes many
wayes:The diuell vseth lyes many wayes. sometime to stablish men in errour, that be
in errour already: sometime to deceiue such as be
in the trueth: but then manifest lyes be not vsed,
but rather lyes conueyed, couered, and cloaked with
the mantell of trueth and veritie: as we may sée by
the examples before specified: howbeit, many times
this vse of lyes, howe so euer it pretendeth trueth,
can not deceiue men. Then, rather then the diuell
will misse of his purpose: he teacheth an other vse
of lyes, which is more daungerous and painefull to
the godly, then any yet before mentioned of. Of the
which vse the Prophete Asaphe speaketh in this
place,A perillous vse of lyes. saying: They speake faire with their toungs,
but thinke euill in their heartes.
                  
                  This is a perillous kinde and vse of lyes: for it
doeth one of these two great mischiefes, or else both
of them. That is to say, eyther at length it ouercommeth
the trueth: or else mortally persequuteth the
trueth that will not be ouercome. As we may sée by
Esau.Esau. He vsed a great while faire speach and gentle
manners with Iacob his brother: but in his heart
he saide,Gene. 27. 
                     If my father dye, I will kill my brother. Againe,
Absolon spake faire to his father,Absolon. and asked
him leaue to go to Hebron, to pay there the sacrifice
that he promised (whilest he was in Gessur of Syria)
vnto God:3. Reg. 15. but in his heart he went thither to rayse
king Dauid his fathers subiectes against him. Certeine
came to Christ and saide:Matth. 22. 
                     Maister, we knowe
that thou art true, and that thou teachest the wayes
of God in trueth: yet in their hearts, they came to
trippe him in a case of treason, if they could.
                  This vse of lyes is very daungerous, for it lyeth

in the heart hid secretly, expecting and looking for
time conuenient, when and howe it may breake
foorth to serue the turne: yet is the diuell the father
of lyes, and the temple of the diuell the wicked mans
and womans hearts, wherein they lye ashamed or
afraide to vtter them:Note. but holdeth outwardly with
the trueth, which inwardly they mortally hate, vntill
they may take occasion to doe outwardly as they
would.The amiable countenance of the papists in King Edwards dayes: be turned nowe into firie faces. And we sée it in Caine, Esau, Absolon, the
Phariseis and others. Yea, our owne age hath too
good experience of this vse of lyes. For, howe many
within this twelue moneths spake faire of God and
his worde, and shewed them selues outwardly as
friendly as could be vnto them? but what their conscience
and heartes were inwardly, nowe it appeareth.
Doubtlesse, that they hated deadly in their spirites,
that they most extolled with their mouthes: for
nowe they be gone from the trueth outwardly, whiche
inwardly they neuer loued. And by the vse of
their lyes, they traine as many, as they may, to be
partakers of their euils: and suche as they can not,
(by the vse of lyes drawe vnto their sect) by violence
and tyrannie they persequute and compell, with extreme
punishment and hatred, in landes, goodes, and
body.
                  Thus may we sée by this Prophet Asaphe, which
way the wicked persequuted the godly, and molested
the séelie members of Christ, that wished al men
good, and no men harme: euen with lyes and falsehoode,
and vsed many craftie and subtile wayes.
Whereof we be not instructed by the Prophet only
to knowe this poyson of the diuell concerning lyes,
and the diuers and manifold vse and practise of thē:
but also, that the Christians be most in daunger of
them, yet must be contented for Christes sake to

beare them, and circumspectly to beware they be
not deceiued by them.
               
               
                  THE FOVRTH PART.
                  
                     
                        5 Neuerthelesse, my soule wait thou stil vpon God:
for my helpe is in him.
                        6 He truely is my strength, and my saluation, he is
my defence: so that I shall not fall.
                        7 In God is my health and my glorie, the rocke of
might: and in God is my trust.
                        8 O put your trust in him always (ye people) poure
out your hearts before him: for God is our hope.
Selah.
                     
                  
                  
                     The fourth part repeateth more at large, the
declaration of the first and the
second part.
                  
                  
                     THE fiue and sixe verses be worde for
worde, as the first & the second were:
Onely there is left out in these two
verses, this word (greatly:) for before
he saide, He should not (greatly) fall.
The which worde may be taken two wayes very
comfortable, of the reader and hearer, if it be well
marked and beléeued.
                  The first way is,Prou. 24. that the Prophet meaneth not,
that the people of God shal not fal,The people of god do fall. for that is against
the Scripture: for, The iust man falleth seuen times
in the day.
                     1 Iohn. 1. Againe, If we say we haue no sinne in vs,
we deceiue our selues: and the trueth is not in vs.
Nowe, whereas sinne inseparably dwelleth (as it
doeth in all men whilest they liue vppon the earth)
there be faultes and falles before God of the mans
part, in whome this sinne dwelleth: yet God of his

mercy for the bloud and death of Christe,The sinnes of the faithful be not imputed vnto them for Christes sake. doeth not
account these inseparable sinnes to be falles: but loueth
the person, preserueth him, and will not impute
nor lay any of those falles or faults, vnto his charge,
but in Christe estéeme him iustified and cleane, as
though he were of him selfe so in déede. And thus the
Prophete saith, that of Gods part, and by our acceptation
into his fauour,Rom. 8. through Christ, the faithfull
falleth not.Iustification. Note. That is to say, his sinne is not accounted
damnable nor laide to his charge, for Christes sake:
As Saint Paule writeth to the Romanes.Rom. 8.
                  
                  An other way it may be taken. That a Christian
hath testimonie in his spirit by the spirit of God,
that he is so elected, chosen, and ordeined of God to
eternall saluation: that what so euer the world, the
flesh,He that standeth fast of Gods election: can not fall to damnation the diuell, or sinne shall doe: yet standeth he assured
of Gods election, grace, strength, and fidelitie,
that he shall neuer fall to damnation, but arise againe,
and be called from his falls what so euer they
be. And yet this most sure & comfortable knowledge
will not giue him licence, nor libertie to sinne: but
rather kéep him in a feare and loue of the strong and
mightie God, in whose handes he is, and kept from
the great fall of eternall damnation, from the which
he was deliuered from the beginning with God. So
that ye may learne of this place, what perseuerance
is, in the meditation & contemplation of Gods most
holy word and promises.Nichodemus.
                  
                  At the first they séeme vnto the fleshe,Iohn. 3. things impossible,
as we may sée by Nichodemus, who was
as ignoraunt as could be at the beginning,The lōger a man is at schoole: the more sweetnesse in learning doeth he feele. when he
came first to schoole to Christ. But when a man hath
bene exercised a while in it, he féeleth more swéetnesse
in the promises of God: as we sée by this Prophete.
For after he had borne the crosse of affliction

a little while, and learned the nature of God, howe
mercifull he is to sinners, he saide: Although I fall,
yet it shall not be greatly. But when he had tarried
in the schoole of Christe, and learned in déede what he
was, and howe that he was able to perfourme his
mercy, he saide plainly: Whatsoeuer, sinne, the diuell,
the world, the fleshe, hell, heauen, or the earth
would say against him, he should not fall. These two
interpretations are to be noted. For which so euer
we vse, we may finde comfort, and vnspeakable consolation.
                  Now, when he hath declared, that he shal not fall
into Gods eternal ire & displeasure: he sheweth how
this certeintie of eternall saluation came vnto him:
and why God so mercifully and strongly, hath warded
and fenced him against all temptations and perilles
of damnation.
                  It is (saith he) bicause God is his health.Why shal not be godly fall. Health. That is
to say, One that hath not onely taken him from the
sicknesse and daunger of sinne, the tyrannie of the
diuell, and damnation of the lawe: but also preserueth
him in the same state, that he fall not againe,
into the sicknesse and perill that he was deliuered
from.The mercy of God and not manswork saueth a sinner. Whereof we learne, that it is not mans labours,
nor mans workes that helpeth a sinner, and
saueth a damnable soule: but it is the frée worke
and vndeserued mercy of almightie God. Wherfore
we be taught, that There is no health, but in God
alone.
                  
                  Then saith the Prophete also,Glorie. that in God is his
glorie. Of the which worde he noteth two thinges.
The one touching God alone:Note. and the other touching
God and him selfe.
                  The glorie that toucheth God alone, is, that this
troubled Prophete pondered in the heauinesse and

anguishe of his minde, the number and strength of
his enimies, the diuel, the flesh, sinne, the world, and
the bitter accusation of Gods lawes, that truely accused
and painfully grieued his conscience for sinne.
Of the other side in faith he considered, howe the
scripture declared that God was merciful, euen vnto
the greatest sinners of the worlde. And he learned
also by the word of God, that GOD had made
promise vnto sinners, to be mercifull. He considered
further, that god had many times vsed and practised
his mercy towardes sinners. And he founde
likewise by the scripture, that God, to perfourme his
mercy, would not spare his owne dearely beloued
sonne, to redéeme man from his sinne with his own
precious bloud, and painfull death.
                  Thus weighing the strength of the diuell and
sinne in the one part to damne, and the strength of
Gods mercy in Christe Iesus on the other part to
saue,The afflicted Christian that beleeueth the strengthe of Gods mercy, to exceede the force of his enimies: receiueth consolation. and perceiuing the riches, aboundance, and
strength of Gods mercy to be more auaylable to
saue, then all the power and strength of the diuell
and sinne to damne, (for the great victory that God
taketh ouer such strong enimies,) the Prophete triumpheth
in the glorie of God, ioyfully and thankefully:
extolling him for his mercy and power, that
hath broken the serpentes head, and spoyled him
of his prisoners. So we vse to doe, when any man
by valiauntnesse, defendeth vs from our enimies:
we extoll and magnifie him for his victorie and conquest.
                  This glorie gaue the Prophete Asaphe in this
Psalme of God,Euery christiā giueth the glorie only vnto God. when by faith he sawe God conquering
of hell, sinne, the diuell, the accusation of the
lawe, desperation, the fleshe, and the world. And the
same glory giueth euery faithful creature vnto God,

at the end of the Lordes prayer,Matth. 6. when he saith: For
thine is the kingdome, the power, and the glorie.
By the which wordes we knowe, that howe so euer
the diuell and wicked people, take vppon them to vsurpe
by violence, warre, and tyrannie, and liue neuer
so princely in pompe and pride: they be but vsurpers,
if they come to it wrongfully: for the kingdome
apperteineth vnto GOD. And howe so euer
they extend their power, (in Gods sight) they be no
stronger then a brused réede, or broken staffe: for
the power is Gods. And what glorie so euer they
seigne and flatter them selues to haue: it is but withered
haye and vile dust, in the sight of God.
                  But nowe the Prophete,The Prophete by faith claimeth the glory of God▪ to be his glory. by the eye of faith, séeing
this glorious triumphe, strength, and power in
God: saith, that In this glorious, almightie, and
triumphant God is his glory, and desireth to haue
part of that victorie, and of that meruellous maiestie.
And as the Psalme saith, He calleth and nameth
the God of glorie, his glorie. Oh meruellous,
and vnspeakable boldnesse and constancie of faith.Note. A
man nothing but sinne by nature, in the sight of
God, nothing but earth and ashes, replenished with
all miserie and wretchednesse, by nature corrupt,
the very enimie of GOD, a vessell prepared vnto all
dishonour, ignominie, shame, and perdition, contemned
through sinne, and shamed before all creatures:
and yet nowe with all these dishonours (by faith)
saith. The king of glorie is his glorie: and the conquerour
of all dishonour, is his shield and buckler.
                  Of the other part, who can thinke or speake any
thing thankfull to suche a king of glory, and most
mightie conquerour, that abhorreth not of mercy, to
be the honour and glory of so vile, sinfull, and wretched
a thing, as man is? Whose eyes abhorre no

filthe of sinne in penitent sinners,Consolatiō
                      whose presence refuseth
not the companie of the sicke and miserable,
whose strength comforteth the weake, whose mercy
reioyceth the comfortles, whose life expelleth death:
whose health banisheth sicknesse, whose loue vanquisheth
hatred,Psal. 103. whose immortalitie giueth euerlasting
life: and who crowneth vs with endlesse pitie
and compassion in ioyes perpetuall.
                  Thus the Prophete, after he had espied the almightie
God in him selfe gloriously, to be voyd of all
troubles, dolours, and other aduersities, and that he
had also conquered gloriously the capteines of al aduersities,Oh liuely faith.
hell, death, satan, and sinne: he challenged
by faith, and craued by Gods promise, to be partaker
of Gods glory in this point. And doubtlesse, he
that can féele in his heart, that GOD is his glory:
he shall take no dishonour nor shame, by all the workes
of the diuell, sinner, or the worlde. Therefore,
many times in reading or thinking of the
Psalmes, or other parte of the holy scripture: it
is expedient to meditate and pray, that the word we
speake or pray, may be vnto vs as much saluation,
comfort, and glory, as we perceiue GOD hath appointed
in it for vs. And when we say with our
mouth to God,Luke. 17. 
                     Thou art my saluation, my glorie, my
rocke, and my trust: Let vs cry, Lorde increase our
faith, helpe vs for thy name sake constantly to beleeue
thee, to be vnto vs in deed in spirit as we speake
of thee outwardly with our mouth. For in case the
heart vnderstande not,Esai. 29. nor beléeue the wordes we
speake with our mouthe:Matth. 15. we honour God in vaine,
as the scripture saith. Let vs therefore praye, as
Saint Paule teacheth vs,1. Cor. 14. saying: I will pray with
the spirite, and I will pray with the minde also.
                  
                  When the Prophete hath by faith assured him

selfe of Gods fauour,Exhortation. he exhorteth all the Christian
congregation to doe the same, saying: O put your
trust in him alwayes (ye people, &c.)
                  
                  Here the Prophete teacheth,What is the office of the pastor, when he vnderstandeth the scriptures? what the Minister
of the Church, Bishop, and others should doe, when
they vnderstand the scripture, and learne by it, feare
and faith, loue and hope in GOD: they be bound to
teache the congregation the same Scriptures for
her saluation. Whereby is condemned the vse
of the Scripture in an vnknowne toung: which
is directly against Gods worde.1. Cor. 14. The office of Kinges and Magistrates, Parentes and Maisters. And here be Kings
and Rulers also taught, to sée their subiectes, tenaunts,
and seruaunts to vnderstand the worde of
God: likewise the Father and the Mother, the Maister
and the Maistresse, who be bound to knowe for
their saluation the worde of GOD, and to teache it
vnto others vnder their gouernaunce. Therefore,
in the end of the verse is put (Selah.) As though he
had saide, Happie be those that put their trust in the
Lorde, and teach other to doe the same. And curssed
be those that trust not in the Lord, and teach others
to do the like.
               
               
                  THE FIFT PART.
                  
                     
                        9 As for the children of men, they are but vaine: the
children of men are deceitfull vpon the weights.
They are altogether lighter then vanitie it selfe.
                        10 O trust not in wrong and robberie, giue not your
selues to vanitie: if riches increase, set not your
heart vpon them.
                     
                  
                  
                     The fift part sheweth, howe mans power is
not to be trusted vnto.
                  
                  
                     
                     THE Prophete by no meanes would
haue men to put their trust in fleshe
and bloud:No truste in fleshe & bloud. Note. in case they doe, they must
néedes perishe. For when miserable
man shall trust in vaine vanitie, whiche
is man: he can be no lesse then vanitie it selfe, in
whome he hath trusted. And this is one miserie and
wretchednesse, a man to be deceiued of helpe and succour:
whereas he most trusted to haue bene holpen
and succoured. Thus must it néedes happen to them
that trust in men. For men of most excellencie and
greatest authoritie, riches, and power in the world,
be but vanitie:As man isIf we say we haue no sinne in vs so is his helpe. as the Prophete saith. Nowe as they
be, so is their helpe. And as their helpe is, so is the
comfort and consolation of such as seeke help at their
handes. Those that be trusted vnto, be but flesh and
bloud:Note diligently. the best of flesh and bloud is but vanitie: the
consolation and helpe of vanitie, is miserie and
wretchednesse: wherefore the Prophete exhorteth
all men to beware, they séeke not ayde and comfort
of man,The Israelites vsed the Egyptians for helpe. for he is but vaine. The Israelites vsed for
their helpe against their enimies, the Egyptians:
but the more flesh conspired together, the worsse successe
had all the battels they fought. Nowe as we
sée, men that haue their trust in men, suffer muche
trouble and miserie in the world,An inferiour medicine to the disease: can not cure the patiēt. Iere. 17. What doth come of the trust in man. bicause their helpe
they trust in, is of inferiour strength and power to
the troubles and aduersities, that they be combred
withall. So doeth the word of God declare, that such
men as trust in vanitie, haue not onely worldly aduersities
against them, but also for their so doing,
(trusting in fleshe) they be accurssed of God, as the
scriptures say: Curssed be he that trusteth in man.
So that we sée meruelous and vnspeakable harmes
come of the trust in man. First, miseries of ye world,

and next the enimitie and cursse of God. For he that
putteth his trust in man, with the same one fact and
doing,Two euils. doeth two horrible euils. The one, he deceiueth
him selfe: for the vanitie that he trusteth in, can
not saue him. And the other, he dishonoureth God
that onely can saue, in putting his trust in mortall
man, that can not saue: and so maketh of man God:
to Gods high displeasure and dishonour.
                  Euery Christian man therefore should forsake
fleshe and bloud, and trust in the Lorde Almightie
maker of heauen and earth, as the Prophet Asaphe
did a little before, when he saide: In God was his
glory, who could defend him from all hurts present,
past, and to come, what so euer they were.
                  The like may we sée in Saint Paule,Gal. 6. that saide:
God forbid that I should glory in any thing, sauing
in the crosse of our Lord Iesus Christ, by whome the
world is crucified vnto me, and I vnto the worlde:
That is, bicause I put al my trust of saluation (saith
Saint Paule) in him that was crucified, the worlde
taketh me for an heretique, and so persequuteth me:
but yet it ouer commeth me not,A goodly explanatiō of Paules words: god forbid that I should glory in, &c. neither taketh it away
my glory, my consolation, and my crowne of
eternall ioyes. For euen as the world persequuteth
me with fire, sword, and all other crucifyings: so I
crucifie the world againe, testifying by the worde of
God, that their liuing is nought, and their faith and
trust worse. So that as they crucifie me with worldly
trouble: in like manner I crucifie the worlde againe
with the worde of God, and speake against it,
bearing testimonie that it is the enimie of God, and
shall perish eternally. But this I doe (saith Paule)
bicause I glory in nothing, sauing in Christ crucified.
                  
                  Thus doeth the Prophete Asaphe teach all men
to put their trust in Christe, and not in sinfull man:

which is not onely vanitie: Man more vaine then vanitie.but also, If vanitie were
laid in one balance, and man in the other, yet of both
man were the more vanitie. Therefore man is not
to be trusted vnto: (saith the Prophet.)
                  And for a further declaration that man is more
vaine, then vanitie: he openly declareth in the processe
of his Psalme, that man is giuen besides vanitie,
to wrong and robberie, which two euilles do increase
mans miseries.Why man is more vaine then vanitie. For man is not onely borne
vaine vanitie: but also by processe of time in wicked
liuing, addeth wrong and robberie vnto vanitie, and
so maketh vanitie more vaine and damnable, then it
was before.
                  Nowe this robberie and wrong is done two maner
of wayes:Who so trusteth in any thing sauing in God, doeth dishonour God. Wrong done. vnto God. to God, and to man. He that putteth
his trust of saluation in any other thing, sauing in
God: looseth not only his saluation, but also robbeth
God of his glory, and doeth God (as much as lyeth
in him) manifest wrong, as the wicked people amongest
the Iewes did, that saide, As long as they
honoured and trusted vnto the Quéene of heauen, al
thinges prospered with them: but when they hearkened
to the true preachers of Gods word,Ose. 2. they said
al things came into worsse state,Iere. 44. and that with scarsitie
and trouble they were ouer whelmed.
                  He that putteth also his trust & confidence in any
learning or doctrine besides Gods worde,What doth he that be leeueth any doctrin besides gods word. doeth not
only fall into errour, and lose the trueth: but also as
much as lyeth in him, he robbeth Gods booke of his
sufficient trueth and veritie, and ascribeth it to the
bookes of mens decrées. Which is as much wrong
to God and his booke, as may be thought or done. In
the which robberie (or rather sacrilege) no man shuld
put his trust, (as the Prophete saith.)
                  An other way,Wrong done vnto man. wrongs be done vnto man: when

the riche and sturdie of the worlde, by abusing of
friendship, oppresse, robbe and spoyle the poore. And
by his thus doing, first he deceiueth him selfe: for euill
gotten goods can not long prosper, neither can
any familie aduaunced by fraude, crafte, or subtiltie
long time endure. Then he deceiueth the simple and
poore that trusteth vpon the outward shewe of his
port and estimation: which glittereth in the worlde
as a vaine, glorious, and deceiuable beautie, and honour:
and marketh neither howe wickedly the glorie
of the robber and doer of wrong sprang vp, nor
howe miserably God hath ordeined it to fall againe.
But séeing carnally he séeth a vaine man in vanitie,
prosper for a time, he trusteth in this vanitie
pampered vp with robberie and wrong, vntill suche
time as vanitie vadeth, and he much lamenteth that
put in vanitie, so much vaine hope. But graunt that
honour and riches by Gods gift and trueth, abound:
yet were they not giuen for men to trust in,Why riches are giuen vnto man. but for
men to giue GOD more thankes, and to helpe the
poore with them, from iniuries of oppression, and
néede of hunger, thirst, and pouertie. Therefore the
Prophete saith, Although riches doe abound: yet
men should not put their heartes vpon them. That
is to say, men should not trust in them, nor kéepe thē
otherwise, then their vse or kéeping should serue to
the glorie of God: in aboundance to be liberall: and
in time of néede to be carefull: not to kéepe them for
a priuate commoditie: but as Iosephe did say, to
saue the multitude from scarsitie and penurie.
Thus doeth the Prophete exhort all men to beware
they put not their trust in men:Gene. 4. for both they and
all that they haue of worldly things, be transitorie,
vaine, and inconstant.
               
               
                  
                  THE SIXT PART.
                  
                     
                        11 God spake once, and twice, I haue also heard the
same: that power belongeth vnto God.
                        12 And that thou Lorde art merciful: for thou rewardest
euery man, according to his worke.
                     
                  
                  
                     The sixt part conteineth: howe that God hath
promised to helpe the afflicted, &c.
                  
                  
                     IOb hath the same phrase and manner
of speache: The Lord spake once, and
will not repeate the same againe.
                     Iob. 33. That
is as much to say,Note. as that the worde of
God is so sure, that it can not be made
frustrate, nor changed by any meanes. So saith this
Prophete Asaphe, God spake once, which standeth
sure for euer, and cannot be altered.
                  
                  This word of GOD hath relation to the verses
before: wherein be opened the vanitie of man, or insufficiencie
to helpe him selfe or others in trouble,
which can not be chaunged, nor euer shall be, but as
fleshe is vanitie be it neuer so holy: as Adam called
his best sonne and holy Martyr,Genesis. 4. Abel in Hebrue: in English in Vanitie. Abel: that is to say
in the Hebrue toung, Vanitie: perfectly knowing,
that all flesh by sinne, was vile and vaine: and therfore
not to be trusted vnto.
                  This (once) speaking of God, is also referred vnto
the text that followeth: which declareth two vertues
in God, Power and Mercy: Power, to punishe
his enimies:How God doth reward euery man after his workes. and Mercy, to recompense his faithful
afflicted. And this is so true, that it shall neuer be
made false: the wicked to féele Gods strength in
damnation, and the faithfull to féele Gods mercies
in saluation: not bicause their workes deserue it:
but bicause God of his mercy, so contented to blesse

the poore faithful workeman. So he giueth eche man
after his workes, the euill hell fire by iustice, and the
good heauens blisse by mercie.
                  Now the Prophet saith, He heard it twise at Gods
mouth, that is to say, He knewe God had made promise
of mercie to saue the faithfull penitentes: and
of iustice to punishe the impenitent sinner. And this
he heard in the time of the Lawe of Nature, by reading
of Moses bookes: and also by the holy Ghost in
his owne time, when by the inspiration of the holy
Ghost, he wrote this Psalme and the rest of his prophesies.
The same haue we likewise heard: first, by
reading of the bookes of Moses: next, by reading of
the Scriptures of the Prophets: and thirdly,
by reading of the new Testament.
The which I pray God giue
vs grace to beléeue
and followe.
Amen.
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶AN EXPOSITION
vppon the 73. Psalme, made by
the constant Martyr of Christe, Maister
IOHN HOOPER, Bishop of Glocester
and Worcester.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               THE matter and argument of this Psalme, is a consolation
for them that are wont much to be moued and afflicted,
when they see the vngodly flourish, and prosper in all wealth,
and pleasure: and contrariwise, the godly and good people oppressed
with pouertie, and all other calamities, & afflictions.
As ye may see the Prophet Asaphe intreate of this matter in this
his first Psalme: the same ye may see also in king Dauid, in
his 37. Psalme. Wherein he exhorteth men not to iudge amisse
of God,Psalm. 37. nor to leaue off godly conuersation, although the best
be punished, and the worst scape quit. These two Psalmes intreating
of one matter, are to be read and knowen of vs in these
perillous dayes, least the hatred & persequution that happeneth
to Gods truth, and to the louers thereof, might vnhappily make
vs to iudge of God, & to forsake his trueth, as many haue done,
and daily the number of them increase, with the decrease of
Gods honour, and the increase of their owne damnation. For
nowe Christ trieth the chaffe from the come,Matth. 26. the rust from the
metall,1. Tim. 1. and hypocrisie from trueth, If we will not, or cannot abide
the hammar,2. Tim. 4. or trying potte that God setteth vs in, to explorate
and search,1. Iohn. 2. whether our faith wil abide the fire of trouble
and persequution,1. Cor. 3. or not: if we suffer not, all our religion
is not worth a hawe. For,Heb. 11. it is not woordes that proue faith, but
deedes.Matth. 10. If it abide the triall, it is true, and the more it is tried, the
finer it wilbe: and at lengthe brought into such finenesse,Iames. 2. as
corruption shall neuer hurt nor harme it,Gen. 12. 15. 17. 22. in the world of grace
and vertue. GOD therefore graunt vs grace to suffer his
triall, and search strongly,Rom. 4. patiently and
thankefully.Matth. 7. Amen.
               
                  
                  
                     ¶The order of the Psalme:
                     1 The text and letter of the Psalme.
                     2 The Paraphrase, or plaine explanation of the text, and
letter of the Psalme.
                     3 The principall partes, and most notable doctrines conteyned in the Psalme.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶The text and letter of the
Psalme of Asaphe.
               
               
                  THE FIRST VERSE.
                  
                     1. Truely God is louing vnto Israel: euen vnto such
as are of a cleane heart.
                  
                  
                     ¶The Paraphrase or plaine explanation.
                  
                  
                     GOD loueth the godly,Matth. 5. although
they be afflicted:Luke. 6. and hateth the
vngodly,Apoc. 3. althoughe they be in
prosperitie.Prouerb. 3. The Lord is louing
and merciful to such as be afflicted,Heb. 11.
and specially if their hearts
be pure and cleane, & iudge nothing
of God amisse: whether they sée the good oppressed,
or the euil exalted. In their hearts they murmur
nothing at Gods doinges: nor in their mindes
they find no fault with Gods order, and prouidence.
               
               
                  THE second and third verse.
                  
                     
                        2. Neuerthelesse my feet were almost gone, my treadinges
had welneere slipt.
                        3. And why? I was greeued at the wicked, I doe see
also the vngodly in such prosperitie.
                     
                  
                  
                     ¶The plaine Explanation.
                  
                  Yet notwithstanding,Psal. 37. 73. when I sawe the good afflicted,
and the euil prosper,Abac. 2. it troubled my minde: so

so that in manner I was forced and compelled, thoroughe
indignation, to iudge of God as other euill
men did: and gréeuously offended his high maiestie,
in thinking his doings not indifferent, in troubling
the good, and quieting of the bad.
               
               
                  THE fourth Verse.
                  
                     4 For they are in no perill of death: but are lustie
and strong.
                  
                  
                     ¶The plaine explanation.
                  
                  I perceiued further, (saith the Prophet) that the
wicked liued not onely quietly, and pleasantly: but
also died (in maner) without heauines, or any great
tormentes. Besides all these felicities, pleasures,
and ease for their owne partes in this world: it happeneth
when they die, they leaue also pleasant and
delectable mansion houses, great riches, and large
possessions to their children.
               
               
                  THE fift and sixt Verse.
                  
                     
                        5 They come into no misfortunes like other folke,
neither are they plagued like other men.
                        6 And this is the cause that they be so holden with
pride, and ouerwhelmed with crueltie.
                     
                  
                  
                     ¶The plaine explanation.
                  
                  If any misse of losse and damage in this world,
it is they: if sicknesse flieth from any, it flyeth from
them. So that much felicitie, and little aduersitie,
causeth them to knowe neither God, they neighbours,
nor themselues.
               
               
                  THE seuenth Verse.
                  
                     
                        7 Their eyes swell for fatnesse, and they doe what

them lust.
                     
                  
                  
                     ¶The plaine explanation.
                  
                  Such as flourish with riches and authoritie, waxe
proud and arrogant; for all thinges come so aboundantly
vnto them, that they haue more then they
looke for.
               
               
                  THE eight Verse.
                  
                     
                        8 They corrupt other, and speake of wicked blaspheme,
their talke is against the most highest.
                     
                  
                  
                     ¶The plaine explanation.
                  
                  They afflict and cruelly persequute the good and
innocent, and they are come to this insolencie and
pride, that they would not onely their abhemination
should be knowen: but also they themselues bost of
it, and in most abhomination, most extoll and magnifie
themselues.
               
               
                  THE ninthe Verse.
                  
                     
                        9 For they stretch foorth their mouth vnto the heauen:
and their tongue goeth through the world.
                     
                  
                  
                     ¶The plaine explanation.
                  
                  They be so blinded and deceiued with he felicitie,
and trouble of this world, that they spare not
God, nor godly men: but speake against both, and
do their willes and pleasures.
               
               
                  THE 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. and 17. Verses.
                  
                     
                        10 Therefore fall the people vnto them, and there out
sucke they no small aduantage.
                        11 Tush (say they) howe should God perceiue it? Is
there knowledge in the most highest?
                        12 Loe these are the vngodly, these prosper in the

world, these haue riches in possession.
                        13 Then haue I clensed my heart in vaine (said I) &
washed my handes in innocencie.
                        14 All the day long haue I beene punished, and chastened
euery morning.
                        15 Yea, I had almost said euen as they: but loe, then
should I haue condemned the generation of thy
children.
                        16 Then thought I to vnderstand this, but it was too
hard for mee.
                        17 Vntill I went into the Sanctuarie of God: then
vnderstoode I the end of these men.
                     
                  
                  
                     ¶The plaine explanation.
                  
                  Because the wicked men prosper so well in this
world: the people of God conforme, and applie them
selues to do as they doe, and frame their liues and
manners, vnto the rule and fashion of such wicked
people as prosper. And they sucke and drawe into
their mindes, the wicked mens opinions and conuersations:
and so replenish themselues with iniquitie,
as the thirstie man doth replenish himselfe with
water. And when the people sée the best part turne
vnto the manners of the worst, and be as euill or
worse then the worst: they muse and thincke whether
there be any God, or knowledge in God, that
suffereth these abhominations. And not onely the
common people (saith the prophet Asaphe,) stoode in
a mamering whether God tooke any héede or cared
for the world, séeing that wicked men did so prosper,
and the godlier sorte so vexed: but I may selfe also
considering these things with my selfe, fell into such
madnesse and error of iudgement, that I had done euill
so to applie my selfe to vertuous and godly life:
séeing I was vexed and turmoyled with continuall

miseries, & séeing that there was neuer a day, that
did not bring her crosse and trouble to the seruaunts
of God, and vertuous people. These thinges (saith
the prophet,) fondly and foolishly I spake to my selfe
many times: but when I weighed the thing with
more iudgement, and considered the matter more
déepely with my selfe, I thought, If I thus iudge
and speake of God, doe I not improue, reprehende,
and condemne the life, conuersation, and labours
of all godly men? The which will not be drawen
nor inticed from godly life, and the loue of vertue by
no misaduentures, nor afflictions in this world: neither
doe they iudge that they haue studied, and followed
godlinesse in vaine, whatsoeuer trouble hath
happened to them in this world. And therfore, when
I assayed to compasse the cause, and veritie of these
thinges: the greatnesse thereof brought me into
much feare, and carefulnesse. And further I perceiued,
that I could not come to the knowledge of these
thinges, except the Almightie God would reueale,
and open vnto me the mysteries and secretes of his
prouidence, and wisedome: that I might sée, and vnderstand,
what ende and outgoing these wicked men
should haue, that with most abhomination and blasphemie
in this life had most felicitie, and pleasure.
And by tarrying in the thoughtes, and cogitations
of this case and matter: at last I found, that these
wicked men and women, whose felicitie and prosperous
estate tormented me, their end was most miserable,
full of wretchednesse and paine.
               
               
                  THE 18. and 19. Verse.
                  
                     
                        18 Namely, thou settest them in slipperie places, and
castest them downe, and destroyest them.
                        19 Oh howe soudeinly do they consume, perish, and

come to a fearefull ende?
                     
                  
                  
                     ¶The plaine explanation.
                  
                  Doubtlesse the felicities and pleasures (Lord) that
thou gauest to these wicked doers, are slipperie and
brittle: for so may I well call them, because such as
enioy them (for the most part,) so abuse them in this
life, that they loose the life euerlasting.
               
               
                  THE 20. Verse.
                  
                     
                        20 Yea euen as a dreame when one awaketh: so shalt
thou make their image to vanish out of the citie.
                     
                  
                  
                     ¶The plaine explanation.
                  
                  These wicked mens felicitie vanished, as the
dreame of him that is awaked. For as ye dreame for
a time séemeth to be true, & as long as he sléepeth he
supposeth it to be as he dreameth: but as the dreame
passeth the sléepe being broken: so doth these wicked
mens felicitie, when they depart out of this life.
               
               
                  THE 21. 22. 23. and 24. Verse.
                  
                     
                        21 Thus my heart was greeued, and it went thoroughe
my raines.
                        22 So foolish was I and ignorant, euen as it were a
beast before thee.
                        23 Neuerthelesse I am alwayes by thee: for thou
hast holden me by the right hand.
                        24 Thou shalt guide mee with thy counsell, and
after that receiue me with glorie.
                     
                  
                  
                     ¶The plaine explanation.
                  
                  Before (saith Asaph) that I sawe such wicked
men (as flourished in all felicitie, and pleasure) caste
downe headlong from their places, I was wonderfully
troubled. And no meruell: for I was but a
foole and an idiote, that perceiued not the iudgement

of the Lord, but as a beast before thée in that respecte,
Oh Lord, yet diddest thou conduct me (such a foole as
I am) to the vnderstanding of thy pleasure, in such
difficil and hard causes. And in their pleasures thou
shewedst me their losse, and damnation: and in mine
owne aduersitie and trouble shewedst me, my saluation
and perpetuall health.
               
               
                  THE 25. and 26. Verse.
                  
                     
                        25 Whom haue I in heauen but thee? And there
is none vppon the earth, that I desire in comparison
of thee.
                        26 My flesh and my heart faileth: but God is the
strength of my heart, and my portion for euer.
                     
                  
                  
                     ¶The plaine explanation.
                  
                  When the Prophete hath weighed Gods iudgement,
towardes such as with iniquitie liued in all
pleasure, and perceiued that their paines were for euer,
and their ioyes but for a time: he is nowe inflamed
with the loue of God, and breaketh foorth into
these godly words, and sentences: Who can delight
me in heauen, but thou? O Lord. Whom shal I loue
vppon the earth? Whom shall I reuerence and honour,
but thée? Doubtlesse of all thinges except thée,
I passe nothing of, nor set stoore by. Thée onely I
embrace, thée onely I desire, and thée onely I couet,
and wishe for: for onely thou art to be beloued, to be
honoured, and to be wished for. So that both my
soule, and my body be rauished with the loue of thée:
for thou art the strength, and foundation of my soule
and body. Thou art my riches, my treasure, and my
euerlasting inheritance.
               
               
                  THE 27. and 28. Verse.
                  
                     
                        27 For loe, they that forsake thee shal perish: thou

hast destroyed all them that commit fornication against
thee.
                        28 But it is good for me, to hold me fast by God, to
put my trust in the Lord God.
                     
                  
                  
                     ¶The plaine explanation.
                  
                  And good cause haue I (Oh Lord) to loue thée: for
they shall perish, and be destroyed, as many as loue
any thing besides thée, and forsake thée. Therefore
as I knowe it profitable onely to preferre thée (O
Lord) in all loue and fauour: so is it méete that I béeing
thus saued by the mercie, and receiuing so many
benefites at thy hand, should continually with
laude and praise, celebrate and magnifie the
meruellous works of thy goodnesse
and prouidence.
               
               The end of the Paraphrase or plaine explanation.
            
            
               ¶The principal partes of the
Psalme 73.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Verse. 1. Truely
God is louing to
Israel, &c.
                        
                        The first part is conteyned in the
first verse: and it declareth that
God loueth the good, although he
punisheth them.
                     
                     
                        
                           Verse 2. My feete
were almost gone,
&c.
                        
                        The second part is conteined in
the second verse: and it declareth
how weake & fraile a thing the
nature of man is, and vppon howe
small an occasion it is in danger to
fall from God.
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Verse 3. 4. 5. 6.
7. 8. I was greeued
at the wicked,
&c.
                        
                        The third part is conteined in
sixe verses that follow, wherin the
felicitie of wicked men consisteth,
that good men bee so sore greeued

                     
                     
                        
                           Verse 9. 10. 11.
Therefore fall the
people vnto them,
&c.
                        
                        The fourth part is conteined in
other three verses next ensuing:
And it declareth howe fraile,
brittle, and weake a thing man
is, that for euery trifle turneth,
and withdraweth himselfe from
God.
                     
                     
                        
                           Verse 12. 13. Then
haue I clensed my
heart in vaine, &c.
                        
                        The fift parte is conteined in
two other verses next following:
And it declareth howe soone men
repent their well doinges.
                     
                     
                        
                           Verse 14. Yea and
I had almost said
euen as they, &c.
                        
                        The sixt part is conteined in one
verse next following: And it declareth
how great a daunger it is,
temerously to iudge of God, or of
Gods people, without the word of
God.
                     
                     
                        
                           Verse 15. 16. 17.
18. 19. 20. 21. Then
thoughte I to vnderstand
this, but
it was too hard for
me, &c.
                        
                        The seuenth part is conteined in
seuen verses next following: And
it declareth that mans reason is
but ignorant and beastly in considering
of Gods workes, vntill it be
illuminated by God and his word.
And then is made open, how vaine
all things be that wicked men possesse
in this world.
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Verse 22. 23. 24.
25. 26. 27. Neuerthelesse
I am alwaye
by thee: for
thou hast holden
mee by my right
hand, &c.
                        
                        The eighth part is conteined in
sixe verses next following vnto the
end of the Psalme: and it declareth
a wonderfull & vnspeakable
consolation. For althoughe wee be
greeuously tempted: yet we be not
forsaken of God, but preserued and
lift vppe, when else otherwise wee
should fall. And in this part in setting
forth the multitude and number
of Gods consolations: he draweth
neere the ende of the Psalme,
and concludeth it with this text, I
wil set forth thy workes. Wherwith
he declareth that hee will be
thankefull vnto God for his great
giftes and mercie.
                     
                  
               
               ¶The end of the partes and chiefest matters
in the Psalme.
            
            
               What thinges are to be marked out of these
partes, and matters of the
Psalme.
               
                  ¶Out of the first part are many
thinges to be noted.
                  
                     FIrst the nature and condition of God,
(for as much as hée hath prepared for
men a place of ioye permanent and euerlasting:)
is not to reward such as
be his,Matth. 6. and ordeined to the life to come
with so slender,Colos. 3. and small a recompense in the bloud
of his sonne Iesus Christ,1. Cor. 15. as these worldy and transitorie
thinges be of this world:Matth. 25. but with riches and
treasures that shall not corrupt,Cantic. 4. nor be eaten with

vermine,Iohn. 17. nor yet taken from vs by théeues. As S.
Paule saith:Ephes. 2. 
                     He hath made vs to sit with him in the
glorie of heauen.
                     Matth. 19. And as Christ said vnto Peter, that
became a begger with the rest of the Apostles in this
world, for Christes sake: Ye shall (saith Christ) sitt
vppon the twelue seates, iudging the twelue tribes of
Israel. We must therefore note out of this place of
the Prophets Psalme, That God, although he whip
and scourge vs, as we haue most worthily deserued:
yet he loueth vs, and will not take his mercie from
vs, but once leaue beating of vs, and burne the rod:
and then in Christ reward vs with euerlasting life.Rom. 8.
In any case therefore,Luke 23. we must well assure our selues
in the dayes of Gods punishmentes,Psalm. 119. that the end
of his crosses & afflictions be the beginning of euerlasting
ioyes.Apoc. 6. 27 22. For, He receiueth none: but such as he
first correcteth and chasteneth.
                     Esaie 54.
                  
                  The second learning in this part,Ose. 1. is to be persuaded,Heb. 12.
that God doth not punish without iust cause,Esaie. 53. for
that he delighteth in punishing of his people:Rom. 3. As the
wicked Pharao,Exod. 14. Nemroth, Saule, and Iulian the Apostata
said.Gene. 10. When he had drowned all the world
with water for sinne,1. Reg. 28. the wicked people iudged, that
God had punished of a parcial and cholericke passion
in his furie,Trip. Hist. without iust matter & cause. And therefore
they went about in contempt of God, to build a
tower so high, that God should neuer haue béene able
to wreake his wrath vppon them againe. So did
cursed Pharao,Exod. 5. he asked What God that should be,
that could plague him and his realme? And in the
time of his punishment railed,1. Reg. 28. and spake most vnreuerently.
Wicked Saule also, when God for his disobedience
punished him: he in despite of God, sought
remedie to withstand the punishmentes of God by
witchcraft,Trip. Hist. and Nekromancie. And Iulian the Emperour,

when Christ gaue him in the warres his
deathes wound, tooke an handful of his owne bloud,
and hurled it in despite of Christ into the aire, and
said, Thou hast ouercome thou Galilean, and so in mockerie
he called Christ, & Christian men Galileans.
Wherfore, in any case this beginning of the Psalme
is to be marked, and vsed in the time of all mens punishments:
and to say with heart and mouth vnto
the heauenly father, whatsoeuer he layeth vpon vs,
Truely God is louing vnto me, &c. And so doth king
Dauid crie out, when God was most seuere and busie
in punishing both him and his people,Psalm. 119. saying:
Thou art iust, (Lord) and right: and iust is thy iudgment.
So did the Emperour Maurice say, when his
wife,Carion. and children were killed before his face: Thou
art iust, Lord, and thy iudgementes are righteous.
                  
                  Iob likewise was of the same minde,Iob. 1. 2. although his
wife and kinsefolke prouoked him to speake vnpatiently,
and vnreuerently of God: yet he said, that
He and all his were the Lords, and that if he had taken
them of him, why should not he be contented,
that God should haue them againe at his pleasure?
These two notes are to be marked, and vsed, whatsoeuer
happen.Ioh. 16. First, that God purposeth to bestowe
heauenly pleasures and treasures vppon his people:Gal. 5.
and therefore he wil not reward them with the trash
and wicked Mammon of this life,Col. 1. and transitorie
vale of miserie.1. Thes. 1. The second,Heb. 12. when he punisheth his
in this world,Iames. 1. it is of loue: and that the person afflicted
must both take it so,1. Iohn. 1. and also saye so with
this Prophete Asaphe, Truely God is louing vnto
Israel, (that is to say,) To him that professeth his
religion.
                  The third note is, to marke that God is knowen
and felt in the time of punishment, and persequution

to be louing:Psalm. 119. but of such as be of a cleane heart.
Whereof we learne,Deut. 4. that all men that beare the
name of Israelites,2. Reg. 22. and of Christian religion: iudge
neither reuerently nor yet patiently of Gods punishmentes,Neh. 9.
but such Christian men as be of cleanePsalme. 18. 91 118.
heartes.Rom. 5. 12. Out of this place we may learne, the cause
why in this troublesome time,1. Cor. 4. so many waxe wearie
and fall from the trueth of Gods word,2. Cor. 1. whiles
God is a punishing of vs that haue béene vnthankeful
vnto him, and did not liue according to his word,
(the Lord forgiue vs.) Doubtles, now they mislike,
and starte backe: no not starte backe, but openly
in the face of Gods enemies sweare and stare, as
Peter did, (God sende them Peters repentance,)
that they neuer passed, nor cared a iote for Gods
word. And all is, because they be not, nor euer were
of a cleane heart: that is to say, so persuaded in their
heartes, that Gods holy word is the onely trueth,
what punishment soeuer GOD lay vppon them
that professe it. God giue vs this cleane heart, that
we may vnfeignedly say, Doubtlesse the Lord is louing
vnto his word, and to them that professe it, althoughe
he lay thousandes of crosses vppon them in
this world.
                  Out of this place we be admonished (dearely beloued,)
to beware of the greatest, and abhominable
euill (one of them) that can be done against God:
that is to say, witchcrafte, and calculation by Astronomie,
and such other like. Howe haynous an offence
is this, when we sée the heauens raine, the
cloudes wholy bent to stormes and tempestes, the
windes roaring, and in such rage, as all should goe
a sunder, thunder and lighteninges as men wonder
at: and vnder all these plagues, tempestes and
soule weather, the young springing corne, the swéete

roote of hearbes, the little withered grasse lye buried
and couered vnder weather and stormes, frost
and snowe, whilest GOD suffereth winter, and
maketh colde to continue. Were it not now witchcraft
and very abhomination, to say and diuine of
these stormie and winterly tempestes, that sommer
should not be gréene, parched blades of graine should
not come againe in the haruest to corne: bitten, and
buried rootes, should not at the spring bring foorth
swéete and pleasant floures: that shaken and wind
torne trées by tempestes, should not in the calme
comming of the sommer, bud foorth their leaues?
What witche and cursed man would thus iudge of
earthly things, that haue their times of vading and
loosing of all beautie for the sinne of man? If this
be abhomination for the bitternesse and stormes
of winter, to condemne and curse the sommer
to come, bycause sommers fruites, and the springes
beautie be stayned and all defiled with winters
barrennesse, and dimme cloudes: what is this,
but tenne times more abhomination, for the bitternesse
and stormes of persequution, to condemne and
curse the life to come of Gods people, bicause truthes
fruites, and the resurrections glory be stained, and
all dishonoured with worldly scarsitie, and dimme
persequution? But as Asaph the Prophete saith, Al
eyes see not these thinges, but such as be of a cleane
heart. All men haue eyes, for the most part, and all
men haue hearts, but they be such, as the wormes of
the earth, and birdes of the ayre can eate and deuour:
but he that will liue in GOD, and sée these
things, must haue immortall eyes, and an incorruptible
heart, which commeth by grace in Gods spirit,
to sée by faith, and honour with reuerence Gods doings,
as well in the winter and colde stormes of persequution,

as in the summer of felicitie and pleasure:
and to remember that all men and women haue this
life and this worlde appointed vnto them, for their
winter and season of stormes. The summer draweth
neare, and then shall we be fresh, orient, swéete, amiable,
pleasant, acceptable, immortall, and blessed for
euer and euer: and no man shall take vs from it.
We must therefore in the meane time, learne out of
this verse to say vnto God: whether it be winter or
summer, pleasure or paine, libertie or imprisonment,
life or death, Truely God is louing vnto Israel, euen
vnto such as be of a cleane heart.
                  
               
               
                  ¶Out of the second part are diuers things
also to be noted.
                  
                     2 My feete were almost gone, &c.
                  
                  
                     FIrst the Prophet noteth, how wretched
and miserable man is, and how
soone inclined to doe euill. He saith,
that He was ready and prest to haue
slipt from God: euen with the beholding
of Gods owne works, when he
sawe God giue vnto the wicked felicitie and prosperitie,
which things be onely Gods riches to giue to
whome he will. Although he bestowed none of his
vpon the wicked, yet was he offended that he should
bestowe his owne where he lusted.Matth. 20. The same occasion
tooke the workmen in the vineyard, to murmur
against God: as it is in the Gospell of Saint Matthewe.
So that we be naturally giuen to this, that
God giueth alwayes too muche vnto other, and too
little vnto vs: yea, although he would giue vs all
the world, and yet kéepe any one thing for himselfe,

(euen his very Godhed,) in case he wil not giue also
that vnto vs:Gene. 3. we be ready to bid him farewell. And
in case he will not also giue vs as muche, as is in
him: such is our nature, that we will by some meanes
or other séeke to haue it. As we may sée, when
he had made Adam, and giuen him both knowledge
and power, aboue all other creatures made for his
vse, bycause he was not made God altogether: he
fell most haynously from God: and slipt not only in
his féete: but also in soule and body, to his vtter ruine
and destruction, and of vs all that come of him.
For this is our condition. Let God giue vs neuer so
much, we thinke it too litle, (except we haue a singular
grace to consider it.) And let vs surrender vnto
God neuer so little homage or seruice: we thinke
it all too much. Such is our cursed nature and first
birth, to be ready to slip from God vpon the lighiest
occasion of the world: yea, when GOD doth other
men good,Gene. 3. and vs no harme. But this nature we
haue of the diuel our forefather,Iohn. 8. to disdeine and maligne
at other mens profite & preferment, as he did.
For when God made Adam, and put him in Paradise:
the diuell neuer rested enuying Adams prosperitie,
vntil he had brought him to the lesse of altogether,
and to slip cleane from the Lorde. This doctrine
therefore touching the brittlenesse and frailenesse
of mans nature, is to be marked: least that
whereas the Prophete saide, My feete were almost
gone, we slide and fall altogether from God.
                  There is also to be noted, that the Prophet said,
He was almost gone, and not altogether. Here is
the presence, prouidence, strength, safegarde, and
kéeping of man by almightie God, meruellously set
foorth: that although we be tempted and brought
(euen to the very point,) to perpetrate, and doe all

mischiefe: yet he stayeth vs, and kéepeth vs that the
temptation shall not cleane ouercome vs. And so
Saint Paule saith of Gods prouidence, and present
helpe: that He will not suffer vs to be tempted further,
then we shall be able to beare. And many times
when we be brought into the greatest daunger and
perill both of body and soule: before we fall and be
ouercome, the Lorde preserueth vs, and preuenteth
the euill.Gene. 20. As when Abraham went into Egypt, and
perceiued that the Egyptians would put him in
daunger for his wife Sara, (for she was a faire woman,)
he desired her to say, She was his sister: and
by that meanes thought to saue him selfe from danger,
and to winne fauour at the Egyptians handes.
The chastitie of this godly matrone Sara and wife
of Abraham, came into such extreme peril, that neither
Abraham nor she, knewe how to stande fast in
the state and chaste condition of matrimonie: for
she was coupled to the king, as his wife. But least
the woman should haue falne, and her féete slipt: the
Lorde rebuked the king, and tolde him, that Sara
was an other mans wife, and vnlawfull for him:
and so, by his merciful defence and goodnesse, kept al
partes from falling in that respect.Iudith. 13. The like may
ye sée also in Iudith the godly woman, that without
a singular grace of God, had falne with Dlofernes,
and abused womanhoode, and widowhoode: had not
the Lord stayed in time, the fall was imminent, and
(in manner) at hande.Iudith. 7. And ye may reade the same
likewise of the people that were within the citie of
Bethulia, at the same time, howe neare they were
falne, when they appointed God a time to help them
the space of fiue dayes: in case he deferred his helpe
any longer, they would yealde them selues into the
handes of their enimies: but God stayed their fall,

and that by the handes of a woman. And if there had
not bene more mercy in GOD, then faith in them,
their féete had not onely slipt: but also all the whole
lande, countrie, and citie. The like ye may sée also
in the notable historie of Hester:Hester. 4. whereas the very
rocke and chiefe stay of the Iewes health Mardocheus,
made suite to the Quéene for Asuerus pardon,
for the life of the Iewes, when sentence and
iudgement was past against them of death. So that,
if faith in the promises of God had not stayed him,
he had slipt and falne downe, to sée al things against
him, and his countrimen. But before men vtterly
fall, the Lorde is with them, and preserueth them
with his mercy:Psal. 94. as Dauid saide, When my feete
were moued, thy mercy (oh Lord) stayed me.
                  
                  The thirde thing to be noted of these wordes, is
the manner of the Prophetes speaking, which must
be marked and vnderstoode, or else the reader or hearer
of the Psalmes shall take no profite.
                  
                     My feete were almost gone, and my treadings had
well nigh slipt.
                  
                  By the féete he vnderstandeth the minde: and by
the treadings well nigh slipt, he vnderstandeth the
iudgement and wisedome of the minde. As foule and
slipperie wayes be daungerous for the féete: so be
the workes of God to the minde, that is not illuminated
with the light of Gods word. And as the slipping
and running away of the feete, causeth all the
body to fall: euen so the ignorance of the mind causeth
both body and soule to fall, and gréeuously to
misseiudge the workes of God. And as the fal of the
body sowceth and defileth it self with mire and dirt:
euen so doth the fall of the minde defile both body
and soule with impatience, and enuious indignation
at Gods workes. So that the Prophete saith by

these wordes, My feete were almost gone, and my
treadings had well nigh slipt: My minde was so
troubled to sée God suffer the euill in such prosperitie,
and the good in suche aduersitie, that my iudgement
almost slipt from the right sentence of thée (O
Lorde:) and very scarsly I auoyded most haynons
sinne towardes thée, in controlling of thy most wise
and iust doings. If we marked the pithe and wisedome
of the scripture, we should sée many thinges
more in our selues, then we doe: & doubtlesse growe
to an excellencie in wisedome, and finde out what euils
we be most inclined vnto. Amongst all other,
hatred and indignation of other mens prosperitie is
not the least, nor the most seldomest. And in déed the
father of sinne, the diuell, hath that in him. First, he
disdained God, and his felicitie: but he wan nothing
thereby,Gene. 3. but euerlasting paines. Then he enuyed
man & his felicitie: yet the wicked spirit gayned nothing
to him self, but double damnation, and losse of
vs all. And this séede of the diuell descended into our
nature (as we may sée,)Gene. 4. 21. 27. and made Caine to kill Abel
his brother:Num. 16. made Ismael, to persequute Isaac: Esau,
Iacob:Num. 12. Dathan and Abiron, Moses and Aaron:
Aaron and Marie his sister,Gene. 38. Moses: Iacobs children,
Ioseph:1. Reg. 19. Saule, Dauid: Herode and the Phariseis,
Christe and Iohn the Baptist,Mat. 14. 27 the tenne Apostles,
Iohn and Iames,Matth. 20. Peter, Saint Iohn the Euangelist:
and the members of the diuell and Antichriste
in this our time,Iohn. 21. the members of Christe. So that
they be not onely almost falne,Iohn. 16. but also (the Lorde
help them, and vs all) altogether sliden to enuie and
indignation, and likewise to violent oppression of
Gods holy word. But let vs not slip ne fall into indignation,
that they prosper and we are afflicted: but
say in the middest of these oppressions of the good,

and prosperitie of the euill, Truely God is louing
vnto Israel: and let vs praye also for their amendment.
               
               
                  ¶The third part.
                  
                     3 And why? I was grieued at the wicked, &c.
                  
                  
                     HErein is conteined what the felicitie
of the wicked is, and wherein
it consisteth, that the godly be offended
with all, when they flourishe
and be in honour: and the poore members
of Christe persequuted and without all honour,
and be rather worms then men: Psal. 2
                           •
                        .yea, the dogs
and brute beastes of the enimies, be in more estimation,
then the poore beléeuers in Christe.
                  Out of this part is to be noted. First, a great fault
and ouersight in the people of God, for lacke of iudgment
and true knowledge: wherein trueth and verie
felicitie in déede consisteth: the lacke of the which
knowledge, maketh men both impatient, and lewde
iudges of Gods holy workes. The Prophete therefore
herein amendeth his owne, and our ignorance,
and willeth vs to knowe perfectly, wherein felicitie
and happinesse doth rest. The Christian must vnderstand
and assure him selfe, that the felicitie and euerlasting
beatitude of man, is wrought by quietnesse
of conscience, and innocencie of life: of which
two partes and vertues, in this tract I will speake
more hereafter, as well what they be, what be the
causes of them: as what is the effect of them. I wil
assure you, if we knowe not these thinges well: our
religion will be but a while permanent, and true
vnto God. To enter therefore into the knowledge of
the matter, wherein the beatitude & felicitie of man

consisteth: it is requisite to cast some cloudes and
darknesse vpon these worldly things that wicked
men possesse, and godly men thinke them thereby to
be happie. Looke as the Sunne at the rising and passing
ouer the earth, doth hide and couer the globe &
sphere of the Moone, and darkneth also the light, and
clearenesse of the starres: euen so doth the tranquillitie
of conscience, and the brightnesse of faith and
charitie that dwelleth in the heart of the faithfull,
darken and hide all things that séeme beautifull and
voluptuous to the world, and carnall lustes of man.
And he that hath a testimonie at home in his owne
conscience, that he is in the fauour of God, will not
greatly passe of other mens iudgements, whether
they saue or damne, laud or disprayse: nor yet greatly
passe, although he lacke such notes of riches and
glory, as worldly men iudge and knowe felicitie by.
For he that knoweth surely wherein felicitie doth
consist, will not take the worldly opinion of men for
his recorde, nor for his rewarde: neither will he
greatly feare for any damnation or punishment,
that the world can annexe and ioyne vnto his life,
for this mortall time. It is therefore Christianitie
to knowe, that felicitie and beatitude resteth in the
riches of the mind, by Gods grace, wrought by the
holy Ghost, for the merites of Christ.
                  There was amongst the Philosophers great diuersitie
of opinions in this matter, wherin felicitie &
beatitude shoulde consist. Some saide it rested in
this, a man still and continually to be voyde from
anguishe and sorrowe. Other saide, it consisted
in the knowledge of thinges. Some saide, in pleasure
and voluptuousnesse. Aristotle and Theophrastus,
and such other as were of the sect of the Peripatets,
did hold, that a blessed and fortunate life did

consist in honestie, and said, that The same might be
accomplished with the voluptuous pleasures of the
body, and with externall riches, honour, and felicitie.
But both these opinions, and all the rest are confuted
by our sauiour Christ, and his holy word. He
saith,Iohn. 17. 
                     This is life euerlasting, that men knowe thee
(O father) the only and true God, and whome thou
hast sent Iesus Christ. And in an other place he saith,Matth. 19.
                     Euery one that forsaketh house, brothers, sisters, father,
mother, wife, children, or possessions for my
name, shall receiue an hundred folde, and possesse life
euerlasting. By these places we knowe, that beatitude
& felicitie consisteth in knowlege, & working of
Gods will, which be the causes of quietnesse of conscience,
and innocencie of life: wherein felicitie doth
consist, as I saide before. The right knowledge of
GOD bringeth faith in Christe. Faith in Christe
bringeth tranquillitie of conscience. Tranquillitie
of conscience, by faith worketh charitie and loue, to
do, and worke the will of our heauenly father. This
may ye sée also in the booke of the Psalmes, that felicitie
& blisse resteth not in these trifling things that
glitter to the eye, wherewith the Prophete was so
sore offended: but in knowledge and working of
Gods will.Psal. 94. 
                     Blessed is the man whom thou teachest
(Lord,) and whom thou instructest in thy lawe. And
in an other Psalme he saith,Psal. 112. 
                     Blessed is the man that
feareth the Lord, and desireth to worke his will. In
these Psalmes, if ye reade them with iudgement,
and prayer to God: ye shall finde both knowledge
and consolation, farre aboue the common sorte of
such as reade and vse them in the Churches nowe,
to the dishonour of GOD, and to the destruction of
their owne soules. And in this matter of felicitie
and beatitude of man and woman in this life: I

would haue you iudge by the scripture of God, or
else ye shall be deceiued, what it is, wherein it consisteth,
and what it worketh: for onely the worde of
God teacheth and sheweth it, and nothing but it.
The scripture of GOD plainely declareth, that nothing
can be profitable: whiche is not honest and
vertuous. And vertue is blessed and very felicitie,
in what condition or state so euer it be: neyther can
it be increased with any externall or bodily goods or
honour: neyther yet can it be diminished with any
aduersities or troubles. And nothing can be blessed,
but that which is voyde from iniquitie, full of honestie,
and the grace of God. As ye may sée in the booke
of the Psalmes, whereas this matter is plainely set
foorth.Psal. 1. Blessed is the man that hath not walked in the
counsell of the wicked, nor stoode in the way of sinners:
nor sate in the chaire of scorners. But his delight
was in the lawe of God, &c. And in an other
Psalme he saith:Psal. 119. 
                     Blessed are they that be cleane of
life, and walke in the lawe of God.
                  
                  Out of these places we learne, that knowledge and
innocencie of life, worketh felicitie and beatitude.
We must therefore beware, that we iudge not felicitie
to be in these inconstant, and vncerteine riches
of the world: but we must contemne them, and also
beware we feare not the trouble that may happen,
for such vertues wherein felicitie doth stand. And
we must vnderstande also, that although these vertues,
wherein felicitie consisteth: and suche as be
friendes of God dwelleth, be afflicted and troubled:
that neyther the felicitie, nor the person in whome
it dwelleth, is any thing the worse for troubles and
aduersities before God, but rather the better. As ye
may sée by the worde of God that saith,Matth. 5. 
                     Blessed be
ye when men speak euill of you, and persequute you,

and speake al euill against you, lying, for iustice sake.
Be glad and reioyce, for your rewarde is great in heauen.
So did they persequute the Prophetes before
you.
                     Matth. 10. And in an other place it is saide:Matth. 16. 
                     Hee that will
come after me, let him denie him selfe, and take his
crosse and followe me. The Psalme therfore in this
part, amendeth the iudgement of weake and wauering
Christian men, that be offended with the prosperitie
of the wicked: bicause they do not know, nor
marke by Gods word, wherein felicitie doth consist,
and that it remaineth in suche vertues as be not
diminished, nor drowned in the aduersities of this
world, what so euer daungers happen. When was
Moses stronger, then when he saw of the one side the
mounteines of Egypt,Exod. 14. and of the other side Pharao
and his armie, and before him the red sea, and in the
middest of these enimies, he and his people standing
like shéepe, ready for the woolues to be slaine: He
was neuer more strong, nor in this life more blessed,
then at that time.Dan. 3. Daniel was neuer better then
amongest the Lions. We must therefore know the
vertues, wherein felicitie doth consist, to be nothing
diminished by sorrowe and trouble: nor any thing
increased by voluptuous pleasures, and brittle honours
of this world.Philip. 3. As S. Paul most godly setteth
foorth in his Epistle to the Philippians: The things
(saith he) that I thought profite and gaines, for Christes
sake, I esteeme as hurt and damage: for whose
loue, I esteeme all thinges as nothing, so that I may
winne Christ.
                     Hebr. 11. And Moses estéemed the treasures of
Egypt hurtfull, and preferred them not before the
reproches and rebukes of the Lord: neyther thought
he him self rich nor blessed with the riches of Egypt,
ne cursed when he was in néede, and lacked them.
Elias the Prophet,3. Reg. 1 if he had considered his néed and

daunger, he might haue accounted him selfe very
miserable and vnhappie: but bycause he knewe it
was appointed him of GOD, he complained not of
Gods doings: for he was as well contented to haue
bread from God by the Rauen in the morning, and
water at night from the founteine: as though he
had had all the world. And he was nothing the lesse
blessed, although he was poore, but rather more blessed:
bycause he was riche to God ward. Reade the
Gospell of S. Matthewe,Matth. 17. and sée the practise of this
felicitie. Moses that was so destritute of all worldly
helpe, and Helias voyde of all worldly consolation,
do talke with Christ in the mount of Thabor, where
as Peter would haue tarried with all his heart, although
he knewe both Christ, and those that he talked
with, in the estimation of this world, were accounted
most vnhappie, and miserable of all men:
yet he sawe, that transitorie honours, riches, and felicitie
holp nothing to the life euerlasting. As Christ
plainly teacheth in S. Luke,Luke. 6. 
                     Blessed are the poore:
for theirs is the kingdome of God. Blessed be they
that hunger and thirst for iustice: for they shall be
satisfied. Blessed be ye that nowe weepe: for ye shall
laugh. Therefore the pouertie, miserie, and affliction
that the Prophete was in, when he spake this
Psalme and most godly Hymne, hindered nothing
at all his felicitie, and blessing of God: but rather
furthered it, if he had wist wherein truely and verily
felicitie had consisted: as ye may sée hereafter, how
he came to the knowledge of it.
                  An other thing is to be noted out of these sixe verses,
conteyning the third part of the Psalme: 
                        
                           •
                        . Tim. 6.That
such treasures, riches, and honours, as men set most
by in this world, be rather (vnto men that haue not
grace) lets and impediments to euerlasting felicitie,

and to the atteinment of vertue in this life, then furtherers.
As the scripture saith:Luke. 6. 
                     Woe be vnto you
rich men: which haue your consolation. Woe be vnto
you that are nowefull: for ye shall hunger. And
such as laugh, shal weepe.
                     3. Reg. 25. Achab the wicked king not
contented with his kingdome, would take Naboths
vineyard from him: but it had bene better for him
that he had bene a swincheard: for his lands and riches
abused, made him to kill an innocent man, and
his true subiect. Plentifulnesse of Gods giftes abused,
bringeth contempt of God and man:Dan. 4. as ye may
sée how Nabuchodonozer in wealth and riches, enuied
the liuing God, and came into beastialitie.Exod. 32. The
children of Israel, when they had filled them selues
with giftes, were not thankfull, but vnthankfull:
and fell from vnthankfulnesse to idolatrie, and all
abhomination. And as men contemne God in prosperitie:
so do they also their neighbours. As ye may
sée by this part of the Psalme, whereas the Prophet
saith: Their eyes swell for fatnesse, that is to witte:
Their riches and honour puffeth them vp in suche
pride, that they contemne and despise all men.
                  The thirde thing to be noted is, that all thinges
that the felicitie and ioyes of wicked men consist in,Deut. 40.
be but worldly and transitorie thinges,Psal. 92. and as vncerteine
as man is him selfe:Esai. 40. which is to be marked.
Bycause no man can be happie or blessed,Matth. 6, 1. Pet. 1, by any
such vading and inconstant things: neyther can any
man come to the beatitude of ioyes permanent,
by such things as God giueth indifferently, as well
to the bad as to the good, and to the vicious as to the
vertuous.Eccle. 3. 4. 5. As Solomon in the booke of the Preacher
meruellously setteth foorth, and matcheth equally
the good with the bad, in such things as happen vnder
the sunne. The good & the bad (saith he) be rich

and poore, in trouble & in prosperitie, haue frends &
foes, be merrie and sorrie, do liue and dye all in like.
But neither the things that bring them to life euerlasting,
nor yet life euerlasting it selfe, be one thing.
For there is nothing that leadeth to euerlasting life
but the knowledge and feare of God, and the doing
of his blessed will: the which vertues come not by
nature,3. Reg. 8. but by grace. As Solomon declareth: when
he prayed so earnestly to haue wisdome & vnderstanding
from God. And as these vertues come not from
nature: euen so be they not the riches of all men, but
of vertuous and godly men only. And as they dwell
& inhabite only in such as feare God: so do they only
conduct, and lead such as be godly (and none other)
to eternall life. The which differeth as farre, and as
much from the wickeds eternall life, as ioy differeth
from sorrowe, ease from paine, plesaunt consolation
from fierie flames, loue from hatred, God from
the diuell, and heauen from hell. For these riches,
wherwith the vngodly are indued in this life, be not
the things that can make any man blessed or cursed
before God. Therefore no more to be cared for, then
néede is to haue them, if GOD will: if not, to lacke
them: to haue them with Gods grace, well to vse
them: or else to pray to lacke them, least they abuse
vs. Better it were to haue too little in the worlde
with Gods fauour: then too much with his displeasure.
If we haue meate,1. Tim. 6. drinke, and cloath, let vs be
contented with it, as with sufficient things to passe
this life: if any more then these come, to take héede
they make vs not to swell in pride, and take from
vs the remembraunce and seruice of God. Oh that
godly eyes would looke vpon this Psalme, & namely
vpon this part of it, that declareth, wherein the
glory, honour, & felicitie of wicked men consisteth:

then I know, his eyes shal hardly escape teares and
wéepings, to sée and heare a wicked and cursed creature
of God, pampered with such a sort of vaine fléetinges,
that when he woulde most gladly flée from
sorrow,Luke. 12. the least be able to carrie him away. Marke
the wicked mans riches, and ye shall perceiue, that
God hath giuen no more, then he hath vnto the clay,
moolde,Matth. 6. and stonie earth: wherin lyeth both gold and
precious stones. His beautie and amiablenesse of vesture
and apparel, is not like the Rose of the garden,
nor the Lillie of the field. His strength much inferiour
to brute beastes. His wisedome lesse then horse
or mule, that vse in meates and drinkes ynough for
necessitie, and not too much for sensualitie. If lacke
and néede oppresse them, patiently they lacke vntill
order prouide for them: but if the wicked lacke, he
beareth not lacke with patience, nor séeketh ynough
by trueth. The couragious horse fiercely in fight cō
                     temneth
death: and the méeke swanne féeling the
life to passe,That is to say, Death. with swéete tunes welcometh Atropos:
and striueth not, but willingly is contented to surrender
that, which will not be kept with force. But
what doth the riche wicked man? Forsooth, as the
wiseman saith:Eccle. 41. 
                     Oh death, howe bitter is the remembrance
of thee, to such as haue confidence in their riches.
Lord what a canell house of stinking carion is
this body and life of wicked man puft vppe with riches?
Inferiour, with all that euer he hath, to the
birdes of the ayre, the beastes of the fieldes, and vnto
the barren clay that he was made of: and the soul
it selfe within that wicked body cursed of God, and
ordeined to eternall paines.
                  Who is he that can reade or behold the state and
honour of man, in whom is not mentioned one vertue
to dwell, without sorrowe & heauinesse? What

a cursed nature is man made of, that can sée an other
thus pampered vp with Gods displeasure, and can
not rather bewayle and mourne to sée his brother
by these riches lost, and cast away, then to enuie or
disdeine at his person? Oh woe befall them, that fal
into this sinne of ours, that thus rather with malice
and disdaine, enuie the miseries and curses of God
vpon other: then charitably do goe about to amend
them, or ruthfully to bewaile them? Read (my deare
beloued in the Lord) this place, and marke well the
wicked men, and learne to pray for them, as GOD
giue vs all grace to doe.
               
               
                  ¶The fourth part.
                  
                     10 Therefore fall the people vnto them, &c.
                  
                  
                     OVt of this part is to be noted, how daungerous
a thing it is, to be continually assaulted
with temptation: and that the
end of it (for the most part) is the conquest
and ouerthrowe of as many as be assaulted. As we
may sée by the examples of our forefathers. Temptation
not resisted at the beginning,Gene. 3. preuayled against
the innocent fathers Adam and Eue in Paradise:
against Caine in murther:Gene. 4. against Aaron &
the people in idolatrie:Num. 17. against Nemroth in pride:
against Dauid in adulterie:2. Reg. 11. against Iudas in auarice:
against Aaron and Marie his sister in enuie:Matth. 26.
against Esau in gluttonie:Hebr. 11. against Pharao in pride:
against Herode in hypocrisie:Exod. 3. against the Phariseis
in blindnesse and obstinacie of minde:Matth. 14. against the
Iewes in the slaunder of Christes death:Iohn. 7. 8. 9
                     1. Cor. 1. against the
Gentiles in ignorance of Gods worde:Rom. 1. against the
most part of Christians now a days in cowardnesse
and feare: and against all the world, in looking more
howe to profite it selfe, then to serue and feare God.
                  
                     
The Prophet said before, He was almost gone, to
sée the wicked so prosper: but he saith now, that The
people fall vtterly vnto them, and learne both wicked
opinions and wicked life of the wicked.
                  The second is, that the people fall not into the
wicked blasphemie of iniquitie one by one, but by
clusters in great number. Wherein is much to be
noted, that so few so hardly turne to God, and so many
so quickly to abhomination. But as Christ said,Matth. 7.
                     The way to heauen is narrowe and straite, and fewe
enter: and the way to hell is broade and plaine, and
many enter in it.
                  
               
               
                  ¶The fifte part.
                  
                     14 Then haue I cleansed my heart in
vaine, &c.
                  
                  
                     OUt of it we be admonished, that our nature
is to be offended by and by with
troubles, for the glorie of God. And euen
as we be vnquiet with the troubles:
so be we inconstant and vnstable
in the knowledge and trueth, that we suffer trouble
for: and beginne to repent, that euer we began to fauour
or imbrace the trueth: and wishe also, that we
had vsed our selues, as other men did: and then, to
haue suffered with other men the common lott and
fortune of the world, and not thus to haue béene giuen
to a singular knowledge of Gods word, whiche
bringeth with it a singular hatred and punishment
in this world.Iere. 20. Such is our nature, if we be by afflictions
and troubles, but for a dayes space, made like
vnto Christe, we thinke it too long: but if we be by
sinne, for all our life time, made like vnto the dinel,
we thinke the time too short, and wish longer to liue:
because we would longer worke and delight in sinne

and abhomination. Great and haynous is our offence
in this respect: for a little time spent in wel doing,
we iudge too long: and all time spent in euil doing,
we iudge too short. All labours and paines be too
little, if they be bestowed in worldly thinges: but if
they be appointed to heauenly thinges, (be they neuer
so fewe and slender,) we thinke them too much.
                  There is not sea nor land with all the perils within
them, but men dare aduenture both their goodes
and their liues, to winne increase of worldly goodes:
but to winne towards God and godlines, scarse one
of a great many without danger will labour or take
paines to gaine it. So doth the Prophet say in this
place, that He had clensed his heart in vaine: because
he sawe clenlinesse and vertue persequuted, and filth
with iniquitie honoured and exalted. Christ in the
Gospel of S. Iohn perceiuing, that when vertue &
wel doing should be troubled, men would waxe wearie
of well doing, and vertue: he said vnto his disciples,Iohn. 16.
                     Remember when they come that I spake of
them and warned you before.
                  
               
               
                  ¶The sixt part.
                  
                     15 Yea, and I had almost said, euen as
they, &c.
                  
                  OUt of it we learne, that no man should
iudge of Gods workes, nor Gods people,
but by the word of God. In this behalfe
we do many times gréeuously offend
the Almightie God. For when
the world damneth Gods word, then doeth the most
part of men the same. If the world say it is true, we
say so to. If the world say it is vntrue, we say it is
vntrue. And if the world condemne it, we condemne
it also. Likewise, if the world accompt them cursed

and damned, that be persequuted for Gods sake, and
for the testimonie of his name: we do so to. Yea, and
moreouer, if the world slaunder and lie vppon poore
men and poore women, that suffer for Gods sake: we
speake as they doe, & sometimes persequute also the
good with them. This is an horrible thing, to reproue,
(after such a carnall and worldly sort,) God,
and all his blessed people: whiche will be at lengthe
(doubtlesse) a iust condemnation of the world.
               
               
                  ¶The seuenth part.
                  
                     16 Then thought I to vnderstand this, but it was
too hard for mee, &c.
                  
                  
                     WE learne out of this part, that vntill
reason be amended and remoued from
her naturall blindnes, it can doe none
other, but condemne both God, and
Gods people. And no meruell: for the
Prophet in the 83. Psalme, & also in the 31. Psalme
hath these wordes:Psalm. 83. and 31. 
                     Consultauerunt aduersus absconditos
tuos, They haue consulted against thy hidden
people. As though he had said: The mercifull father
of heauen, kéepeth the godly people in most sure and
strong defence and protection: but this kinde of protection
is hid from the eyes of mans reason. So that
it séemeth many times, that God hath the lesse care
of the godly, and passeth more of the wicked then of
them. Yet, howsoeuer the world iudgeth, God sléepeth
not. Further, how blessed the state and life of
the godly is, and how cursed the life and state of the
wicked is, only the vertuous and godly do perceiue.
Therefore the Scripture calleth those that be godly
and vertuous, The hidden of God. Moreouer, the
godly doe perceiue, that all the vanitie of worldly
things, which be the treasures of the wicked: and the

permanent state and condition of heauenly thinges,
whiche be the treasures of the godlie: be onely séene
of such as enter into the holy Sanctuarie and secret
treasures of Gods most holy word, without yt which
worldly thinges séeme to be riches, and heauenly
thinges pouertie, wicked men to be blessed, and godly
men cursed, falsehood to be trueth, and trueth falshood,
death to be life, and life death.
               
               
                  ¶The eighth part.
                  
                     23 Neuerthelesse I am alway by thee, for thou hast
holden me alwayes by my right hand.
                  
                  
                     THe Prophet out of this part declareth
that, which Saint Paul writeth to the
Romanes.Rom. 8. 
                     If God be with vs, who can
be against vs? If he loue vs, what is hee
that can separate vs from his loue?
which spared not his only sonne for our redemption,
but gaue him for vs vnto the death. Therefore, there
is neither life nor death, thinges present nor thinges
to come, that can separate vs from him.
                  
                  Unto this place is referred all the diliuerance
from trouble and danger that God vsed from the beginning
of the world, vnto our time. And when we
vnderstand and knowe Gods mercie, towardes our
selues, and others: we must giue our selues wholy
to laude and praise his holy name, and be thankful.
For, There is nothing more vnnaturall in man, then
forgetfulnesse of Gods great and innumerable
giftes towards vs. To whom be all honour
and praise, world without
end. Amen.
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶AN EXPOSITION
vppon the 77. Psalme, made by
the constant Martyr of Christe, Maister
IOHN HOOPER, Bishop of Glocester
and Worcester.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               WHen this Prophet Asaph, (being a man appointed to the
seruice and teaching of Gods word vnto the people,)
perceiued, that such as were vnder his cure & charge, were many
times troubled and brought into great heauinesse, for the
feare and dread they had conceiued of Gods most iust ire and
straite punishment for sinne, & transgression of his holy lawes:
and in himselfe felte especially the burden of Gods displeasure
against sinne intollerable: hee receiued, from the holy
ghost (the spirit of consolation,) what was the best remedie and
helpe for euery troubled conscience, to appease and quiet the
poore spirite of man, that knoweth and feeleth not onely that
God is iustly angrie for sinne: but also will straitly punish the
iniquitie and abhomination of the same. And when hee had
learned himselfe by God, how a troubled and desperate conscience
might be quieted, hee spake it to such as were aliue and
with him, and wrote it to all such as should come after him vntil
the worldes end, that troubled sinners might see their sinnes
for giuen in the mercie of God, and they themselues accepted,
as Gods most deare children, into eternall friendship,
and endlesse ioyes of saluation.
            
            
               ¶The partes of the Psalme.
               1 In whome a man should put his trust, and to whome he
should resort in the dayes of sicknesse, troubles, and aduersitie.
               2 How a man should vse himselfe towards him, in whom
he putteth his trust, in the time of trouble.
               
                  
3 What great and perillous dangers the man that is troubled
shall suffer for the time of his trouble.
               4 Howe a man taketh consolation in the time of his
trouble.
               
                  ¶The two first verses of the Psalme, conteyning
the two first partes.
                  
                     1 I will crie vnto God with my voice: euen vnto
God will I crie with my voyce, and he shall hearken
vnto mee.
                     2 In the time of my trouble I sought the Lord:
my hand I held vp all night, and it was not wearie,
my soule refused comfort.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  ¶The first part.
                  
                     ¶In whom a man should put his trust, and to whom
he should resort in the dayes of sicknesse,
troubles, and aduersitie.
                  
                  
                     1 I will crie vnto God with my voice: euen vnto
God will I crie with my voice, and hee shall hearken
vnto mee.
                  
                  
                     FIrst out of this text it is to be
noted, that God onely is to be
trusted vnto in the dayes of
trouble: as our Sauiour Christ
exhorted in heauines and anguish
of body and soule, all people
to resort vnto him, saying:Matth. 11.
                     Come vnto mee all ye that be laden and burthened,
and I will refreshe you. And the same is spoken of
God by Esaie the Prophet:Esaie. 55. 
                     Ye that be a thirst come
vnto the waters, and ye that haue no monie come &
take it freely. S. Iohn likewiseIohn. 7. in the midst among

troubled and afflicted persons, reciteth the words of
Christ,Esaie. 18. saying, If any be drie, let him come to me and
drinke: Hee that beleeueth on mee, (as the Scripture
saith,) flouds of water of life, shall flowe out of
his bellie.
                  
                  Of this knowledge and suretie in the soule of
man,Rom. 5. 14. that God is, can, and wil be an ease and remedie
for the troubled conscience, cōmeth iustice, peace,
and ioy of the conscience. Not that any man shalbe
by and by without all feare, trembling and dread of
his sinnes, & of Gods iust iudgement against sinne:
but that this feare and trembling shal not come to
desperation: neither shall he be more afraide of his
sinnes, then comforted by Gods mercie and grace in
Christ. Therefore saith our sauiour Christ,Matth. 5. 
                     Blessed
be they that weepe, for they shalbe comforted. Blessed
be they that hunger and thirst for iustice, for they
shalbe replenished.
                  
                  In this that he saith,Of those that weepe & mourne who be blessed. 
                     Blessed be they that weepe,
He noteth such as do knowe and féele with sorrowe
and heauines of conscience, that they be sinners, and
the filthines of their sinnes maketh them sorrowful
and heauie hearted: yet shall they in Christ be comforted.
Againe, the poore, sensible, féeling, and troubled
sinner doth wishe his sinnes away, and would
gladly haue vertue and iustice to rule and do altogether
in him Gods holy will and pleasure. This hunger
and thirst (saith Christ,) shalbe quenched for the
merits of his owne death and passion: as it shal not
misse, if men in their thirst, hunger, persequution,
and trouble, doe knowe and vse onely God for their
helpe and consolation: as this Prophet did, and teacheth
vs to doe the same in this Psalme.
                  In this first part be two sorts of people condemned.Two sons of people condemned.
The one is such as plainely despaire, and in

their troubles, neither looke for consolation, nor yet
beléeue that there is any consolation to be hoped for
in Christ. The other is such as séeke consolation, but
not onely at Gods hand & power, but at the Saincts
departed, at witches, coniurers, hypocrites, and the
workes deuised and done by man.
                  The first sort be left comfortlesse, because they séeke
no consolation: and the second sort find no comfort,
because they séeke it where it is not, contrarie vnto
God and his holie word. Happie therefore is the
troubled, that séeketh consolation at Gods handes,
and no where els:Esaie. 45. 
                     For he is (as it is written by the
Prophet Esaie,) the God alone, that doth saue, and
none but hee. 
                     Two impediments keepe God from helping the troubled.But there be two manner of impedimentes
that kéepe the Almightie God from the helping
and comforting of people that be in trouble.
1. Ignorance.The one is ignorance of Gods nature and propertie
towards the afflicted: 2. Feare of Gods iustice.and the other is feare and
dread, whereas God is most iustly angrie for sinne,
lest that in his anger and iust punishment, he will
not be mercifull.
                  Of the first impediment, whiche is ignorance, is
sprong into the world horrible blasphemie,Of ignoraunce is sprong horrible blasphemie. that neither
séeketh helpe at Gods hand, nor yet is thankful
vnto God for any thing that God giueth: but rendereth
all things to such Gods and Saincts as he hath
deuised out of his owne imagination, or els learned
(as S. Peter saith) out of the traditions of his Elders.1. Peter. 1. The remedie against ignorance.
So that ignorance taketh away the honour of
God, & also the saluation of them that be ignorant.
The remedie against this great impediment is onely
the reading,2 Peter. 1. meditating, hearing, and learning of
Gods holy word, whiche is as a candle light in a
darke place, to kéepe and preserue a man from danger
and peril.Psalm. 119. And so saith king Dauid, that, It is a

candle vnto his feete, and a light vnto his stepps. And
in an other place of his Psalmes he saith: The lawe
of God is so perfect, that it turneth soules vnto the
Lord. Wherefore (saith he) it is the part of euery
man that wil be vertuous and godly,Psalme. 1. to haue his desire
and cogitations in the law of God both day and
right. And to preserue the people from this horrible
impediment of ignorance, God spake by his prophet
Esaie,Esaie. 59. these wordes: My spirite which is in thee, and
my woordes which I put in thy mouth, shall not depart
from thy mouth, and from the mouth of thy
seede (saith the Lord) from henceforth for euermore.
And in the same Prophesie Christ prayeth the heauenly
father to seale his word in his disciples,Esaie. 8. wherby
the daungerous impediment of mans saluation,
which is ignorance, might be eschewed & auoyded.
The same remedie against ignorance,Deut. 6. commandeth
Almightie God also by Moses in Deut. and by S.
Paul to the Ephesians,Ephes. 6. whereas the fathers and the
mothers be not bound themselues alone, to knowe
the lawe of God: but also bound to teach it to their
children, that by ignorance they offend not God.
                  Of the second impediment,What cō
                        meth of the feare of Gods iustice. whiche is feare and
dred of Gods iustice, commeth trembling and terror
of the conscience, and many times also the extremest
euil of all euils, very desperation, that neuer looketh
who can helpe, neither yet trusteth to find any helpe.
But of these fruites of terror and feare, and also of
their remedies how they may be cured and holpen,
it shalbe shewed hereafter in the Psalme, as it followeth,
whereas both terror of conscience and tranquillitie
of the same, be meruellously and diuinely
set foorth. Onely, vntill I come to those pointes I
doe note, that this feare and terror of conscience in
the faithfull, be the very hunger and thirst that

Christ saith shalbe quenched:Matth. 5. and they that féele
them, shalbe replenished with grace and consolation,
as the blessed Virgin the mother of Christ saith:Luke 1.
and they that féele them not, shall departe emptie
without grace.
                  
                     Rom. 3. 5. 6. 7. 8. Gods spirite worketh the knowlege of sinne by preaching of the law.And the cause of this terror and feare, is the spirite
of God that worketh the knowledge of our sinne
by preaching, reading, or thinking of Gods Lawe,
that openeth and detecteth, how wretched and sinnefull
we be by nature in the sight of God. But of this
matter is better occasion ministred afterwardes in
the Psalme, then in this place.
               
               
                  ¶The second part.
                  
                     ¶How a man should vse himselfe towards him,
in whome he putteth his trust in the
time of trouble.
                  
                  
                     2 In the time of my trouble I sought the Lord: my
hand I held vppe all night, and it was not wearie: my
soule refused comfort.
                  
                  
                     How we should vse our selues in the time of trouble.
                     IN this part is taught vs, both by doctrine
and by example, howe we should
vse our selues in the time of trouble.
When we know there is no helpe nor
helper but God alone, it is not ynough
for a man to know that God can helpe: but also we
must beléeue constantly, that he hath as prompt a
will to helpe, as a sufficient power able to helpe:
and then béeing assured that he both can and will
helpe, we must call vppon him for helpe, according to
his commaundement vnto vs, Call vppon mee in
the dayes of trouble, &c.
                     Psalm. 50. 15.
                  
                  
                     
But of this place we may marke and learne,The feare and terror of sinne is an intollerable butthen. what
an intollerable burthen and vnspeakeable sorrowe,
the terrour and feare of sinne is: and how gréeuous
a thing the sight and contemplation of Gods displeasure
and iust iudgement is against euery sinner for
his sinne and transgression of Gods most holy Law.
The text saith, That the Prophete, when he felt the
displeasure of God against sinne,The conscience being admonished of the filthines of sin, bringeth the body into a trē
                        bling and feare. cryed out with a
lowde voyce vnto the Lord. Whereby we learne,
that the conscience of man admonished by the word
of God, of the filthinesse and abhomination of sinne,
bringeth all the bodie into a trembling and feare,
lest God should vse rather iustice, and iustly punishe
sinne: then mercie, and mercifully forgiue sinne.
                  And thus béeing made afrayde thoroughly of
sinne, the mind is occupied with sorrowfull and heauie
cogitations:What ensueth after the feare of conscience for sinne. and the tongue by vehemencie of
the spirite, brought into clamours and cryes. As we
may sée commonly by examples left vnto vs in the
word of God, that where sinne is throughly felt in
the conscience, the feeling sinner is not onely troubled
within in spirite, but also outwardly in all the
members and partes of his bodie: as it is to be séene
most manifestly in king Dauid.
                  In what a sea of heauines was king Dauid in his
conscience, when he spake to his owne soule:Psalm. 42. 
                     Why
art thou so heauie and sorrowfull, ô my soule, and
why dost thou thus trouble mee? Againe, How long
wilt thou forget mee (ô Lord?) for euer? And in other
Psalmes we may sée, into what trembling and
feare outwardly he was brought by the knowledge
and féeling of his sinne.
                  In one place he saith, The feare of his sinnes did
not onely ouerlay his conscience:Psalm. 38. but also crushed
and (in maner) all to broke his bones.Psalme. 6. And in another

place, His visage was all defaced with wéeping
teares: and so abundantly they gushed out of his
eyes, that he watered, or rather ouerflowed his bed
with them where he lay. Into what horrible cryes
and waylings many times he fell for feare of sinne:Psalm. 77.
this Psalme and many other doe declare. The like
horrour and feare also of the sight and féeling of
sinne we sée to haue béene in Saint Paule, when he
cryed out vppon him selfe: Oh wretched man that I
am, who shall deliuer me from this bodie subiect vnto
death?
                     Rom. 7. And Marie Nagdalene with the sight and
féeling of Gods displeasure against her sinne, made
teares and wéepings enowe to washe the founteine
of mercies féete, Iesus Christ. But blessed is that
conscience feared by the Lawe,Note. whose feare by the
swéete promises of the Gospel, is turned into mirth:
and blessed be those teares and wéepings, that end
in consolation:Psalm. 126. and happie is that troubled bodie,Matth. 5.
whose end is immortalitie in the resurrection of the
iust.1. Cor. 15. Further, as we sée here king Dauid a sinner
for feare of Gods iudgement, breake out into lowd
cryes for helpe and preseruation: the same anguish
and trouble of minde and of bodie, for feare of Gods
punishment for sinne towardes man, was likewise
in Christ without sinne,Matth. 26. which said: My soule is
heauie vnto death: and in such an agonie was his
bodie, that he burst out and swett both water and
bloud.
                  So that of this second part, first we learne, that
such as be truely & vnseignedly brought to a knowledge,No trouble to the trouble of cōscience.
féeling, and repentance of their sinnes, haue it
with great heauines of minde, terrour of conscience,
and trouble also of the bodie many times: that no
sicknesse nor troubles, may be compared to the trouble
of the conscience, for feare of due and condigne

punishment for the sinne perpetrated and committed
against Gods lawes.
                  The second doctrine that we be taught out of this
second part,Differēce betweene the penitent, desperate, and contemptuous man. The penitent man. is to declare what difference there is betwéene
the penitent Christian in aduersitie, and the
desperate person that looketh for no helpe, or els the
presumptuous person that contemneth helpe.
                  The penitent afflicted calleth vnto the Lord, and
although he finde his burden neuer so intollerable,
doe wéepe and lament neuer so sore: yet he despaireth
not, but in aduersitie he hath hope, and is not
confounded: as in prosperitie he hath faith, and yet
presumeth not.The desperat man. The desperate man féeleth all troubles
and no consolation, is wholy ouercome with
mistrust, ful of incredulitie, and cleane voyd of hope:The contemptuous man.
as Saule, Iudas, and others. The contemner of admonition
hath hope in prosperitie, with al presumption:
as Cain and Pharao: and in aduersitie, desperation,
with all mistrust,Note. The Christian afflicted. & diffidence. The Christian
afflicted, calleth in faith and hope vppon the Lorde,
and is heard: the wicked afflicted calleth not vppon
the Lord, but is cleane reiected and comfortlesse by
Gods most iust iudgement. The Christian afflicted,
séeth all his sinns lesse then the least mercies of God:The wicked afflicted.
the wicked afflicted séeth the least of his sinnes, greater
then the greatest mercies of God. The one, in
trouble by faith glorifieth the Lord,Note. and by mercie
findeth saluation: the other, in trouble by mistrust
dishonoureth the Lord, and by iustice findeth damnation.
The one, by troubles thoroughe faith in
Christ, is made like vnto the sonne of God, and cannot
be separated from him in eternall life: the other,
by troubles through desperation of Christe, is made
like vnto Sathan, and cannot be separated from him
in eternall death. The one, in eternall life findeth euerlasting

ioyes: the other, in euerlasting death, findeth
endlesse paines. Almightie GOD (therefore)
graunt vs grace in all our troubles and afflictions,
penitently and faithfully to call vppon him: and to
finde him merciful vnto vs his wretched creatures,
Amen.
                  The third thing to be noted in this second part is,Gods nature and mans, differ much.
that Gods nature and mans differ much one from
the other. For man (for the most part) is no more
seruiceable vnto God, nor longer friendly vnto man,
then Gods condition vppon the earth is fortunate
and quiet with the world.Man for the most parte is vnstable & followeth religion as the world fauoureth. For if stornies arise for
Gods cause, and troubles happen where quietnesse
erst had place: the men of the world alter their loue,
seruice and reuerence: and will neither make nor
medle with God nor his cause: no, althoughe tenne
thousand idols be brought in for one God: as Englishe
men haue séene in former time. As long as
Christ had a king in this realme to hold of his part,Idols set vp againe in Queene Maries time.
and that great liuings, gaines, friendship and loue of
ye world rose for Gods sake, they dissembled towards
his worde, and so long as faire wordes could please
God, he lacked none: but now euen such as God did
most for, doe knowe neither God nor his word: but
had rather heare tenne times spoken of the falsest
tradition that euer man brought into the Churche,
then once of Christes most holy Gospel: so that now
mens natures, for aduersities sake, be cleane turned
from God.
                  How long the loue of man continueth towardes
men, daily experience sheweth within one moneth.How long mans loue continueth towardes man.
If a man fall into trouble for the most iust cause: he
that was his friend, will not onely alter his loue
from him, but also all the notes and tokens of the
same: whereas in prosperitie he was assured both

of friendly words and friendly workes, in aduersitie
he shal find neither words nor workes, except words
and works of displeasure. In prosperitie faire lookes
and amiable countenances were as common as the
cart way: in aduersitie there shall neither looke, nor
countenaunce be shewed, except it be frowning and
bending of browes: yea, and moreouer, aduersitie taketh
from the dissembling friend, all knowledge that
euer he had of his friend afflicted: that if the poore afflicted,
(although he be euen vnder the nose of his
feigned friend) with courtesie and all obeisance cannot
be knowne.
                  Oh God,God loueth and helpeth the poore afflicted. blessed be thy name, that withdrawest
neither thy knowledge, loue, nor yet thy helpe from
the poore afflicted, but hearest them, and grauntest
them their godly and honest requestes: as here this
Prophete most godly & comfortably writeth of thée.
For he saith.Psalm. 77. Consolation. 
                     The Lord shall hearken vnto me: when
I seeke him in the time of my trouble. And also the
Lord abhorreth not to be present with the afflicted,
be his troubles neuer so great:Psalme. 91. 
                     For I am (saith the
Lord) with him in trouble, I will deliuer him, and set
him in honour, &c.
                  
                  Of this doctrine we learne two things.God hateth not the troubled for his trouble but for his sinne. Man hateth man for trouble and not for sinne. The one
that God hateth not the troubled man for his trouble,
but for his sinnes. Men doe cleane contrarie for
the most part. For they hate the man for trouble,
and not for sinne. For let the wickedest man aliue
haue prosperitie, and all wicked men will loue him,
for his prosperities sake. God turneth not his fauour
from man for trouble, but for sinne. The world
for troubles sake will not knowe the most deare and
honest friend: but let the most wicked that liueth by
breath haue prosperitie, and wicked people will not
faile to know him with beck and du-gard, if he come

into companie. Yea rather then faile, the most wickedest
man aliue, shall be narrowly sought out, that
wicked men may haue acquaintance of him. But he
that hath God to his friend, is sure of a Sauiour as
well in aduersitie as in prosperitie: as the Prophet
here declareth, which can in troubles send ease, and
in quietnes continue ioyes for euer. To him therefore
be all laude and praise worldes without end,
Amen.
                  The fourth thing to be noted in this second part,Continuance in prayer.
is the continuance of the faithfull afflicted in prayer
vnto God. For the Prophet saith, that He lifted vp
his hands all night, and waxed not wearie. Of this
continuance in prayer we learne two thinges. The
one perseuerance in prayer, and the other patient expectation,
and willing sufferance vntill God sende
redresse and ease. To the first the Scripture exhorteth
vs, that we pray both heartily and continually
vnto God: not because he is ignorant of our troubles,
but because we should throughly be brought to
vnderstand, that there is none can helpe vs out of
trouble, but hée: and also that by continuance in
prayer we may the better knowe, and more earnestly
repent our sinns, that be the cause of our troubles:
thirdly, that by often remembrance and diuers rehearsalls
of our iniquitie vnto GOD, we may the
sooner bring both our soules and bodyes, into the
seruice and homage of Almightie God, whome we
haue by sinne most gréeuously displeased.
                  The second vertue patient expectation in troubles,Patient expectation.
declareth that we be much bound vnto God,
that chasteneth vs in this life: and deferreth not our
punishment to the eternall paines in the world to
come. Also it maketh the minde of man to vnderstand
the wisedome of GOD, and also the foolishnesse

of man, that many times for lacke of patient
expectation and thankfull sufferance, waxeth wearie
of his crosse and punishment, and also murmureth
against God, bicause he helpeth not when mans
wisedome iudgeth most méete to be holpen. But patient
expectation prescribeth God no time, when to
helpe, nor yet meanes how to helpe, but saith:Matth. 6. 8 
                     Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heauen. Also: Lord,
if thou wilt thou canst deliuer me. As the Prophete
vseth here in this Psalme, He called and cryed vpon
the Lord all the night, and attended patiently, when
God would helpe, leaning altogether to his blessed
will and pleasure, to doe, or not to doe, as him best
pleased.
               
               
                  ¶The third part.
                  
                     What great and perillous daungers the man that is
troubled shall suffer for the time of
his trouble.
                  
                  
                     
                        2 My soule refused comfort.
                        3 When I am in heauinesse, I will thinke vpon God:
when my heart is vexed, I will complaine. Sela.
                        4 Thou holdest mine eyes waking: I am so feeble
I can not speake.
                        5 I haue considered the dayes of olde: and the yeres
that be past.
                        6 In the night I called to remembraunce my song,
and communed with mine owne heart, and my
spirite searched diligently:
                        7 Will the Lord absent him selfe for euer? and will
he be no more intreated?
                        8 Is his mercy cleane gone for euer? And is his promise
come vtterly to an end for euermore?
                        
                           
9 Hath God forgotten to be gratious? and will he
shut vp his louing kindnesse in displeasure?
                     
                  
                  
                     HEre in these verses it appareth what
terrible and fearefull thinges, a man
that is in trouble, shall suffer and be
vexed withall. And the first that the
Prophete mentioneth, is in the end of
the second verse, and it is this: My soule refuseth
comfort.
                  
                  Of this aduersitie and anguishe of the soule,As long as sinn is not felt, man is iocund & pleasant. we
may learne many thinges: First, that as long as
sinne appeareth not, nor is felt, the minde of man is
quiet, iocund, and pleasant: and the mirth and pleasure
of the minde reioyceth the body, and maketh it
lustie and pleasant: not féeling at all the breache of
Gods commanundements,2. Samu. 1. neither passing any thing
at all of sinne,Rom. 8. nor euill conuersation: but rather delighting
in things that displease God,Act. 9. then in any
vertue or honestie. But when trouble, sicknesse, or
death commeth,When the horrour of a mans sin is felt to desperatiō no worldly ioyes cā comfort the afflicted person. then most commonly, though men
sée not the horrour of their sinnes to repent: yet féele
they the horrour thereof to desperation: and that
once felt in the soule, all the ioyes of the worlde can
not comfort the troubled person. As Adam with all
the solace of Paradise could not reioyce, when his
soule felt the abhomination of his offence towardes
God. Caine could neuer plucke vp merrie countenaunce
for the cruell killing of his brother Abel.Gene. 3. 4.
Peter coulde not stint wéeping for his denyall of
Christ,Note. vntill Christ looked vpon him.Matth. 26. Marie Magdalene
could not put vp her head from vnder the table,Luke. 7.
for shame of her sinne,Iohn. 8. vntill Christe had forgiuen
her: nor the poore woman that was taken in adulterie,
vntil her offences were pardoned. Neither yet

could this Prophetes spirite take any consolation,Psal. 77.
as long as his sinnes were felt and not pardoned.
Whereof followeth this saying: A small trouble of
conscience putteth away all ioy and mirthe of the
world. Wherefore it is wisedome and also the duetie
of all Christian people, to auoyde sinne and the
enimitie of God, which onely troubleth the conscience:
and to put the body to all paines possible, yea,
and to death it selfe, rather then to put the soule in
daunger towardes God:1. Tim. 
                           •
                        . as Saint Paule writeth
to Timothie his disciple: and not without cause.
For as the spirite that contemneth God, and féeleth
(for his contempt) Gods displeasure, can not take
comfort, but is full of anguish & heauinesse inward,
and in the outward man full of paine and sorrowe:Esai. 66.
so likewise shal the soule in the life to come inwardly
féele vnspeakable grudgings and sorrowes,Apoc. 14. and
outwardly the vnquenchable and euerlasting fire of
hell.The dearest frends of Christe be not voyde of trouble & anguish of minde for their sins. Consolation. And here is to be noted that the very elect and
dearest friendes of Christe, be not frée from trouble
and anguish of minde for their sinnes, perpetrated &
committed against God. But this is a consolation,
that the elect, as they finde anxietie and anguish of
minde for sinne in this life: so in this life is the consciēce
that is troubled, by grace quieted, that it may
after this life finde eternall rest. And it is a common
order and ordinarie way,An ordinari way that God vseth to call sinners to repentaunce, and from repentance to forgiuenesse. whereby GOD vseth to
bring the sinner to acknowledge and repent his sin,
and so from knowledge and repentaunce to the forgiuenesse
of his sinne: to shewe and set before the
conscience of the sinner, his sinne: as the example of
king Dauid and others do declare. My sinne (saith
Dauid) is alwayes before me. As though he had said:
In case I coulde hide mine iniquitie from all the
world,Psal. 51. yet can I not excuse it before God, nor hide it

from mine owne conscience. And euery mans sinnes
thus open before God, and knowne and felt in his
own conscience, bringeth the soule into this discomfort
and heauinesse, that it refuseth all consolation
and comfort: as this Prophet Asaph sayth meruellously
in this second verse of his Psalme.
                  There is to be noted out of this comfortlesse spirite
of the Prophete Asaph,Two maner of discomforts. an other most necessarie
doctrine for euery Christian creture, which is this:
that there is two manner of discomfortes, or two
sortes of heauinesse in the word of God, that is appointed
to leade vs in the time of this wretched life:
as there is in it also two manner of consolations.
There is two manner of brightnesse and clearnesse,
and two manner of darknesse and obscurenesse in it:
as it shall appeare in the treatise of this Psalme
hereafter. And bycause the diuersitie is not marked:
the worde of God doeth many times, and in many
places and persons, no good at all.
                  There is a discomfort inwardly, and a discomfort
outwardly in the scripture.An inward discomforte. The discomfort inwardly
is, when the sinneful man or woman séeketh
and suffereth the same discomfort in his soule, that
the lawe of GOD doth open and proclame against
him for his sinnes committed against God and his
lawe: so that, as the lawe commaundeth after this
sort:Matth. 3. 
                     Agite poenitentiam, Repent ye: so the man that
is commaunded by the lawe to be sorie and heauie
for his sinnes,Mark. 1. is sorrie and heauie in déede, by the
working of Gods spirite:Gene. 3. 4. as we may sée in Adam,
what inward feare and discomfort he had,2. Samu. 11 when he
heard the voyce of God after the doing of his sinne:
Caine the like,Matth. 27. Dauid the same,Act. 9. with Peter, Paule,
and others in the word of God, This discomfort inwardly
is felt of al Gods elect, that be able to learne

and knowe the nature of Gods lawe, and the damnation
and curse of God vpon sinne.Matth. 3. For this is a generall
commaundement to all fleshe borne and conceiued
in sinne:Mark 1. 
                     Agite poenitentiam, Repent ye. It is
also many times felt of suche as dye,Saule and Iudas. and liued wickedly.
As Saule and Iudas,1. Samu. 31. whose spirites in their
discomforts refused al consolation,Matth. 27. and so dyed without
comfort in great anguishe and perturbation of
minde.Mark. 14. But that is not generall in all wicked and
damned persons: for many times they féele no discomfort,
nor heauinesse of spirite inwardly in this
world: but God, of his vnspeakable wisedome and
iustice, maketh them (for their sinnes) aliue, and in
securitie of conscience,Pharao. to goe to hell. As Pharao,
whilest he followed the Israelites in persequution
into the red sea,Exod. 14. soudenly was drewned. Chore, Dathan
and Abiron, whilest they were doing their sacrifices,
God killed them,Num. 16. in opening the earth that
swallowed them aliue downe into hell. Nowe this
inwarde discomfort,Rom. 3. 5. although it eude not in ioye,
but onely in such as beléeue their sinnes to be forgiuen
in the death and passion of Christ: yet we sée by
the examples of the scripture, that both good and bad
suffer and féele this, that their spirite will take no
comfort.Outward discomfort But nowe as concerning outward and externall
discomfort: which is felt as well of such as
haue the word of God, as such as haue not the word
of God, but only the lawe of nature. As we may sée
in the time of the lawe of nature, how Noah shewed
the discomfort of all men, and the destruction of the
world for sinne:Gene. 5. 6. but this discomfort did not enter
into the spirites of the hearers. Christ complaineth
of the same, that the people had both discomfort and
comfort preached vnto them: and yet they receiued
none of them both. To whome (saith Christ) should I
                     
                     compare this generation? It is like boyes that sit in
the streates and cry vnto their fellowes, and say: We
haue played vpon our tymbrels to you, and you haue
not daunsed: we haue soung mourning songs vnto
you, and ye haue not wept.
                     Matth. 11. Luke. 7. God by his Prophete Esaie
saith the same:Esai. 65. 
                     All the day long haue I extended
foorth my hand vnto an vnfaithfull and intractable
people: Meaning, that what so euer he threatened,
or gently offered vnto the Iewes, it came no
further then the outwarde eare.Esai. 53. 6. Whereof both the
Prophets and Christ him self gréeuously complaine,Matth. 13.
in this sort:Iohn. 12. 
                     They haue eares and heare not, and they
haue eyes and see not.
                     Rom. 11. Saint Paule rebuketh men
also,Rom. 1. that by the lawe of nature knewe good, whereof
they should haue reioyced: and euill, whereof they
should haue lamented, and yet did not. And to leaue
off the examples of our fathers mentioned in the
scriptures: we may sée the same by daily experience
amongest our selues. We reade in the booke of God,
we heare by preaching, we knowe in our owne consciences
the displeasure and anger of God, against
vs for our sinnes. God outwardly sheweth vs the
same with many horrible plagues: as by sicknesse,
warre, sedition, scarsitie, enimitie, and hatred, by the
deliuerance and surrender of a whole realme (to the
vtter destruction thereof) into the handes and rule of
a straunger, and by the deliuery and giuing ouer of
Christian soules into the hands and rule of the Antichristian
Pope, and his wicked Cleargie: and yet
this discomfort commeth no further, then our outward
eare. If Asaph the authour of this Psalme
were amongest vs, he would say, His spirite would
take no consolation. And this is an horrible plague,
that wéekely this Psalme is read amongest the Popish
Cleargie, and yet it bringeth their spirites to no

sorowe nor féeling of God displeasure. Wherefore
our owne experience teacheth, that there is an inward
and an outwarde discomfort in this Psalme,
and in the rest of Gods most holy word. The one penitent
sinners féele, and by it amend their liues: and
the other some wicked men féele, and yet despaire:
but of the most part of the world, it is not felt at all.
Whereof commeth the contempt of God,Sinne not felt, bringeth the cō
                        tempt of God, &c. the loue of
our selues and of the world, and the losse of our sinfull
soules in the world to come. Let vs therefore
marke the scripture that teacheth this discomfort,
and pray to God, that as we sée it in the letter: so we
may féele it in the spirite. Of the two maner of consolations,
it shall be saide in the next verse: and of
the brightnesse and darknesse also, in the Psalme
hereafter.
                  Nowe in the trouble of the spirite is an other
thing to be considered, whereof the text also maketh
mention: that is, howe the discomfort of the spirite
had continuaunce all the night. Whereof is to be
gathered the greatnesse of discomfort. For as the
night is a very image of death, and the bed a very similitude
of the sepulchre and graue: euen so is the
discomfort of the spirite in the night, that will not
suffer the body to take rest, but to be vnquieted with
it selfe.Vnquietnes of the spirite is a veri image of eternall death. The which vnquietnesse of the spirite, is a
very similitude and image of eternall discomfort in
the world to come, that both body and soule, whiche
were created first to inherite the heauenly blisse, after
the fall of Adam, should rest by night, (as king
Dauid saith) and after this life,Psal. 104. for sinne vnforgiuen,
should for euer be disquieted in the vnquenchable
fire of hell.
                  Here may we learne the circumstances and causes,The cause of al trouble is sin.
how the trouble of the Prophet Asaphes spirite

was increased.Psal. 39. It was trouble ingendered by sinne,
(the occasion onely of al mens miseries,)Rom. 5. 7. 8 opened and
reuealed vnto the conscience by the law, condemned
by iustice to eternall fire, and it continued al night:
yea,The night representeth hell prison. The bed representeth the graue. The sheets of mans fleshe is earth. how much more, the scripture declareth not. In
the which night, the darknesse thereof represented
vnto his eyes outwardly, the horrour of hell prison:
and also his bed, the graue and sepulchre, wherein al
flesh is clad, after the spirite departeth. The shéetes
of mans flesh after this life, be nothing but earth aboue
and earth vnderneath: as whilest it liueth, it
is clad with such vaine thinges as grow vpon the
earth.
                  This whole night in discomfort of the spirit, declareth
two notable things.Two thinges to be noted. First, howe earnestly
God is angrie in déede with sinne, that putteth man
to such long paine for it. And the next, howe gratious
a God he is, that will not yet suffer the discomforted
spirite to despaire in his discomfort, as it followeth
meruellously in the next verse.
                  
                     3 When I am in heauinesse I wil thinke vpon God:
when my heart is vexed I will complaine. Sela.
                  
                  Whilest Asaph was thus troubled in spirite, he
remembred the Lord,No cōfort to the afflicted but GOD alone. and called vnto him for helpe.
First, out of this verse it is to be considered, that nothing
can quiet the comfortlesse spirit, but GOD alone.
But for as much as it séemeth by the partes of
this Psalme that followeth, that this verse came in
by occasion, rather then to shewe a full remedie for
the Prophetes trouble: I will not write what I
thinke thereof, but deferre the remedie against trouble
to such other verses as follow: bycause the Prophete
saide before, that his spirite could take no consolation,

and that a great many of troubles followe,
as the Psalme declareth. It sheweth, that he was
not able to beare the troubles of the minde alone,
without the inuocation and helpe of God. Wherefore,
before he expresseth by writing al his troubles:
he writeth also, howe in the middest of them, he did
remember and put his trust in the Lord.
                  Out of this we learne, howe necessarie it is in
time at the beginning of troubles and temptations,
to remember the Lord, and to cal vnto him for mercie.
For the more temptations doe growe without
present assistance of Gods grace, the greater is the
damnation, and the more is the daunger thereof: as
we may sée in the examples of the scripture.
                  Adam fell into anxietie and discomfort of spirite,Gene. 3.
and God immediately tolde him of his fault, and by
Gods grace his discomforted spirite was quieted in
the promises of God:Note. Caine by the murther of his
brother Abel,Gene. 4. felt the discomfort of the spirit, and by
neglecting of Gods calling, dyed in the same.2. Samu. 12 Dauid
being admonished by Gods grace, found rest for his
vnquieted spirite:1. Samu. 31 Saule in deferring the remedie
of Gods grace, died comfortlesse. Peter, at the beginning,
through Gods grace with one looke of Christe,Matth. 27.
put away discomfort: Iudas with contemning Christes
admonitions, dyed in horrible despaire.
                  Whereof we learne to beware, (as much as may
be,) that temptations growe not so farre, that Gods
admonition, or the remembraunce of Gods name be
forgotten: but that we doe in the middest of discomforts,
(as Asaph the Prophet did,) remember and cal
vpon the Lord for help. There is also by this remē
                     braunce
of God, in the discomfort of the spirite, to
be noted, what a vanitie all the world, and worldly
things be for man in time of trouble, when God shal

shew and reueale vnto man his sinnes.What maner of mā Asaph was. This Asaph
(as we reade in the scripture) was a man, whom for
his vertues and good qualities, king Dauid appointed
to be a Musician for the comfort of many, vntill
the building of the temple of Hierusalem:1. Paral. 6. Yet
nowe, (as we sée) he is not able to solace him selfe
with his Musicke, nor yet with any worldly thing:
but this onely comfort is in the Lord. And here the
Prophete declareth the truth of Christes sentence,
written in S. Luke:Luke. 9. 
                     What doth it profite a man to
winne all the worlde, and to loose his owne soule?
What externall riches can comfort the inward spirite,
troubled with sinne and transgression of Gods
lawe? None at all doubtlesse: as the scripture sheweth
examples euery where.Note. Al king Dauids kingdome
was not able to appease his troubled and discomforted
spirite, when he said to his troubled soule:Psal. 42. 43
                     Why art thou so heauie and sad my soule, and why
doest thou trouble me?
                  
                  Nowe, this one thing more I will marke in this
verse, and no more, bycause it is more fully vsed by
the Prophete for the comfort of discomforted spirits
in the verses that followe.
                  I sayde, there was two kindes of consolations in
the word of God.Two kindes of consolations in the worde of God. The one outward in the face and
lesson of the letter: and the other inward, in the vnderstanding
and féeling of the spirite. And of this diuision
must great héede be taken. For it is not euery
man that readeth and heareth, that Christe dyed for
the remission of sinne, that shall haue the consolation
of the redemption promised in Christes bloud. For
we sée and reade, (God giue vs grace to learne it,)
that Adam caused his sonnes to heare of his owne
fall in Paradise, and the redemption of his fal in the
bloud of Christe to come,Gene. 4. as Abel his yonger sonne

right wel perceiued: yet did Caine, hearing the same
consolation, perish in his sinne. There was consolation
and rest promised vnto all them that came out
of Egypt: but none tooke the benefite thereof, but
Iosua and Caleb. There was in the outward letter
promised consolation vnto all Abrahams children:Who be the childrē of Abraham.
but none receiued the commoditie thereof, but suche
as in spirite followed the fayth of Abraham. The
scripture saith in the letter, that GOD would all
men to be saued: yet we sée such as followe not the
spirite offered,Consolation offered vnto England in K. Edwardes dayes. be damned. God by his worde in the
time of holy and blessed King Edward the sixt, offered
consolation vnto all this realme: yet none shall
inioy it, but suche as in their spirites haue learned,
kept, and do followe the word of consolation. So our
Sauiour Christ in S. Matthew doth say: Not euery
man that calleth me, Lord, Lorde, shall enter into the
kingdome of God: but he that followeth in Christ
Gods commaundements.
                  There be a great many at this day (as there were
before our time,) that knowe and speake of such consolation,
as is conteined in the letter, & vtter barke
of Gods worde: but in their consciences they féele
not in déede the consolation thereof.Iudas. As Iudas preached
abroad with the rest of his companions, consolation
to the lost shéepe of the house of Israel: but he
shewed vnto others that he felt not him selfe. So did
the Phariseis,Phariseis. when the scripture was read euery
Saturday in their Synagogues, shew that Messiah
should come to redéeme the worlde: yet they them
selues (for the most part) felt not the consolation in
déede, that the scripture did testifie of Christ. Euen so
at this present, many reade this Psalme (and daily
almost in the letter,) whereof if it be in Englishe, he
that vnderstandeth not but the English toung, séeth

great consolation in the letter, and also in the Prophete
Asaph, that vsed the Psalme: yet when néede
should be, the inward consolation of the Psalme, of
many is nothing felt. The cause is, that either they
vnderstand it not, or else marke it not: eyther they
thinke (as the Papistes doe teach) that to say or sing
the Psalme without vnderstanding and féeling of it
in the spirite, is sufficient for the worke it selfe, and
that it pleseth God Ex opere operato, as they terme it.
                  It is too euident, and also too horrible, (if it pleased
God,) that men be contented only with the externall
consolation conteined in the word of God. For
if they heare that Gods commaundements be true,
and full of consolation, they be contented to heare of
them in the letter or by speach, and neuer learne thē
or féele them by heart. The like is in the Articles of
our Christian religion. They be thought to be true
and godly: and yet the most part that so iudge, neyther
learne them nor féele them in their conscience:
Wherefore they doe outwardly and inwardly as
much idolatrie, contrarie to their Créed, by the commaundement
of men, as can be deuised: for their
consolation of faith is no more but such an outward
knowledge, as the most men hold withall, without
any proper iudgement, or singular féeling of their
owne spirites.Prayer. The same is likewise in prayer. For
in the externall letter, there is so much consolation
as may be: but in the heart of him that prayeth, is
there no vnderstanding nor féeling of the consolatiō
that outwardly is spoken and talked of. Therefore,
marke this order of the Prophete Asaph. He sayde,
that His spirite could take no consolation in all the
night time, whilest he helde vp his handes. And as
there is not only discomfort and vnquietnes spoken
of, but also felt: not onely noted and written in the

letter of y• Psalme, but also throughly felt inwardly
in the spirite with heauinesse and anguish, without
comforte and consolation: so in this verse is there
consolation in the letter, in the voice, & in the mouth
mentioned of, & inwardly the same consolation felt
in the spirite. And as outwardly Gods displeasure
troubled him: so inwardly Gods holy name & promises
comforted him. And this is to be noted, least we
should heare of consolation outwardly, or reade it in
the booke of the holy Bible: and yet inwardly neyther
féele nor knowe any consolation at all.
                  
                     Man in trouble without Gods presence is miserable.In the end of this verse is put this worde (Sela.)
And it doth note vnto the Reader or Hearer, what a
miserable and comfortlesse thing man is in trouble,
if God be not present with him to help him. It is also
put as a spurre & pricke for euery Christian man
and woman, to remember and call vpon God, in the
days of their troubles. For as the Iewes say, where
so euer this word (Sela) is, if doth admonish and stirr
vp the Reader or Hearer, to marke what was saide
before it: for it is a worde alwayes put after very
notable sentences. Then followeth the rest of suche
paines & troubles, as this Prophet suffered, whilest
the Lord laide his crosse vpon him: after this sort.
                  
                     4 Thou holdest mine eyes waking: I am so feeble I
can not speake.
                  
                  Before, he saide his spirit could take no consolation,
which was a gréefe vnspeakable. For no thought
is able to comprehend the anguish of the mind, much
lesse is the toung able to expresse it. But now he sheweth
a further increase of discomfort, and saith: that
The terrour of his mind was such, that he was not
only comfortlesse, but the Lord also to the increase of
sorrowe, kept sléepe from him. And as the greatnesse

of Gods punishment, suffered him not to sléepe: so
would it not permit him to speake,Note. but made him
speachlesse: such was the great punishment of God
towardes him.
                  Here is the tyrannie and violence of sinne to be
perceiued and séene:What sinn worketh in man. which is first in this verse to be
noted. It taketh all mirthe from the spirite, and
bringeth in heauinesse and discomfort. It taketh away
sléep, and placeth for it tediousnesse and sorowfull
watch. It taketh away also the speache of the
tong, and leaueth the man mute and speachlesse. If
sinne can do so painful things in the body and soule,
whilest they be yet conioyned together, and there is
hope of remission: what can it doe, when the one is
in the earth, and the other in hell separated, or else
both of them conioyned againe in the resurrection
of the wicked, where there is no hope of redemptiō,
but assuraunce of euerlasting paine? Besides this, it
is to be noted in this verse,A peaceable conscience, precious iuel. conteyning the increase
of the Prophetes heauinesse, what a precious iewel
man or woman hath: that hath a quiet heart and
peaceable conscience. For where so euer they be,
there be all the members of man & woman, wholy
bent vnto the seruice and honouring of God. The
eyes shall neuer be turned from their seruice: neyther
shall the toung ceasse (if it be able to speake) to
sound foorth alwayes the glory of God. As Dauid
saith:Psal. 25. 121. 
                     Mine eyes be alwayes towardes the Lord. Againe:Psa. 123. 131
                     I lifted vp mine eyes vnto the Lord. As the
eye of the handmaide attendeth vpon her Maistres:
so our eyes attend vpon the Lord. Againe:Psal. 132. 
                     Mine eyes
Lord be not proud. And in another Psalme he saith,
There should come neither sléepe ne slumber in his
eyes, vntil he had prouided a place for ye arke of God
to rest in. In case the spirite be troubled, or in a contempt

of Gods lawes, not liking his holy deuises:
the eyes be eyther troubled with ouermuch watch,
(as in this Psalme we sée:) or else bent to sée vanitie,
the lustes and concupiscence of the flesh and the
world. Wherefore Dauid prayed the Lord,Psal. 119. to turne
his eyes that they looked not vpon vanitie.Prou. 17. For the
eye of him that hath not a right spirit, is insatiable.
And many times the eye (wheras the spirit is without
the fauour of God) abhorreth Gods owne good
giftes. As the eyes of the Israelites lothed Manna
in the desert, saying: Our eyes see nothing but Manna:Num. 11.
euen so the toung also of the godly spirited man
will sound the glory of God,Psal. 35. 39. 71. as king Dauid vsed his
toung, and will not hinder it by naughtie speach.
                  If the spirite be voyde of Gods feare, then doth
it speake of malice falsly to slander the good, as king
Dauid doth declare: or else for trēbling or quaking,Psal. 6. 12. 14. 140.
it can speake nothing at all, as ye may perceiue by
ye Prophet Asaph in this place. He that will therfore
consider accordingly, the greatnesse of this feare in
the spirite, and howe it taketh away the office of euery
member externall: doubtlesse must labour to
haue the spirite that Dauid prayeth,Psal. 51. in this sorte:
Cor mundum crea in me deus, & spiritum rectum innoua
in visceribus meis, Create in me a cleane hart, O Lord,
and renue in me a right spirite. In the which verse
the Prophete prayeth first, to haue such an heart, as
by faith in Christe may be cleane and purged from
sinne: and next, to haue a certeine and sure spirite,
that doubteth nothing of Gods promises towardes
him. For, such a spirite within the body of man or
woman, maketh the heart so ioyfull, that no sorrow
can molest it: and it strengtheneth so euery member,
that they will be giuen to nothing so much as to
the seruice of God. But if the spirit be wicked, doutlesse

the outwarde members will serue nothing but
iniquitie: if it be troubled, the outwarde members
can not be quiet. For as the soule giueth life to the
body:Note. so doth the vertue of God in the soule, drawe
the outward partes of the body vnto the obedience
of vertue. And contrariwise,Rom. 7. 8. 12. the vice of the soule
draweth the members of the body vnto the seruice
of sinne and iniquitie. And as the eares and eyes of
man were made by God,Vnto what vse the eys & eares of man were created. to be instruments to heare
and sée Gods will and pleasure,Rom. 10. & by them (sith man
fell in Paradise) knowledge might come into the
soule and spirit of man, by hearing Gods word preached,
& séeing his sacraments ministred: so by them
abused, in hearing and seeing of sinne and abhomination,
there entreth into the soule much vile filthinesse
and transgression. The Prophete Asaph (therefore)
doth admonish vs to beware that we bring not
our spirites into discomfort, by sinne and transgression
of Gods lawes: for if we do, whether ye offence
be done in the spirite, by the euill that naturally is
in it, by originall sinne, by the temptation of the diuell,
or by the meanes of any member of the body:
doubtlesse the trouble of the spirit shal not only take
away the office of the members, (as ye sée in this
place the speache of the toung, and the closing of
the eyes, be taken away:) but at the length also,
God shall make the same body and the same members
to rise againe at the generall resurrection,Iacob. 19. and
they shall suffer with the wicked spirite eternall
paines.1. Cor. 15. Let this doctrine therefore teach all men to
knowe and féele the crueltie of sinne, that so painefully
vnquieteth doth body and soule, and think that
if these grudgings, discomforts, terrours and feares
be so great, that death it selfe is more tollerable and
easie to beare: howe much more intollerable and

vnspeakeable be the paines of hell, which God hath
ordeined for all impenitent sinners?Esaie. 66. After this verse
of trouble and anguish,Matth. 25. whereas we sée sléepe taken
from the eyes, and speach from the tongue: followeth
next, how these great sorrowes were mollified and
somewhat diminished.
                  
                     5 I haue considered the dayes of old: and the yeres
that be past.
                     6 In the night I called to remembrance my song,
and communed with mine owne heart: and my spirite
searched diligently.
                  
                  I did (sayth the Prophet) in this great discomfort
and heauinesse, consider with my selfe the times and
worlds of old, wherein the Lord had holpen and deliuered
my fathers before my time, from such troubles
as I am in, and also from greater. And in the
night, while I was sléeplesse, I remembred that many
times I lauded and exalted the goodnes of God in
my Psalms and Hymns, giuing him thanks for his
great mercie and goodnes vsed towards his Church
at all times: and in remembring Gods accustomed
clemencie and pitie, my spirite was much giuen to
debate thinges.
                  Out of these two verses we may note diuers doctrines
for our consolation in the dayes of our trouble.Consolation in trouble.
And the first (after my minde) shalbe concerning
the two brightnesse and the two darkenesse in the
word of God. The one brightnesse is in the letter
outwardly, and the other brightnesse is in the spirite
and heart of the reader of the Scripture. This
brightnesse or claritie of the letter is this, when by
reading, hearing, or thinking of Gods word: men
learne and knowe that God made all thinges, and

that he preserueth all thinges, and that Iesus Christ
his onely sonne is the mediatour betwéene God and
man, and that he pacified Gods iust ire against man
by his bitter death and passion. Also he knoweth by
the externall histories of the Scripture, that GOD
hath deliuered many times his people from dangers
and perils, in maner impossible to be holpen.
                  This claritie and brightnesse of the Scripture,
although it be necessarie: yet it is not sufficient: for
if standeth alone in bare and naked knowledge, whiche
before God saueth no, neither illuminateth the
man that hath the knowledge in a sufficient claritie
and brightnesse of faith, and of Gods promises due
in Christ vnto faith.Gene. 12. 13. 15. 16. 17 As we may sée, how the children
of Israel had the external claritie and brightnesse of
Gods promises vnto Abraham, Isahac, and Iacob,
that they and their posteritie should inherite ye lande
of Canaan, that flowed with all plentie and aboundance:
yet notwithstanding such as came out of Egypt,
for the most part,Num. 14. perished in the desart & wildernesse.
The Phariseis and learned men amongest
the Iewes,Mich. 5. had the clearenesse and brightnesse of
Christes comming,Matth. 2. & of the place he should be borne
in, and told in that part the trueth vnto Herod: yet
did they for all this knowledge and claritie, abhorre
Christ when he came, and put him to death most
wrongfully. The people in like sort saw an external
brightnesse in Christ,Matth. 27. that by his miracles and wonders,
they thought him worthie to be made a king:Mark. 15. Luke 20. Iohn. 19. Iohn. 6. Luke 4.
and yet for all this, they cryed out against him: Crucifige
eum, crucifige eum, Crucifie him, crucifie him.
The diuel himselfe said he knewe who Christ was,
the sonne of the most highest: and yet for all this
knowledge and clearenesse shall he neuer be saued.Matth 7.
And Christ himselfe also perceiued that this external

brightnesse was amongest a great many that called
him Lord, Lord: Yet notwithstanding he said, they
should not enter into the ioyes of heauen. So likewise
be there very many at this present time, that
sée the claritie and brightnesse of Christ outwardly
in the letter, and yet follow it not here in liuing, neither
shall they haue the effect of their knowledge in
the life to come: for their clearenesse is onely knowledge,
without féeling or practise of the brightnes inwardly:Luke 12.
which deserueth more stripes then obscuritie
or darkenesse doth.
                  There is another claritie or brightnes, which is
an inward vnderstanding and spirituall knowledge
and sight of Gods trueth, which no man hath but he
that is possessed with the spirite of God: that whatsoeuer
he readeth in Gods word himselfe, or heareth
preached of other men, he vnderstandeth it, and consenteth
vnto it gladly, and willingly. As for example:
God spake vnto Adam,Genes. 3. and his wordes made
him afeard, so that he trembled for feare. Christ spake
vnto Paule, and he fell downe flatt,Actes. 9. and could not abide
the peril of Christes voyce: So that as the lawe
rebuked sinne in the voice and letter, it wrought also
rebuke and discomfort in the hearts of Adam and
Paul, and made them afraid inwardly, as the voice
and letter was terrible outwardly. Wherefore they
had not onely an externall clearenesse of Gods hatred
against sinne, but also an internall sight and féeling
of the same, as the Scripture doth record.
                  The like is also in the promises of God, when
they be preached or read, that promise remission of
sinne. The inward claritie and brightnesse of the
same, is to féele priuately euery man and woman in
his owne conscience (through faith in Christ) that
the same promises doe apperteine and belong vnto

himselfe. As the Prophet Abacuc saith:Abacuc. 2. 
                     The iust
man liueth by his owne faith.
                     Rom. 1. Also Christ said
vnto the woman of Canaan, that it was not good to
cast the bread that apperteined to the children, vnto
dogges:Matth. 15. she said, Yes Lord: for the dogges do eate of
the crumbes that fall from their maisters table. And
so doth Christ himselfe vse the brightnesse of his promises
to Marie Magdalene:Luke 7. 
                     Thy sinnes be forgiuen
thee. Applying the clearenesse of the letter, vnto the
inward comfort of her soule.
                  The same is likewise meruellously expressed in
the common créede, whereas euery man saith: Hée
beléeueth in God the father, God the sonne, and God
the holy Ghost, and that he beléeueth the remission
of sinnes: meaning, that whosoeuer saith his créed,
should sée & feele in his soule the claritie and brightnesse
of his saluation, that is conteined in the letter
and wordes of the créede. But this clearenesse is not
séene of all men, nor yet of the most part of men: As
Christ declareth:Matt. 20. 7. 
                     Many be called and fewe chosen.
Many say: Lord, Lord, and fewe doe the Lords will.
Therefore Christ saith meruellously concerning the
claritie and brightnesse of Gods word inwardly, in
S. Luke: Blessed be they that heare the word of God
and keepe it.
                     Luke 11. By the which words he declareth, that
many heare and sée the outward light and trueth of
Gods word: but very fewe there be that sée the inward
light and profite thereof. Of this is learned
what the cause is that Christians beare the name of
Christ, and yet be not Christes in déede: for because
a great many be contented with the name, and few
do vnderstand what the name truly and verily conteineth
in it.
                  And as there is in the Scripture this double
brightnesse, whereof the one lyeth in the letter, and

many sée what it meaneth by the externall word,
and the other lieth in the meaning of the letter, and
is perceiued onely by such as haue the spirit of God:
so is there two kindes and sortes of darkenesse and
obscuritie in the Scripture: the one in the letter, and
the other in the sense and taking of the letter. The
outward obscuritie is to be séen in such as contemne
the word of God, and wil not read it nor heare it. As
the Turkes and heathen, and also the common sort
that beare the name of Christe, be christened in
Christes name, and outwardly be taken to be very
Christians in déede, and yet they know not so much
as the letter of Christs lawes, that prescribeth them
what they should doe, and what they should not doe.
And this obscuritie is a brutish, beastly, and externall
darkenesse.
                  The other is obscuritie or darkenesse inwardly
in the text.The inward obscuritie. For although the letter be well knowne,
and the sound thereof séemeth to be plaine: yet the
sense is not so common nor so manifest as the letter
soundeth. Wherevppon S. Paule bindeth all men
in the vnderstanding of the letter, vnto the Analogie
and proportion of faith, that no one place be taken
contrarie to many places. Whereof was gathered
the abridgement of our common Créede, accepted at
all times and of all Christian men, for an infallible
trueth: so that whosoeuer beléeued it, was accompted
a good Christian man. And of this obscuritie of
the Scripture in the sense and spirite, is risen this
troublesome contention about transubstantiation
of bread and wine in the sacrament of Christes bodie
and bloud. For the vngodly sort would haue no
substance of bread and wine to remaine in the Sacrament,
and yet a corporall presence of bodie and
bloud: contrarie, not onely to the articles of our

faith,Matth. 26. that telleth vs he is in heauen, and shall abide
there vntil he come to iudge the quick and the dead:Marke 14.
but also contrarie to many other places of the scripture.Luke. 12.
And this is no new thing,1. Cor. 10. 11. to haue and record
the text and letter of the Scripture, and yet lack the
effect and the very consolation of the Scripture in
déede.Actes 3. For here in these two verses the Prophet Asaph
doth record and remember Gods doings mercifullyColoss. 3.
in time past, and yet taketh no more consolation
thereof: then he findeth in the barke of the letter,
or in the rehearsall of the histories. And the same he
doth of his owne Psalmes and Hymnes, wherof he
maketh mention, and yet by the same meane his
spirite is brought into no further considerations of
Gods trueth then it was before: with much heauinesse
and sorrow, as the verses following do declare:
So that in the affliction of the spirit he could repeate
and cal to his remembrance the truth, how God had
delt mercifully with his forefathers, but felt not at
that present the like mercie of God towardes himselfe:
neither could he sée nor féele for his consolation
the ease and succour of Gods promises which he saw
in others: as all the electes of God at lengthe shall
doubtlesse féele: As it is said by the Prophet,Psalm. 48. 
                     Sicut
audiuimus, sic vidimus, As we haue heard, so haue wee
seene: and at length (as the Psalme saith) he felt him
selfe. Whether he wrote the Psalme of his own sorrowes
and troubles, or of the sorrows and troubles
of the Israelits, it maketh no matter: let euery man
in that case vse his owne iudgment, so that he mark
the doctrine of the Psalme.
                  There is to be noted of these verses also this doctrine,
that what soeuer trouble ye spirit was brought
vnto, whatsoeuer watch had taken his eyes, & what
soeuer vehemencie of disease had taken his speach

from him: yet vnder all these crosses he cursed not
God, nor grudged against his plagues, but as a man
contented, gaue himselfe to record and to call to memorie,
how God was wont to be vnto men afflicted,
and tooke accompt how in times past he had spent
his yeares, and found that he had made certeine
Psalmes or Hymnes to the glorie of God, and to the
praise of his holy name. Of the which we learne not
onely patience in the time of trouble and persequution,
but also how to spend our youth and transitorie
life in doing or making some thinges, that may
be recordes and remembrances when we be gonne,
that we liued here to serue God, and not to serue our
selues. And it is a great helpe and no small consolation
for a man that is in trouble & heauines, to thinke
that he in his life before sought the glorie of God: &
that testimonie of conscience is more worth in the
time of trouble, then all other mens déedes for him.
Not in that his séeking Gods glorie & setting foorth
of the same, can be his gage and raunsome before
God: but because it is a very testimonie, that God
once loued him, and gaue him of his blessed spirite,
to indite something to Gods praise and honour. And
as godly Psalmes and vertuous Hymnes, be testimonies
of a vertuous spirite: so be wanton and adulterous
ballads, records of a vicious and sinnefull
spirite. And as the remembrance of good & vertuous
workes in the time of sicknes and trouble, be ioyful
and comfortable: so is the remembrance of wicked
doinges sorrowful and painefull.
                  We be therefore taught by this Prophete to be
circumspect and warie, how we accumulate & heape
vppon our soules infidelitie, and the wicked workes
thereof: for as they be the only cause of trouble, so do
they not onely worke trouble, but also increase trou-

and augment the heauinesse of the spirit and paines
of the body, as is declared meruellously by the graue
and profound sentences following. Wherein he declareth
what it was that his spirite searched so diligently
for. It was this.
                  
                     7 Will the Lord absent himselfe for euer? and wil
he be no more intreated?
                     8 Is his mercie cleane gone for euer? And is his
promise come vtterly to an end for euermore?
                     9 Hath God forgotten to be gratious? And will
he shutt vp his louing kindnesse in displeasure?
                     10 And I said, It is mine owne weakenes: but the
right hand of God can chaunge these thinges.
                  
                  These verses declare what mindes and cogitations
do happen to men that be in sicknes or trouble:The troubled spirite is ouerwhelmed with greeuous cogitations.
and how gréeuous they be vnto the patient.
                  Out of these verses first we sée a common rehearsall
of the great terrour and feare of the féeling of
Gods displeasure and anger towards the wofull spirite
for sinne. The first meditation of the sinnefull
spirite was this: Will the Lord absent himselfe for
euer? This may be vnderstood two maner of wayes.
For this English word (euer) hath two meanings
in the Hebrue tonge. Sometime it is taken for continuance
and time euerlasting:The remēbrance of Gods iustice for sinne: is greater paine then the death of the bodie. sometime for certeine
yeres, and the life of men. If it be taken in this
place for time euerlasting, the sorrowes of the Prophete
were the greater, when he reuelued with his
spirite, that God iustly for sinne might cast him into
euerlasting paines: the remembraunce whereof is
greater paine, then the mortall death of the bodie. If
this word (euer) be taken for a certeine time, and the
life of man, then meaneth the Prophet thus: Will

God as long as I liue absent himselfe? And thus
continue me in heauines of spirite and sorrowes, as
long as I liue? Which sense soeuer be taken, there
be profitable thinges to be learned of it. But I suppose
the latter sense to be the better for diuers causes.
First in this, that the Psalme conteineth the
complaint and prayer of the Prophet, a man of God,
that cannot be brought to this desperation, that he
should be cast away for euer from the fauour of God
vnto eternall paines. And the text that saith: It is
mine owne infirmitie, and the right hand of the Lord
can chaunge this: doth beare with this latter sense
and explanation. For the words be of great weight,
and of meruellous wisedome and consolation, and do
declare, that although the Prophete felt the iudgement
of God against sinne, and was in a meruellous
terror & feare with the horror and sight of his sinns:
yet the spirite of God did testifie with his spirit,Rom. 8. that
he was the child of God,A godly consolation. and that it was a paine and
punishment of the soule and body, and not a desperation
and thorough casting away and absenting of
Gods mercie. For the very electes of God be chosen,
so ordeined,Iohn. 6. 10. so preserued and kept, that nothing
is able to take them out of Gods hand. For the godly
men in the Scripture, did reioyce, with the assurance
of Gods certein promise: and did not presume
to do euill, as S. Paule in sundrie places doth giue
testimonie: Once to the Romanes, where as he felt
and perceiued the filthines of sinne, & the iust iudgement
of God against the same:Rom. 7. as it appeareth by
his wofull crie and complaint, Oh wretched man
that I am, who shall deliuer mee from this body subiect
vnto death? He felt (as we may perceiue) the heauie
burden and weight of Gods displeasure, and yet
in the midst of terror and feare, he stayed assuredly in

the mercie of God through Christ.2. Cor. 15. And the same he
writeth also to the Corinthians,2. Tim. 4. & to his disciple Timothie:
that his death was at hand, & that he knew
(although his quarell were neuer so good,) that he of
himselfe was a sinner, and by sinne worthie reiection
& casting away from God: yet he said that Christ
had in kéeping for him a crowne of iustice, whiche he
should assuredly receiue at the day of his death. God
is contented that his chosen people, shall suffer and
beare the burden and heauinesse of temptation and
feare of euerlasting paine,Genes. 3. as Adam did first in Paradise,
Dauid many times,Psalm. 42. 43. Iob, and others: yea
Christ himselfe,Iob 3. that said his soule was heauie euen
vnto death,Matth. 26. which made him sweat both water and
bloud.Nothing can hurt him that is in Christ Iohn. 6. But these temptations and terrors shall neuer
ouercome and cast away the person that hath his
faith in Christ: for none is able to take his shéepe out
of his hand. Yet God withdraweth his hand many
times, and suffereth his to be tempted and to be comfortlesse,
and as it were cleane ouerthrowen: not that
in déede their election can be altered,Note. or they themselues
left comfortlesse vntill the end of their liues,Iob. 3. 42.
but for a time: as ye may sée by Iob, who spake as
horrible words, and as desperatly as might be. Yet
sée in the end of his booke, and marke what a ioyfull
outgoing his gréeuous temptations had. What pitifull
cryes were these of Christ our Sauiour vppon
the crosse? My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken
me? Yet the end was, Father into thy handes I
commend my spirite.
                     Matth. 27. Marke. 15. Luke 22. Iohn. 19.
                  
                  
                     Psalm. 34. Actes. 14.It is written that we must enter into heauen by
many troubles. The trouble of the minde is the greatest.Now, of all troubles, the trouble of
the minde and of the spirite is the greatest. Who
then can enter into heauen without such troubles?
Doubtlesse no man. For the iudgement of God must

begin at his house, as Saint Pater saith: That is to
say,1. Peter. 4. None shall in this life more féele Gods displeasure
for sinne in the spirite,Prouer. 12. nor suffer more aduersitie
in the bodie,Heb. 12. then such as be of Gods owne houshold
and very electes. Wherefore we be admonished
in the troubles and sorrowes that this Prophete Asaph
susteined in his soule that could not rest, and in
his bodie that could not sléepe nor speake, that good
men be not frée from aduersitie,God hideth his consolation for a time to trie vs. and that aduersities
(be they neuer so great) shall not separate men from
God for euer, but for a time he punisheth sinne and
hideth the consolation of God from vs: As the scripture
saith:Esaie. 54. 
                     For a time, a little while I haue forsaken
thee, but I will gather thee together in wonderfull
mercies. In a short time of my wrath I hidd my face
a while from thee, but I will haue mercie vppon thee
for euer: saith the Lord thy redeemer.
                  
                  All men that shall profitably knowe and féele the
certeintie of Gods promises in this life, and enioy
them in the life to come, shall be troubled with some
paine of doubtfulnes of them,Genes. 3. before he come to perfection.
For as by sinne death entered into the flesh,Rom. 5.
and also the flesh is subiect vnto sicknesse and aduersitie:
so is there entered into the soule and powers
thereof,Rom. 7. 8. by reason of sinne, great imperfection. As
the minde of all men is burdened with ignorance,Ephes. 2.
the heart with contumacie,Psalm. 53. and the will with frowardnesse,
so that as they be before regeneration
and knowledge of God in all godly matters starke
blind, very obstinate, and naturally altogether froward:
euen so after regeneration and the knowledge
of God, they continually resist and fight against the
spirite, not onely of man, in whome these powers
dwell:Rom. 8. but also against the spirite of God,Iohn. 3. that teacheth
and leadeth the spirite of man to eternall saluation:

So that it is not man that is able to ouercome
the wickednesse of his owne soule.Phil. 1. 2. And therefore
séeing life through grace dwelt in a bodie naturally
full of sinne, Saint Paule said,Galath. 2. 
                     I doe liue: yet
not I, but Christ liueth in mee. So this Prophete
Asaphe séemeth in wordes to be starke dead from
grace,Psalm. 77. but it was not for euer: for he felt the spirite
of God that told him, that such heauie and vngodly
thoughtes of his spirit came of his owne infirmitie,
and that Gods right hand could alter and chaunge
them. And this is the difference betwéene the affliction
of the godly and vngodly: as it is wonderfully
sett foorth in the Psalme next before this sauing
one, where it is said:Psalm. 75. 
                     There is a cuppe in the Lordes
hand full of redd wine, and hee powreth out of it, but
the wicked shall drinke the dregges thereof, and the
vngodly of the earth shall receiue the bottom of it.
The cuppe in the Scripture is taken many times
for aduersitie,Matth. 26. whereof God filleth a quantitie and a
certeine measure vnto all his electe and chosen seruauntes:Marke. 14.
but the wicked shall drinke the bottome
and all,Esaie. 66. and neuer come to rest nor ease.Matth. 25.
                  
                  Out of this temptation we may learne how foolish
and how impatient we be. When God sendeth
troubles,Prouerb. 3 we thinke such to be best at ease that want
them:Apoca. 3. whereas the Lords booke declareth, that it is
necessarie,Heb. 12. and also very expedient, that we should
haue them. Againe, there is to be noted how that the
Prophet in the cogitations of his minde,The Prophet maketh no mention of the griefe of the body. maketh no
mention of the griefe of the bodie, whereof he spake
before at the beginning of his troubles. For in the
second and fourth verse he declareth how he held vp
his handes all night, cryed with his voyce vntill he
was speachlesse, and lay waking & could not sléepe.
Of the which sorrowes now he maketh no rehearsall,

but saith: his spirite was searching and inquisitiue,
Whether God would absent himselfe for euer,
with diuers like interrogatories of Gods nature, as
followe in the Psalme. Whereof we learne the
vilenesse of our owne nature, and also the treason
and subtiltie of the diuel. For as long as we sinne,
we haue such delight and pleasure therin, as though
it were but a play to transgresse and breake Gods
holy commaundementes.Note. But when sickenesse and
trouble haue layed the wicked the bodie abedd.Rom. 7. and
made it weake and féeble:Gal. 2. 3. our conscience is waked
by the Lawe of GOD, and we put in such terrour
and feare, that nothing can quiet vs. Also, as long
as we doe sinne, the diuel beareth vs in hande that
God is so mercifull, (doe what we will,) that hée
will not be angrie: but when sicknesse or death inuadeth,
then turneth the diuel his tale, and persuadeth
with vs, that GOD is onely extreme iust,
and nothing at all mercifull. And this griefe of
the minde is so sore and vehement, that all the paines
of the bodie séeme nothing in comparison thereof:
as we sée in this place by the holy Prophete Asaph,
that was very sore vnquieted in his bodie, yet
did his spirite make no accompt of it, but still hée
stayed and staggered, trembling and quaking at the
heauinesse and sorrowe of the spirite, that could not
féele, for the time of his trouble, any certeintie or cō
                     solation
in the promises of God.
                  Of this we be admonished, that whatsoeuer we
haue, if Gods fauour lacke, we haue nothing able to
reioyce vs. And of the other side, if we lacke all
thinges, and haue assuredly Gods fauour, there is
nothing able to make vs heauie and sorowfull: As
we see king Saule, hauing a noble kingdome, and
lacking the fauour of God, was alwayes vnquieted:

Poore Dauid hauing the grace and fauour of
God, was quiet and contented with all thinges, saying:
If God will, he may restore mee: if he will not,
his will be done.
                     1. Reg. 16. 1. Reg. 24. 2. Reg. 16. 15. 2. Tim. 4.
                  
                  The assurance of Gods promises made Paule
glad to die: and the mistrust & desperation of Gods
promises,Matth. 26. made Iudas wearie to liue. The certeintie
of Gods trueth made Saint Stéeuen quietly to
die in the assurance of eternall life:Actes 7. the vncerteintie
and doubtfulnesse of Gods mercie caused Saule to
die in the feare of eternall death.1. Reg. 31. Riches of this
world be treasures muche estéemed and made of:
friendes and louers much sought for and warily
kept, and health of bodie highly regarded and preserued
with much care: yet, if the soule be destitute of
the assurance of Gods grace, the rest séeme to be of
no valure at all.1. Reg. 16. As we sée, Saule in his kingdome
with riches, strength, and friendship: yet his minde
vexed still an euill spirite, and Gods spirite departed,
his sorrowes were incomparable. So that we
learne that not onely the goodes apperteyning to the
body be nothing worthe, whereas the spirite wanteth
the grace of God: but also, whereas the spirite
is troubled, the goodes of the bodie be little felt and
nothing passed of: as we sée by this Prophet in this
Psalme.
                  The other part of his cogitations in the time of
his sicknesse was this: Will hee be no more intreated?
This gréeuous temptation, whether GOD
would be intreated to forgiue sinne any more, may
haue two vnderstandings: The one generally, and
the other particularly. Generally in this sort, whether
God once offended, will be mercifull and forgiue
or not? Particularly, whether God, whose nature
is mercifull, will forgiue the priuate man, that

séeketh by saith, mercie, as he hath in time past forgiuen
al men that asked it with repentance in faith?
The first sense and taking of the text generally, is
meruellous wicked and blasphemous, to thinke
that God once offended with any man, will neuer
for giue againe? Of this opinion was Caine,Genes. 4. when
he said his sinnes were greater then they might be
forgiuen: and he thought God would be no more intreated,
because he iudged his fault greater then the
mercie of God that forgiueth faultes. And wheresoeuer
this iudgement of the spirite is, this sentence
is verified: God will be intreated no more.
                  And as euery man that is priuatly thus minded,
that his owne sinnes be greater then can be forgiuen:
euen so hath he the like minde and iudgement
also of all other mens sinnes that be like vnto his,A wicked iudgment.
thinking them to be greater then they may be forgiuen.
For he that despaireth of his owne faultes,
cannot thinke well that other mens faults as great
as his owne,Matth. 27. 26. be remissible. As Iudas that hanged
himselfe for betraying of Christe, could not thinke
well of Peter that denied Christ: but rather iudged
of Peter as he did of him selfe, saying: God will be
intreated no more.
                  Of this wicked iudgment of Gods mercie, Whether
he will be intreated any more of a sinner, after
that he hath sinned: I wil speake no more. But they
that lust to read how horrible a thing it is, may haue
many Psalmes that do declare it: namely Psalme
10.Psalme. 10▪ and 73. and 73. In the one of them it is said by the wicked,
that God hath forgotten the earth, and careth
neither for the godly life of the godly and vertuous,
nor the vngodly life of the vngodly and wicked. And
in the other Psalme they make a doubt, Whether
there be any knowledge in God of man and of his

life, or not. But these sortes of people be too horrible
and blasphemous, and not to be rehearsed or muche
spoken of.
                  The other sense of this place that is more particular,
is the better sense for the argument and meaning
of the Psalme: that is, to aske whether God
will be intreated no more, as touching the remission
of his owne sinne: or els whether God will be no
more mercifull to helpe him out of trouble, that specially
and particularly suffereth the trouble. And
this question so asked, is very common and familiar
to the Christians, and putteth them to great trouble,
and heauinesse. As we may sée that this Prophet
Asaphe considered the yeares before him, and what
God did to his elders, and found that they receiued
remission of their sinnes, and great benefites in this
world at Gods hand. So do a great number of men
in hearing and reading the Scripture of God, sée
and perceiue the remission of many mens sinns, and
how mercifully God delt with them: yet when they
féele their owne sinne, and suffer their owne crosse
and trouble, they haue much a doe, and with great
difficultie doe they beléeue that God will be as good
vnto them, being priuate sinners and priuately afflicted,
as he was vnto the great number of those, of
whom they read in the Scripture, that God forgaue
them their sinnes, and preserued them in most horrible
and daungerous troubles.
                  
                     A whole man can giue good counsel to the sicke: but being sicke himselfe cannot apply the same to his comfort.Therefore, this is a common wisedome and daily
experimented sentence, Omnes, cùm valemus, bonum,
consilium aegrotis damus. When other men be sicke, we
can giue good counsell patiently to beare it. When
other men be afflicted and troubled, we can speake
of many meanes to quiet them. When they be in any
mistrust of Gods promises, we can comfort them

with many arguments of faith: but most commonly,
if we be sicke our selues, troubled, or in mistrust
of Gods promises, we can ease or comfort our selues
very little. And good cause why: for God that giueth
of his owne gist and only frée liberalitie, wisedome,
knowledge, learning, and consolation: giueth also
the grace that the saide vertues may worke their operation,
and expell the infirmities and diseases,
wherefore these wisedomes and vertues were ordeined.
As it is meruellously noted of Saint Paule:1. Cor. 3. 
                     I
haue planted, & Apollo hath watered: but God gaue
the increase. The word of God is a meanes to teach
truth,Rom. 1. and to condemne falshood: to place vertue, and
to remoue vice:Matth. 10. 28. to giue consolation, and to banishe
and put away diffidence and mistrust: but God giueth
and worketh the effect thereof.Act. 16. Meate is made
to preserue the body: but if God giueth not strength,
it misseth the purpose.Prou. 21. The horse and man be means
to ouercome: but in battell God giueth the victory.
The preacher preacheth Gods word: but God openeth
and teacheth the mysterie therof. Man heareth:
but God giueth the vnderstanding. Asaph remembred
Gods workes, and had in minde his own godly
Psalmes: but God must giue the consolatiō. He
sawe the trueth, and knewe that God was faithful:
but the ioy and profite thereof, lay in the distribution
and gift of God: as we may wel perceiue by this
sorrowfull interrogatorie: Will he be intreated no
more?
                  
                  Of this part we learne howe we ought,When we heare or reade gods promises, wee ought to pray. when
we reade or heare Gods promises for our saluation,
to pray: and howe necessarie a thing this prayer
is that godly men made in the scripture: Lord help
my incredulitie: Lord increase our faith.
                     Mark. 9. The poore
man that heard and sawe Christes mercy and liberalitieLuke. 17.
                     
in healing of others, desired also helth for his
owne childe, Christe saide: if he beléeued, all things
were possible: the poore man sayd: I beleeue Lorde,
helpe mine vnbeleefe. The Apostles, when they
heard Christe speake of forgiuenesse of one to the other,
they sayde: Increase our faith, good Lord. As
though they had sayd: Except thou giue vs strength
to beléeue and credite thy godly lessons: we shal take
no commoditie nor profite by them. Therefore let
the preacher of God, the reader of Gods worde, the
hearer of Gods worde, & the thinker vpon the same,
many times before, also whilest they be speaking,
thinking, reading, or hearing of Gods word, pray in
their spirits, that ye word of God may work in them
the thing, wherfore the word was instituted and appointed
of God:2. Tim. 3. or else we shall be (as Saint Paule
saith) alwayes learners, and yet neuer come to the
knowledge of the truth.
                  And I do verily thinke, and am truly persuaded,
that for lacke of earnest and continuall prayer, with
lifting vp of my heart vnto God, whilest I preached
his most holy word vnto the people, God iudgeth me
not worthy to sée such fruites of my labours as I
hoped for. And for this, that the people did not heartily
pray, to vnderstand Gods pleasure by his word
preached, they be accounted vnworthy of such saluation,
as GOD did offer them by his worde, and the
true preaching of his mysteries. Let all men therefore
pray to God in Christ, that they may be the better
for the hearing, recording, remembring, or reading
of Gods word. For notwithstanding they haue
amongest them the booke of God: yet shall they be
troubled (without Gods singular grace) with one of
these two euils: either to mocke and scorne at the
scripture, caring not whether they learne it or no:

or else when they haue learned it, to dout whether it
be true or no. And then followeth these questions:
Will God absent him selfe for euer? And, Will God
be no more intreated? with such other doubtes as do
followe in this Psalme: with much heauinesse vnto
the spirite where such demaundes rest & haue place.
Then followeth the third demaunde by this troubled
Prophete: Is his mercy cleane gone for euer?
                  
                  Here in this demaund first be two things to be
noted: The one declaring a fault in the Prophetes
faith: and the other expressing a veritie in the Prophetes
knowledge. The fault in his faith, was to
doubt or to stande in a mamering of Gods mercy,
which is most sure and endureth for euer and euer:
and to aske this question, Whether his mercy were
cleane gone for euer? The veritie of his knowledge
was to iudge and say, that It was his mercy that
forgaue sinnes, and not his or any other mens merites
that could deserue the pardoning of sinne: As
ye may sée how sinneful Saule for his sinne,1. Reg. 15. thought
to haue appeased God with sacrifice,Luke. 18. and the proude
Pharisée with his pretenced good workes. But here
in this knowledge, that the Prophet complained of
the departure of Gods mercy, is set foorth, that only
mercy appeaseth Gods ire in Christ, for the sinne of
man.Exod. 34. And what works so euer be done, except Gods
mercy pardon the sinne,Deut. 5. 7. they all can neyther please
God,Psal. 33. 51. 56. 85. nor quiet the conscience and troubled spirite of
him that doth the workes.Psal. 130. 143. As it may be séene in the
example of Sainte Peter, and the rest of the Apostles.
When that Saint Peter walked vpon the sea
comming towardes Christ,Matth. 14. and felt the wind strong
and tempestuous, he beganne to feare: and when he
beganne to sincke, he cryed: Lord saue me. And the
Lord put foorth his hande and tooke him, & sayd vnto

him: Thou of little faith, why doubtest thou?
                  
                  Here we sée, if GOD did helpe vs no more of his
mercy,Note. then our owne merites deserued, or else no
more then the gifts of God, faith, hope, and charitie,
as they be qualities in vs: we should surely perish.
Therefor this place of the Prophete Asaph, where
he demaundeth this question: Whether Gods mercy
be gone for euer? doth teach vs, that of all thinges
we should be most assured of this: that onely
mercy is the help of mans troubles and damnation.
But as I saide before, there were two maner of clarities
and brightnesse in the word of God: so nowe
I say,Two maner of mercies mentioned in the scripture. there is two manner of mercies of God mentioned
in the scripture: The outwarde mercy is in
the letter which men reade and sing euery day, and
speake and talke of: but the other is inward.
                  When that men can not féele Gods mercy in their
conscience, as they heare it spoken of, and as they
reade it in the booke, they be troubled and full of anguish
and paine: and as long as they be in this case,
without Gods mercy, they can do nothing that pleseth
GOD, or content them selues. But as soone as
the spirite is assured and féeleth, that GOD for his
mercy doth forgiue and forget the iniquitie that the
spirite and body haue committed and done against
God, it reioyceth and is so glad, that it will doe nothing
but that, which pleseth and is acceptable vnto
God, and in Christ shall content and quiet his owne
conscience. As for example: Adam before he inwardly
felt the mercy of God promised in Christe,Gene. 3. to forgiue
and remit his sinne and offence: in what heauinesse
was the poore man? He hid him selfe, and
could not abide the voyce of the liuing God: for he
felt that his doings pleased neyther GOD nor him
selfe. But when grace had assured him of Gods mercy,

he fell in the spirit to quietnesse.Rom. 8. For where the
spirite of God testifieth and beareth record with the
spirite of man, that he is the childe of God, there is
ioy and consolation, with this ioyfull song and melodie:
Abba pater, Father, father: So that where so
euer this song is felt in the spirite: there are suche
ioyes as no toung can expresse: as all the booke of
Solomons ballads meruellously doe declare. And
wheras the mercy of God is not, there is eyther abhomination
of sinne, and continuance therein, without
any feare or grudge of conscience at all: or else
such heauinesse of spirite, that desperation vtterly
quaileth, and oppresseth the spirite for euer. Yet shal
the spirite & soule of man féele this for a time, while
God hideth his mercifull face: Is his mercy cleane
gone for euer? Which cogitations of the minde, be
full bitter and sorrowfull: as all men of GOD doe
knowe that haue felt them, and as the Prophete declareth
in the processe of his Psalme, in this sorte:
And is his promise come vtterly to an end for euermore?
Hath God forgotten to be gratious? And wil
he shut vp his louing kindnes in displeasure? These
demaundes and questions of his owne minde and
spirite that was troubled, be no more in effect,
then troubles that he named before. But in this
that he calleth the trouble by so many names, it declareth
that his spirite was for the time so disquieted,
that the paines in maner could not well be named
and expressed. As it is to be séene always when
the minde of man is brought into an excellencie and
profoundnesse of mirth or sorrowe: then it is so rauished
with the vehemencie of them both, that the
toung is not able to expresse the inward ioy, nor the
inwarde sorrowe, as it is to be séene as well in prophane
writers, as in the holy word of God. Reade ye

the 18.Psal. 18. Psalme of king Dauid, which he soung to the
Lorde when he was quit and deliuered from all his
enimies, & ye shall sée what shift and copie of wordes
he vsed to name God, & to expresse what he thought
of God in his heart, and with what Metaphors he
expresseth the strength of God, that ouercame al his
enimies, the Psalme is to be read and marked. Againe,
reade ye these Psalmes 42. 43.Psal. 42. 43 where ye shall
perceiue the prayer of Dauid, wherein is described
a vehement agonie and most bitter battel betwéene
faith and desperation: and there mark, what words
he hath found out, to expresse the sorrowes of his
heart, that was so sore put in doubt by desperation
and weaknesse of faith. The Harte (saith he) being
wounded, was neuer more desirous to come to the
water: then my soul desireth to come to thee ô God.
And at length, when he can finde no more wordes to
vtter the pensiuenesse of his heart, he turneth his
wordes inward to his owne soule, and asketh why
she is so heauie and sad. Ye may sée also the very
same ioyfull and sorrowfull spirites in the ballads
of Solomon, and in the lamentations of Ieremie
the Prophete. In the one it séemeth, that the
soule annexed vnto Christ, is in such ioy as the tong
can not expresse it: and in the other for sinne, the
soule is afflicted in such sort, that it can not tell how
to expresse the heauinesse thereof.
                  There is to be considered also in these demaunds
of the Prophete, that he made to him selfe in his spirite
(as the text saith, he reuolued the matter with
his owne spirite) this doctrine, howe easie a thing it
is to teach and comfort other men, and howe hard a
thing it is for a man to teach and comfort him selfe
in the promises of God.Rom. 2. S. Paule found fault therewithall,
and saide to the Iewe: Thou teachest an other

man & teachest not thy selfe. And Iudas went
foorth with the eleuen other of his fellowes, to teach
Gods mercy in Christ vnto the lost shéep of the house
of Israel:Mat. 10. 27 but he neither followed his own doctrine,
nor yet tooke any comfort of remission of sinnes in
the promises of God, but hanged himselfe desperately.
Wherefore it is very expedient for eueryman
and woman that hath learned, and doth knowe the
truth of God, to pray, that they them selues may folowe
the truth: and for such as knowe and teach others
the consolations of the scriptures of God, that
they may with knowledge of them féele them in
déede, and with speaking of them to others for their
learning, they may speake them to them selues for
their owne edifying.
                  But doubtlesse it is an easie matter for a man to
speake of comfort and consolation to others: but a
hard thing to féele it him selfe. Vertue is soone spoken
of to other mens instructions: but the putting
thereof in practise and vre, is very hard: yea, not
only in the scholer that is taught, but also in the
maister that instructeth. Beware of despaire, can euery
man say: but to eschue despaire in great conflictes
of the minde, is an harde matter. Reade
the booke of the Psalmes well, and ye shall sée the
experience thereof to be most certeine and true. In
the 62.Psal. 62. Psalme, ye shall haue this commaundement
to all men: Trust ye alwayes in him ye people:
yet when it came to the triall in him selfe, ye
may sée with what heauines and great trouble of
mind, he came to ye trust in the Lord. Ye may learne
by these Psalmes indited by king Dauid,Psal. 41. 43 that easily
he taught Gods religion, and how men should
put their trust in the Lord: and yet how hard it was
to do and practise the thing himselfe that he taught

vnto others?Psal. 73. 77 Asaph also declareth the same. For in
the 73. Psalme, he teacheth what men should thinke
and iudge in aduersitie: that God would be good vnto
Israel. But in this Psalme he himselfe being vnder
the rod and persequution of God, is come to questioning
and demaunding: Will God absent him
selfe for euer? Will he be no more intreated? Is his
mercy cleane gone for euer? with many other demaundes,
declaring vnspeakable troubles and difficulties
of the minde: before it be brought to a perfect
consent and full agréement vnto the promises of
God. So that we sée the excellent Prophetes, and
most vertuous organes and instruments amongest
sinfull men, knewe it was an easie matter to speake
of faith & vertue: and yet a very hard thing to practise
true faith, and to exercise vertuous liuing.
                  Saint Paule sheweth the same to the Romanes
to be in him selfe.Rom. 8. For he had more adoe in Christ to
get the victorie of sinne in him selfe, then to speake
of the victorie vnto others by mouth: and more adoe
to mortifie and kill the fleshe, and to bring it in subiection
to the spirite, then to practise the death of the
flesh in him selfe,2. Cor. 12. and to followe the spirit. He spake
and vttered with his mouth most godly doctrine,Rom. 12. 8. to
the destruction of sinne:2. Cor. 6. but with what prayers,Gala. 5.
teares,Ephes. 5. and clamours to God, he did the same in him
selfe,Matth. 11. read 2. Corinth. 12.
                  The olde saying is,To such as haue wrestled with sin, and in Christ got the vpper hand, Gods preceptes be easie & sweete. Knowledge is no burthen, and
in déede it is a thing easie to be borne: but to put
knowledge in experience, the body and the soule shal
finde paine and trouble. And yet Christes wordes
where he saith, My yoke is light, & my, burden easie,
be most true to such as haue wrestled with sinn,
and in Christ got the vpper hand. To them (I say)
the precepts of vertuous liuing be easie and swéete,

as long as the spirite of God beareth the ouer hande
in them. But when faith waxeth faint, and the flesh
strong, then can not the spirit of God command nor
desire any thing,Rom. 7. but both body and soule be muche
offended with the hearing therof, and more gréeued
with the doing of it. S. Peter likewise maketh mention
of the same. For when Christ bade him followe
him, (meaning that he should dy also for the testimonie
of his word) he liked not that:Iohn. 21. but asked Christe
what Iohn should do, being (doutlesse) in great perplexitie,
when Christ tolde him that he should suffer
the paines of death. But here are to be noted two
things: The one, that as long as affliction is talked
of generally, & other mens paines spoken of, so long
can euery man and woman heare of affliction: yea,
and commend the persons that suffered affliction,
as we sée at this day. All men be contented to heare
of ye death of Christ,We can praise other men for wel doing, but we be loth to put it in experience our selues. of ye martyrdome of his Saints,
and of the affliction and imprisonment of his godly
members: but when the same or like should be experimented
and practised by our selues, we wil none
of it, we refuse it, and we abhorre it: yea, so much,
that where Christ, and those Saints (whose names
be most common and vsual in our mouths,) suffered
the vilest death that could be deuised: we will not
suffer as much as the losse of a frend, or the deceiueable
goods of this vnstable and transitorie world: so
that in the generalitie we be very godly, and can cō
                     mend
al godly martyrs and sufferers for Gods sake:
but (alas) in the particularitie we be very vngodly,
and will followe no martyr, nor suffer at al. Also, as
long as we be without danger for Christes sake, we
can speake of great daungers, and say, that we will
suffer all extremitie and crueltie: but when it commeth
to passe, that an enimie to God and his worde

shall say in déede, Forsake thy religion, or else thou
shalt dy (as Christ said vnto Peter,Iohn. 21. When thou art
old, an other shall girde thée, and leade thée whether
thou wouldest not:) then a litle threatening of an other
man, stark quayleth this man that said he wold
suffer al troubles:Matth. 26. as Peter said, If he shuld loose his
life, he would not refuse his maister, but when an other,
yea, a poore maide but asked him, Whether he
were one of Christes seruants, and made no mentiō
at al of losse of life or goods: he would not hazard him
selfe to beare so much as the name of Christes disciple.
Thus we sée the vilenesse & frailtie of our owne
nature, how weake we be to suffer in déede, when of
necessitie we must beare the crosse, and can by no
means auoyd it. How troublesome also it is both to
body and soule, this Psalme & place of the scripture
declareth: and therfore in the end of these temptations
is put, Sela. A worde that maketh as it were,
an outcry against the corrupt nature of man for sin.
As S. Paule said:Rom. 7. 
                     I know that there dwelleth in my
flesh no good thing. To admonishe therefore man
thereof in déede, and to shewe him his owne damnation,
the word is put there to cause the reader or
hearer of the place, to marke and bewaile the wretchednesse
thereof. As the Prophete him selfe doth in
the next verse.
               
               
                  ¶The fourth part.
                  
                     Howe a man taketh consolation in the
time of his trouble.
                  
                  10 And I said, This is my infirmitie: but these things
the right hand of God can chaunge.
                  
                     
                     HEre is life and death, and the occasions
of both meruellously set foorth. He said
that it was his infirmitie that caused
him to question & doubt of Gods mercy.
Wherein he hath disburdened God,
and charged him selfe with sinne and doubtfulnesse.
And so much al men sée and find in them selues, that
damnation is of our selues:Osee. 13. and saluation onely of
God. There is also to be noted in thi
                        •
                      infirmitie, yt
it occupieth not only the body: but also the soul. For
he saith, These cogitations and questions (as touching
the doubtfulnesse of Gods mercy) were the deuises
and actes of his mind: so that both his body and
soule were comfortlesse. And good cause why: for in
both of them were sinne and abhomination against
God. And of these two partes of man, the body & the
spirit, came these dubitations of God and of his promises.
The which fruites of corruption, ingender
(except sinne be forgiuen) eternall death.Rom. 8. And here is
the wisedome of the fleshe séene to be very enimitie
vnto God, working continually the breach of Gods
commaundements, and the destruction of mans saluation,
as much as lyeth in it. But in the second
part of the verse is life, & the occasion thereof: which
is a sure trust that God can remoue despaire, & put
in place therof,The occasion of mans help is Gods right hand faith, hope, & sure confidence. And the
occasion of this helpe is not mans merites, but the
right hand of God: yt is to say, Gods power inclined
to saue man by mercy. Of this doctrine be certeine
things to be marked of euery reader & hearer of this
Psalme. First, in this verse is declared how man
taketh consolation in time of his trouble, which is ye
4. part of the Psalme, & in the same part the Psalme
endeth. He saith, It was his infirmitie, that made
him to question & demaund in his spirit so doubtfull

things of God, and of his promises. Whereof we
learne, that consolation beginneth where sorrowe
and heauinesse is first felt: for the spirit can take no
solace by Gods promises, vntill suche time as it féeleth
by Gods lawe, how sinnefull it is for the transgression
thereof.Prou. 18. Therfore Solomon saith: The iust
man is the first accuser of him selfe. And so doth the
Prophet Asaph in this place confesse, that these cogitations
and profound thoughts against God, came
of his owne infirmitie and sinne. And the knowlege
of a mans owne wickednesse from the bottome of
the heart, although it be a shame to speake or remember
the vilenesse of sinne, wherewith sinner
hath most gréeuously transgressed Gods commaundementes:
yet is this knowledge and confession of
our sinne and iniquitie very necessarie, and is (as it
were) an induction to the remission thereof:True confession of sinne is in manner an induction to the remission thereof. as it is
to be séene in this Prophet, and in the Prophet Dauid.
For here is first confessed, that all sinnes in
him came of his owne infirmitie: and all consolation
against sinne, came of Gods right hand. And
the Prophet Dauid sayth, whē he was in like trouble
for sinne:Psal. 74. Psal. 32. 
                     I determined (saith he) to confesse against
my selfe, mine owne iniquitie: and thou Lord
forgauest the wickednesse of my sinne. But here is
to be noted in this, that the confession of sinne is (as
it were) an induction and beginning of consolation:
that confession of sinne is not the beginning of consolation,
except he that maketh the confession be assured
in his heart of Gods promises in Christe, that
of mercy in Christes death, his sinnes be forgiuen:
as ye may sée in these two Prophetes. The one said:
It is mine infirmitie the worketh this doutfulnes
in my soule. And the other saide: I determined to
condemne my selfe of sinne.
                  
                     
Thus farre it is death, and an increase of diffidence
in Gods promises, and an induction to desperation,
to féele sinne, to bewayle sinne, to speake of
sinne, and to remember sinne. But whereas knowledge
and confession hath a certeintie and assurance
of Gods forgiuenesse annexed vnto it, there is confession
and knowledge of sinne, partly a beginning
of consolation against sinne.Rom. 7. I call it partly, or as an
occasion, bycause first of all,1. Samu. 15. God by his word, or by
his punishments,2. Samu. 12 through the operation of the holy
Ghoste, openeth the soule of the sinner, to sée and
know his sinne: also to tremble and quake at sinne,
rather then to hate and abhorre sinne. And from
these principles and originalls, commeth the humble
and lowly confession of sinne, not to man, but vnto
God: except it be such an open sinne done against
man, as man knoweth of that the sinne is committed
against.Matt. 5. 18. Then must the offender of man also,
reconcile him selfe to man that is offended,Iacob. 5. according
to the commaundement of God.Luke. 7. Therefore we
must marke what confession and acknowledging of
our owne infirmities is. For euery confession is not
acceptable before God, nor the beginning of consolation:
as these examples declare. Iudas saide openly
in the face of the court (where Christe our SauiourMatth. 27.
was arraigned) that he had offended in betraying innocent
bloud:Mark. 15. but there followed no faith nor hope of
forgiuenesse: So that for lacke of faith in Christes
bloud, desperation and hanging of him selfe ensued
his confession. Whereby it is euident, that confession
of sinne without faith, is nothing worth, but a
testimonie of a desperate mans damnation.
                  King Saule,1. Samu. 15. after long impulsion by the Prophet
Samuel, was brought to confesse that he had offended
in preseruing aliue Agag king of ye Amalekites,

and the fattest of his cattell. I haue offended (sayth
Saule:) for I haue broken and transgressed the commaundement
of God.
                     Psal. 77. But what followed? Gods
right hand can remedie my sinne,Psal. 32. as this Prophete
Asaph saith? or, God hath forgiuen the iniquitie of
my sinne,Luke. 18. as Dauid sayde? er else: God be merciful
vnto me a sinner, as the Publicane sayd? No, but
this ensueth:Sual wold haue Samuel to beare his sinne. 
                     I Pray thee (sayth Saule to Samuel)
beare thou my sinne. In this mans confession of sin,
was not the beginning of consolation, but of more
sorrowes: for his heauinesse from that day more
and more increased,1. Samu. 31. with his sinnes: vntill he was
slaine.Matth. 9. And the cause thereof was this. He would
that Samuel being but a man,Luke. 5. should haue pardoned
his sinne:Mark. 2. whereas none can doe it but God, as
it is notably to be séene in king Dauid. For when
he sayde, he had offended the Lord, Nathan the Prophete
sayde:2. Samu. 12 
                     And God hath taken away thy sinnes.
Wherein is declared, that the minister can but pronounce
to the sinner, that God in Christe forgiueth
sinne. So that we sée Iudas confession of sinne was
nothing worth, bycause he found no fayth nor trust
for the remission thereof: and Saules confession
was of no valure, bicause he trusted and desired consolation
at mans hand, and not at Gods.
                  Yet in Saules confession was some thing good,
in that he confessed (although it were long first and
in manner wrested out of his mouth by the Prophete
Samuel) his fault to God: and in that point
he did as Dauid did,Psal 51. who sayde: I haue offended the
Lord.
                     2 Samu. 12. And this is to be noted,Esai 63. bycause nowe adayes
men be taught to confesse their sinnes to the SaintsEcclesi 9.
departed,3. Reg. 8. that knowe not what the outward works
of men be vpon the earth:Papisticall confession. much lesse the inward &
sinfull cogitation of the heart. So that in this part,

the Papists confession is worse then Saules: and in
the other part it is like.1. Samu. 15 For as Saule trusted to the
merites of Samuel, and would haue him to beare
his sinne:Oh blasphemie. so do the people trust, that the Priestes
hand vpon their head, & the penaunce inioyned them
by the Priestes, shall be a cleane remission and full
satisfaction for all their sinne: but before God, their
sinnes be as much forgiuen them as Saules were,
that is to say, nothing at all.
                  But wheras sinne is knowne and confessed from
the very hart,1. Iohn. 1. vnto God, although it be a bitter thing
and also a shamefull thing,Psal. 130. to féele and beare Gods
displeasure for sin, the burden wherof is very death,
and more gréeuous then death it selfe: yet whereas
confidence and trust in the mercy of God is annexed
with it, there followeth great consolation and comfort:
As it is to be séene in this Prophet that spake
with a strong faith boldly: The righthand of God cā
chaunge these things. So that the latter part of this
verse hath more comfort, then the first part hath discomfort.
And it is a plaine doctrine, that although ye
sinnes of man be many & horrible:Esai. 1. yet be they fewer
and lesse in estimation many thousande foldes, then
Gods mercies. Death is declared in the first part of
the verse, in this, that mans infirmitie is not onely
sinful in body & soule, but also doutful of Gods mercy
& holy promises: Yet in the second part by grace
is set foorth life, and cleane deliuerance from the tyrannie
of the diuel, the seruitude of sinne, the accusation
of the lawe, and the infirmitie of nature, by the
strong and mightie power of God, whose mercy in
Christ is alwayes ready to helpe poore afflicted and
troubled sinners.Ezech. 18. After this confession of sinne, and
the great confidence that the prophet had in God for
his mightie power and mercies sake,1. Iohn. 1. that was both

able by power and redy with will, to help and remedie
this troubled spirite, and great aduersities of the
Prophet: he goeth foorth in the consolation, & taketh
yet more and more of Gods benefites, vsed in times
towardes such as were afflicted, after this sort.
                  
                     11 I will remember the workes of the Lord, and call
to my minde thy wonders of olde time.
                     12 I will thinke also of thy workes, and my talking
shall be of thy doings.
                     13 Thy way (ô God) is holy: who is so great a God
as our God.
                     14 Thou art the God that doth wonders, and hast
declared thy power amongest people.
                     15 Thou hast mightily deliuered thy people, euen
the sonnes of Iacob and Ioseph. Sela.
                     16 The waters saw thee, ô God: the waters saw thee
and were afraid: the deapthes also were troubled.
                     17 The cloudes powred out water, the ayre thundered,
and thine arrowes went abroad.
                     18 The voyce of thy thunder was heard round about,
the lightenings shone vpon the gound, the
earth was moued and shooke withall.
                     19 Thy way is in the sea, and thy pathes in the great
waters, and thy footsteps are not knowne.
                     20 Thou leadest thy people like shepe, by the hand
of Moses and Aaron.
                  
                  Of these meanes howe men take consolation in
aduersitie, that the Prophet nowe maketh mention
of: first we learne, what difference is betwéene the
consideration of Gods works aduisedly & by faith: &
the consideration of Gods workes rashly & without
faith. The which diuersitie is to be séen in this Prophet.
For the one part, as touching the remembring
of Gods workes out of faith and in faith, he spake
before in the second verse, and in the fourth verse,

how that he considered the workes and old doings of
the Lord when he was troubled. But, as ye haue
heard, because his spirite was in a doubtfulnesse and
mamering vppon the certeintie of Gods doinges: he
felt no consolation thereof, but much heauinesse and
anguish of minde. For those demaundes: Will God
absent himselfe for euer? Will he be no more mercifull,
and such like heauie and doubtfull complaintes,
could neuer procéed but from a sorrowful and much
troubled conscience. But now, after that Gods spirit
hath wrought in his spirit this assurance and iudgment,
that God can in him chaunge the conditions
of his miseries (as ye may sée,) he maketh no more
complaint of doubtfulnesse, neither remembreth any
more the fearefulnesse of his conscience: but goeth
foorth with repetition and rehearsall of all thinges
comfortably, how that God in time past holpe troubled
spirites and afflicted personages, that put their
trust in him. So that of this we learne, that whosoeuer
hath a sure faith in God, taketh consolation of
Gods word and workes. And such as haue not first
true faith in God, cannot in the spirite receiue comfort
of Gods word or workes. Outwardly men may
meruel at God and his worker, but inwardly it easeth
not the heauinesse, nor yet quieteth the grudge
of conscience.
                  Wherefore,Exhortation to prayer. it behoueth vs all, that we pray earnestly
vnto GOD, to giue vs faith to beléeue his
word and workes, when we heare, read, or sée them:
For the word and workes of God do nothing comfort
the vnfaithfull,Esaie. 65. as we may sée by the Scripture:
where God saith,Rom. 10. He stretched foorth his hand al day
long to a people that beléeued not:Esaie. 6. for such as haue
eares & heare not,Iohn. 12. eyes & sée not, be rather the worse
for Gods word & workes then the better. Ye shal sée

where the spirite of Dauid was replenished with
faith, he was in assured and ascerteined of Gods present
helpe, that he said he would not feare, although
a thousand men inuironed and compassed him round
about:Psalme. 3. No, he would not feare, thoughe he should
walk in the shadow of death.Psalme. 23. At another time, when
faith quailed and waxed faint, he was trembling in
his spirite, and fearefull in his bodie: as we may sée
when he felt his spirite waxe faint, he said:Psal. 6. 38. 
                     My soule
is troubled very sore, and my bones be weakened.
And in other of his Psalmes he sheweth,Psal. 42. 43 that his
soule was very heauie and comfortlesse, and could
take no consolation.
                  Also when the spirite is assured of Gods grace,
then the eyes cannot looke vppon any worke of God.
but the mind taketh by the contemplation and sight
thereof, vnspeakeable consolation: As Dauid declareth
in his Psalmes, and saith, He would sée the heauens
the workes of Gods fingers, and would marke
how one day was an induction to an other: and how
the heauens praised the Lord.Psal. 8. 19. 148.
                  
                  At an other time, when the consolation and life of
the spirit was ouer whelmed with troubles, he could
not sée at all with his eyes: but cryed and complained
that he was starke blinde.Psal. 38. And also in that meruellous
Psalme in number 88.Psalme. 88 whereas prayer is
made to be deliuered from the horrour and féeling of
sinne, the Prophet saith, that his eyes waxed dimme
and blinde. The same is to be séene likewise in the
crosses and afflictions that God sendeth. As long as
true faith and confidence remaineth in the heart, all
troubles be wellcome and thankfully taken: as we
read. When Iob had newes that his goods and chidren
were taken from him,Iob. 1. 2. in manner soudeinly, he
most patiently said: God gaue them, and God hath

taken them away, as God would so it is done. But
when faith quailed, and the spirite was troubled,
then followed these impatient wordes:Iob. 6. 
                     I would my
sinne were layed in one balance, and my paine in an
other. As though God had layed more vppon him,
then he had deserued. When the spirit was quieted,
for all his pouertie and nakednesse, he reioyced and
was contented with his birth and comming into the
world, and also with the state in the world appointed
vnto him by God, saying:Iob. 2. 
                     Naked I came out of
my mothers bellie, and naked I shall depart hence againe.
But when faith fainted, then came out these
woordes:Iob. 3. 
                     The day, the night, and the time be cursed
wherein I was borne. With many more horrible
wordes, as the text declareth. So that we sée, whereas
Gods spirite wanteth, there is no learning nor
consolation to be had of any thing: as it is opened
in this Psalme, in that at the first time the Prophet
recorded Gods workes, and was so troubled in his
minde, that he occupied his cogitations this way:
Will God be no more mercifull? Hath God shut vp
his mercie in his ire? But now in the second record
of Gods workes, he beginneth his entrance cleane
contrarie, and saith: Gods right hand can chaunge
his sorrow, and turne his heauines into mirth. And
vppon this ground and sure hope of Gods promises,
he procéedeth foorth to a consideration and déepe record
of Gods factes, in this sort: I will remember the
workes of the Lord, &c.
                  
                  In this verse and in the next folowing it, be conteyned
thrée kinde of words: remembrance, meditation
and speach. By the first we learne that it profiteth
nothing to read or heare Gods word, except we
remember it, & beare it away with vs. By the next
we learne that it auaileth vs not, to learne and beare

the word of God in remembrance, except by meditation
and thinking vppon it, we vnderstand what it
meaneth. And by the third we learne, that neither
the remembrance it, nor the vnderstanding thereof
profiteth, except we teache and instruct other in
the same, of whom we haue charge, if we may.
                  Now to consider further, we sée how the Prophet beginneth
with this word (Remembrance,) whereof it
appeareth that he had learned before out of Gods
word, Gods nature towardes penitent sinners to
forgiue them: and towards wilfull, obstinate, and
impenitent sinners to be a iust iudge to punish them.
Here is the ignorance of all people condemned, that
neuer learne to know Gods word in sicknes, nor in
health: but when they be troubled or sicke, they send
for such as they thinke and fansie haue learned and
doe remember how Gods word doth comfort in aduersitie.
And then, if he that is sent for be not learned
in Gods word, he cannot remember how God is
wont to comfort the troubled or sicke: then all that
euer the sicke man heareth of an ignorant comforter
or counseller, is as clene voyd of consolation or counsell,
as though he had neuer sent for a counseller or
comforter. For no man can haue more of another,
then the other hath himselfe, which is neither knowledge,
counsell, nor consolation out of Gods word.
Therefore he is not able to giue knowledge, consolation,
nor comfort to another.
                  If the Prophet Asaph, had béene as the most part
of people now a dayes be, that fall sick and into many
kinds of trouble, & had sent for an ignorant foole,
(which commonly is called a ghostly father,) he had
béene in as good taking as these wretched soules be,
that béeing comfortlesse séeke comfort where none
is to be had, séeke knowledge where none is, & séeke

counsell where ignorance aboundeth. Let all men
therefore remember this verse, that when the Prophet
was in trouble, he remembred the wisedome
and meruellous workes of God: (for he knew them
before:) so let all men and women learne, before they
come into trouble, a true knowledge of God, that in
the time of trouble they may remember it to their
consolation. But now to the second word, where he
saith, He will meditate in all the workes of God.
                  Here is another notable doctrine, that neither the
learning of Gods word, nor the remembrance therof
profiteth any thing, except it be vnderstanded and
applied to the vse that God hath appointed it for.
And here be two sortes of people wonderfully condemned.
The one sort be those, that for custome or
bondage to their profession, doe learne without the
booke a great part of the Scripture: or els by daily
vse in singing or saying their seruice (as it is called)
they learne to sing and say a great part of the Bible.
But this auaileth nothing, nor they vnderstand it
not in the sense and meaning that the holy ghost appointed
it for: nor perchaunce the Grammaticall
construction therof. And these remembrances of
Gods word, be nothing but lippe labour, and honouring
of God with the mouth,Esaie. 29. but the hart is farre away:
which before God is in vaine,Matth. 15. and of no estimation.
The other sort of people be such as professe the
Gospell, that haue learned much, and can remember
much, but follow very little: so that they be nothing
the better for it.
                  The third word is, that the Prophet saith, He
wil speake of God and his works, as outwardly and
inwardly he remembreth them, and with his spirite
doth meditate them: as it is likewise the part and
duetie of all Christian men so to doe. For as they beléeue

in the heart to iustice:Rom. 10. so wil they confesse it to
saluation, as S. Paule saith to the Romanes.
                  Here in this word be thrée sortes of people condemned.Three sortes of people cō
                        demned.
The one that wil not confesse and teach the
trueth for feare of loosing their aduauntage. The other
will not confesse and teach the trueth for sluggishnesse
and slouth. And the third will not confesse
and teach the trueth for timiditie and feare.
                  In the first sort be such as know doctrines for the
soule, or medicines for the body, and yet because they
gett gaine thereby, they would not haue too many
know thereof, lest their owne gaines should be the
lesse. As we fée, such a one as knoweth a good methode
and order to teach, would be lothe it should be
common, because his estimation and gaine, (as he
thinketh) should diminish & decrease. The excellent
Physician would not haue his cunning common,
least many men, as cunning as he, should part his
gaines amongest them.
                  The second sort of men be those that come to great
liuings by their learning,Note well. and when they haue the
reward of learning, they teach no more, as bishops
and ministers of the Church: whome the Prophet
calleth dumbe dogges that cannot barke,Esaie. 56. their mouthes
be so choked with the bones of bishoppricks and
benefices. I speake of such as knowe the trueth and
loue it, and not of such as neither know it nor loue
it. For although those men speake but seldome, yet it
is too much: for better it were neuer to speake, then
to speake falsely.
                  The thirde sorte be our Nichodemes,Nichodemes. that can
speake of Christ in the night, or to their friends, but
openly they will confesse nothing with the mouth,
nor doe any thing outwardely for feare of the
world, that should sounde to Gods glorie. And these

men be assured they shall haue their rewarde:Matth. 10. that
Christe will denie them before his father which is
in heauen. Of this we learne wherein our profession
consisteth.Wherein doth our profession consist. First, to learne Gods worde. Secondarily,
to beare it in our hearte and remembraunce.
Thirdly, to vnderstande it. And fourthly, to speake
of it to the glorie of God, and the edifying of our
neighbours. And Gods word this wayes vsed, shall
kéepe vs humble and lowely in prosperitie, and patient
and strong in aduersitie. But in these two verses
be more wordes necessarie to be considered, if we
will take consolation in aduersitie. The first, I will
(sayth the prophet) remember the works of the Lord,
and that of olde time, (or from the beginning.) The second,
I wil think also of al the works of the Lord, &c.
                  
                  In this that the Prophet sayeth,We ought not to be ignorant of any booke in the scripture. He will remember
the workes of the Lorde of olde time, or from the
beginning, we learne that it is expedient to know,
or at the least way,) not to be ignorant of any
booke in the scripture. For where as we finde not
consolation in the one, we may finde it in the other.
And where he sayth He wil remember all ye works
of the Lord (meaning as many as the scripture maketh
mention of:) we be instructed, that we cannot
sée these works for our erudition, neither yet giue ye
almightie God thanks, except we learne them from
one of his bookes to the other. And here is to be noted,
that séeing we be bounde to knowe and to be
thankefull for all the workes of God conteined in
the scripture, we be muche in daunger, as well for
ignorance as vnthankefulnesse, that we knowe not
the principall workes of our owne creation or redemption.
We be therefore admonished, to haue
bookes to read the works of God, and to be diligent
to ask better learned then we be, what Gods works

doe meane. As the children by Gods law vs bound to
aske the parents,Deut. 4. 6. 31. & the parents bound by the same
to teach them: then shall both fathers and children
finde comfort and consolation against all temptations,
in the time of trouble and heauinesse. As we sée
this mans remedie (by ye spirite of God) riseth from
recording, meditating, and speaking of Gods word
and workes.
                  Here hath this Prophete meruellously opened,
howe a man in trouble commeth to consolation
and comfort. First, that the spirite and heart of man
must haue such strong fayth, as may credite Gods
power, and also his good will: and beléeue that God
both can and will for his truethes sake, helpe the
troubled conscience. Therefore Solomon giueth a
godlie and necessarie commaundement:Prouerb. 4 
                     Keepe thy
heart with all circumspection, for of it proceedeth
life. So did Dauid, when the Prophet Nathan had
made him afraide for the murder of Vrias, and the
adulterie with Bersaba, his cōscience was in great
anguishe and feare, and among other thinges that
he prayed for to God,Psalm. 51. he desired that God would create
and make him a newe heart: that is to witte, to
giue him such a stedfast and burning fayth, that in
Christe his sinnefull heart might be purged. And
secondarily he prayeth, to haue so right and sure a
spirite, that shoulde not doubt of Gods sauour towardes
him. Thirdly, that God woulde alwayes
preserue his holy spirite with the heart regenerated,
that from time to time, the heart might be ruled
in obedience towardes God. Fourthly, he prayeth
to be lead with a willing spirite, that quietly and
patiently he may obey God in aduersities, without
impatience or grudge against God. And, where as
this knowledge and féeling of the favour of God is

in the spirite, there followeth recording, and remembrance
of Gods works, meditating and thinking
vpon heauenly thinges: and the tongue readie
also to speake foorth the glory of God, to Gods honour
and praise, and to the edifying of Gods people
and congregation, after this sorte.
                  13 Thy way oh God is in holinesse: who is so great
a God, as God, euen our God?
                  Here is a consolation much worthie to be learned
and receiued of all troubled men: and it is this, To
vnderstande and perceiue,Consolation. that all the doinges and
factes of Almightie God be righteous, although
many times the fleshe iudgeth, and the tongue speaketh
the contrarie, that God should be too seuere, and
punishe too extremely. As though he did it rather of
a desire to punishe, then to correct or amend the person
punished. As we sée by Iobs words, that wished
his sinnes layed in one balance,Iob. 6. and his punishment
in another balance: as though God punished more
extreamely then iustly. The same it séemeth king
Dauid also felte, when he sayde:Psalme. 13. 
                     Howe long Lorde
wilt thou forget me, for euer? With like bitter speaches
in the scripture: complayning of Gods iustice,
iudgement and seueritie.Ierem. 20. The same we reade of Ieremie
the Prophete, He spake Gods word truely,
and yet there happened vnto him wonderfull great
aduersities: the terrour whereof made him curse
the day that he was borne in. And doubtlesse, when
he sayde, Why haste thou deceiued mee Lorde?
he thought, God was rather too extreame, then iust
in his punishment,Passur. to afflicte him in aduersitie, and
to suffer Passur the high Priest and his enimie to
be in quiet and tranquillitie.
                  This prophet Asaph was before in great trouble,

as ye heard), and especially of the minde, that self
not a sure trust and confidence in Gods mercie: and
thought of al extremities that to be (as it is in déed)
the greatest, a minde desperate and doubtfull of
Gods mercie: yet nowe he saith, God is holie in his
way, and all that he doeth is right and iust.
                  
                  We learne hereby, that the potte can not say to
the Potter,Ierem. 19. 
                     Why hast thou made me after this sorte?
Neither may the mortall man,Rom. 9. in whom is nothing
but sinne,Potter. quarel with the Lord and say: What layest
thou vpon me? But thinke, that although he had
made vs both blinde, lame, and as deformed as monsters:
yet had he made vs better then euer we deserued.
And in case he layd all the troubles of the world
vppon one man: yet are they lesse then one sinne of
man doeth deserue. Thus hath the Prophet learned
nowe and felt, and sayth: The doinges of God be
holie and right, and there is none to be compared vnto
him: and sheweth the cause why none is to be
compared vnto God. In the declaration whereof, he
continueth seuen verses, and so maketh an ende of
the Psalme.
                  The first cause why he sayeth none is to be compared
vnto God: is this.
                  14 Thou art the Lord that doth wonders, and hast
declared thy power amongest people.
                  Firste he noteth generally that God is the doer
of wonders,God is the doer of wonders. and miracles: and afterwardes he
sheweth, wherein God hath wrought these miracles.
Of this we learne thrée doctrines. The one, that
some men knowe generally,Three doctrines. that God worketh all
thinges meruellously. The second, that other some
knowe that God worketh in some men meruellously.

The third, that other also knowe that God worketh
in themselues meruellously.
                  Of the first sort be such as know by Gods works
generally, that God hath, and doth dispose all things
vpon the earth, and nothing hath his beginning nor
being but of God:Rom. 1. of whome Saint Paule speaketh
to the Romanes, that by Gods workes they knewe
God, and yet glorified him not. Of the seconde sorte
be suche, as more particularly knowe and speake of
Gods miracles:Genes. 7. as suche be, that reade how God of
his singular fauour preserued Noah & his familie,
and drowned all the world besides:Exod. 14. how he brought
the children of Israel out of Egypt, and deliuered
the people from the captiuitie of Babylon, with such
like: and yet when they be in troubles themselues,
these meruellous workes and mercies shewed vnto
others, cannot comfort themselues. Of the thirde
sorte be suche, as knowe generally the meruellous
workes of God, and perceiue that in some God is
particularly mercifull: and from some he findeth
it in him selfe singularly the mercie of GOD, and
from the remembraunce of Gods benefites vnto others
he findeth in him selfe the working of Gods
mercie, and findeth in his conscience such comfort in
déede, that he remembreth others before him, that
had of Gods mercies in their time of troubles.
                  The moste parte of men consider generally,Note. that
God is the worker of miracles:The true Christians take consolation themselues of gods miracles wrought vppon others. the common sorte
of Christians consider, that God hath wrought miracles
particularly vpon others: but the verie elects
and Christians in déede, sée the miracles of God
wrought particularly vpon others, and take consolation
singularly of Gods mercies themselues. As
we sée this Prophete meruellously declareth Gods
wonders, & putteth the generall working of Gods

miracles betwéene a singular working of wonders:
and a particular working of wonders.
                  The generalitie is this: Thou art God that doth
wonders, and hast declared thy power amongst people.
The singularitie and particularitie of Gods
working of wonders, is the one before, and the other
behinde. The singularitie is in this, that he perceiued
that is was his owne infirmitie, that made him
doubt of Gods promises: & yet Gods singular grace
made him singularly féele & perceiue that God singularly
would be good vnto him. The particularitie
is in this, that he saith: With Gods right hand God
deliuered the posteritie of Iacob and IosephIacob and Ioseph. from
the seruitude of Egypt, &c. The way to consider the
meruellous works of God is a profitable consideration
& sight of them, as wel to know them, as to be ye
better for them. For there is no man can take commoditie
or profite by Gods goodnesse shewed vnto a
multitude, except he singularly receiue gaine therby
him selfe. As we sée, when a whole multitude was
fed meruellously with a fewe loaues and fewer fishes,Iohn. 6.
(almoste fiue thousande people,) he taught the
consolation and health of mans soule in his owne
bloude:Euery man must beleeue for himselfe. but none was the better for it, but suche as
beléeued euerie man for him selfe that which Christ
spake. The miracles and mercifull helpe of Christe
vnto others, had nothing profited the poore woman
of Canaan:Matth. 15. excepte she her selfe had bene partaker
of the same. And as it is in the workes of God, that
doe comfort the man afflicted: so is it in the workes
of God, that bring men into heauinesse and sorrowe
for sinne.
                  Generally, the worde of God rebuketh sinne,
and calleth sinners to repentaunce: particularly it
sheweth vnto vs, howe that Dauid, Peter, Marie

Magdalen and others repented. But to vs those sorrowes
and repentaunce do no good:Repentance. except we euery
man singularly, repent and be sorrowfull for his
sinnes. For it is not another mans sicknesse that
maketh me sicke,Notable doctrine. nor another mans health that maketh
me whole: no more is any other mans repentance
my repentance, or any other mans fayth my
fayth: but I must repent, & I must beléeue my selfe
to féele sorrowfulnesse for sinne by the law, & remission
therof by faith in Christ. So that euerie priuate
man must be in repentaunce, sorrie with the true
repentaunt sorrie: and faithfull, with the true
faithfull. For as God himselfe is towardes man: so
be all his workes and promises.Note. For looke to whom
God is mercifull, to the same be all his promises
comfortable: and to whom God is seuere and rigorous,
to the same Gods threateninges be terrible,
and his iustice fearefull. As king Dauid sayeth,Psalme. 18.
                     With the holie, thou wilt be holie: and with the innocent;
thou wilt bee innocent: with the chosen,
thou wilt be chosen: and with the peruerse, thou wilt
be peruerse.
                  
                  Such as followe vertue and godlinesse,To whom God is mercifull, and to whome seuere. God increaseth
with gifts and benefits: & such as haue wicked
manners, and by false doctrine decline from the
truth, in those God is seuere & sharp. And except such
persons repent, God wil spoyle them from all iudgement
of trueth: and being blinde and destitute of
knowledge, permitte them to the power and dominion
of most filthy lustes, and abhominable desires.
So that such as would not loue the beautie & excellencie
of vertue, shal tumble & wallowe themselues
like swine, in the filth & vomit of sinne: of the which
abhominations and iust iudgements of God,Rom. 
                           •
                        . Saint
Paule speaketh in the Epistle to the Romanes. For

this is to be noted, looke as euerie man is: euen so he
thinketh of God. And as the good and godlie man
thinketh well of God: so doeth he euill and wicked
man thinke euill of God.
                  Some thincke that man and all worldly thinges
be ruled and gouerned by God, with greate iustice
and inscrutable wisedome,A wicked iudgment of Gods doinges. with all mercie and fauour.
Others thinke that GOD ruleth not this
world, and worldly things: and in case they thinke
he doe, yet do they condemne his administration and
rule, of iniustice and parcialitie: because God doeth
as it pleaseth himselfe, and not as man would haue
him doe. And vpon these diuersities of iudgements
in mens mindes: God is to the godly, mercifull:
and to the vngodly, seuere and rigorous.
                  If the spirite of man iudge truely and godly of
him, by and by the spirite of man shall perceiue and
féele the heauenly influence of Gods spirite, stirring
and impelling his spirit to all vertue and goodnesse.Oh horrible blindnesse.
If the spirite of man be destitute of spirite of
God, and iudge peruersly and wickedly, the spirits
of man shall féele the lacke of Gods spirite, and true
iudgement, to blind the eyes of his mind, & cast him
self into al abhomination & sinne: as the iniquitie of
the man iustly hath deserued. Of the which thing
cōmeth this, that as the vertue & godlinesse of godly
men daily increaseth: euen so doeth the iniquitie and
abhomination of the vngodly also increase.Lokewhat preeminence God obteineth of man: the same place hath man with God. And looke
what place and preeminence God obteineth with any
man: in the same place and preeminence is the
man with God. And suche as doe godlie after Gods
worde, honour and reuerence the almightie God:
iudging aright of Gods might and prouidence: they
giue moste humble thankes vnto the mercie of God:
that alone, and none but he, can teach or instruct the

mind of man in true knowledge, nor incline his will
to godlie doings, nor inflame the soule with all her
powers to the desire and feruent loue of godlinesse
and vertue. As we sée by this prophete Asaph in this
place, that as long as his spirite, wanted the helpe
of Gods spirite, it iudged doubtfully of Gods mercie
and promises: but, when the spirite of God had
exiled and banished doubtfulnesse, and placed this
strong fortresse of confidence,A stronge fortresse. (The right hande of
GOD can chaunge this my wofull and miserable
estate,) with the iudgement and féeling thereof, he
was rapte and stricken with a meruellous loue of
Gods wonders: and repeated them with greate ioy
and consolation, what God had done generally to
all men: after that, what he had done to some particular
men, and priuat nations: naming Iacob & Ioseph,
whose ofspring and succession he brought out
of the lande of Egypt, as it followeth in the Psalme.
                  15 Thou hast mightily deliuered thy people, euen
the sonnes of Iacob and Ioseph. Sela.
                  Of this verse we learne two consolations. The
one, that euerie Christian troubled, may sée his elders,
and also his betters troubled:Two consolations. not that it is a
comforte to a man that is afflicted, to sée another in
trouble: but to marke that God loued none so well,
but in this world he sent trouble vnto,Whome God loued he always corrected. and excepted
not his déere sonne. Wherefore, it is a consolation to
the afflicted, to be made like vnto the godly fathers,
(that were before his time) by tribulation: and to
remember, that although all Christian men be not
brought vnder the captiuitie of Pharao in Egypt,Euery Christian member hath an Egypt and a Babylon.
nor vnder Nabuchodonozer in Babylon: yet there is
an Egypt and a Babylon for euery Christian member:
that is to say, the captiuitie of sinne, the bondage
of the fleshe, the seueritie of the lawe, the daunger of

the worlde, the enimitie of Infidels, the treason of
dissembling friends, the wickednesse of ciuil & diuellishe
ordinaunces, the dissimulation of hypocrites,
the periurie of incōstant persons, the breach of faithfull
promises, the inconstancie of the weake, ye crueltie
of Papistes, the loue of man, & the hatred of God,
with many others: as ye ignorance of Gods lawes,
rebellion of the heart against it, frowardnesse of the
will to consent vnto it, diffidence & mistrust of Gods
mercie, boldnesse to sinne in the time of health, faintnesse
and mistrust of the remission thereof in sickenes,
loue of vice and sinne, hatred of vertue and godlinesse,
souden falling from grace, slowe rising vnto
it againe, lothsomnesse to die mortally, readinesse to
liue wickedly, sorrowfulnesse to forsake this world,
great delight to vse it euill whiles we haue it, lothe
to séeke heauenly thinges, glad to séeke earthly thinges,
nothing féeling the pouertie and trouble of the
soul, alwayes grudging at the pouertie and trouble of
the body, with innumerable other captiuities that
euery Christian is intangled withall, as euery man
may iudge by his owne life.
                  The next consolation is to sée the trueth of Gods
helpe promised to all men, when they be troubled, to
haue béene declared opened, and verified in others,
in time past.The greatest consolation in trouble. For, this is the greatest consolation
that can be to any man, in trouble, or in sicknesse:
when he is assured of such help, and such medicines,
as neuer were vsed, but did helpe the afflicted, and
heale the sick. Now, against all the troubles of man,
and also against all the sickness of man. God hath promised
his present and helping mercie: the which medicine
and helpe neuer failed, but did helpe as many
as put their trust therein. Therefore doth this Prophet
Asaphe, establish and assure himselfe of Gods

helpe, against his gréeuous temptations and troubles
that he suffered, by recording that his greefes
were no greater, nor his troubles more daungerous
then Iacobs, Iosephes, and their posterities: nor yet
so gréeuous.From the greater to the lesser. In so much that, séeing the mercie of
God could helpe the greater troubles in his predecessors:
he could helpe and ease the lesse in him that
was presently troubled. And béeing so assured of
Gods helpe, he spake at the end of this verse, (Sela:)Sela. as though he had said. It is most true that God can
help and comfort me: as he holpe and comforted my
forefathers. And for the better consolation and more
firme assurance, he sheweth, how meruellously he did
helpe the posterite of Iacob & Ioseph, after this sort.
                  16 The waters sawe thee, oh God, the waters saw
thee, and were afraid: the depthes also were troubled.
                  In this that he saith, The waters were afraide,
when they sawe God.Vnto insensible thinges be attributed sensible qualities. First the maner of speach in
the Scripture is to be noted, that attributeth vnto
insensible things, sensible qualities: as in this place
is attributed vnto the water sight and feare, whereas
in déede properly the water cannot sée nor feare.
But, when the Scripture vseth any such phrase or
speache, there is to be marked diuers doctrines of
edifying.Three doctrines. First of GOD, then insensible creatures,
and thirdly of man, for whose sake the Scripture
sometime speaketh vnto insensible creatures, as
though they were sensible, and worketh miracles in
them for the instruction and amendement of sensible
and reasonable man.
                  The learning touching God is,The first doctrine touching God. that he worketh
his will, and vseth his creatures, as it séemeth vnto
his wisedome inscrutable most méete and conuenient:

as here he troubleth and altereth the condition
of the seas and waters.Gene. 1. These waters were appointed
by God, in the third day of the creation, to be in
one place, and was called The Sea, a pleasaunt element,
and a beautifull thing to sée: and God said, It
was good, as the effect thereof sheweth in déede: for
it nourisheth the earth with necessarie moysture, by
priuie veines and secrete passages, secretely passing
through the earth. And when the floudes, that doe
moysture the earth, haue done their office, they returne
into their old lodging, the Sea againe: from
whence riseth the matter of showres and raine to
moisture from aboue, that flouds beneath cannot be
conueyed vnto. And it serueth for transporting the
necessaries of one realme to the other, quietly suffering
the ships of passe with great gaine & pleasure.
These and many more commodities God worketh
by this insensible creature, when it is calme and nauigable:
but when he moueth it with his winds and
tempestes, it is so horrible in it selfe, that no man
may, without perill and death, trauell within it, so
raging and feareful is that pleasaunt element of tho
water, when God moueth it. It hath (by Gods appointment)
his time of calme, and time of storme:
time to profite men,Time. and time to vndoe men: time to
be a refuge for men in the dayes of peril, and time to
be a graue and sepulchre for men: time to conioyne
strange nations together, and time to separate them
againe: as it pleaseth the creator Almightie God to
appoint and direct it.
                  The doctrine that toucheth the insensible creature
it selfe,The second doctrine touching the insensible creature. is: that it can be no longer calme, nor
any longer troubled, then it pleaseth the heauenly
gouernour to dispose it. And here is to be noted, against
such men as attribute stormes and calmes to

Fortune:Psal. 29. whereas onely the voice of the Lord moueth
tempestes, and sendeth faire weather. It is also
a doctrine against all men, that do thinke the waters
and seas may be moued, and ceasse at their owne
pleasure: which is contrarie to this Prophets doctrine,Psal. 77.
that saith: The waters sawe the Lord & were
afraide. So that their trouble riseth from the commaundement
of the Lord, and they cannot do what
they lust,Psal. 114. but what God biddeth them to doe. It is
godly set foorth afterwardes in another Psalme,
wherein the passage of the children of Israel is mentioned:
as it is in this Psalme.
                  The doctrine touching man,The third doctrine touching man. in this verse, is a declaration
of mans obstinacie and stubbernesse. The
insensible creature the water, that lacketh both life
and reason, at euery commandement be as the Lord
their maker commaundeth them to be. With euery
tempest they be troubled, and with euery calme so
plaine and quiet: that it séemeth rather a stablished
land, then a variable sea.Oh rebellion of man. But let God send his word
vnto man, and the contentes thereof threaten the
tempest of all tempestes, eternall death, hell fire, and
Gods euerlasting displeasure: yet man will not
heare nor sée them, nor yet be moued any thing at
all.Insensible creatures shall be a condemnation vnto man. Or let God gently and fauourably offer his mercies
vnto man, and by his word exhort him neuer so
much to repentance: it is for the most part in vaine.
Therefore God by his Prophets Moses and Esaie,
called Heauen and Earth to witnesse against mans
stubbernesse and hardnesse of heart.
                  There is also out of this trouble of the water, this
doctrine to be learned: how to receiue consolation,
and how to learne feare by the creatures of God that
beare no life, and yet be thus troubled. Consolation
in this sort: When the penitent man that suffereth

affliction and trouble, séeth vnsensible thinges moued
and vnquieted that neuer offended,Marke most diligently. he shal iudge
the lesse wonder at his owne trouble. When he séeth
that a sinner, and wretched offender of God, is punished,
he shal learne feare. When he séeth God doth
punish his creatures that neuer offended, for the
sinne of man: what punishment is man worthie to
haue, that is nothing but sinne it selfe? And what
feare should this bring into Christian mens consciences,The diuell & man be only disobedient vnto God.
to knowe that no creature deserueth punishment,
no creature disobeyeth God: but the diuel and
man? Oh what man or woman can with faith looke
vpon the least flowers of the field, and not hate himselfe?
In Summer time, when men shall sée the medowes
and gardens so meruellously apparelled with
flowers of euery colour, so that he shall not be able
to discerne, whether their beautie better please the
eye, or their swéete sauour the nose:Oh take heed miserable man. what may they
learne, in thinking of themselues (as the trueth is)
that there is nothing in them but filth and sin, that
most heynously stincke before the face of God? And
when man shal perceiue that flowers vade,Consolation. and loose
both beautie to the eye, and swéete sauor to the nose,
that neuer transgressed: what may miserable man
thinke he is worthie to loose yt is nothing but sinne,
and euer offendeth? Againe, when man shal perceiue
that God thus meruellously, after long Winter
and great stormes, doth raise out of the vile earth so
beautifull flowers, plantes, and trées: what consolation
may the man take that hath his faith in Christ,
to thinke that all his sinnes in his precious bloud be
forgiuen: and after long persequution & cruel death,
he shall come to eternall life. After this sort did the
Prophet consider the workes of God, & the troubles
of his creatures, & receiued great consolation therby.
                  
                     
In the end of this verse the Prophete sayth,Deapthes. 
                     The
deapthes were troubled. In the which words he hath
aptly shewed the mightie power of God, and perceiueth
how the record of Gods fact may be his consolation.
In this that he saith, The deapths were troubled:
there be diuers vnderstandings. If the meane
of the seas, when they are troublesome & tempestuous
by soule weather, he speaketh rather after the
iudgement of such (as suffer the trouble and peril of
the waues,) that thinke at one time they fall to the
bottome of the sea, & at an other time they be rather
vpon high mounteins then vpon the waters, the rages
thereof be so extreme: yet in déede, the bottome
of the seas be not felt, neither doth the shippe that is
saued descend so farre: but the tempestes be so sore,
that it séemeth to the sufferers thereof, that no extremitie
can be more. In this sense it serueth meruellously
the Prophetes purpose.A goodly similitude. For as they that endure
the tempestes of the sea, thinke there could be
no more extremitie then they susteine: so doe they
that suffer the tempest of mistrust and despaire (for a
time) of the conscience, thinke they could endure no
more extremitie of conscience: whereas in déede,
if God should suffer them to féele the extremitie, it
were eternall death: as the extremitie of the sea in
tempestes, is shipwracke and losse of man and goods.
But if it be vnderstoode as if standeth in the letter,
then hath the Prophet relation to the mightie hand
of GOD, that brake the red sea euen vnto the very
bottome,Exod. 14. and also the water of Iordane:Iosua. 3. that his
people might haue both a nighe way, a safe way, & a
glorious way towards the land that the Lorde had
promised them. And then in this sense we learne,
that although water and winde, with all troubles
else, couer the face of the earth, in the bottome of the

sea, and is not possible to come to the vse of man: euen
so the troublesome temptations, and great terror
of Gods wrath against sinne, couereth the soule
of man, that vnto the iudgement of the flesh, it shall
neuer come to haue the vse and fruition of Gods holy
fauour againe. Oh the mercifull goodnesse of God towards man inscrutableBut nowe, as we sée by miracle,
God maketh drie the deapthe of horrible seas, and
turneth the bottome of them to the vse of man: so
doeth he in the bloud of Christ (by the operation of
the holy ghost) drie vp and cleane lade out, the ponds
and déep seas of mistrust & heuines out of the soule,
and turneth the soule it selfe to the vse of his owne
honour, in the ioyes euerlasting. And as the water
couereth the beautie of the land: so do sinne & temptation
couer the image and beautie of mans soule
in this life. But as with a worde God can remedie
the one: so with the least of his mercies he can redresse
the other. And for the better experience and
more certeintie thereof, we sée it proued by this prophete
Asaph, in this place. For the ground was neuer
more ouerwhelmed with water, nor the bright
Sunne with dimmie cloudes: then was this poore
Prophetes spirite, with heauinesse and sorrowe of
sinne and temptations. Therefore he féeleth howe
God easeth the heart, and recordeth howe he banished
floudes and waters, to make his people a way
to rest and tranquillitie.
                  17 The clouds powred out water, the aire thundered,
and thine arrowes went abroad.
                  
                     Noah.The Prophete remembreth the meruellous invndation
and drowning of the worlde, in the dayes
of Noah, that drowned all the world for sinne: sauing
such as were in the Arke or Ship with Noah.
And he remembreth also the horrible thunder that

was heard of the people,Gene. 7. when God gaue his lawe
vnto them vpon mount Synai.Exod. 19. Likewise, he calleth
to remembrance the plagues of Egypt,Note. wherewithall
God punished Pharao,Exod. 5. 6. 7 8. 9. 10. 11. his people, and the whole
land: which paines and plagues he calleth (after the
phrase of the scripture) arrowes and dartes. These
remembraunces may be comfortes to the hearers,
and to the readers, two manner of wayes. First, in
this, that God (when he punisheth) punisheth iustly:
as he did the whole world for sinne.God punisheth iustly for sin. Whereof
the Prophete gathereth, If sinne iustly merited, doe
trouble all the generation of man: it is no great
meruell, though sinne trouble me, that am but one
man, and a vile sinner. If sinne brought all flesh vnto
death, sauing those that were in the ship: is it any
meruell, though sinne make me to tremble & quake?
Againe, If God, when he gaue the lawe of Moses,
and to the people, spake out of thunder, declaring
what a thing it was, to transgresse that lawe, in so
much, that al ye people were afraid to heare the Lord
speake,Exod. 19. and desired that Moses might supplie his
roome: what meruell is it, that my conscience trembleth,
féeling that my soule hath offended the lawes
of God? And if Pharao and his realme were sore afraid
of Gods outward plagues: what cause haue I
to feare the inwarde dread and sorrowfull sight of
sinne, shewed vnto me by Gods lawe? So that we
may take this cōsolation out of this place, that God
is a iust Iudge to punish sinne:God is no tyrant. and not a Tyrant,
that punisheth of affection or wilfull desire. And so
saide Dauid,Psal. 51. 10. 119. When so euer, or howe so euer thou
punish, (let men say and iudge as they list,) thou art
iust,God alwayes preserueth pemitent sinners. and righteous be all thy doings.
                  The other consolation is, that in the middest of
all aduersities, God preserued penitent and faithfull

sinners. As in the time of the vniuersall floud, the
water hurted not Noah, nor suche as were in the
ship. In the time of Pharaos plagues, the Israelites
tooke no harme. At the giuing of the lawe, the Israelites
perished not with lightening and thunder. Euen
so, sorrowes and anguish, diffidence and weaknesse
of faith, they are plagues and punishments for
all men by reason of sinne: yet penitent sinners, by
reason of faith in Christ, take no hurt nor damnation
by them. As it appeareth by this Prophete that
was troubled in the spirite and in the body, as meruellously
as could be: but yet in Christ escaped the
daunger,Rom. 8. as all men shal do that repent and beléeue.
Whereof we learne, that as the rayne falleth generally,
and yet bettereth no earth to bring foorth her
fruite, but such as is apt to receiue the rayne (stonie
rocks and barren ground being nothing the better:)Hebr. 6. 10.
euen so doth the plagues and rayne of Gods displeasure
plague all mankinde, but none be the better
therefore, but such as repent and bewayle their sinnes,
that gaue GOD iust occasion thus to punishe
them. The same is to be considered also of the verse
that followeth, which is this.
                  18 The lightening shone vpon the ground, the earth
was moued, and shooke therewithall.
                  By these manner of speaches, The lightening
shone, and the earth quaked: the Prophete setteth
foorth the strength and might of Gods power, and
willeth men to loue him and to feare him: For he
is able to defend and preserue his faythfull, and to
punish and plague the wicked. And the like he sayth
in the verse following.
                  19 Thy way is in the sea, and thy pathes in the deep
waters: and thy footsteps are not knowne.
                  
                     
He taketh comfort of this miracle, that GOD
brought the Israelites through the red sea,The Israelites were conducted by God, through the red sea. in this,
that the waters knewe the Israelites, & gaue place
vnto them, that they might drye footed goe through
them. But when king Pharao and his people would
haue followed in the same path, persequuting Gods
people, the sea would make no way for him, nor yet
shew the steppes where the Israelites troade,Pharao & his were drowned. but ouerwhelmed
them in most desperate deaths. So in
the seas of temptations,Exo. 14. suche as put their trust in
the Lorde,Psalm. 121. 125. 13. 46. 54. 71. passe, and neuer perish by them: whereas
such as put not their trust in the Lorde, perish in
temptations: as Pharao and his armie did by water.
And the next verse that concludeth the Psalme,
sheweth by what meanes the Israelites were vnder
God saued in the red sea: by the handes of Moses
and Aaron, as it appeareth.
                  20 Thou leadest thy people like sheepe, by the hand
of Moses and Aaron.
                  Of this verse the afflicted may learne many consolations.The best is not able of himself to resist temptations.
First, that the best people that be, are no
better able to resist temptations: then the simple
shéepe is able to withstande the brier that catcheth
him. The next, that man is of no more abilitie to beware
of temptations, then the poore shéepe is to aboyd
the brier,Sheephearde. They that doe thinges at Gods commaundement, can take no harme. being preserued only by the diligence
of the shéepheard. The thirde, that as the shéepheard
is carefull of his intangled and briered shéepe; so is
GOD of his afflicted faithfull. And the fourth is,
that the people of Israel could take no harme of the
water, bycause they entered the sea at Gods commaundement.
Whereof we learne, that no daunger
can hurt, when God doth commaund vs to enter

into it: and all daungers ouercome vs, if we choose
them our selues,Math. 14. besides Gods commaundement. As
Peter,Math. 16. when he went at Gods commandement vppon
the water, tooke no hurt: but when he entered
into the Bishops house, vppon his owne presumption,
was ouercome, and denied Christ. The Israelities,
when they fought at Gods commaundement,
the perill was nothing:Num. 14. but when they would doe it
of their owne heades, they perished. So that we are
bound to attend vppon Gods commaundement, and
then no daunger shall destroy vs, though it paine vs.
                  The other doctrine is in this,Such as be ministers of the Church, ought to attend only vppon the voyce of God. that God vsed the
ministerie of Moses and Aaron, in the deliuerance of
his people: who did commanded them to do nothing,
but that the Lord did first bid. Whereof we learne,
that such as be ministers appointed of God, and doe
nothing but as God commaundeth, are to be followed.
As S. Paule saith, Followe mee, as I followe
Christ. And these men can by the word of God giue
good counsell,2. Cor. 11. and great consolation, both for bodie
and soule: as we perceiue this Prophet, in marking.
Gods doinges vnto the Israelites, applied by grace
the same wisedome and helping mercie vnto himselfe,
to his eternall rest, through Iesus Christ in the
world to come, To whome with the father and
the holy Ghost, be all laude and praise
world without end. Let all
Christians say,
Amen.
               
            
         
         FINIS.
      
      
         
            
            
               ❧A table declaring as well the
generall as the speciall contentes of this
whole Booke.
            ¶The figures note the number of the leafe. A. the first
side. B. the second.
            
                 
                  
                     
                        ❧The argument of the 23. Psalme. fol. 9. A.
                     ¶Of this Psalme, there are seuen partes. ibid. B.
    
                           1 Who it is that hath the cure and charge of mans life and saluation. 10. A.
                           2 Wherein the life and saluation of man consisteth. 14. B.
                           3 How a man is brought to the knowledge of life and saluation:
    which part sheweth, what man is of himselfe, and how he is
    brought into his life, and to feede in the pleasaunt pastures of
    Gods word. 19. B.
                           4 Wherefore man is brought to life and saluation. 23. B.
                           5 What trouble may happen to such, as God giueth life and
    saluation vnto. 25. B.
                           6 Whereby the troubles of Gods elect be ouercome. 31. A.
                           7 What the end of Gods troubled people shall be. 41. B.
                        
                     
                  
               
                 
                  
                     
                        ❧The Argument of the 62 Psalme. 43. A.
                     ¶Of this Psalme there are two generall partes, and sixe
    particular. ibid. A. & B.
                     ¶The first generall part, conteyning foure particular partes.
                     1 How that the fauour of God, and his helpe, is able to remedie
    all aduersities. 43. A.
                     ¶The second generall part conteyning two particular partes.
                     2 How that the fauour of man, and his helpe, is able to redresse
    no aduersities. 43. A.
                     ¶A breefe paraphrase vppon the whole Psalme. 44. B.
                     ¶The sixe particular partes as they followe in
    their order and place.
    
                           1 What is to be done by the Christian man that is afflicted. 45. A.
                           2 Why the troubled person seeketh health of God. 51. A.
                           
                              
          3 How the persequuters of the innocent shall soudenly perishe. 58. A.
                           4 Why trouble is patiently to be borne, and faithfully to
              be beleeued, that God can and will remedie it. 63. B.
                           5 How mans power is not to be trusted vnto. 66. B.
                           6 How that God hath promised to helpe the afflicted. 69. A.
                        
                     
                  
               
                 
                  
                     
                        ❧The Argument of the 73. Psalme. 70. A.
                     ¶A Paraphrase vppon the whole Psalme. Fol. 70. 71. 72. 73.
                     ¶Of this Psalme there are eight partes. 74.
    
                           1 That God loueth the good, although he punisheth them.
       75. A.
                           2 How weake and fraile a thing the nature of man is. 77. B
                           3 Wherein the felicitie of wicked men consisteth, &c. 80. A
                           4 How fraile, brittle, and weake a thing man is, &c. 84. B
                           5 How some men repeat their well doings, &c. 85 A
                           6 How greate a daunger it is, temerously to iudge of God,
      &c. 85. B
                           7 That mans reason is but ignorant and beastlie in considering
      of Gods workes, &c. 86. A
                           8 The multitude & number of Gods consolations, &c. 86. B
                        
                     
                  
               
                 
                  
                     
                        ❧The Argument of the 77. Psalme. 87 A.
                     ¶Of this Psalme there are foure partes. 87. A & B.
    
                           1 In whome a man shoulde put his trust, and to whome he
    should resorte in the dayes of sickenesse, troubles, and aduersities. 87. B.
                           2 How a man should vse him selfe towardes him, in whome
    he putteth his trust in the time of trouble. 89. B
                           3 What great and perillous daungers, the man that is troubled
    shall suffer, for the time of his trouble. 93. A
                           4 How a man taketh consolation in the time of his trouble.
    113. B
                        
                     
                     ¶Other pointes of Christian doctrine are referred
  to the consideration of the reader.
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   