
      
         
            
            
            A
SERMON,
PREACHED AT
THE FVNERALL
of the Right VVorshipfull
Sir Robert Boteler
Knight, of Wood-Hall:
            In the Parish of Watton in Hertford-shire,
the ninth of
Ianuary, 1622.
            
               
                  PROV. 10. 7.
The memorie of the Just is blessed, but the name
of the wicked shall rot.
            
            
               LONDON,
Printed by Nicholas Okes for Iohn Waterson,
and are to be sold at the signe of
the Crowne in Pauls Church-yard. 1623.
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧ TO THE RIGHT
Worshipfull and truely vertuous,
the Lady FRANCIS BOTELER, late
wife to the Right worshipfull
Sir ROBERT BOTELER
Knight, deceased.
            MADAM,
            
               IT was your Ladyships
importunity that
brought these poore
Meditations to the
Presse, and it is your
name likewise that
must countenance them abroade in the
world, The Queene of Sheba heard very
much of Salomons glory: yet when shee
came in person to see it, shee found it was
farre greater then the report. But heere
it is otherwise. For though haply some
that doe ouer-loue either me or my Sermon,
haue told you more of it then it deserues;
Yet when you come to see it, to reade it, I

doubt, you will find lesse in it then you doe
expect: And so will others too. But the
difference is, that you can blame none
but your selfe; and they will blame none
but me. Yet notwithstanding, as it was a
great comfort vnto me at the first, that my
auditors were pleas'd to accept it then as a
discharge of that debt, that seruice which I
did owe vnto the memory of that Noble
Gentleman your louing husband: So will it
be now likewise, if this dedication may any
way expresse that reuer entiall obseruance,
which the vertues that are in you aboue
your Sexe, and the fauours that you haue
done me beyond my desert, shall euer challenge
at my hands. In the meanetime what
is wanting in my endeauours, I will supply
by my prayers for your Ladyship, that
God would be pleas'd to afford you a daily
encrease of comfort in the happy growth
of that tender plant, your little Daughter,
and to multiply his blessings vpon you, and
his graces in you both, to his glory.
            
               Your Ladyships faithfull
seruant in Christ Jesus,
T. H.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               1. PET. 1. 24.
               All flesh is as grasse.
            
            
               TOuching obsequies and
Funerall solemnities,
wherewith all times
and religions, haue in
some kinde or other
honoured their dead,
it is the conclusion of
a heathen man, and Christianitie denies it not,
Totus hic locus etsi contemnendus in nobis, tamen
non negligendus in nostris; Though wee
ought not to make them any part of our care
as touching our selues, yet notwithstanding,
where either a commixtion of blood by affinity
and kindred, or a secret inter-inanimation, an
vnion of soules by amitie and loue, or any
other collaterall and binding relation, hath

entail'd vpon vs the memory of the dead,
there, it will be an act of a reuerentiall and a
pious affection, to prouide that those rites and
those ceremonies may accordingly haue their
course. Augustine. But yet St. Austin hath set them
their boundes too: we may not carrie them so
high as to thinke that they are mortuorum subsidia,
any whit auaileable vnto those who are
gone; but the respect that's due vnto them, and
the vse that is to bee made of them must end
and determine in this, that they are Viuorum
solatia, they doe indeed in some measure asswage
and lessen the sorrow, and so adde something
to the comfort of those that suruiue.
And this vse doe we make of them, this comfort
doe we milke from them now; as being an
act, not of safetie only, but of pietie too, that
we are thus met together, you, to contribute
your presence and condolencie, and I, (most
vnworthy) my poore meditations to the celebration
of this day. For wee shall thereby not
only quitt our selues of a debt, wherein wee all
stand bound (though by different obligations)
to the memory of that noble Gentlemen,
whose day this is; but some gaine also will arise,
happily some aduantage may accrue vnto
vs, if we shall contemplate, exemplarily in him,
and doctrinally in this text, Figmentum nostrum,
(as the Prophet Dauid calls it) our owne
composition and structure, and mould, and
mortalitie; Omnis caro vt foenum, All flesh is as
grasse.
            
               
In the handling of which words, wee shall
first passe through those considerations that are
most obuious, and neerest hand; as first, the
various acceptations of this word Caro, Flesh,
in Scripture, and which of them wee are to
pitch vpon here; then the extent, the latitude
of it in that acceptation, and that is carried
here as farre as any terme, any expression can
doe it, for it is Omnis Caro, All flesh; Lastly the
condition, the nature of flesh in this latitude,
in this vniuersalitie, and that is set downe by a
similitude, a comparison, and the thing whereto
it is likened, wherto it is compared is, Grasse,
Omnis Caro vt foenum, All flesh is as grasse.
And when these particulars haue passed our
discussion, wee will then fall vpon those resultances,
those emergent and collaterall considerations,
wherein the text and the time shall best
agree.
            To begin then; This word Caro, flesh, is diuersly
taken in Scripture. Amongst other
things which the Prophet Dauid ascribes vnto
God by way of praise, Psal. 136. One is that he
doth, Dare escam omni carni, hee giueth food
to all flesh; there, flesh is taken for euery creature
that hath life. In the 29. of Gen. Laban
sayes to Iacob, Os meum es, & caro mea, Surely
thou art my bone and my flesh; there flesh is
taken for consanguinitie and kindred. Among
other articles of the Creed, wee beleeue 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
the resurrection of the flesh: there, flesh

is taken for the body of man. In the 7. to the
Rom. St. Paul sayes, I know that in me, that is,
in my flesh, that is, in my soule, as farre as it inclines
vnto, and is guided by the flesh, I know
there dwels no good: there flesh is taken for the
soule of man. In the 6. of Gen. God saw that
Omnis caro, all flesh had corrupted their wayes;
there flesh is taken for those that had forsaken
God. In the 2. of Ioel, God sayes, I will powre
out my Spirit super omnem carnem, vpon all
flesh; there flesh is taken for those that should
be called to the knowledge of God. Many
other significations it hath; sometimes it is taken
for the people of the Iewes; sometimes for
the ceremonies of the old law; sometimes for
the corruption of nature, sometimes for the infirmity
of nature; and many times in a larger
capacity it comprehends all men, and so it is
taken here, Omnis caro, All flesh, that is, all
men are as Grasse.
            Now if you aske me the reason why men in
Scripture are called by the name of flesh, (besides
the reason of grāmer, that the part is here
siguratiuely taken for the whole) St. Chrysostome
renders it thus:chrys. Because (saith he) they are so
wholy giuen ouer to the workes and lusts of
the flesh, ac si sola carne circundati, carerent
anima: As if they were nothing else but a
masse, a lumpe of flesh, that had no soule to
quicken it, no reason to guide it at all.
            But yet we must take heede that we stretch

not this reason of St. Chrysostome too farre.
For though it be true in most men, yet it is not
true in all: God forbid that all men should be
so fleshly. Greg. And therefore St. Gregorie thought
fit to correct and to limit it by a distinction,
In sacro eloquio aliter dicitur caro iuxta naturam,
aliter iuxta culpam vel corruptionem, (saith he)
The sinne, the corruption of flesh, is one thing:
and the nature, the constitution of flesh, is
another thing: these are two different considerations,
and the Scripture takes them so: And
therefore where it is taken in the first sense,
there St. Chrysostomes reason is good, but not
otherwise, for it holds not heere; since it is only
the nature, the constitution of flesh that is
aym'd at in this place, & in that sense it growes
to an vniuersality, which is the second thing we
obserue, Omnis caro, All flesh is as grasse.
            
               All flesh: That flesh which is but coursely
fed, with any thing that comes next hand: and
that flesh which eates nothing but what is farre
fetcht and deerely bought. That flesh which is
clothed in ragges, or perchance not so well;
and that flesh which weares only what is rak't
out of the intrails of beasts, and out of the
bowels of the earth, and out of the bottome of
the Sea. That flesh which is so macerated with
fasting, that the skinne is ready to cleaue to the
bones, much like a walking Anatomy: and that
flesh which is so pampered and blowne vp by
riot and excesse, that the skinne can scarce

hold it. That flesh wherein is lodged and cloystered
vp as much learning, as much wisedome,
as makes a man a walking Library: and that
flesh which entertaines nothing but ignorance
and folly. That flesh which is painted and
trimmed vp as Iezabells was; and that flesh
which is squallida & fletibus siccata, neglected,
and squallid, and dried vp with teares;Hierom. as St.
Hierome writes of that vertuous Lady Paula.
That flesh which is smoothly playsterd on; and
that flesh which is but rough-cast. The face
that is so amorous and so angelicall, that it
rauisheth a beholder; and the face that is so ill-fauoured,
so Ther sites-like, that it may well
serue for a skarre-crowe in a garden of Cucumbers.
The body that is so eleganly contriu'd, so
methodically layd together, with such an eutaxy
of proportion, such a concinnity, such a
harmony of limbes and members, as if nature
meant to make it her master-piece; and the
body that is so mishapen, so discomposed, as if
nature had shuffled it vp in hast, or made it in
the darke. The man that is so transported with
the conceit of his riches or his honour, that
he is ready vpon euery occasion to swagger in
St. Bernards termes, Quis ille, vel ille, aut quae
domus patris eorum? What is this fellow, or
that base fellow, and what is the house of their
father that they should affront me? And the
man that glories only in his infirmities, and
accounts all but drosse and dung in respect of

Christ crucified, as St. Paul did: Omnis caro,
all faces, all bodyes, all men, all flesh is but as
grasse.
            Yea but Omnis caro non eadem caro. (sayth St.
Paul) all flesh is not the same flesh, there is one
manner of flesh of Men, and another of Beasts,
and another of Byrdes, and another of Fishes.
It is true: but yet marke the distinction that
Tertullian giues here:Tertull. All flesh is not the same
flesh, in equality of prerogatiue; but, all flesh is
the same flesh, in community of nature. It is
differentia honoris, not differentia generis, (as
he sayes there) a difference of honour, not of
kind that St. Paul puts betweene them. Now
then, make an Allegory of it; vnderstand by
men, those that are the best of men, those that
liue as men should doe, that is, religious and
exemplar Christians; Vnderstand by beastes,
men of a carnall and a bestiall conuersation;
by byrdes, contemplatiue men, that soare vp
aloft to hidden and heauenly things; by fishes,
men that are satisfied only with a baptismall
aspersion, non-proficients in Christianity, that
stand at the Font still, and are gone no further
then their God-fathers first brought them: and
then, though in regard of personall and particular
qualities it may be true in this figuratiue,
this Allegoricall sense too, Omnis caro non
eadem, all flesh is not the same flesh; though
there be a great difference betweene the humors
and affections and inclinations of men,

yet notwithstanding, whatsoeuer their beginning
or their progresse be, they will meete still
in the Center of nature, they are all but flesh,
& Omnis caro foenum, and all flesh is as grasse.
            It is obseruable, that the first thing which
euer sprong out of the earth, was grasse; and
the last creature that was made of the earth,
was man. And surely (besides that infinite difference
in nature) when God at first did put
such a difference betweene the manner of their
creation, Germinet terra, let the earth bring
forth grasse, but faciamus hominem, let vs make
man our selues, let that be our owne immediate
handy-worke; when he put such a distance betweene
the time of their making, (for grasse was
brought forth the third day, and man was
made the sixt day; and he was the last creature
that was made, as being Gods master-piece
here on earth, and the vp-shot and the Epilogue
and the complement of all;) when hee
did thus separate these two at the beginning, it
was not likely that there should be, neither did
he intend any such degeneration, any such declination
in nature, that they should euer meete
togeither in termes of comparison. Yet, see the
confusion that sinne hath brought in: Man
that was so glorious a creature at the first, is
now falne so farre, and growne so meane, so
vile, that grasse and he are growne to a resemblance,
to an affinity, & they are both weighed
heere, one against another in the ballance, this

text, Omnis caro vt foenum, All flesh is as
grasse.
            As grasse, in diuers respects: 1. grasse is light;
and so is man. Sometimes a winde of doctrine,
some new-fangled opinion, blowes him out of
the faith. Sometimes a winde of preferment,
an ambition of honour blowes him out of the
society of his friends. Sometimes a winde
of persecution blowes him out of the Church.
Euery little blast of distemper makes him
droope and hang towards the earth; but the
impetuous gust of a violent disease blowes him
quite out of the world.
            Secondly, grasse is short; and so is the life of
man too. The Scripture, at longest, makes it
but a spanne; and yet this spanne is continually
cut off by inch-meales too. Sometimes it is
cut off an inch aboue, when a Father or a Mother
dyes; and sometimes it is cut off an inch
belowe, when a Sonne or a Daughter is taken
away: and sometimes it is cut off quite in the
middle, when a wife is parted from her husbaud,
or a husband from his wife; death is still
nibling at it, euery day, euery houre, till at
length it hath eaten it so low, so neere the
ground, that there is nothing left.
            Thirdly, grasse is brittle, apt to be bruised
with the least touch; so is man likewise: So
thinne, and so slight, and so weake of constitution,
such brittle ware, that it falles to peeces
many times, euen by the least mischance. The

light of the knowledge of Gods glory in the
face of Christ Iesus, is the greatest, the richest
treasure that we can enioy heere; and yet when
we haue it, Habemus thesaurum hunc in vasis
fictilibus, saith St. Paul, we haue this treasure
but in earthen vessels, and such vessels, you
know, are quickly broken. A pinne, or a fishbone,
or a crumme, or a haire, these are but
poore and weake, and despicable things: and
yet historie tels vs that men haue lost their
liues, euen by these. It is strange, you will
thinke, they should doe so; and yet I shall tell
you that which is more strange then this too.
Chilon the Spartan, when his sonne returned
home a conquerour from the Olympian games,
dyed, prae gaudio, meerely for ioy. When Clidemus
the Athenian had a crowne of gold set
vpon his head, he died prae gloria, only with
the conceite of that glory. Plato died in a
dreame; and Crassus died in a laughter; and
Tertullian reports all this too. So tender a piece
is the body of man, so fraile, and so feeble, and
so brittle is his constitution.
            Fourthly, grasse is subiect to beasts, they
may eat it vp and tread it downe: so are men
too, for whilst they are as tenacious of wrongs
as a Cammell, as lustfull as goates, as deceitfull
and craftie as Foxes, whilst they licke vp
the dust of the earth by couetousnesse, with
the Serpent, & foame with anger like a Boare,
and are readie to deuour one another by oppression,

like Wolues; they make themselues a
prey to these beasts, that is, to these base and
beastiall affections, which trample vpon, and
tread down their soules to the nethermost hell.
            Fiftly, grasse is subiect to Mowers, they may
cut it downe when they please; so are men too,
if you consider them in respect of a ciuill and
temporall estate; so, the Potentates, the great
ones of this world they are mowers, inferiour
people are as grasse: if there bee any that stand
in their way, and ouershadow their steps neuer
so little, that thriue and grow vp faster then
they would haue them, they haue their sithes
readie, oppression and policie and supplantation,
to cut them downe. If otherwise you consider
them in respect of a vitall subsistence, a
naturall being, which is the consideration that
wee are to stop vpon here; so there is one that
hath beene a mowing euer since the beginning
of the world to this present, that is, Death;
and yet there is a repullulation of grasse, a succession
of men euery day: and where he is the
mower, there great men, and meane men, and
all men, Omnis caro, All flesh is as grasse. Hee
that comes to mowe downe a field, doth not
spare and passe by the flowers that are in it, but
cuts downe all, perchance a Cowslip, or a
Primerose, or a hony-suckle, as soone as other
ordinarie grasse. Though we ascribe so much
to the nobles and great ones of this world, as
to account them the flowers of the field, the

glory of a people; yet when death comes with
his sithe, he doth not passe by them, and suffer
them to stand and to flourish still, whilst others
are cut downe and fade away; but hee
takes all before him, flowers and grasse, Prince
and people, rich and poore, without any difference
or distinction at all. A mower doth not
passe by an herbe, though happily it bee very
wholesome and medicinable, but cuts downe
that too, as well as the weed that is good for
nothing. Though men in the generall are said
to be as grasse, yet some men are as wholsome
and soueraigne, and medicinable herbes, there
is much vertue in them. There is vertue in a
good States-man to cure the maladies, and to
ease the grieuances of a Common-wealth.
There is vertue in an honest Lawyer, to support
and to strengthen a weake and a feeble, and a
crazie estate. There is vertue in a good physitian
to recouer and restore to health an indispos'd,
and a languishing body. There is vertue
in a learned Diuine to binde vp a broken heart,
and to heale the woundes of a distressed conscience:
these are wholsome herbes indeed;
happy is that land wherein they grow: yet notwithstanding
Death will not spare these neither,
but cuts them downe too, as well as the
weedes, as well as debosh'd and idle and ignorant
people, that are not only not vsefull, but
very hurtfull and combersome to a Commonwealth.
            
               
Thus haue you a Catalogue, and an Inuentory
of mans infirmities: so light is he, and so
vnsettled in his course; so short in continuance;
so brittle of constitution; so subiect to
vile and bestiall affections, and so apt to bee
mowen downe by the hand of death, that
St. Peter did rightly cast it vp, when hee made
the summe of all to be but grasse, Omnis caro
vt foenum, All flesh is as grasse.
            Now, if the weaknesse, the frailtie of humane
nature be such, that flesh is but as grasse;
if this weakenes, this frailtie be so vniuersall, so
vnlimitable, that there is no exemption, no immunitie
from it, quia omnis caro, for all flesh is
as grasse; Surely then amor corporis ebrietas animae,
as St. Chrysostome calls it,Chrys. the loue of the
body is the drunkennesse of the soule; nay, St.
Bernard giues it a higher terme,Bern. and saies, that
it is Spiritualis phrenesis, A spirituall kinde of
Lunacie: they are drunke and madde indeed,
Qui sic intendunt tabernaculo suo ac si nunquam
esset casurum, (as he speakes) that are so curious,
so busie about the tabernacle of the body
as if they thought it should neuer fall; so fond
and so tender, and so carefull ouer their flesh, as
if it should neuer see corruption. But it is a
lamentable complaint that St. Austin makes
here; Quid meruit anima? whilst the flesh is
thus magnified, and so much made of, that all
the store-houses of nature are ransackt and exhausted
to serue those two vnthrifts, the backe

and the belly; quid meruit anima? What hath
the poore soule deseru'd all this while, that
men should be so carelesse of her, as that she is
all naked and readie to starue, whilst they prouide
not for her any one drop of the comfort
of the Spirit, any little ragge of righteousnesse
to hang vpon her? Quid meruit anima? How
hath the soule deseru'd so ill, that shee should
be thus neglected, for whom Christ died; and
quid meruit caro? How hath the flesh deseru'd
so well, that it should be thus cocker'd & pamper'd
vp, since it is but grasse? Omnis Caro
vt foenum, All flesh is as grasse.
            Yet notwithstanding, as in those particulars
which we specified before, flesh was compared
to grasse in respect of its weakenes and mortalitie;
so there is yet a further analogie and relation,
and a resemblance betweene these two,
that makes not a little for its grace and for its
glory. Though grasse be eaten vp or cut downe
neuer so lowe, yet there is a root still left in the
ground, and that root is capable of a repullulation:
as soone as the warmth of the Sunne, and
the influence of heauen comes at it, it springs
vp againe, more greene and more liuely then it
was before. So likewise, though happely affliction
may bring a man to so lowe an ebbe
and declination of fortune, as to leuell him
with the ground; though death bring him yet
lower, and lay him in his graue; yea, though
his race, and his name, and his memory perish

among the liuing, as if he had neuer beene; yet
there is a root still left in the earth, the body
that sleepes in the dust, and that body is capable
of a resurrection: as soone as the Spring of
Iudgement shall begin to aduance, and that
glorious Sunne of righteousnesse to appeare
and shine in his strength; Surget caro, & quidem 
omnis, & quidem ipsa, & quidem integra,
(as Tertullian speaketh) flesh shall rise,Tert. and all
flesh shall rise, and that flesh shall rise which
was buried before, and it shall rise with a full
proportion of feature and perfection of parts
without any diminution at all.
            Though you heape vpon it all the termes of
ignominy and infirmitie that may be deuis'd:
Say that it is Immunda à primordio, Vncleane
from the very beginning, as being made of the
slime of the earth; and vncleane in its propagation,
as being conceiued in sinne: say that it
is friuola, infirma, criminosa, onerosa, molesta,
a weake, and a friuolous, and a sinfull, and a
burdenous, and a troublesome thing. Say further,
that it is Caduca in originem terram, that
it will dissolue againe into that dust of which it
was first made; that it will change the name of a
man into the name of a carcasse, and say that it
falls from that name too, In omnis iam vocabuli
mortem, (as Tertulltan doth elegantly deliuer
it:) say that it dies so farre to all expression, that
no terme, no name can be found for it; yet notwithstanding
all this waight of Rethoricke, and

of infirmitie cannot keepe it downe, or diminish
one haire, one atome of it, but it will rise
againe, Quia in deposito est apud Deum; God
himselfe hath taken it into his tuition, his custodie,
Et quis eripiet? And who shall take it
out of his hands? And surely it is a good reason
that Tertullian giues for it,Tertull. because (saith
he) it stands in better congruitie with the nature
and maiestie of God, to restore to a being
that which he once reiected, then vtterly to destroy
that which himselfe once made, and liked
well too. Et sic caro foenum, in this respect also
flesh is as grasse, it will spring and rise vp againe,
and this makes for its glory.
            Yet this is not all its glory neither. 'Tis true,
that in the 6. of Gen. God saies, My Spirit shall
not alwaies striue with man, quia Caro, because
he is but flesh; there indeed flesh is branded
with infirmitie. But in the 2. of Ioel, God sayes
that he would poure out his Spirit, Super omnem
carnem, Vpon all flesh; there flesh is aduanc'd
to a great deale of glory. St. Paul sayes,
that in carne, in his flesh there dwelt no good;
this was St. Pauls infirmitie: But Iob was confident,
that in carne, in his flesh he should see
God, and this was Iobs glory. St. Peter sayes
here, Caro foenum, flesh is as grasse; What
greater infirmitie? and yet St. Iohn saies, Verbum
caro, the Word was made flesh; and what
greater glory?
            
               St. Austine Aug. hath a passage to this purpose

too; Let no man thinke (saith he) that God
doth not regard the sinnes of the flesh: For,
know ye not (saith the Apostle) that ye are
the Temple of God? If therefore you sinne,
you defile Gods Temple. Yea but dicit aliquis,
haply some wicked man will say, it is my soule
that is Gods Temple, not my body; that's no
fit place for him to dwell in, & adijcit testimonium,
perchance hee brings this testimony to
confirme it, Omnis caro vt foenum, all flesh is
as grasse. Infelix interpretatio, punienda cogitatio,
(sayth the good Father:) this is a dangerous
exposition, a damnable imagination. For
flesh is therefore called grasse, quia moritur,
because it fades, it dyes; but Quod ad tempus
moritur, vide vt non resurgat cum crimine, take
heede, that that which dyes for a time, but for
a time, take heede that it rise not againe laden
with sinne: For the same Apostle sayes elsewhere,
that our bodyes also are the Temples of
God; and therefore vide quid agas de Templo
Dei, take heede how thou vsest thy body, thy
flesh, for it is Gods Temple. Now then, Caro
Dei Templum, that flesh should be so highly
aduanced as to be call'd Gods Temple; this is
mans excellency and this is his glory: but Caro
foenum, that flesh, notwithstanding all this,
should be as grasse, this is mans infirmity and
this is his frailty. And this infirmity, this
frailty Christ himselfe could not take from our
nature, though he tooke our nature vpon him.

               Verbum Caro, the Word was made flesh; & yet
Caro foenum, that flesh also was as grasse, hee
dyed too.
            So that the summe, & the resultance; and the
harmony of this text is briefely this; that as in
diuers other places of Scripture, so heere also,
grasse is set downe as an embleme and an Hieroglyphique
of mans mortality, which is the
Center, wherein all those lines that wee drew
before, haue their concurrence and period.
            Now, though the very Heathen themselues
haue declaim'd so largely & so elegantly vpon
this theame, that we may digge siluer enough
out of their Mines, learning enough out of
their bookes to make vs rich in this knowledge,
that we must die: yet notwithstanding if wee
desire to find out that fine Gold of sauing
knowledge, to make such vses of our mortality,
as may conduce to our saluation, wee must
seeke for that elsewhere, wee must digge for
that in another Mine, that is, the Scripture.
Euery Poet & euery Philosopher can tel vs that
our life is a moment, but that it is momentum
tanti momenti vt ab eo pendeat aeternitas, a moment
of so great moment, as that therevpon
depends happines or misery, ioy or sorrow
that shalbe as endles as eternity it selfe, this is
more then they can tell vs; and this wee learne
out of the Scripture. When they had trauelled
ouer all that Microcosme, that little world,
Man, and curiously obserued all that was in it;

when they had made an exquisite suruay, an exact
description of euery Country, euery
climate; his generation and his natiuity,
and his infancy, and his child-hood, and
his adolescency, and his mans estate, and his
middle age, and his old age; when they had
passed ouer all these; yet when they came once
to that same Mare mortuum, that dead Sea,
the graue, there they sate them downe, and set
vp a pillar, as Hercules did, & they wrote vpon
it Nil vltra: Further they could not goe, for
they thought there was no further being. But
Christianity hath taught vs that there is Plus
vltra; wee haue discouered another world besides
this, and a farre greater then this, whereof
this earth is but the Center. Wee know that
the graue is Diuersorium non domicilium, it is
but an Inne wherein the flesh must soiourne
for the while, not the house wherein it must
dwel for euer. The Scripture sayes that the dead
doe sleepe in the dust: If so, then the graue is
a bed: wee know that we shall lie in this bed
but one night, but a St. Lucies night; and when
that great and glorious day of Iudgement shall
once beginne to dawne, we know that then we
must lie there no longer.
            Now, in this abundance and plenty of knowledge,
what remaines but that we commit it to
the good Ioseph of the land, the memory; that
if haply there doe fall out a famine of grace in
the soule, she may find whereby to sustaine her

selfe. Memorare nouissima, (sayth the Sonne
of Syrach) Remember thy end, and thou shalt
be sure not to doe amisse.
            Hee that will guide a Ship well, must put
himselfe into the hinmost part of it, the Sterne;
so likewise he that will shape the course of his
life aright according to the carde & compasse
of Faith and Hope, that finally he may arriue
at the land of liuing, must conuey himselfe to
the hindmost part of his life, by a continuall
meditation of Death.
            That great tempest mentioned in the Gospel,
wherein the disciples were like to be cast away,
it rose (as the text sayes there) while Christ
was asleepe in Puppi, in the hinmost part of
the Sip: so likewise the tempests of Gods iudgments
and the stormes of the Deuils temptations,
wherein many a soule doth suffer Shipwracke,
they rise whilest we sleepe too in Puppi:
in the hinmost part of the Ship, the latter end
of our life; whilst we are secure and carelesse, &
thinke not of Death. Tis true, there is no man
so brutish, as to thinke that hee shall neuer die;
but yet, alas! how many are there so Godlesse,
that they neuer thinke they shal die? So strangely
doth the Deuill blinde their eyes, that they
may not see that ditch, that deepe infernall
ditch, into the which he leades them.
            But as Christ in the Gospell restored that
blind man to sight by applying to his eyes a
playster of spittle clay, so must we doe in this

case too; we must take spittle, that is, the teares
of repentance, and clay, that is, the consideration
of our owne frailty, and temper these two
well together, and apply them to the eyes of
our Soule; and then we shall easily discouer any
danger that is before vs, and preuent it too.
Pliny writes of Bees, that when they swarme
and fly vp into the ayre, if you doe but cast a little
dust amongst them, they will quickly come
downe. When vaineglorious, and ambitious
and aspiring thoughts doe swarme in our
hearts, let vs learne to doe so too: That is, to
intermingle them with the meditation of that
dust into which we must one day be dissolued;
and then they will soone fall from that pitch to
humility and mortification. I haue heard, that
it is a present remedy to asswage a swelling in
the body, if you rubbe it with a dead mans
hand: when there riseth vp any tumor of pride
in thy heart, doe thou so too; rubbe and chase
it well with this consideration, that Caro foenum,
Flesh is but as grasse; that the body which
thou dost so much tender and value at so high
a rate, shall at length become a liuelesse, and a
stinking carkas; and surely thy proud heart
will quickly downe: So vsefull and so operatiue
and so soueraigne is the meditation of our
mortality, that as Dauid s
                  •
               ake of Goliabs
sword, so may we of it, Non est ei altera simili
                     •
                  ,
There is no other like vnto it.
            Yet notwithstanding how little doe the

world makes of it in these dayes, I shall shew
you by a homely comparison, I confesse, and
yet sutable enough to the disposition of most
men. When a Hogge is kill'd; it is an vsuall
thing for the rest of the Hogges to runne together,
and to make a great noise, a grunting for
the time; but anon they goe all away, and returne
euery one to his mire and to his wallow
againe. So likewise when a neighbour dyes, it
is a common custome for people to flocke about
his Corse, & to follow it to the Church,
and perchance some lamentation is made, some
good thoughts are entertain'd for the time;
but when the solemnity is once ouer, they all
part, and returne euery one to his owne home,
to his old sinne againe, as if there had bin no
such matter. But I hope better things of you,
who haue at this time, not only a text and a
precept to put you in minde of your mortality,
but an instance also and an example, the example
of a worthy Gentleman; vnto whose
memory we doe now offer vp this last act and
sacrifice of our loue: In which loue I hold
my selfe to be so farre interessed, that I cannot
but ascribe vnto him those termes and titles
of worth, which all you doe know better
then my selfe, to be but his due. As he was descended
of an ancient and worthy family, so
did he entertaine those dispositions and those
affections, whereunto men of such a race doe
commonly encline: so humble hee was and so

affable, and so inoffensiue in his behauiour; so
vpright and so conscientious in his dealings;
so liberall and so bountifull in his hospitality;
so euen and so equall in his temper: but aboue
all, so well deuoted to religion (as will appeare
by some speciall euidences) that now
nomen eius quasi vnguentum effusum, his name
is like a sweete oyntment powred out, the box
is broken, and the fragrancy of it is dispersed
ouer the wholehouse. And those tokens, those
euidences of his piety were these. 1. He was
quite out of that common fashion which too
too many of his quality are in, that is, hee was
no swearer; he hated it in himselfe, and he hated
it in others too. 2. Hee was so tender
and so chary ouer the truth, that he could not
abide to heare it toss'd and tumbled vp and
downe in a controuersie, least peraduenture
heate and impatience might doe it wrong.
3. Hee was much and often grieued at the
irregularities and exorbitancies of those present
times; which I take to be, not a probability,
but a demonstration of an honest and a
Christian heart.
            Touching his sickenes, which is vsually the
abstract and Epitome of the whole volume of
a mans life, what I saw, I will relate.
            As God hath giuen to all things in the
world their seuerall instruments to laud and to
magnifie his name; the heauens haue their motion,
their light, their influence; the seasons their

succession, their vicissitude; the elements their
conducibility to the vse and seruice of man, and
all creatures their sustenance and being; so man
hath his instrument for this purpose too, that
is, his tongue: and this instrument did hee dispose
and tune to the sweetest harmony that can
be vnder heauen, that is, hee prayed. Sometimes
he made his chamber a Church, Ego &
domus (as he spake) he and his family ioyned
together in prayers & supplications vnto God.
Sometimes hee made himselfe a Church: for
wheresoeuer a man gathers together the powers
and faculties of his soule to pray, there is a
Church and there is a congregation, Ibi duo
vel tres, there are two or three, Et ibi Deiu,
and there is God in the midst of them. Sometimes
he prayed in a continued forme, and
sometimes he prayed by Eiaculatious, as the
pauses and intermissions of his agony gaue him
leaue. When his tongue fayl'd him, then his
hands tooke their turne, and by a frequent eleuation
testified his zeale, and did (as it were)
say Amen to the prayers of those that were about
him. And when his hands lost their
strength, then his eyes were lifted vp; & surely
vbi amor ibi oculus, his eyes were fixed where
his loue was fixed, that is, vpon the Kingdome
of heauen. And when all these failed him, I
doubt not, but the heart, as it is vltimum moriens,
the last thing that dyed in nature, so was it
in religion likewise; it liued longest, & it prayed

longst too. Yet for all this, he was but a man;
his breath was in his nostrells, & his foundation
in the dust. Et quid de mortali nisi mortale expectandum,
What can be look't for at the hands
of a mortall man, but that he must dye?
            Now, though Dauid prayed earnestly vnto
God, that he would not take him away in the
midst of his age; yet let no man thinke this
good Gentleman the lesse happie, because hee
was taken away much about that time, for he
was but two yeeres ouer, 37. yeeres old when
he died: doe not thinke him the lesse happy in
this respect; for Christ himselfe died before he
came to the middle of mans age, when he wanted
two yeeres of it, when he was but 33. yeeres
old: Et quis Christo beatior? Who can be more
happy, who can be so happy as Christ is? Neither
yet let any say that they haue lost him,
though he be dead: as, I haue lost a louing husband,
or I haue lost a louing brother, or I haue
lost a louing friend, or I haue lost a good Landlord,
or I haue lost a good Master: for though
he were all these, and though this be the vsuall
phrase of the world, yet it is a plaine solecisme
in the language of Christianitie. For why
should we thinke that lost, which God hath?
Non est amissus sed praemissus, He is not lost,
but only sent before vs into heauen. And now,
that which lies vpon vs to doe, is, that wee endeuour
and striue to follow him thither.
            Which that we may the better doe, first it

will easily be granted that we must follow, Quiae
omnis caro vt foenum, For all flesh is as grasse.
            Secondly, two places of Scripture there are,
wherewith I shall close vp this exercise, and
which will be, perchance, not vnworthy your
remembrance. The first is that of our Sauiour
in the Gospell, Facite vobis amicos, Make you
friends of vnrighteous Mammon, that when
ye die, they may receiue you into euerlasting
habitations: and vpon this text I shall descant
by way of historie. I remember I haue heard of
a certaine man, that had three friends; it fortuned,
that suite being commenc'd against this
man, he was summoned to appeare before the
Iudge. In which extremity, he did as all men
vse to doe in the like case; that is, hee went to
his friends, for aduice and assistance. When
hee came to the first, his answer was, that hee
would lend him a good cloake to goe before
the Iudge in a decent and a handsome fashion,
and that's all he would doe for him. When he
came to the second, his answer was, that hee
would goe along with him to the Court gate,
and there he would leaue him. But when hee
came to the third, his answer was, that he would
accompany him into the Court, and stand before
the Iudge, and speake for him too. This
man that we speake of is a Christian, and hee
hath three friends too, his wealth, his kindred,
and his good workes. When death arrests
him by some mortall disease to appeare before

the Tribunall seate of Almightie God, if hee
come to his riches, they will lend him a winding-sheet,
and that's all they can doe for him.
If he come to his kindred, his acquaintance,
they will attend him to the doore, the graue;
that's all they can doe for him. But when hee
comes to his good workes, they answer, That
they will neuer leaue him, they will goe vp
with him into the Court of heauen, and
plead his cause before almightie God. Happy
is the man that hath store of such friends, for
they will receiue him into euerlasting habitations.
            The second place of Scripture that I would
commend to your memory, is that of the Preacher,
Vbicurque ceciderit arbor, ibi erit; and
vpon this text I shal descant by way of Allegorie.
Wheresoeuer the tree falles, there it lies; if
it falles towards the North, then it lies toward
the North; and if it fall towards the South,
then it lies towards the South: but which way
soeuer it falles, there it lies. Now, looke which
way we would haue a tree to fall, it is an vsuall
thing to loppe off the boughes on the contrary
side, that their waight may not carry it that
way; and then when it doth fall, it will fall according
to our desire. Beloued, euery man is a
tree, his inclinations and affections the branches;
though hee spread neuer so farre, and
growe vp neuer so high, yet the hand of Death
must one day cut him downe: and he hath but

two waies to fall; either toward the cold and
pinching North of damnation; or toward the
warme and comfortable South of saluation:
but wheresoeuer he falles there he lies. If thou
then wouldst faine haue thy tree fall the right
way, be sure that thou begin betimes to cut off
all the luxuriant boughes on the contrary side,
those carnall and rebellious desires, that grow
and weigh towards hell. Cut off that lower
branch of couetousnesse, that doth so houer ouer
earth; and cut off those middle branches
of lustfull and licentious affections; and cut off
that top branch of ambition and pride; cut off
all on that side: but cherrish those branches on
the other side, good affections, good desires;
and then when this time comes that thou must
fall, their weight will carry thee the right way
towards saluation, towards heauen. Which the
Lord of his infinite mercy grant vnto vs
all, for the all-sufficient Merits of his
only Sonne and our alone Sauiour
Christ Iesus: To
whom, &c.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   