
      
         
            
            
            
            
               
                  CHARLES, Earle of Nottingham, Barron Howard of E
                     ••
                  ingham,
Knight of the moſt Noble order of the Garter, Lord Lietetenant of his
Maieſties Counties of Suſſex, and Surry, Conſtable of his Maieſties Honour
and Caſtle of Windſor chiefe Iuſtice and Iuſtice Itinerant of all his Maieſties
Forreſts, Parkes, Chaſes & Warrens on this ſide Trent. Lord high Admirall
of England, Ireland, and Wales, and the Dominions and Iſles of the ſame, of
the towne of Callis, and Ma
                  ••…
               hes thereof, Normandy, Gaſcoigne, and Gwines,
and Captaine Generall of his Maieſties Seas, and Nauy royall.
            TO all & ſinguler Viceadmiralles, Iuſtices of peace, Mayors, Sheriffes, Bayliffs, Parſons, Vicars,
Curates, Cunſtables, Churchwardens, Headboroughes, Tythingmen, Collectors, and all other his
Maieſties Officers, Miniſters, and l
                  •
               uing Subiects whatſoeuer, to whom thieſe Preſents ſhall be

                  〈◊…〉
                gréeting.
            WHEREAS the bearer hereof Anaſtaſius Ioſeph, borne in Amaſia the chiefe Cittie of Capadocia,
a Marchant by his t
                  ••
               de, and of good accompt and worth, was by the malice of ſome wicked
men in Walachia, enuying his wealth and proſperitie, accuſed, falſely, caſt in priſon, robbed of all his
goods, and his onely Sonne taken from him and ſould to the Turkes, who keepes him ſtill in ſlauery and
bondage vntill ſuch time he eyther deny his Sauiour Chriſt & turning Turke, embrace Mahometiſme,
or pay for his ranſome and libertie ſeauen hundred Crownes, vpon conſideration whereof hee hath a
Teſtimoniall vnder the moſt high and mightie Emperour of Germanie, his hand and ſeale of the Duke
of Walachia, of the Patriarch of Conſtantinople, of the Archbiſhops of Lacedemonia, and Bulgaria, of
the Earles of Pembrooke, and Mountgomery, of diuers Biſhops, Deanes, Mayors of Citties, and
ſundry learned men of this kingdome, and of the Councell of Scotland, who haue fauourably aſſiſted
him with their 
                  〈◊…〉
                Almes for his owne better reliefe in his trauels, and the more ſpeedy redemption
of his ſonne. Thiefe are therefore in his Maieſties name, and by highnes authoritie royall to me in
this behalfe Directed: to require you and euery of you in your ſeuerall places, to recommend his miſerable
eſtate and condition vnto the charitable deuotion of the people, and to permit and ſuffer him the ſaid
Anaſtaſius Ioſeph (he behauing himſelfe honeſtly and ſoberly according to his Maieſties lawes) to
trauell by you and euery of you, through any parts of this Realme without any trouble or moleſtation,
and by the way to helpe him with conuenient lodging, he demaunding the ſame in due time: And hereof
faile ye not. Giuen at London in his Maieſties High Court of the Admiraltie of England, the ſecond
day of Iuly in the yeare of our Lord God 1613. and in the eleuenth yeare of the Raigne of our Soueraigne
Lord Iames. By the grace of God King of England, Scotland, Fraunce, and Ireland, Defendor
of the Faith, &c. And of his Raigne of Scotland the 
                  •
               xe and 
                  •
               or
                  ••
               eth. 1613.
            
               Hareward.
            
         
      
   