
      
         
            
            
            St. PAVLS
EXERCISE,
OR,
A SERMON OF
Conscience.
            Describing the nature of it; and declaring
the manner and meanes how to obtaine,
and retaine, a good CONSCIENCE.
            Preached by IOHN HVGHES, Doctor
in Diuinitie.
            
               2 COR. 1. 12.
Our reioycing is this, the testimony of our
Conscience.
            
               LONDON:
Printed by T. S. for Iohn Budge, and are to be
sold at his shop at the signe of the Greene-Dragon
in Pauls Church-yard. Anno
Dom. 1622.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
Honourable, and Right Reuerend
Father in God, IOHN, Lord Bishop of
LINCOLNE, Lord Keeper of the Great
Seale, and one of his Maiesties most Honourable
priuie Councell; Grace and
peace in this life, and glorie in the
life to come.
            
               PReaching, and Printing (Right
Honourable) are excellent
meanes to beget Faith, and to
encrease Knowledge. The one
(like a shower of raine) waters
for the present; the other (like
Snow) lyes longer on the
ground, and may speake when
the Authour cannot: Hauing therefore preached
diuers Sermons, I haue presumed to print this one,
and to present the same vnto your Honour, as a testimony
of my seruice and dutie. My labour in this
kinde, if it may doe good to any, and be accepted of
your Lordship, it is the height of my desire. The matter
hath beene handled by many: And, many more
zealous and learned men I pray God to raise vp daily
to preach, & to write more of the same argument:
for, beside the methode and manner of handling
(which I also attribute to the grace of God, exciting



and assisting nie) I challenge nothing to my selfe but
the faults,

                  Mala mea sunt purè mala,August. & mea;
                  Bona mea nec purè bona, nec mea.
               
Your Lordship may claime a speciall interest in these
lines, not onely in regard of the Authour, obliged vnto
your Honour in many respects; but also of the matter,
which is meere Chancery, and hath need of your
patronage. For it is a common complaint that Conscience
(for the most part of these latter yeares) hath
lyne bed-rid & speechlesse: But blessed be God, that
hath raised vp your Honour to be a Patrone to his
Church, a Paterne of equity and Iustice in the Common-wealth,
and a principall agent in these vnconscionable
dayes, to restore and recouer conscience againe,
where it was much decayed.
            The same God that was the Authour of your preferment,
continue his mercies, and multiply his blessings
vpon your Lordship, that as the hearts of all
good men (specially of vs Church-men) doe reioyce
in your aduancement; So I pray God wee may long
enioy your Honour, to the comfort both of Church
and Common-wealth. Thus, crauing pardon for my
boldnesse, and fauourable acceptance of these my endeauours,
in most humble manner I recommend
your Honour to the protection of the Almighty,
euer resting.
            
               Your Honours most bounden
and dutifull Chaplaine,
IO: HVGHES.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            St. PAVLS
EXERCISE,
OR,
A SERMON OF
Conscience.
            
               
                  ACTS 24. 16.
And herein doe I exercise my selfe, to haue alwaies
a Conscience, voyde of offence toward
God and toward men.
            
            
               The Preface. 
               THe very reading and hearing of
this Text may put vs in minde
of our duties; doe but apply
it vnto your soules, and practise
it in your liues, and you
shall finde much comfort.
            The maine matter of it is
Conscience; a doctrine much neglected in ourage,
and yet neuer more needfull. I will not trouble



you with any long discourse of the Context, for the
words are plaine, and they containe part of S. Pauls
Apologie before Faelix, when Tertullus the Oratour
accused him for a pestilent and a turbulent fellow.The coherence
This Apologie consisteth of

                  two parts

                        Negatio facti.
                        Confessio fidei.
                     
                  
               
            
            1. A negation, or deniall of the fact,
               Verse
                     ••
                  . They neither
found me in the Temple, disputing with any man, nor in
the Synagogues, or Citie, raising vp the people.
            2. A confession of his faith,Goran. 
               Non negat sed narrat;
non dissimulat sed planè profitetur quam religionem
coluit, saith an Ancient vpon this Text; he doth not
denie nor dissemble his religion, as many doe, but
professeth plainely, that after that way which they
call Heresie, so worshipped he the God of his Fathers.Verse 14.
            
            To this he addeth the ground of his faith, beleeuing
all things written in the Law and the Prophets.
            
            
               And then the fruit of this ground,
               Verse 15. Hauing hope
towards God that there shall be a resurrection of the
dead, both of the iust and vniust.
            And lastly, in the words of my Text hee setteth
downe his practise and exercise: And herein I exercise
my selfe, to haue alwaies a conscience voyd of offence,
&c.
            
            As if he had thus spoken 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Herein,
               The sence of the Words. and for
this respect, because I am a Christian, beleeuing the
doctrine of the Law and the Prophets, and hauing
hope in the Resurrection, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , I my selfe doe
studie (as the Rhemists render it, or labour and endeauour,
as Tremelius reades it, or exercise my selfe,


               
as the vulgar English hath it.
            Where, by the way wee may obserue, that the
ground-worke and foundation of a good conscience
is Christian Religion, and a right beleefe concerning
things diuine, specially the doctrine of the
Ressurection, without the which the conscience
cannot be good nor cleare.
            For in this respect S. Paul saith, I labour and endeauour
to haue and to hold a conscience, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
cleare and voyd of offence in all duties towards
God and men, and that alwaies. This I take to be
the sence of the words, & their coherence with the
precedent Scripture. The summe and substance
whereof may be reduced to these three generall
heads, whereof I will speake briefly.
            
               The Diuision. 1. Of Conscience, and the nature thereof, Quid
sit? What it is? because many talke of it that know
it not; And this is Subiectum adaequatum, the maine
subiect, and as it were the Center of this Text.
            2. Quotuplex: The kinds and qualities of Conscience,
which are as lines drawne from the Center,
to demonstrate and deliniate the seuerall climates
and regions of conscience; which are either offensiue,
or without offence, as the word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
doth import.
            3. The extent and latitude of this Text, call it
what you will, the manner or meanes to obtaine
and maintaine a good conscience; or the matters
wherein, in all dutie humane and diuine, towards
God and men; and the time how long, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
at all times. These are the lists and limits of this
Text, and my intended Discourse; And of these



in order; but first of Conscience, and the nature
thereof.
            
               The first part. There are two things wherein man doth excell all mortall Creatures,

                  Ratio,
&
Oratio.
                  Reason,
and
Speech.
               
Now Conscience doth belong vnto Reason, and is
thus defined by Aquinas;
               Aquin. pars 1. Q. 79. Art. 13. 
               Actus rationis applicans
scientiam ad opus: An act of reason, applying our
knowledge to our workes, and iudging of the lawfulnesse
and vnlawfulnesse thereof. Medina saith,
that it is, Dictamen rationis applicatum ad opus; which
is the same in effect. Some call it a Hebite, others a
Facultie: But I decline the Casuists and Schoolemen
of purpose, that I may speake to the people,
and to their consciences: And therefore (according
to plainenesse of speech, and soundnesse of truth)
Conscience may thus be defined.
            
               Conscience defined. 
               Conscience is a noble and a notable faculty in
the soule of man, working vpon it selfe, and determining
of all our particular thoughts, words, and
workes, either with vs, or against vs.
            
               The parts of the definition expounded. 1. I call it a Faculty, because it produceth acts,
and is inseparable from its subiect; Exui sed non deponipotest,
It may be left off for a time in respect of
the vse of it, as reason in a drunken man, but it cannot
be cast off for euer, or remoued from the soule.
Which made St. Bernard to say,Meditations. 
               Quocun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   vado conscientia
mea wecum; Wheresoeuer I goe my conscience
is with me, it dogs and followes mee; Adest
vin
                     •
                  , seqitur mort
                     •
                  um, It is present with me while I
liue, and when I die it dyeth not; for when my



body is rotting in the graue, my conscience shall
liue: And when I rise againe, my conscience will
come with me before God and his iudgement seat,
either to excuse, or accuse me.
            2. I call it noble and notable, in respect of the reciprocall
working thereof, which is strange and admirable,
and it is on this manner: First the minde
thinkes a thought either good, or bad; and then
the conscience by doubling and reflecting the same,
doth thinke againe of that thought, and iudgeth
whether it be good, or bad. Wee haue a good resemblance
thereof in the eye, for the eye that seeth
all things that may be seene, seeth not it selfe but by
way of reflection, and the helpe of a looking-glasse;
So it may be said of the minde, it mindes and vnderstands
all things that may be vnderstood, yet it
vnderstands not it selfe, nor its owne nature, but by
recoiling, reflecting, & recollecting the beames &
rayes of that diuine light in and vpon it selfe; which
made some to say that Conscience is nothing else
but anima reflexa, the soule of man recoiling, and
reflecting vpon it selfe.
            3. I place it in the Soule of man, not as part of
a part, for anima est indiuisa,
               Aristot. the soule is impartible;
but tota in tota, whollyin the whole soule, and all the
faculties thereof, where it keepeth a compleat
Court, the Court of Conscience. In the vnderstanding
where it principally resideth; Bonorum
malorum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   facinorum est Index & Index;
               Sen
                     •
                  ca. It sitteth as
a Iudge determining and prescribing de iure, this
may, or may not be done, and this is well or ill done.
In the memory it is a Register, a Recorder, and a



Witnesse, Qui nec fallit, nec fallitur, which can neither
deceiue, nor be deceiued, testifying, de facto,
this was done, and that was not done, whereof the
Poet speaketh,
Nocte die
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   tuum gestas in pectore testem.I
                        ••
                     enal.
               
            
            In the will and affections it is a layler, or executioner,
easing or tormenting vs: For what are the
approofes and reproofes, the ioyes and checkes of
the conscience, but actions of the will and affections,
recoiling vpon the Soule, either comforting, or
tormenting vs for deeds past, or else terrifying vs
for euill deeds to come? Which made one to compare
it to a bridle and a whip,
               Lips. Pol. 
               Frenum ante peccatum,
flagrum post peccatum; A bridle to curbe vs before
we sinne, and a scourge to whip vs after wee haue
sinned.
            4. The fourth and last thing in the definition, is
the Subiect or Obiect whereupon Conscience doth
worke, or the matters wherewith it intermedleth.
It medleth not with vniuersalities, as Arts and Sciences,
nor with other mens matters, as busie-bodies
doe; but it deales wholly and solely in our owne
proper and particular actions. And of these it giueth
iudgement by a kinde of reasoning and disputing
in & with it selfe, called by the Schoolemen a
practicall Syllogisme, whose maior is some maxime in
Reason or Religion, which cannot be denyed; and
whose minor is some act, fact, or dutie of ours, ill or
well done, omitted or committed: And then followeth
the conclusion, of it selfe either with vs, or against
vs, as conscince beareth witnesse. Sometime
it speaketh for God against vs; and sometime for



vs vnto God, being as it were a middle 
                  〈…〉
               ng,M. Perkins. and
an indifferent arbitrator betweene God and man.
And it is called, Conscientia, quasi cordis scientia, saith
S. Bernard, or rather, Scientia cum alia, a knowledge
ioyned with our knowledge, whereby it knowes
that of vs, which God onely knowes with vs. It is a
co witnesse with God, for no man knowes what is
in man but God onely, & the spirit of man, which is
his conscience; and this is instar mille testium, worth
a thousand witnesses: Which made the Philosopher
to say,Seneca lib. 1. 
               O te miserum si contemnis hunc testem!
               Epist. 43. O
wretched man if thou despisest the iudgement and
testimony of thine owne conscience!The nature of Conscience illustrated.
            
            The Fathers haue many sayings and similies to
expresse the nature of Conscience. S Bernard compares
it to a Booke,De interiori domo. 
               Conscientia est liber ad quem emendandum
omnes scripti sunt libri; Conscience is a liuing
booke, annexed to the soule of man, indeed a
power or faculty of the soule like vnto a Booke, for
the informing and reforming whereof, all other
bookes are written and printed; for what are all
the Diuinity-bookes, and all the Law-bookes, but
glosses and Commentaries vpon this Text? Et maledicta
glossa quae corrumpit textum; Cursed is that
law-booke, or glosse, that goes against Conscience.
            
            This booke consisteth of two parts,M. Cade. or volumes;
The one is a Law-booke, wherein are set downe the
grounds and principles of truth, and equity, called
by the Ancients 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               siue relicta rationis Scintilla,
the reliques and remaines, or the records of the
Law, and light of Nature. The other part is a
Chronicle, or a Registrie, wherein all our workes are



written; which made S. Chrysostome vse the same
comparison which S. Bernard long before: Conscientia
est codex in quo quotidiana peccata conscribuntur; A
booke wherein all our daily sinnes are written.
            Now Conscience when it giueth iudgement, it
first reades ouer the Law-booke, and examineth
what is written there, what is bidden or forbidden
by the law of God, & nature: And then it turneth
ouer the records, and seeth what is done or left vndone,
and accordingly it giueth iudgement either
with vs or against vs.
            S. Origen compares Conscience to a Schoolemaster,
Pedagogus animae sociatus, & affectuum corrector, A
Master or Monitor, to direct our wayes, and to correct
our errours.
            S. Austin to a looking-glasse, Speculo similis, euen a
cleare Christall glasse, wherein wee may see our
owne vertues and vices, and behold the image of
the inner man.
            
               Tertullian calls it praeiudicium extremi iudicij, A
fore-runner of Gods last iudgement, euen the best
Almanacke in our owne breasts and bosomes, to
foretell vs what shall become of vs at the last day.
            
               A briefe Application. These things I pray you to apply, for I cannot
stand to amplifie: These things if ye know, happie
are you if you doe them.
               Iohn 13. 17. In this learned age (amongst
the innumerable bookes that are extant) I
recommend vnto you the booke of Conscience,
Hunc lege, relege, & perlege, O reade, reade often, and
reade ouer this booke, and doe nothing against the
Dictates thereof. It is not the want of knowledge,
but of Conscience which the world complaineth



of: many haue knowledge that want Conscience;
And I wish from my heart that many had lesse Science,
vpon condition they had more conscience.
And so I come to the second part, the kindes and
qualities of Conscience.
            
               Conscience two fold. 
               Conscience (according to my Text) is either 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
cleare, guiltlesse, and without offence; or
else, guilty, troubled, and offensiue. The one is a
Cordiall, the other a Corrosiue; the one a heauen;
the other a very hell, euen in this life: Of the one
Salomon speaketh,Prou. 15. 15. 
               A good conscience is a continuall
feast, Iuge conuiuium, a continuall Christmas, and a
perpetuall Iubilee; whereof S. Paul,
               2 Cor. 1. 12. 
               Our reioycing
is the testimony of our Conscience; But the other is anima
Carnificina, the racke and torture of the Soule,
a very worme gnawing the heart at the roote, and
compared to a very fiend or furie of hell, pursuing
men with firebrands.
            
               Conscience foure-fold. S. Bernard hath a witty distribution of conscience into foure kinds,

                  1. Good, but not quiet.
                  
                  2 Quiet, but not good.
                  
                  3 Both good, and quiet.
                  
                  4 Neither good, nor quiet.
                  
               
            
            The two good belong properly to the godly; and
the two bad to the wicked, whose conscience is either
too quiet, or too vnquiet.
            
               
                  Good, but not quiet.
                1. The first kinde of Conscience is good, but not
quiet. I call it good, not simply, but in respect of
the tendernesse of it, and fearefulnes to offend; yet
vnquiet for want of true light and information.
Such is the conscience of those that are erronious in
iudgement, or ignorantly dubious and scrupulous,


               
making many quaeries and questions for conscience
sake, where God and his word makes none. They
may be compared to a wilde and a wall-eyed horse,
which stirres and starts at euery shadow, without
cause or occasion.
            Such are many of my Brethren, both on my right,
and left hand, I meane the Recusants in both kinds,
Catholiques and Catharists, Papists and Puritans,
who are no lesse offended, the one with an egge on
a fasting day; the other with a Cap, Crosse, or Surplesse,
then with some hainous offence. I commend
their zeale, but not their iudgement; their affection,
not their discretion; they haue indeed a kinde of
tendernesse of Conscience, but they want the right
rule thereof, both which are required in a good
Conscience. Their iudgement is weake and crazie,
vnable to digest any hard matter, or difficult question:
They mistake the grounds of Conscience,
building vpon vnstable foundations, and burdening
themselues and others with things in their owne nature
indifferent.
            
               Three degrees of Conscience, that is quiet, but not good.
                The second kinde of Conscience is quiet, but not
good; and of this kinde there are three degrees,

                  Caeca.
                  
                     The blinde.
                  Secura, &
                  
                  
                     The secure, and
                  
                  Obdurata.
                  
                     The seared.
               
            
            
               Caeca. 1. The blinde and ignorant Conscience is quiet,
because it knowes not how to stirre; the blind man
swallowes many a flie, and the ignorant many a
sinne; he sees and
                  M. Wards Balme from Gilead.
                discernes sinnes as we doe stars
in a darke night, onely the great ones, primae magnitudinis,
of the larger size. Concupiscence, the roote



of all euill, S. Paul thought to be no sinne, while
the scales of ignorance were vpon his eyes. And
so doe many ignorant men in their blinde Conscience
thinke many a sinne to be no sinne: They
thinke that a few heartlesse prayers, and Lord haue
mercy vpon vs, at the last gaspe, will serue their
turne: They dare not looke into the glasse of Gods
holy Word, least the number of their sinnes, and
the foulenesse of their soules, should affright them.
But if God once open their eyes, as he did the Prophets
seruant, they shall see whole armies, and legions
of euils, and Diuels, in them, and against them.
            
               2. Secura. The second degree is the secure and carelesse, the
sleepie, and drawsie Conscience, that can and will not
see, with whom sinne and Sathan are in league for
a time, Sed ista tranquilit as tempestas erit,
               Ad Heliodor. that calme
in the end will proue a storme, as S. Ierom noteth.
The flesh, the world, and the Diuell hath so lulled
them a sleepe, that they neuer dreame of Heauen,
nor Hell, death, nor iudgement, they neuer thinke
of their sinnes, nor of the euill day; the noise of
carnall pleasures, and the voyce of worldly profits
doth drowne the voyce of Conscience in them, as
the Drummes in the sacrifice of Moloch did the cry
of the infants: Their Conscience is quiet, not because
they be at peace, but because they are not at leasure.
O thinke vpon this you that swim in worldly
wealth and pleasures! O remember this you Polyphragmaticall
men, that haue whole Mynes and
Mints of businesse in your pates, making so much
haste to be rich, that you are not at leasure once in
a weeke, in a moneth, in a yeare, nay scarce in your



whole life time to conferre with your poore Conscience,
which is a very dangerous thing. For if euer
this sleepy and drousie Conscience doe awake,
as many times it doth in the time of aduersity, as
in Iosephs brethren, or at the houre of death, as in
many others; like a wilde beast robbed of her
whelpes, and rowsed from sleepe, Iugulum petit, it
will flie (as it were) to the throat of thy soule, accusing
thee to the vttermost, and laying all thy sinnes
to thy charge.
            
               3 Obdurata. The third degree is, the seared and cauterized Conscience,
which (by adding sinne to sinne) is so hardned,
that it hath no sence nor feeling of sinne. The
habite and custome of sinning hath taken away all
shame of face and remorse of Conscience in many, that
they are giuen ouer to a reprobate sence, to worke
vncleanenesse with greedinesse. At the first euery
mans Conscience will speake vnto him, as
Peter did to our Sauiour, Master, saue thy selfe; her
pricke-arrowes are like the shafts of Ionathan, to
forewarne Dauid of the great Kings displeasure; but
if we neglect her cry and calling, this good Cassandra
will speake no more. That body is in great danger
where the pulse doth not beate; that Armie is
soone surprized, where the watch and alarme are
not kept; So it is with that Soule, where the Conscience
is not waking and stirring: Grauissime aegrotat
qui se non sentit agrotare, That man is desperately
sicke that doth not feele his sicknes; So is that soule that
doth not feele his sinnes: Tunc maxime oppugnaris
cum te nescis oppugnari, saith S. Ierome to Heliodor,
Then art thou most tempted, when thou doest not feele



thy temptations. And S. Austin asketh the question,
Quid miserius, misero non miserante seipsum? What
more miserable, then a wretch that seeth not his owne
misery? O hearken vnto this you that harden your
hearts, and seare your Consciences, by quenching
the motions thereof, and sinning the rather when
your Conscience is against it.
            
               Good and quiet 3. The third kinde of Conscience is that which is
both good and quiet, which is very tender and sensible
of sinne, and yet is neuer troubled nor perplexed,
which is full of hope and loue, full of faith and
knowledge, and which bringeth good tydings, and
that vpon good grounds. This kinde of Conscience
euer excuseth, and neuer accuseth, euer comforteth,
and neuer condemneth; and if it hap to
pricke and ake with sorrow for some sin past, that
sorrow bringeth repentance neuer to bee repented
of. Some there are that haue such Consciences,
but very few in these our euill dayes, and they that
haue them are happy and blessed both heere and
hereafter.
            
               Neither good nor quiet.
                4. The fourth kinde of Conscience is that which
is neither good nor quiet, and this is the worst of all,
for as the godly haue the first fruit of the spirit, and
certaine tasts of heauenly ioyes, euen in this life by
the goodnes of their Conscience: So the wicked on
the contrary do feele certaine flames and flashes of
hell-fire, by reason of their guilty conscience; which
made S. Bernard to say, Nulla poena est grauior mala
Conscientia quae proprijs agitatur stimulis: No plague,
nor punishment more grieuous then a guilty Conscience,
which is tormented with a sting in it selfe, a worme;


               
And a worme that euer gnaweth, and neuer dyeth.
Such is the Conscience of wilfull and wicked murtherers
and malefactors, which despaire of Gods
mercy, and oftentimes lay violent hands vpon
themselues. Polydor Virgil writes, that Richard the
third had a most terrible dreame the night before
Bosworth-field, in which he was slaine: He thought
that all the Diuels in hell haled and pulled him in
most hideous and vgly shapes; It credo non fuit somnium,
sed Conscientia scelerum, That was no fained
dreame (saith Polydor) but a true torture of his
Conscience, presaging a bloudy day to himselfe and
to his followers. And we see by daily experience a
great many that are driuen by the terror of a guilty
Conscience to hang, drowne, and murther
themselues; And of these it may be said that, Iudas-like,
they are both Iurie and Iudge, accusers and executioners
of themselues.
            Thus you see the different kindes and qualities
of Conscience, with the degrees and gradations
thereof; Some too quiet, as the blinde, the secure,
and the seared; and some too vnquiet, as the erronious,
dubious, and desperate, or guilty: The meane is
the best; not lulled asleepe with a habite of sinning,
nor yet affrighted with the terrours of guilt and
despaire, but well-seasoned with feare and faith,
hope and loue, which is the best temperature of a Christian
soule. And so I come to the third and last part.
            
               Part 3. The extent, latitude, or circumference of this
Text, (call it what you will) the manner and meanes
to obtaine and retaine a good Conscience, or the matters
wherein, in all duties towards God and men; and



the time how long a good Conscience is to be kept,

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , alwayes, and at all times.
            It is an Aphorisme in Physicke, that lisdem nutrimur
quibus constamus,
               Hippocrat. wee are fed by the same
whereof we are bred, whether we vnderstand it of
bloud the immediate, or the earth the remote
meanes of nutriment. And it is true in Diuinity,
that the meanes to haue, and to hold, a good Conscience
are alike, and the same. And these are principally foure,

                  Vniuersality of obedience.
                  Sincerity of heart and affection.
                  
                  Constancy in well-doing.
                  
                  Diligence in practise, and exercise.
                  
               
All which are closely included in the words of my
Text.
            
               Obedience. 1. First, to haue a good Conscience, there is required
an vniuersall and Catholique obedience in all
duties humane and Diuine, towards God and men,
the workes of Piety and Charity, in the first and
second Table: For the conscionable man hath respect
vnto all the Commandements of God, he intends
not to breake any, although hee may faile in
many;Lumbard. 
               Bona Conscientia non stat cum proposito peccandi;
A good Conscience stands not with a purpose to sin.
He is no true penitent that mournes for sinne past,
and at the same time meanes to commit the same
sinne againe. He is no good man that makes conscience
of one sinne, and not of another; so hee
that breakes one Commandement,Iam. 2. 10. hates the rest,
and is guilty of all. Herod, Naaman, and Ananias,
made conscience of many sinnes, they went a great
way towards Heauen, but for their Pride, Incest,



Idolatry, and Sacriledge, they were cast downe to
Hell. Many there are that hate Pride and Couetousnesse,
but they loue Whoredome and Drunkennesse.
And some there are that make a conscience
of the duties of the first Table, specially those
that crosse not their will and affections, that are no
way against their profit and pleasure, and that are
glorious before men; they will not misse a Sermon,
sweare an oath, nor doe the least worke on the Sabaoth
day, which are very good things in them, for
part of our endeauour, though it be not mere
righteousnesse, yet is it lesse sinne. But as for the
duties of the second Table, which are the best
Touchstone of the Conscience, if we looke to their
doings and dealings with men, you shall finde many
of them full of fraud and falshood, full of malice
and mischiefe, as if their holinesse were a discharge
vnto them from righteousnesse. And others there
are that liue orderly with their neighbours, and
pay euery man his due, but they rob God of his
due; they haue no care of the duties of the first
Table, neither make they any Conscience of Religion.
The first are like the Pharises, who were very
holy, but vniust; the others like the Saduces, good
liners, but very bad belieuers, for they belieued that
there was neither Spirit, Angell, nor Resurrection:
And of both these I may say, that they doe their
duties by halfes, and Agrippa-like, they are but
semi Christiani, almost, or rather halfe-Christians;
whereas the conscionable man makes conscience
of all the Commandements of God, euen from the
greatest to the least, generally, though not equally;



for most of all hee straines and striues against the
great and grosse sinnes, yet swallowes not the least,
hee abhorres adultery, and hates dalliance; He
is so farre from pride, couetousnesse, and other capitall
sinnes, that hee abstaines from all occasions
and appearance of euill,Iud. 23. hating euen the garment
spotted by the flesh. In a word, he is a perfect Christian,
quoad partes (as the Schoolemen speake) though
not quoad gradus; as a Childe is said to haue all the
parts of a perfect man, although he want age & stature;
so the conscionable man hath all the parts and
properties of a perfect Christian, which may be had
here in via, in the way, although he attaine not those
high degrees of perfection, which they haue in patria,
in their Country.
            
               Sincerity. 2. Secondly, in a good Conscience there is required
Sincerity, integritie, and vprightnesse of
heart and affections, which the Greeke word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
in my Text doth well import, if you change but the
Case, and reade it thus, before God & men. All things
are before God, and nothing is hid from him; yet
properly that is said to be before God, which is hid
from men, and which is before none but God only,
as the heart and the conscience. God is 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
the searcher of the heart, and tryer of the reines.
And therefore he saith,Prou. 23. 26. 
               My Sonne giue me thy heart.
And S. Paul saith,Col. 3. 23. 
               Whatsoeuer ye doe, doe it heartily,
as vnto God, and not vnto men: For God is a spirit,
and he will be serued in spirit and truth.
               Iohn 4. 14. We cannot
complement before God with faces and phrases, as we
doe with men. A little done in sincerity and truth
from the heart, is more worth then all the workes



of hypocrites; yea, without this integrity of the
heart all our labour is but lost. And therefore the
Hypocrite,Math. 6. 2. that sounds a Trumpet when hee giues
almes, that prayes in the corners of the street, and
doth all his workes to be seene of men, can neuer
please God, nor haue a good Conscience, for a good
Conscience cannot stand with hypocrites.
            
               Constancie. 3. Thirdly, to haue, and to hold, a good Conscience,
there is required Constancie, Continuance,
and Perseuerance in well-doing: Not Demas-like
for a spurt,2 Tim. 4. 10. Gal. 5. 7. nor as the Galathians for a time, Ye ranne
well, who hindred you? But alwayes, and in the
whole course of our life.
            In the life of man there are many windings and
turnings; but the conscionable man, turne him
loose, hee is not bonus cum bonis, malus cum malis,
godly in one company, prophane in another; sober
to day, deboyst to morrow; but like a square
Cube, he is semper idem, euer the same, which way
soeuer you turne him. There is not any, but at times
haue fits and flashes of a good conscience: They
are affected for the time present with some good
Sermon, or vpon some great deliuerance they grow
a little holy; but that little is little worth, for they
are soone out of breath, and quickly weary. And
therefore my Text saith 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                alwaies, and at
all times. It is true, that the best doe sometimes
faile, the most faithfull haue their faults and frailties:
Who can say, My heart is cleane? In many
things wee sinne all of vs; But the godly, though
they fall, yet shall they rise againe, and be renued by
repentance; they fall not finally, neither doe they



finne pleno consensu, with full consent, and bent of
the will: Their will and desire is, yea, they are stedfastly
purposed with Dauid, to keepe all the Commandements
of God; And though they faile in
many particulars, yet God accepteth their will for
the deed, their good endeauour, as if it were perfect
obedience: And therefore to haue a good
Conscience, wee must bee constant in well-doing
at all times, effectu, or affectu, in deed or desire,
in action or affection. And that this may bee effected,
we must begin betimes, put not off from day
to day to turne vnto the Lord, for delay is dangerous.
            And continue vnto the end,Reuci. 2. 
               Be thou faithfull
vnto the death, and I will giue thee the crowne of glory.
He that endureth vnto the end shall be saued. Incipere
multorum finire paucorum;
               Chrysos
                     •
                  . Many begin well, but
few doe continue vnto the end:Ierom. 
               Incassuam curritur
si caeptum iter ante terminū deseratur; It is in vaine to
begin a iourney and not to goe forward: And therfore
S. Bernard saith, Sola perseuer antia coronatur,
               Beru
                     •
                  
                of
all other vertues, onely perseuerance weares the
Garland.
            4. To 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the last word in my Text, importing
Constancie, and Continuance, if wee adde

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                the first word, which implieth diligence
and exercise, then is the Circle round, or Circumference
compleat. Conscience, like a vessell, may easily
be kept pure and cleane, if rinsed euery day; but if
it goe longer, it gathers soile and corruption, and
requires more then ordinarie repentance to purge
and cleanse it. Wee sinne daily, and therefore wee



must daily wash our consciences with the teares of
inward sorrow and contrition, which bringeth repentance
not to be repented of. This was S. Pauls
exercise, to keepe his Conscience vnspotted, and
without offence; and this must bee the daily practise
of euery good Christian: Now the onely Bath
or Lauacre to wash our Consciences in, is the bloud of
Iesus Christ, which cleanseth vs from all our sinnes,
I say the bloud of Christ applyed by faith. In which
respect Faith is said to purifie the Conscience from
dead workes: And S. Paul ioyneth them together,
Keepe faith and a good Conscience;
               1 Tim. 1. 19. as if the one could
not well be without the other.
            Out of the flesh of man, when the body is dead,
are bred those wormes which consume the flesh.
Euen so from the corruption of the Conscience
there breeds a worme a thousand times more terrible,
euen the worme of Conscience, which euer
gnaweth, and neuer dyeth.
            To preuent this, we must purge the Conscience
from such corruptions.
            
               The corruptions of Conscience. Ignorance. The corruptions of the Conscience are diuers,
and different.
            As first, Ignorance and Superstition; against the
which wee must seeke for sound and sanctified
knowledge to direct vs in our generall and particular
callings.
            
               Pride. Secondly, Pride. and Singularity; against the
which apply meekenesse and humility, for, Vbi
humilitas, ibi sapientia, Where humility is, there is
wisedome;Austin. 
               Et inter sapientes sapiensior qui humilior,
Amongst the wise, he is wisest that is most humble,



for God resisteth the proud, but giueth grace vnto
the humble.
            
               Vncharitablenesse. Thirdly, Vncharitablenesse, and Vnrighteousnesse,
are great peruerters of the Conscience; for the vncharitable
and vniust man can neuer be conscionable.
Against these apply those precepts of our Sauiour,
Loue thy neighbour as thy selfe;
               Luk. 10. 27. 
               Whatsoeuer
ye would that men should doe vnto you, euen so doe
you vnto them, for this is the Law and the Prophets.
            
            
               Vnruly passions of the minde. Fourthly, We may adde to these, all the vnruly
passions and affections of the minde; for as wilde horses
ouerturne the Chariot with men and all: So
the passions of the minde, if they be not tamed, ouerwhelme
all iudgement and Conscience; for Perit
omne iudicum cum res transit in affectum:
               Austin.
There is no place for Iustice, Iudgement, or Conscience,
where passion beares the sway. The best remedy
against these is mortification and alteration of
their course, by turning their edge, as our anger against
others: The streame is turned when we begin
to bee angry with our selues, and our owne
sinnes. Our loue to the world, the edge is turned
when wee begin to loue God and godlinesse, and
seeke those things that are aboue, where Christ sitteth on
the right hand of God.
               Col. 3. 5. Much might bee spoken of
these things, but I draw towards an end, and will
conclude with a word, or two by way of application.
            
               Application. It is a witty Parable which one of the Fathers
hath of a man that had three friends, two whereof
he loued intirely,
                  Gregory in his Morals. the third but indifferently. This



man being called in question for his life, sought
helpe of his friends: The first would beare him
company some part of his way: The second
would lend him money, and affoord him some
meanes for his iourney; and that was all that they
would or could doe for him: But the third, whom
he least respected, and from whom hee least expected;
this would goe all the way, and abide all
the while with him, yea, hee would appeare with
him, speake, and plead for him.
            My brethren, this man is euery one of vs, and
our three friends are the Flesh, the World, and our
Conscience.
            Now when death shall summon vs to iudgement,
what can our friends after the flesh doe for
vs? They will bring vs some part of the way. Our
Wiues and Children, and our dearest friends, they
will bring vs to the graue, and further they cannot
goe. And of all the worldly goods which we possesse,
what shall we haue? what will they affoord
vs? onely a shrowde, and a Coffin, or a Tombe at
the most.
            
               
                  〈…〉
                a good Conscience, this will liue
and 
                  〈…〉
                or rather liue when we are dead;
and 
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  •
               ine, it will appeare with vs

                  〈…〉
                
               
                  ••
               dgement seat. And when

                  〈…〉
                purse can doe vs good;

                  〈◊〉
                a good 
                  〈◊〉
                will speake and plead for
vs, yea, excuse and 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            O then (my 
                  〈◊〉
               ) let vs labour aboue all
things to haue, and to hold, a good Conscience,
keepe it as the apple of thine eye, and doe nothing



to offend it. Aures omnium pulso, Conscientias si
                     ••
                  
gulorum con
                     •
                  enio.
               Austin. I speake to the eares of all in generall,
I conuent the Conscience of euery one in
particular; yea, I appeale to all that heare me this
day, what little regard there is made of Conscience
in our age, and how few there are that follow
the dictates thereof.
            
               An Apostrophe to Conscience. And therefore (O Conscience) I turne my speech
vnto thee, thou art a iudge of Iudges, and one day
thou shalt iudge vs all, and testifie either with vs or
against vs: In the meane time, it is thy office to
preach ouer my Sermon againe and againe, and to
apply it to the hearts of all that heare me this day,
or else my labour is but lost. Goe to all estates of
persons, tell them of their duties, and put them in
minde of God and thy selfe.
            Speake vnto those Honourable persons that sit
at the Sterne of Gouernment (either in Church,
or Common-wealth) that they consult with thee
in all their counsells and courses, that they preferre
thee before policie, that they execute true iustice
and iudgement without partialitie, or respect of
parsons, and that they cause others that are subordinate
vnto them to doe the like.
            Speake to those that are towards the Law, and
other Officers in Courts of Iustice and equitie, either
Ciuill or Ecclesiasticall, specially in those
Courts that are of thy Iurisdiction, and haue their
Denomination from thee, that they entertaine, nor
maintaine bad Causes against the innocent; that
they wrest nor the law to terrifie their poore neighbours,
and to intangle the simple; that they spinne



not our honest suites to such length of time and
costlinesse, that it may bee said (and that truely)
Causa torque
                     •
                   noce
                     •
                  tem, Comsidicus innocentem, The
Medicine is more grieuous then the maladie.
            Speake to my Reuerend Brethren of the Clergy,
that they preach Vi
                     •
                  a voce (that is) Vita & voce, both
by life and by doctrine, that they teach after a plaine
and a profitable manner, not affecting craggy, curious,
Scholasticall speculations, fitter for the chaire
then the Pulpit; nor such Roman English and sublimity
of 
                  〈◊〉
                that a plaine English-man cannot
vnderstand them; for our Language is now grown
so learned, that a man may clerum in English.
            Speake to the poore, that they beare their pouerty
with patience; and as for those that are rich,
O charge them that they be not high minded, that
they trust not in vucertaine riches, but in the liuing
God, that they be rich in good workes, ready to distribute,
laying vp for themselues a good foundation against
the time to come.
               1 Tim. 6.
            
            In a word, to conclude; speake to all men and
women, that they feare God and serue him in vprightnes
& 
                     〈◊〉
                   truth,
               Iosuah 24. Like 1. Tit. 2. 12. that they serue him in holinesse &
righteousnesse before him all th
                     •
                   da
                     ••
                  s 
                     〈…〉
                  
               
that denying vngodlinesse and 
                     〈◊〉
                   losts, they liue
soberly, righteously, and godly in 
                     〈◊〉
                   present world, looking
for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing
of the great God, and our Sauiour Iesus Christ:
To whom with the Holy Ghost, three persons, and
one immortall and eternall God, bee all honour,
praise and glory, foreuer and euer, Amen.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   